2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July,
2024
[1]
SHOUGRAKPAM Digitally signed by
SHOUGRAKPAM
DEVANANDA DEVANANDA SINGH
Date: 2024.07.18 16:00:03
SINGH +05'30' IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 699 of 2019
1. Shri Pauminthang alias PMT Neihsial, aged about 61 years, S/o
(late) Shri Thangtinmang of Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S.
Churachandpur, District Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128.
2. Shri Ngamneilien Khawbung, Secretary of Neihsial
Veng Village Authority, S/o (late) Shri T. Lawmthang of Neihsial
Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District, Churachandpur,
Manipur State - 795128.
3. Shri Paukam Khongsai, aged about 43 years, S/o Shri Dimpau of
Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur District
Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128.
4. Shri Thangjagin, aged about 60 years, S/o (late) Shri Lukhokam of
Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S., Churachandpur, District
Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128.
5. Shri Paominlun, aged about 29 years, Shri Doukhosat Neihsial of
Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District
Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128.
6. Shri Lamlalvang, aged about 18 years, S/o Shri Damkhokap
Neihsial of Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District
Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128.
7. Shri David, aged about 25 years, S/o Shri Thangboi of Neihsial
Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District Churachandpur,
Manipur State - 795128.
8. Shri Samuel, aged about 28 years, S/o Shri Zangkholian Neihsial
of Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District
Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128.
9. Shri Thangbensam, aged about 24 years, S/o Shri Thiankholal
Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District
Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128.
10. Shri Khamlalhawl, aged about 24 years, S/o Shri Paucha of
Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District
Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128.
WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
[2]
11. Shri Kam David, aged about 29 years, S/o (late) Shri Kamkholam
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 1
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
of Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District
Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128.
12. Shri Siemminlen, aged about 23 years, S/o Shri Haukhokai of
Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District
Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128.
13. Shri Khaimalsom, aged about 29 years, S/o Shri Haukhokai of
Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District
Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128.
14. Lamkhosat, aged about 34 years, S/o Shri Thiankholal of Neihsial
Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District Churachandpur,
Manipur State - 795128.
15. Shri Lamthansang, aged about 17 years, S/o Shri Khoulcha of
Neihsial Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District
Churachandpur, Manipur State - 795128 and
16. Shri Satlallien, aged about 22 years, S/o Shri Haukhokai of Neihsial
Veng, P.O. & P.S. Churachandpur, District Churachandpur,
Manipur State - 795128.
... Petitioners
-Versus-
1. The State of Manipur represented by the Principal Secretary
(Home), Government of Manipur - 795001.
2. The Superintendent of Police, Churachandpur District,
Manipur- 795128.
3. The Officer-in-Charge, Churachandpur Police Station,
Churachandpur District, Manipur.
... Respondents
B E F O R E HON'BLEMR. JUSTICE AHANTHEMBIMOL SINGH For the petitioner :: Mr.
Thangchunghnung Leivon, Advocate For the respondents :: Mr. Niranjan Sanasam, GA Date of
hearing :: 02-04-2024 Date of judgment & order :: 18-07-2024 WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
JUDGMENT & ORDER [1] Heard Mr. Thangchunghnung Leivon, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners and Mr. Niranjan Sanasam, learned GA appearing for the respondents.
The present writ petition had been filed with a prayer for closing the FIR No. 87(7)2019 CCpur P.S.
u/s 506/447/153-A/427/147 IPC or to allow the withdrawal application filed by the complainant of
the said FIR by returning the said FIR as a false report. The question that falls for determination in
the instant case is about the ambit of the inherent powers of the High Court under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India and/ or under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure to quash criminal
proceedings.
[2] The facts of the present case are not in dispute. The petitioner No. 1 filed a complaint dated
13-07-2019 to the Officer-in-Charge of Churachandpur Police Station. In the said complaint, it is
stated that on 13-07-2019 at around 10 a.m., the petitioner No. 3 came to the house of the petitioner
No. 4 and warned him that the newly constructed Manipur Presbyterian Church Synod (MPCS)
building located at their village should not be inaugurated at any cost and if the same is inaugurated,
they will face dire consequences. In the said complaint, it is also stated that on the same day at
around 05:00 p.m., some unknown persons numbering about 30 led by petitioners No. 5 to 16
dismantled the said newly constructed Church by using axe, hammer, knife and sticks thereby
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 2
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
disturbing the peace and tranquility of the locality, creating fear in the hearts and minds of the
women WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
and children residing in the locality. On the basis of the said compliant, the O.C., Churachandpur
Police Station registered an FIR No. 87(07)2019 CCP-PS u/s 506/447/153-A/427/147 IPC against
some unknown persons numbering about 30 led by petitioners No. 5 to 16.
[3] The complainant and the accused persons, who are the petitioners herein, being residents of the
same village i.e., Neihsiel Veng village were summoned by the Kuki Inpi (Kuki Supreme House),
Churachandpur and the petitioners and most of the leading villagers of Neihsial Veng village
organized and convened a General Body Meeting of the said village on 16-07-2019 for settling the
dispute and to bring mutual and harmonious relationship, peaceful co-existence and for
maintenance of peace and tranquility among the members of all the communities of the said village.
In the said meeting, the petitioners have mutually settled their disputes or differences under the
Kuki customary law and practices by rendering their agreement into writing as a deed of
"Compromise Agreement". Accordingly, the petitioners, who are the complainant and the accused
persons, out of their own free will and without any fraud, coercion or influence from anybody and in
full possession of their senses have settled their disputes/ differences in terms of the following
agreements:-
"1. That, the First Party/complainant agreed to withdraw his complaint in connection
with FIR No. 87(07)2019 CCP-PS Dated:
13-07-2019 within three days from the date of this Agreement and shall also
co-operate in the closure or cancellation of the said FIR in any court of Laws.
"2. That the accused party and Village Authority agreed to organise a compromise
feast Known as "KI CHAMNA ANKUONG" and love feast known as "NGAILUT
ANKUONG respectively on 18-7-2019 as per customary law in the vicinity of the
village.
WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
"3. That both parties agreed to recognise and establish only one congregational
Church Known as Neihsial Veng Local Church in future within the village jurisdiction
of Neihsial Veng "4. That the First Party/ Complainant and his associates also agreed
to withdraw all cases, civil or criminal, pending in any court of law against the Second
party and his associates relating to issues arising from Neihsial Veng.
"5. That, both parties agreed to co-operate rules and regulations made by the village
authority and shall also take interest in promoting peace and harmony in the village.
"6. That, both parties agreed to comply with the previous decisions taken by the
KUKI INPI Churachandpur regarding Neihsial Veng Case."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 3
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
[4] The petitioner No. 1, who is the complainant in the said FIR, voluntarily filed an application
dated 16-07-2019 to the Officer-in-Charge of Churachandpur Police Station by stating, inter alia,
that he voluntarily withdraw the complaint made by him in respect of the aforesaid FIR
unconditionally on humanitarian ground and also for the best interest of peace and tranquility at
Neihsial Veng village, Churachandpur. Even though the Churachandpur Police Station
acknowledged the receipt of the said application filed by the petitioner No. 1, neither any action has
been taken up by the respondents for closure of the said FIR nor has the Police taken up any further
action for investigation in connection with the said FIR and also none of the accused persons have
been apprehended by the Police in connection with the said FIR.
[5] It has been submitted on behalf of the petitioners that non-acceptance of the withdrawal
application submitted by the petitioner No. 1 and non- closure of the said FIR by the authorities has
created/ caused a confusion or misunderstanding among the villagers, including the petitioners, and
that it would be most desirable and expedient to close the WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
said FIR in order to secure the ends of justice or to prevent the abuse of the process of the court. It
has also been submitted that there is no question at all of committing any of the acts by the accused
persons as alleged in the complaint/ FIR and that if there was any misunderstanding between the
petitioners, who are the complainant and accused persons, such dispute or misunderstanding had
already been settled amicably among the villagers of the said village including the petitioners by
executing a deed of Compromise Agreement in the best interest of peace and tranquility at the said
village. Accordingly a prayer has been made for quashing the said FIR by exercising the inherent
powers of this court conferred under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and/ or section 482 of
the CrPC, 1972. In support of his contentions, the learned counsel cited the judgments rendered by
the Hon'ble Apex Court in the cases of:-
(i) "B.S. Joshi & ors. Vs. State of Haryana & anr." reported in (2003) 4 SCC 675;
(ii) "Nikhil Merchant Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation & anr."
reported in (2008) 9 SCC 677;
(iii) "Parbatbhai Aahir alias Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur & ors. Vs. State of Gujarat & anr."
reported in (2017) 9 SCC 641; and
(iv) "Kapil Agarwal & ors. Vs. Sanjay Sharma & ors." reported in (2021) 5 SCC 524.
[6] Mr. Niranjan Sanasam, learned GA appearing for the respondents submitted that the offences
committed by the accused persons attract section 147/153-A of the IPC, which are
non-compoundable offences and that the case is still under investigation. It has also been WP(C)
No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
submitted by the learned GA that once a case is registered in a Police Station, there is no provision
for allowing withdrawal of non-compoundable offence. It has further been submitted by the learned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 4
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
GA that as the High Court has inherent power under section 482 of the CrPC for consideration of a
prayer for quashing an FIR, there is no reason to entertain the present writ petition filed under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The learned GA, accordingly, prays for dismissing the
present writ petition as being devoid of merit. In support of his contentions, the learned GA cited
the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of "Arnab Ranjan Goswami Vs. Union
of India & ors." reported in (2020) 14 SCC 12 wherein it has been held at para 57 as under:-
"57. We hold that it would be inappropriate for the Court to exercise its jurisdiction
under Article 32 of the Constitution for the purpose of quashing FIR No. 164 of 2020
under investigation at N.M. Joshi Marg Police Station in Mumbai. In adopting this
view, we are guided by the fact that the checks and balances to ensure the protection
of the petitioner's liberty are governed by the CrPC. Despite the liberty being granted
to the petitioner on 24-4-20201, it is an admitted position that the petitioner did not
pursue available remedies in the law, but sought instead to invoke the jurisdiction of
this Court. Whether the allegations contained in the FIR do or do not make out any
offence as alleged will not be decided in pursuance of the jurisdiction of this Court
under Article 32, to quash the FIR. The petitioner must be relegated to the pursuit of
the remedies available under the CrPC, which we hereby do. The petitioner has an
equally efficacious remedy available before the High Court. We should not be
construed as holding that a petition under Article 32 is not maintainable. But when
the High Court has the power under Section 482, there is no reason to by-pass the
procedure under the CrPC, we see no exceptional grounds or reasons to entertain this
petition under Article 32. There is a clear distinction between the maintainability of a
petition and whether it should be entertained. In a situation like this, and for the
reasons stated hereinabove, this Court would not like to entertain the petition under
Article 32 for the relief of quashing the FIR being investigated at N.M. Joshi Police
Station in Mumbai which can be considered by the High Court. Therefore, we are of
the opinion that the petitioner must be relegated to avail WP(C) No. 699 of 2019
Contd.../-
of the remedies which are available under the CrPC before the competent court
including the High Court."
[7] I have heard the rival submissions advanced by the learned counsels appearing for the parties at
length and also carefully perused the materials available on record as well as the judgments cited by
the learned counsels. In the present case, the allegations made by the petitioner No. 1 in his
complaint is that in the morning of 13-07-2019, the petitioner No. 3 came to the house of the
petitioner No. 4 and warned him that the newly constructed Church building located at their village
should not be inaugurated at any cost and if the same is inaugurated, they will face dire
consequences and left after giving the warning. It has also been alleged in the said compliant that in
the evening of the same day about 30 unknown persons led by the petitioners No. 5 to 16 dismantled
the newly constructed Church building by using axe, hammer, knife and sticks thereby disturbing
peace and tranquillity of the locality, creating fear in the hearts and minds of the women and
children residing in the locality. On the basis of the said complaint, the O.C., Churachandpur Police
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 5
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
Station registered the FIR in question. Just after three days of filing the said complaint and
registering of the said FIR, the complainant and the accused persons, who are the petitioners herein
and residents of the same village, along with the leading villagers of Neihsial Veng Village organized
and convened a General Body Meeting of the villagers of the said village under the supervision of the
Kuki Inpi (Kuki Supreme House), Churachandpur, in order to settle or sort out any dispute or
misunderstanding between the villagers and to bring mutual and harmonious relationship, peaceful
co-existence and for maintenance of peace and tranquility among the villagers of the said village. In
the said WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
meeting, the disputing parties, who are the petitioners herein, have mutually settled and sort out
their disputes or differences or misunderstanding by executing a Compromise Agreement, which is
enclosed as Annexure-A/2 in the present petition.
[8] After the said agreement, the complainant, who is the petitioner No. 1 herein, filed an
application to the O.C., Churachandpur Police Station stating that he voluntarily withdraw the
complaint made by him on 13-07- 2019 unconditionally on humanitarian ground and also for the
best interest of peace and tranquility in their village. It has also been stated at the bar by the learned
counsel appearing for the parties that after settlement of their disputes or misunderstanding as
reflected in the deed of Compromise Agreement of the villagers of the said village, including the
petitioners herein, they lived peacefully and harmoniously in their village without any untoward
incident. The only concern and anxiety expressed by the petitioners in the present writ petition is
that non-closure of the said FIR has created/ caused a confusion or misunderstanding among the
villagers, including the petitioners and that it will be most desirable and expedient to close the said
FIR to secure the ends of justice or to prevent the abuse of the process of the court. In view of the
peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case, this court find force and merit in the cases set
out on behalf of the petitioners.
[9] In the case of "B.S. Joshi & ors." (supra), it has been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court as under:-
"8. It is, thus, clear that Madhu Limaye case does not lay down any general
proposition limiting power of quashing the criminal WP(C) No. 699 of 2019
Contd.../-
proceedings or FIR or complaint as vested in Section 482 of the Code or
extraordinary power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. We are, therefore,
of the view that if for the purpose of securing the ends of justice, quashing of FIR
becomes necessary, Section 320 would not be a bar to the exercise of power of
quashing. It is, however, a different matter depending upon the facts and
circumstances of each case whether to exercise or not such a power."
"9. The High Court has also relied upon the decision in case of Surendra Nath
Mohanty case for the proposition that offence declared to be non-compoundable
cannot be compounded at all even with the permission of the court. That is of course
so. The offences which can be compounded are mentioned in Section
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 6
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
320. Those offences which are not mentioned therein cannot be permitted to be
compounded. In Mohanty case the appellants were convicted by the trial court for
offence under Section 307. The High Court altered the conviction of the appellants
and convicted them for offence under Section 326 and imposed sentence of six
months. The trial court had sentenced the appellants for a period of five years' RI.
The application for compounding was, however, dismissed by the High Court. This
Court holding that the offence for which the appellants had been convicted was
non-compoundable and, therefore, it could not be permitted to be compounded but
considering that the parties had settled their dispute outside the court, the sentence
was reduced to the period already undergone. It is, however, to be borne in mind that
in the present case the appellants had not sought compounding of the offences. They
had approached the Court seeking quashing of FIR under the circumstances
abovestated."
"10. In State of Karnataka v. L. Muniswamy considering the scope of inherent power
of quashing under Section 482, this Court held that in the exercise of this wholesome
power, the High Court is entitled to quash proceedings if it comes to the conclusion
that the ends of justice so require. It was observed that in a criminal case, the veiled
object behind a lame prosecution, the very nature of the material on which the
structure of the prosecution rests and the like would justify the High Court in
quashing the proceeding in the interest of justice and that the ends of justice are
higher than the ends of mere law though justice had got to be administered according
to laws made by the legislature. This Court said that the compelling necessity for
making these observations is that without a proper realization of the object and
purpose of the provision which seeks to save the inherent powers of the High Court to
do justice between the State and its subjects, it would be impossible to appreciate the
width and contours of that salient jurisdiction. On facts, it was also noticed that there
was no reasonable likelihood of the accused being convicted of the offence. What
would happen to the trial of the case where the WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
wife does not support the imputations made in the FIR of the type in question. As
earlier noticed, now she has filed an affidavit that the FIR was registered at her
instance due to temperamental differences and implied imputations. There may be
many reasons for not supporting the imputations. It may be either for the reason that
she has resolved disputes with her husband and his other family members and as a
result thereof she has again started living with her husband with whom she earlier
had differences or she has willingly parted company and is living happily on her own
or has married someone else on the earlier marriage having been dissolved by divorce
on consent of parties or fails to support the prosecution on some other similar
grounds. In such eventuality, there would almost be no chance of conviction. Would
it then be proper to decline to exercise power of quashing on the ground that it would
be permitting the parties to compound non- compoundable offences? The answer
clearly has to be in the "negative". It would, however, be a different matter if the High
Court on facts declines the prayer for quashing for any valid reasons including lack of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 7
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
bona fides"
"11. In Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia v. Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre it was held
that while exercising inherent power of quashing under Section 482, it is for the High
Court to take into consideration any special features which appear in a particular case
to consider whether it is expedient and in the interest of justice to permit a
prosecution to continue. Where, in the opinion of the court, chances of an ultimate
conviction are bleak and, therefore, no useful purpose is likely to be served by
allowing a criminal prosecution to continue, the court may, while taking into
consideration the special facts of a case, also quash the proceedings."
"15. In view of the above discussion, we hold that the High Court in exercise of its
inherent powers can quash criminal proceedings or FIR or complaint and Section
320 of the Code does not limit or affect the powers under Section 482 of the Code."
"16. For the foregoing reasons, we set aside the impugned judgment and allow the
appeal and quash the FIR abovementioned."
[10] In the case of "Nikhil Merchant" (supra), it has been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court as under:-
"8. Apart from the said decision, reliance was also placed on another decision of this
Court in B.S. Joshi v. State of Haryana wherein while dealing with the proceedings
under Sections 498-A and 406 of the Penal Code involving matrimonial disputes and
offences, this Court held that even though the provisions of Section 320 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure would not apply to such offences WP(C) No. 699 of 2019
Contd.../-
which are not compoundable, it did not limit or affect the powers under Section 482
CrPC and the powers conferred on the High Courts and the Supreme Court under
Articles 226 and 136 of the Constitution of India. Referring to the decision of this
Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal this Court observed that the categories
indicated in the said case which warranted exercise of power under Section 482 CrPC
were only illustrative and not exhaustive. This Court ultimately held that the High
Court in exercise of its inherent powers can quash criminal proceedings or an FIR or
complaint and Section 320 CrPC does not limit or affect the power of the High Court
under Section 482 of the Code.
"30. In the instant case, the disputes between the Company and the Bank have been
set at rest on the basis of the compromise arrived at by them whereunder the dues of
the Bank have been cleared and the Bank does not appear to have any further claim
against the Company. What, however, remains is the fact that certain documents
were alleged to have been created by the appellant herein in order to avail of credit
facilities beyond the limit to which the Company was entitled. The dispute involved
herein has overtones of a civil dispute with certain criminal facets. The question
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 8
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
which is required to be answered in this case is whether the power which
independently lies with this Court to quash the criminal proceedings pursuant to the
compromise arrived at, should at all be exercised?"
"31. On an overall view of the facts as indicated hereinabove and keeping in mind the
decision of this Court in B.S. Joshi case and the compromise arrived at between the
Company and the Bank as also Clause 11 of the consent terms filed in the suit filed by
the Bank, we are satisfied that this is a fit case where technicality should not be
allowed to stand in the way in the quashing of the criminal proceedings, since, in our
view, the continuance of the same after the compromise arrived at between the
parties would be a futile exercise."
"32. We, therefore, set aside the order passed by the High Court dismissing the
petitioner's Revision Application No. 49 of 2003 in Special Case No. 80 of 1998 and
quash the proceedings against the appellant. The appeal is accordingly allowed."
[11] In the case of "Parbatbhai Aahir Alias Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur & ors." (supra), it has
been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court as under:-
WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
"11. Section 482 is prefaced with an overriding provision. The statute saves the inherent power of the
High Court, as a superior court, to make such orders as are necessary (i) to prevent an abuse of the
process of any court; or (ii) otherwise to secure the ends of justice. In Gian Singh a Bench of three
learned Judges of this Court adverted to the body of precedent on the subject and laid down guiding
principles which the High Court should consider in determining as to whether to quash an FIR or
complaint in the exercise of the inherent jurisdiction. The considerations which must weigh with the
High Court are: (SCC pp. 342-43, para 61) "61. ... the power of the High Court in quashing a criminal
proceeding or FIR or complaint in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from
the power given to a criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code.
Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in accord
with the guideline engrafted in such power viz.: (i) to secure the ends of justice, or (ii) to prevent
abuse of the process of any court. In what cases power to quash the criminal proceeding or
complaint or FIR may be exercised where the offender and the victim have settled their dispute
would depend on the facts and circumstances of each case and no category can be prescribed.
However, before exercise of such power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape,
dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or victim's family and the offender
have settled the dispute. Such offences are not private in nature and have a serious impact on
society. Similarly, any compromise between the victim and the offender in relation to the offences
under special statutes like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
servants while working in that capacity, etc.; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly and
predominatingly civil flavour stand on a different footing for the purposes of quashing, particularly
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 9
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
the offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership or such like
transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes
where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire
dispute. In this category of cases, the High Court may quash the criminal proceedings if in its view,
because of the compromise WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
between the offender and the victim, the possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
continuation of the criminal case would put the accused to great oppression and prejudice and
extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the criminal case despite full and
complete settlement and compromise with the victim. In other words, the High Court must consider
whether it would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal
proceeding or continuation of the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of law
despite settlement and compromise between the victim and the wrongdoer and whether to secure
the ends of justice, it is appropriate that the criminal case is put to an end and if the answer to the
above question(s) is in the affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its jurisdiction to quash
the criminal proceeding."
"12. In Narinder Singh, Dr Justice A.K. Sikri, speaking for a Bench of two learned
Judges of this Court observed that in respect of offences against society, it is the duty
of the State to punish the offender. In consequence, deterrence provides a rationale
for punishing the offender. Hence, even when there is a settlement, the view of the
offender and victim will not prevail since it is in the interest of society that the
offender should be punished to deter others from committing a similar crime. On the
other hand, there may be offences falling in the category where the correctional
objective of criminal law would have to be given more weightage than the theory of
deterrence. In such a case, the court may be of the opinion that a settlement between
the parties would lead to better relations between them and would resolve a festering
private dispute. The court observed that the timing of a settlement is of significance
in determining whether the jurisdiction under Section 482 should be exercised: (SCC
p. 484, para 29.7) "29.7. ...Those cases where the settlement is arrived at immediately
after the alleged commission of offence and the matter is still under investigation, the
High Court may be liberal in accepting the settlement to quash the criminal
proceedings/ investigation. It is because of the reason that at this stage the
investigation is still on and even the charge-sheet has not been filed. Likewise, those
cases where the charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is still
at infancy stage, the High Court can show benevolence in exercising its powers
favourably, but after prima facie assessment of the circumstances/material
mentioned above. On the other hand, where the prosecution evidence is almost
complete or after the conclusion of the WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
evidence the matter is at the stage of argument, normally the High Court should
refrain from exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the
trial court would be in a position to decide the case finally on merits...."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 10
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
This Court held, while dealing with an offence under Section 307 of the Penal Code that the
following circumstances had weighed with it in quashing the first information report: (SCC p. 485,
para
33) "33. We have gone through the FIR as well which was recorded on the basis of statement of the
complainant/victim. It gives an indication that the complainant was attacked allegedly by the
accused persons because of some previous dispute between the parties, though nature of dispute,
etc. is not stated in detail. However, a very pertinent statement appears on record viz. "respectable
persons have been trying for a compromise uptil now, which could not be finalised". This becomes
an important aspect. It appears that there have been some disputes which led to the aforesaid
purported attack by the accused on the complainant. In this context when we find that the elders of
the village, including Sarpanch, intervened in the matter and the parties have not only buried their
hatchet but have decided to live peacefully in future, this becomes an important consideration. The
evidence is yet to be led in the Court. It has not even started. In view of compromise between
parties, there is a minimal chance of the witnesses coming forward in support of the prosecution
case. Even though nature of injuries can still be established by producing the doctor as witness who
conducted medical examination, it may become difficult to prove as to who caused these injuries.
The chances of conviction, therefore, appear to be remote. It would, therefore, be unnecessary to
drag these proceedings. ..."
"16. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on the subject, may be
summarised in the following propositions:
"16.1. Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the High Court to prevent an
abuse of the process of any court or to secure the ends of justice. The provision does
not confer new powers. It only recognises and preserves powers which inhere in the
High Court."
"16.2. The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to quash a first information
report or a criminal proceeding on the ground that a settlement has been arrived at
between the WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
offender and the victim is not the same as the invocation of jurisdiction for the
purpose of compounding an offence. While compounding an offence, the power of
the court is governed by the provisions of Section 320 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under Section 482 is attracted even if the
offence is non- compoundable."
"16.3. In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or complaint should be
quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482, the High Court must
evaluate whether the ends of justice would justify the exercise of the inherent power."
"16.4. While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide ambit and plenitude it
has to be exercised (i) to secure the ends of justice, or (ii) to prevent an abuse of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 11
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
process of any court."
"16.5. The decision as to whether a complaint or first information report should be
quashed on the ground that the offender and victim have settled the dispute, revolves
ultimately on the facts and circumstances of each case and no exhaustive elaboration
of principles can be formulated."
"16.6. In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and while dealing with a plea
that the dispute has been settled, the High Court must have due regard to the nature
and gravity of the offence. Heinous and serious offences involving mental depravity
or offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot appropriately be quashed
though the victim or the family of the victim have settled the dispute. Such offences
are, truly speaking, not private in nature but have a serious impact upon society. The
decision to continue with the trial in such cases is founded on the overriding element
of public interest in punishing persons for serious offences."
"16.7. As distinguished from serious offences, there may be criminal cases which have
an overwhelming or predominant element of a civil dispute. They stand on a distinct
footing insofar as the exercise of the inherent power to quash is concerned."
"16.8. Criminal cases involving offences which arise from commercial, financial,
mercantile, partnership or similar transactions with an essentially civil flavour may
in appropriate situations fall for quashing where parties have settled the dispute."
WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
"16.9. In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal proceeding if in view of
the compromise between the disputants, the possibility of a conviction is remote and
the continuation of a criminal proceeding would cause oppression and prejudice; and
"16.10. There is yet an exception to the principle set out in propositions 16.8. and
16.9. above. Economic offences involving the financial and economic well-being of
the State have implications which lie beyond the domain of a mere dispute between
private disputants. The High Court would be justified in declining to quash where the
offender is involved in an activity akin to a financial or economic fraud or
misdemeanour. The consequences of the act complained of upon the financial or
economic system will weigh in the balance."
[12] In the case of "Kapil Agarwal & ors." (supra), it has been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court as
under:-
"18. However, at the same time, if it is found that the subsequent FIR is an abuse of
process of law and/or the same has been lodged only to harass the accused, the same
can be quashed in exercise of powers under Article 226 of the Constitution or in
exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC. In that case, the complaint case will
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 12
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
proceed further in accordance with the provisions of the CrPC."
"18.1. As observed and held by this Court in a catena of decisions, inherent
jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC and/or under Article 226 of the Constitution is
designed to achieve salutary purpose that criminal proceedings ought not to be
permitted to degenerate into weapon of harassment. When the Court is satisfied that
criminal proceedings amount to an abuse of process of law or that it amounts to
bringing pressure upon the accused, in exercise of inherent powers, such proceedings
can be quashed."
"18.2. As held by this Court in Parbatbhai Aahir v. State of Gujarat, Section 482 CrPC
is prefaced with an overriding provision. The statute saves the inherent power of the
High Court, as a superior court, to make such orders as are necessary (i) to prevent
an abuse of the process of any court; or (ii) otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
Same are the powers with the High Court, when it exercises the powers under Article
226 of the Constitution."
WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
[13] In the present case, there is nothing on record to show that after
registration of the said FIR any action has been taken up by the Police for
investigation and prosecution of the accused persons named in the FIR and
moreover, none of the accused persons have been arrested by the Police in
connection with the said FIR. On the other hand, as the dispute or misunderstanding
had been settled or resolved amicably between the complainant and the accused
persons in the presence of the respectable and responsible villagers of the said village
by executing a deed of Compromise Agreement, this court is of the considered view
that the possibility of conviction of the accused persons is remote and blink and
continuation of the criminal case could put the accused persons to great oppression
and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to them by not quashing the
criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise with the
complainant.
[14] Taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of the present case and
keeping in view the well settled principle of law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court
that to secure the ends of justice or to prevent an abuse of the process of the court,
the High Court can quash and set aside the FIR in exercise of its inherent power
provided under Article 226 of the Constitution and/ or Section 482 of the Cr.PC, this
court found no force or merit in the submission advanced by the learned GA. This
court is also of the considered view that the judgments relied on by the learned GA is
not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case for the simple
reason that the facts and circumstances of the said case and the facts and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 13
2 vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 18 July, 2024
circumstances of the present case are totally different.
WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
[15] In the result, the present writ petition is allowed by quashing and
setting aside the impugned FIR being FIR No. 87(07)2019 CCP-PS u/s
506/447/153-A/427/147 IPC in order to secure the ends of justice and to prevent the
abuse of the process of the court. The writ petition is disposed of accordingly. Parties
are to bear their own costs.
JUDGE
FR / NFR
Devananda
WP(C) No. 699 of 2019 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14077012/ 14
