(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ...
Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
Author: Sashikanta Mishra
Bench: Sashikanta Mishra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
I.A. No.13 of 2025
(ELPET No.03 of 2024)
(An application under Sections 81,83,86 and 87 of the
Representation of People Act, 1951 read with Order VI Rule
16 & Order-VII Rule 11 read with Order VII Rule 14 of C.P.C.,
1908)
Manorama Mohanty ... Petitioner
(Respondent in the
Election Petition)
-versus-
Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party
(Petitioner in
the Election Petition)
Advocates appeared in the case through hybrid mode:
For Petitioner : Mr.G.K.Agarwal,
Sr. Advocate
-versus-
For Opposite Party
: Mr. Bidyadhar Mishra
Sr.Advocate.
Mr. T.K.Biswal,
Advocate
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CORAM:
JUSTICE SASHIKANTA MISHRA
ORDER
11.03.2025.
Sashikanta Mishra,J. This application has been filed by the sole Respondent of the above Election
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49691477/ 1
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
Petition under Order VI Rule 16, Order VII Rule 11 read with Order VII Rule 14 of the C.P.C. and
Sections 81, 83, 86 and 87 of the Representation of People Act, 1951 and the rules framed there
under.
2. The Election Petition has been filed with two fold prayer;
(1) To declare the election of sole Respondent-Manorama Mohanty from 81 Narla Assembly
Constituency as void and to set aside the same, and (2) To declare that the affidavit filed by the sole
Respondent-Manorama Mohanty in Form-26 does not disclose complete, correct and true
information regarding her educational qualification as mentioned under Col.11 of the said affidavit.
3. Notice of the Election Petition being served upon the sole Respondent, she has entered
appearance and filed her written statement. Additionally, she has filed the instant application to
which the Election Petitioner has filed his objection.
4. The present application has been filed with prayer to dismiss the Election Petition in limine under
Section 86 of the Act on the following grounds;
(i) The copy of election petition served on the Petitioner/Respondent though official mail of this
Hon'ble Court is not the exact and true copy of the original Election Petition filed in Court.
(ii) The Election Petition has not been signed and verified by the election petitioner as required u/s
83(1)(c) of the Act read with Order VI Rule 15 C.P.C. The affidavit appended to the election petition
has not been signed and sworn either before the Notary Public or before the Oath Commissioner, as
required under the law.
(iii) There is complete lack of oath/affirmation of the Election Petitioner as required under Sec.
83(1)(c) of the R.P. Act, 1951 read with Order VI Rule 15 C.P.C and Chapter VI Rule 16 of High Court
of Orissa Rules, 1948 for verification of the pleadings. Thus, the Election Petition does not confirm
to the requirement of Sub-section (3) of Sec. 81 of the R.P. Act, 1951 and is to be dismissed u/s 86 of
the Act in limine.
(iv) The election petition has not been signed and verified by the election petitioner in the manner
laid down in the C.P.C. for the verification of pleadings. The election petition has not been presented
along with the Affidavit as required under Sec. 83(1)(c) of the Act read with Order-VI Rule-15 of the
C.P.C. and Chapter VI Rule 16 of High Court of Orissa Rules, 1948 and as such, the election petition
is liable to be dismissed in limine.
(v) The Affidavit appended to the election petition served on the Respondent is without oath and
affirmation. The election petition having been filed without the affidavit as required under law is no
Petition under the eye of law, and as such the same is liable to be dismissed under section 86 of the
R.P. Act, 1951.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49691477/ 2
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
(vi) On a plain reading of the election petition it appears that the election petitioner sues upon
several documents and/or relies upon several documents purported to be in his possession or power
in support of his claim /allegation in the election petition. The election petitioner has neither
produced such documents in court, when the election petition was presented nor has delivered
copies of such documents to the Respondent, therefore the election petition is incomplete and the
same is liable to be dismissed at the threshold on this score alone.
(vii) The documents referred to in the pleadings of the Election Petition on the basis of which
averments have been made in the Election Petition have not been annexed along with the election
petition nor copies of such documents have been provided to the Respondent, nor contents of such
documents have been reproduced in the election petition so that the Respondent shall not be
prejudiced to set up his defence. Therefore, the election petition is incomplete and is liable to be
dismissed at the very threshold under Sec. 86 for non-compliance of Sec. 81 and Sec. 83 of the R.P.
Act, 1951.
(viii) The election petitioner has absolutely no cause of action to file the above election petition. The
election petition has been filed purely on false, frivolous and imaginary grounds and on bald
allegations without any supporting materials and documents. Hence, the same are liable to be
dismissed in limine.
(ix) The election petition is liable to be dismissed as none of the ingredients of Sections 100, 101 and
123 of the R.P. Act, 1951 have been satisfied in the present case.
In addition, objections have been raised in respect of each of the paragraphs of the Election Petition,
the particulars of which would be stated in detail hereinafter.
5. Heard Mr. G.K.Agarwal, learned Senior counsel with S. Srivastava for the sole
Respondent/Petitioner in the I.A. and Mr. Bidyadhar Mishra, learned Senior counsel with Mr.
T.K.Biswal, learned counsel, for the Election Petitioner/Opp.Party in the I.A.
6. Mr. Agarwal, learned Senior counsel, would argue that the copy of the Election Petition served on
the sole respondent through official mail of this Court is not the exact true copy of the original
Election Petition filed in the Court.
In response, Mr.B.Mishra, learned Senior counsel, would submit that the Respondent intentionally
avoided to receive notice which prompted this Court to direct the Registry to serve notice on the
Respondent by e-mail and through Court process. The copy of the Election Petition as filed before
this Court was sent by e-mail and therefore, the allegation that it is not the exact true copy is
baseless.
7. It is settled law that the purpose of serving a true copy of the Election Petition and affidavit is to
enable the respondent to understand the charges and prepare an effective defence. In the case of
T.M.Jacob v. C. Poulose and others;1, the Supreme Court held as follows;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49691477/ 3
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
"35. The object of serving a "true copy"
of an election petition and the affidavit filed in support of the allegations of corrupt practice on the
respondent in the election petition is to enable the respondent to understand the charge against him
so that he can effectively meet the same in the written statement and prepare his defence. The
requirement is, thus, of substance and not of form.
36. The expression "copy" in Section 81(3) of the Act, in our opinion, means a copy which is
substantially so and which does not contain any material or substantial variation of a vital nature as
could possibly mislead a reasonable person to understand and meet the charges/allegations made
against him in the election petition. Indeed a copy which differs in material particulars from the
original cannot be treated as a true copy of the original within the meaning of Section 81(3) of the
Act and the vital defect cannot be permitted to be cured after the expiry of the period of limitation."
8. Coming to the case at hand, this Court finds that the Respondent has not been able to
demonstrate as to how the copy of the Election Petition served upon (1999) 4 SCC 274 her was
different from the one filed in the Court or that she was not in a position to understand the
averments made therein or was misled in any manner. The objection raised in this regard is
therefore, untenable.
9. Mr.Agarwal, learned Senior counsel, next argued that the Election Petition has not been signed
and verified by the Election Petitioner as required under Section 83(1)(c) of the Act read with Order
VI Rule 15 of C.P.C. The affidavit appended to the Election Petition has not been signed and sworn
before the Oath Commissioner.
Mr. B.Mishra, learned Senior Counsel, would submit that the Election Petition has been signed and
verified in consonance with the provisions of Order VI Rule 15. Further, the Election Petitioner has
himself attested and signed on each page. He has also sworn affidavit before the Oath Commissioner
of this Court.
10. This Court has perused the Election Petition and finds that each of the pages thereof have been
attested and signed by the Election Petitioner himself. The Election Petition is appended with
verification followed by affidavit as prescribed. It cannot therefore, be held that the Election Petition
was not properly verified or there was no affidavit. Even otherwise, it has been held that the defect
in such respect, if any, is curable and that it is sufficient if there is substantial compliance. In this
context, reference may be had to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Thangjam
Arunkumar vs. Yumkham Erabot Singh and others;2. Moreover, what exactly is the defect has not
been specified save and except for pleading that the Election Petition was not verified in terms of
Section 83(1)(c) of the Act and Order VI Rule 15 of C.P.C. The objection raised by the Respondent on
that count is therefore not tenable.
11. Mr. Agarwal would then argue that the Election Petition also contains the list of documents
relied (2023) 11 S.C.R. 392 upon, but the said documents have not been filed along with the Election
Petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49691477/ 4
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
In reply, Mr. B. Mishra would submit that the Election Petitioner has relied upon Form 2(B) and
Form-26 of the Respondent. Additionally, the Election Petitioner has relied upon two documents
received under the R.T.I. Act. Since the documents are public in nature and have already been
referred to, the same can always be filed at the time of trial.
12. Perusal of the Election Petition reveals that a list of documents relied upon has been appended
thereto. The documents are; copy of Form-B of the Respondent, copy of Form 26 of the Respondent,
copy of information received under R.T.I. Act dated 19.5.2022 from Panchayat Samiti Office, Narla,
copy of the information No.103 dated 20.6.2024 received from Headmistress, Government Girls'
High School, Bhawanipatna and any other document to be filed at the time of hearing. In so far as
the documents at Sl. Nos.3 and 4 are concerned, the averments relating thereto have been made
under Paragraph-7 (ii). In other words, the contents of the documents have been pleaded and relied
upon in support of the contentions put forth by the Election Petitioner. While the contents or the
information contained in the documents are integral to the Election Petition, the document itself
may not be an integral part. To amplify, had the Election Petitioner not related the contents of the
documents in question and merely referred to the document, in such case it would have formed
integral part of the petition but in the instant case, as already stated, the contents of the document
or the information received through it have been stated in detail. Therefore, mere non-production of
the document by itself, according to the considered view of this Court, cannot be fatal to the election
petition. In the case of F.A. Sapa and others vs. Singora and others;3, the Supreme Court held as
follows;
"The next grievance of the appellants is that they were not served with a true copy of
the election petition inasmuch as the annexures served therewith were not true
copies of the original.
(1991)3 SCC 375 Section 83(2) lays down that any schedule or annexure to the
petition shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the same manner as a
petition. The grievance under this head is not that there is no compliance with section
83(2) but that the annexure which was an integral part of the election petition was
not a true copy of the original, inasmuch as certain pages found in the annexure
produced with the petition were missing from the copies supplied to the returned
candidates/appellants. It was strongly submitted that an annexure which is an
integral part of the election petition is an important and vital document and failure to
supply a true copy thereof clearly violates the mandatory requirement of section
81(3) and renders the petition liable to be dismissed by virtue of section 86(1) of the
R.P. Act.
As held in Sahodrabai' case (supra) where details of averments too compendious for inclusion in the
petition are included in the schedule or annexure, the schedule or annexure in that case must be
treated as integrated with the election petition and must comply with the requirement of Section
83(2) and section 81(3) failing which the provision of section 86(1) would stand attracted. But this
does not apply to a schedule or annexure which produces a document as evidence in support of the
allegation in the election petition. Such a schedule or annexure cannot be described as integrated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49691477/ 5
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
with the election petition and defect in verification thereof would not prove fatal. In Sasidharan's
case (supra) the same principle has been reiterated. In that case the election petitioner referred to a
video cassette showing progress of the constituency which also contained speeches of government
servants. A copy of the document was not served on the opposite party along with the election
petition. It was held that the said document formed part of the election petition and failure to supply
a copy thereof along with the election petition was fatal. If a document does not form an integral
part of the election petition but is merely referred to in the petition of filed in the proceedings as
evidence of any fact, failure to supply a copy-thereof will not prove fatal. Therefore, the
maintainability of an election petition, in the context of the point on hand will depend on whether
the schedule or annexure to the petition constitutes an integral part of the election petition or not. If
it constitutes an integral part it must satisfy the requirements of section 81(3) and failure in that
behalf would be fatal. But if it does not constitute an integral part of the election petition, a copy
thereof need not be served along with the petition to the opposite party. Much would, therefore,
depend on whether the schedule or annexure was an integral part of the election petition or not; if
the former, failure to serve it along with the petition to the returned candidate would be fatal but not
so in the latter case. The appellants contend that it was an integral part of the election petition but
the High Court did not go into this question; it solely relied on the Stamp Reporter's report. It then
emphasised that no defect was noticed by the Stamp Reporter in the following words:
"The stamp reporter, in the instant case, found the copies in order and made his
endorsement accordingly. I do not find any reason not to rely upon the endorsement
of the stamp reporter."
Therefore, the criticism that the High Court which was duty bound to apply its mind and decide the
question judicially had abdicated in favour of the Stamp Reporter's decision extracted earlier. We
are afraid this criticism is not wholly correct because the High Court has also observed that `no
specific omission or deviation in the copy from the original was pointed out' nor was it shown that
the respondents were misled on that account. We have also closely scrutinised the application made
by the returned candidate in the High Court and except for a general allegation that the annexure
served along with the petition was not a true copy, no specific allegation is found. However, in the
special leave petition filed in this Court question No.(vi) states that certain pages were missing from
the copy of the annexure served on the returned candidate. Then in paragraph 11 it is averred that
pages 15 and 16 of Annexure II were missing. Since no such specific allegation was made in the
application filed by the returned candidate, the High Court had no occasion to go into this allegation
and to ascertain if the missing pages contained material forming an integral part of the election
petition. We would not like to embark upon an inquiry in this behalf and would leave it to the
appellants to agitate the question before the High Court. We would request the High Court to
examine the contention on merits, if raised, and answer the same in accordance with law. For the
above reasons therefore, this Court is unable to accept the contentions advanced by Mr. Agarwal
that the documents relied upon not having been filed along with the Election Petition or served
upon the Respondent cannot be treated as fatal to the petition. It is for the Election Petitioner to
produce the documents at the time of trial to substantiate the contentions advanced relating thereto.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49691477/ 6
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
13. Having dealt with the preliminary grounds urged by the sole Respondent, this Court would now
deal with the specific contentions raised by her in respect of the individual paragraphs of the
Election Petition.
(i) It is stated that under paragraphs 1 to 6 of the Election Petition that the pleadings are in respect
of the area and schedule of election, names of contesting candidates, their symbols, party affiliation
etc. These do not disclose any cause of action. Mr.Agarwal would argue in this context that unless
the pleadings disclose a cause of action, the Election Petition cannot be maintained.
Mr. B. Mishra, on the other hand, would submit that the said paragraphs of the Election Petition
cannot be read in isolation and moreove,r the necessary introductory facts have only been pleaded
in the said paragraphs.
After going through the averments made in paragraphs 1 to 6 of the Election Petition, this Court
finds that only the relevant information with regard to the election, contesting candidates and their
party affiliation etc. have been indicated. As submitted by learned Senior counsel Mr.B.Mishra,
these are formal in nature and necessary to introduce the other grounds on which the Election
Petition is based and therefore, cannot be read in isolation. The argument of Mr. Agarwal in this
regard is therefore, untenable.
(ii) It is stated in paragraph-7 (i) and (ii) that the Election Petitioner has relied upon an affidavit
filed in a previous Panchayat Election, which has no relevance to the election in question. Further, it
is not stated how the declaration in Form 26 is false and the same has materially affected the result
of the election. According to Mr. Agarwal, the Election Petitioner alleges that the age declared by the
Respondent in the affidavit in Form 26 is false inasmuch as she declared to have completed
Secondary Education in 2021, but the School records and information received under R.T.I. Act
reveal that she repeatedly failed in H.S.C. Examinations from1988 to 1992. According to Mr.
Agarwal, it settled law that the School Admission Register is not conclusive proof of date of birth. He
relies upon the judgment of this Court in the case of Mayadhar Nayak vs. Sub-Divisional Officer,
Jajpur and others; 1982 SCC Online Ori-1. In the instant case, the Respondent completed her
secondary education from Bihar Board of Open Schooling and Examination in 2020-21 and
correctly stated her date of birth as 11.6.1978. The allegations made by the Election Petitioner are
therefore, completely false and baseless.
Mr. B. Mishra, on the other hand, would argue that the very fact that the Respondent has, in the I.A.
filed by her, denied the allegation relating to her age as made in the Election Petition, by itself
proves that it is a triable issue, which requires adjudication. Therefore, according to Mr.Mishra, the
pleadings cannot be struck out nor the case can be rejected at the threshold.
After considering the grounds raised in the I.A. and the contentions advanced, this Court is inclined
to accept the argument of Mr. Mishra that the Election Petitioner has made certain allegations in her
Election Petition regarding false declaration of the date of birth of the respondent. Said allegation
appears to be based upon the School Admission Register and other documents obtained under the
R.T.I. Act. Having pleaded so, it is for the Election Petitioner to prove the same by adducing
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49691477/ 7
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
evidence. Moreover, applicability or otherwise of the judgment cited can only be considered after the
evidence is laid before this Court in the context of the facts pleaded. It cannot therefore, be said that
the pleadings in question do not disclose any cause of action or that the pleadings being
unnecessary, frivolous or vexatious are liable to be struck out.
(iii) It is stated that the pleadings under paragraphs- 8(i) to 8(v) do not disclose any cause of action.
They only outline the general facts relating to the election such as constituency, number of
candidates, nomination process etc. According to the Respondent, these pleadings do not disclose
any action of action. Mr. Agarwal would argue that these pleadings do not disclose any material fact
nor any cause of action for which the Election Petition must be held to be in non- compliance of
Sections 81 and 83 of the Act. In this regard, Mr.Agarwal has relied upon the Judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of Jyoti Basu and others vs. Debi Ghosal and others,4 and in the case of
Azhar Hussain vs. Rajiv Gandhi;5.
Mr.B.Mishra, on the other hand, would argue that the pleadings under Paragraphs-8(i) to (v) of the
Election Petition, being formal in nature cannot be read in isolation, but have to be read along with
other paragraphs of the petition. It is not the requirement of law that each paragraph of the Election
Petition must independently disclose a cause of action.
After going through the relevant sub-paragraphs of Paragraph-8 of the Election Petition and on
consideration of rival contentions put forth, this Court is inclined to accept the argument of
Mr.B.Bishra that (1982) 1 SCC 691 1986 (supp) SCC 315 each paragraph of the Election Petition does
not necessarily have to disclose a cause of action independently. Rather, the Election Petition has to
be read holistically. Moreover, the paragraphs referred to by the Respondent are formal in nature
and are merely reproduction of the basic facts necessary to introduce the allegations made in the
subsequent paragraphs and therefore, cannot be read in isolation.
(iv) It is stated that in Paragraph-9 of the Election Petition that the Election Petitioner has simply
quoted the provision of Section 33-A of the Act which by itself does not give rise to any cause of
action. Mr. Agarwal would argue in this context that the election of a returned candidate can be
questioned only by pleading material facts and particulars as per Section 83(1) of the R.P. Act. As
such, the pleadings under Paragraph-9 are unnecessary, baseless and vague.
Mr. B. Mishra, on the other hand, would argue that the Election Petitioner has referred to the
relevant statutory provision in order to justify the other pleadings containing specific allegations
and therefore, cannot be treated as unnecessary.
As already stated, it not necessary nor the requirement of law that each paragraph of the Election
Petition must necessarily reveal a cause of action independently. Reading of the Paragraph-9 reveals
that the Petitioner has extracted the provision under Section 33-A of the Act and has subsequently
tried to plead as to how the said provision was violated by the returned candidate. Therefore, the
pleading cannot be treated as unnecessary so as to be struck out.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49691477/ 8
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
(v) In paragraph-10 of the Election Petition, it has been alleged that the Respondent in her affidavit
in Form 26 has given a false declaration about her educational qualification deliberately. According
to the Respondent, the Election Petitioner has not pleaded as to how the Respondent deliberately
did so, what are the false declarations and the source of his information. In this context, Mr.
Agarwal would argue that unless material facts and particulars are pleaded, such bald allegations
cannot be the basis for making a fishing and roving inquiry by the Court.
Mr. B.Mishra, on the other hand, would argue that the very fact that the Respondent states that the
allegations are false, implies that he denies the same. This, in turn, implies that the issues raised are
triable and therefore, the pleadings definitely reveal a cause of action.
Reference to Paragraph-10 reveals that according to the Petitioner, the Respondent in her affidavit
dated 23.4.2024, submitted in Form 26, deliberately provided false declaration regarding her
educational qualification making her nomination liable for rejection. It is true that further
particulars of the alleged false declaration in Form 26 have not been given but, as stated earlier, the
Election Petition has to be read as a whole and no paragraph can be read in isolation. If such
exercise is undertaken, it will reveal that the election of Respondent has been questioned mainly on
the ground that she had falsely declared her educational qualification in the affidavit in Form 26. In
fact, the details of the alleged false declaration have been highlighted under Pararaph-7(ii). The
entire Election Petition is silent as regards any other allegations. Therefore, the allegations made
under Paragraph-10 has to be read in the context of the only allegation made by the Election
Petitioner i.e. regarding the so called false declaration regarding educational qualification made by
the Respondent in the affidavit in Form 26. The contentions advanced on behalf of the respondent
cannot therefore, be accepted.
(vi) With regard to Paragraph-11 of the Election Petition, it is stated that the nomination of the
Respondent has been questioned with reference to judgment of the Supreme Court but without
specifying which judgment. According to Mr. Agarwal, unless there are clear and concise pleadings,
the Court cannot indulge in any fishing or roving inquiry, which would be an abuse of the process of
the Court.
Mr.B.Mishra, on the other hand, would argue that the Election Petitioner has merely stated that as
per the law laid down by the Supreme Court the nomination for declaration regarding educational
qualification by the Respondent is liable to be rejected. The relevant case laws shall be cited at the
time of trial.
It is trite law that only facts and not law are required to be pleaded. Paragraph-11 undoubtedly refers
to "decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court" without giving the particulars of the said decision. But the
same is of no consequence because the allegation is with regard to false declaration in the affidavit.
It is for the Election Petitioner to substantiate his allegation by referring to the relevant case laws at
the time of trial. Only because the relevant case law has not been cited, cannot be a ground to throw
away the Election Petition at the threshold.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49691477/ 9
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
(vii) With regard to the averments in paragraph-12, it is stated that the material facts such as how
the nomination was invalid, how the returning Officer improperly accepted it or how the votes cast
in favour of the Respondent are void, have not been pleaded. Further, how the result of the election
was materially affected have also not been pleaded. Mr.Agarwal would argue that it is necessary for
the Election Petitioner to plead all material facts and to show as to how the result of the election was
affected because of improper acceptance of the nomination. Mr. Agarwal has relied upon the
judgment of the Mairembam Prithviraj @ Prithiviraj Singh vs. Pukhrem Sharatchandra Singh;
2017(2) SCC 487.
Mr.B.Mishra, on the other hand, would argue that the Election Petitioner has specifically referred to
the facts/pleadings in the preceding paragraphs of the Election Petition and has tried to make a
summary thereof in Paragraph-12 and nothing more.
(viii) Reading of Paragraph-12 of the Election Petition clearly reveals that the said paragraph starts
with reference to the facts/pleadings in the preceding paragraphs with regard to the submission of
the alleged false affidavit by the Respondent giving false information regarding her educational
qualification and her age. Thus, nothing new has been pleaded in the said paragraph. As argued by
Mr. Mishra, the pleadings under Paragraph-12 are in the form of reiteration of the earlier
paragraphs and as stated earlier, are to be read conjointly with the other paragraphs. The objection
raised in this regard by the Respondent is therefore, not tenable.
(ix) As regards, Paragraphs-13 to 15 of the Election Petitioner, it stated that the same do not reveal
any cause of action for which the same need to be struck out. Mr.Agarwal would submit that unless
the averments disclose a valid cause of action, the Election Petition cannot be held to be
maintainable in law.
Mr. B. Mishra, on the other hand, would argue that in the paragraphs in question, the Election
Petitioner has referred to the jurisdiction of this Court, limitation period for filing of the Election
Petition and the security deposit made, which is necessary to constitute the Election Petition.
Reading of Paragraphs-13 to 15 of the Election Petition would reveal that the Election Petitioner has
not made any specific allegations thereunder, but has asserted about the territorial jurisdiction of
this Court, the fact that the Election Petition was filed within time and regarding deposit of
Rs.2,000/- as security for cost as required under Section 117 of the Act. It is evident that these are
facts concomitant to maintain an Election Petition as prescribed under the Act and an assertion that
the same is a valid Election Petition. As such, it does not necessarily have to disclose any cause of
action, which has already been disclosed in the previous paragraphs.
14. Thus, from a conspectus of the analysis of facts, the position of law and the contentions advanced
by the parties, this Court is of the view that no ground is made out by the Respondent for this Court
to exercise jurisdiction under Order VI Rule 16 of C.P.C.to strike out any of the pleadings or under
Order VII Rule 11 of C.P.C. to reject the petition at the threshold or to dismiss the Election Petition
under Section 83 of the Act. On the contrary, it is held that the Election Petition as laid does disclose
a valid cause of action and involves triable issues for which it would not be proper to throw away the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49691477/ 10
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Bhakta Charan Das ... Opposite Party on 11 March, 2025
Election Petition at the threshold without taking it to trial.
15. In the result, the I.A. is held to be sans any merit and is therefore, dismissed.
.................................. Sashikanta Mishra, Judge Ashok Kumar Behera Designation:
A.D.R.-cum-Addl. Principal Secretary Location: High Court Orissa, Cuttack Date: 12-Mar-2025
12:11:16
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49691477/ 11
