(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite
Party on 21 March, 2025
Author: Sashikanta Mishra
Bench: Sashikanta Mishra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
I.A. No.111 of 2024
(ELPET No.07 of 2024)
(An application under Sections 81,82,83,86 and 87 of the
Representation of People Act, 1951 read with Order VI Rule
16, Order-VII Rule 11 read with Order VII Rule 14 of C.P.C.,
1908)
Tankadhar Tripathy ... Petitioner
(Respondent in the
Election Petition)
-versus-
Dipali Das ... Opposite Party
(Petitioner in
the Election Petition)
Advocates appeared in the case through hybrid mode:
For Petitioner : Mr.G.K.Agarwal,
Sr. Advocate
Ms. S.Srivastava,
Advocate.
-versus-
For Opposite Party
: Mr. Bidyadhar Mishra
Sr.Advocate.
Mr. T.K.Biswal,
Advocate
---------------------------------------------------------------------------
CORAM:
JUSTICE SASHIKANTA MISHRA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 1
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
ELEPT 07 of 2024 Page 1 of 38
ORDER
21.03.2025.
Sashikanta Mishra,J. This application has been filed by the sole Respondent of the above Election
Petition under Order VI Rule 16 and Order VII Rule 11 read with Order VII Rule 14 of the C.P.C. and
Sections 81, 82, 83, 86 and 87 of the Representation of People Act, 1951 with prayer to strike out the
pleadings under Paragraphs-5 to 14 and 14-A to 14-L of the Election Petition and to reject/dismiss
the Election Petition in its entirety at the very threshold under Section 86 of the Act. It is stated that
the pleadings in the aforementioned paragraphs sought to be struck out are wholly unnecessary,
frivolous, scandalous, etc. and an attempt to abuse the process of this Court. Further, the Election
Petition being bereft of material facts and particulars and not disclosing a complete cause of action
nor constituting any triable issues needs to be dismissed at the threshold.
2. The Election Petition has been filed by the Election Petitioner questioning the election of the sole
Respondent from 7-Jharsuguda Assembly Constituency to Odisha State Legislative Assembly in the
General Elections, 2024, seeking the prayers as enumerated under Paragraphs-A to N of the prayer
portion of the petition. Pursuant to summons issued by this Court upon admission of the Election
Petition, the sole Respondent entered appearance and filed his written statement. In addition, he
has filed the present I.A. to which a written objection has been filed by the Election Petitioner. The
grounds set forth in the I.A. along with contentions raised by the parties shall be discussed in detail
hereinafter.
3. For convenience, the parties are referred to as per their original status in the Election Petition.
4. Heard Mr. G.K.Agarwal, learned Senior counsel with Ms. S. Srivastava for the sole
Respondent/Petitioner in the I.A. and Mr. Bidyadhar Mishra, learned Senior counsel with Mr.
T.K.Biswal, learned counsel for the Election Petitioner/Opp.Party in the I.A.
5. At the outset, Mr. Agarwal, learned Senior counsel, would argue that the copy of the Election
Petition served on the sole Respondent through Court process is not the exact and true copy of the
original Election Petition filed in Court. Mr. Agarwal draws attention of the Court to the Election
Petition and submits that the original Election Petition contains seal and signature of the Oath
Commissioner at the bottom of the affidavit at page 123 but the signatures of the Oath
Commissioner are not available in pages 1 to 122 as required under Chapter IV Rule 16 of the Orissa
High Court Rules, 1948 and therefore, cannot be said to be a true copy as per Section 81(3) of the
Act.
Per contra, Mr.B.Mishra, learned Senior counsel, would submit that the Election Petition was
presented upon the Election Petitioner taking oath before the Oath Commissioner. The Oath
Commissioner has endorsed his signature at the bottom of the affidavit, which is substantial
compliance of the statutory requirement. The sole Respondent has not established as to how he was
prejudiced because of non- availability of signatures of the Oath Commissioner from pages 1 to 122.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 2
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
The Election Petitioner has attested each page of the Election Petition by putting her signature with
the endorsement 'attested to be true copy of the original Election Petition'.
6. It is true that the Election Petition contains signature of the Oath Commissioner of this Court only
at page 123 under the affidavit sworn by the Election Petitioner. Assuming that non-signing of each
page by the Oath Commissioner is a defect, the same, in the considered view of this Court, cannot be
treated as fatal to the Election Petition as a whole, more so, when it has not been shown as to how
the Respondent was prejudiced by it. Further, it has not been demonstrated that the copy of the
petition served on the Respondent was different from the one filed before this Court. Even
otherwise, it is the settled position of law that 'true copy of Election Petition' within the meaning of
Section 81(3) does not mean absolutely exact copy, but it is one which no reasonable person can
misunderstand as not being the same as the original. Reference can be had in this regard to the
judgment of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of T.M.Jacob v. C. Poulose and
others;1. The Supreme Court referred to the doctrine of substantial compliance emanating from
violation of Section 81 of the Act and the doctrine of curability emanating from Section 83 of the Act.
It was held that it is not every minor variation in form but only a vital defect in substance which can
lead to a finding of non- compliance of the provisions of Section 81(3) of the Act with the
consequence enumerated under Section 86(1). The ground raised by Mr. Agarwal is therefore, not
acceptable.
7. It is stated that allegations have been made against another candidate namely, Amita Biswal of
(1999) 4 SCC 274 Indian National Congress to the effect that she had concealed material
information in her affidavit in Form 26. Further, the affidavit in Form 26 of said Amita Biswal was
not presented by her before the Returning Officer or by any of her proposers, but by one Manish
Kumar Bajpayee, which violates the mandate of law. However, said Amita Biswal has not been made
party to the Election Petition and therefore, in her absence, the Election Petitioner cannot question
her nomination nor the same can be adjudicated.
Per contra, Mr.B.Mishra, learned Senior counsel, would argue that Amita Biswal is not a necessary
party as prescribed under Section 82 of the Act since the prayer of the Election Petitioner is limited
to declare the election as void and to set aside the same without containing any allegation of corrupt
practice against Amita Biswal.
This point shall be disclosed in detail while discussing the pleadings under Paragraph-14.
8. Having dealt with these preliminary objections to the Election Petition as per the I.A., this Court
would now proceed to deal with the grounds raised by the Respondent relating to the individual
paragraphs of the Election Petition.
9. Paragraphs 1 to 4 of the Election Petition are formal in nature. In so far as Paragraph-5 is
concerned, according to the sole respondent, the same lacks in pleading of material facts and
particulars besides being false, frivolous and vexatious. In this context Mr.Agarwal, learned Senior
counsel would argue that there is no pleading that on the date of scrutiny, the Election Petitioner or
her representative Ram Chandra Pradhan was present in the office of the Returning Officer or that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 3
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
they had raised objections in writing during scrutiny of nominations. Who others were present and
what was the process of scrutiny adopted, etc. have also not been pleaded.
Mr. Mishra, on the other hand, would argue that the Election Petitioner is not required to plead all
such facts as raised by the sole Respondent as it is her contention that despite objections being
raised, the nomination of the respondent was accepted. The basic facts having been pleaded, the
Election Petitioner would endeavour to prove the same by adducing evidence at the time of trial.
It is further stated by the sole respondent that objections were purportedly raised with regard to the
nomination of the Respondent on the ground of non- disclosure and his criminal
antecedent/criminal cases as well assets/liabilities of self, spouse and dependents. The Election
Petitioner has not pleaded the number of criminal cases, name of the Police Station and the Court
where such cases are pending. The source of information has also not been disclosed. Rather, no
objection was ever raised by the Election Petitioner as claimed. Mr. Agarwal argues that unless,
these vital facts are pleaded, the pleading cannot constitute a valid cause of action.
Per contra, Mr. Mishra would submit that according to the Election Petitioner, the respondent did
not disclose some criminal cases pending against him by mentioning the Police Case Number
though the Court case number was not given. It cannot be said that the Respondent was not aware
of the criminal cases, the same being instituted against him. According to the Election Petitioner
therefore, it was pleaded that this non-disclosure has the effect of misleading the voters.
The pleadings in Paragraph-5 appear to be a general summation of the allegations which are more
fully described in the individual sub-paragraph of Paragraph-14. Hence, this Court deems it proper
to discuss and consider the same at the appropriate place to avoid repetition.
10. It is stated that Paragraph-6 simply states the name of the contesting candidates, their symbols
and party affiliation which do not give rise to a cause of action.
It is stated in opposition that these are facts necessary to introduce the grounds urged subsequently
to challenge the Election.
After perusing the pleading in Paragraph-6 of the Election Petition, this Court is of the view that the
same is formal in nature and though it does not by itself constitute a cause of action yet, the same
cannot be read in isolation, but along with the other paragraphs. In fact, the Election Petition is to
be read as a whole.
11. It is stated under Paragraph-7 that the Election Petitioner has failed to plead the details of the
Polling Agents of the Election Petitioner of the 43 numbers of Polling Stations and whether they
were present throughout till closure of the Poll, whether there were any discrepancies in their entry
made in respect of total number of votes polled and counted etc. The Election Petitioner has also
failed to plead the details of the Presiding Officer and the Polling Officers who were present in the
43 Polling Stations. The Election Petitioner has also not stated whether Form 17(C) Part-I was filled
up or not and whether the Polling Agents of the Election Petitioner signed thereon and whether they
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 4
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
raised objection for non-supply of the Form. The Election Petitioner has also not pleaded how
non-supply of the Form 17 (C) Part-1 materially affected the result of the election. The allegations
against the Officers have been made without pleading that they had acted at the behest of the
Respondent.
Per contra, it is stated that the Election Petitioner has referred to the specific polling stations by
mentioning the numbers of each with the allegation that Presiding Officers of the said stations,
despite being duty bound under law to supply copy of the Form-17(C), Part-1 duly filled in under
their signature to the respective Polling Agents, did not do so.
12. It is seen that the above pleadings in Paragraph- 7 contain allegations that have also been stated
in detail under Paragraph-14(I). Hence, the contentions raised shall be dealt with at the appropriate
place.
13. According to the sole Respondent, the Election Petitioner has failed to plead under Paragraph-8,
the details of her Polling Agents and of the other contesting candidates, who were present in the 14
Polling Stations, the details of the Polling Officer who did not comply with the statutory
requirements. Further, what are the defects which are curable in nature, have not been stated. The
material particulars of the facts stated in the table have not been stated.
It has been stated in opposition that the Election Petitioner has pointed out the incurable defects in
Col.6 of Form 17(C) Part-1 committed by the Presiding Officer of the 14 Polling Stations with their
numbers and the total number of votes recorded in the EVM in support of her allegations.
14. It is observed that the pleadings in Paragraph-8 contain allegations that have also been stated in
detail under Paragraph-14(J). Hence, the contentions raised shall be dealt with at the appropriate
place.
15. According to the sole respondent, the Election Petitioner in Paragraph-9 has not pleaded the
details of the Counting Agent, who raised objection during counting of votes and who were the other
officers and Counting Agents present at that time. She has also not pleaded why she or her Counting
Agent did not bring the fact to the knowledge of the District Election Officer and Election Observer,
who were present, or the Chief Electoral Officer and Election Commission of India. She has not
stated as to on what grounds the postal ballots were rejected.
It has been stated in opposition that the Election Petitioner has given all the basic material facts
which are to be substantiated through evidence during trial. In this context, Mr. B. Mishra argues
that as per legal procedure, the postal ballots are to be counted first but in the instant case, the
postal ballots were counted after counting of votes recorded in the control unit of EVMs. Out of total
1710 postal ballots, 179 were rejected and the Election Petitioner expects that 100 of them would
have been counted in her favour. There was disparity in the control unit. The requirement of law in
case of disparity was not followed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 5
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
16. The pleading in Paragraph-9 contain allegations that have also been stated in detail under
Paragraph- 14(K). Hence, the contentions raised shall be dealt with at the appropriate place.
17. In so far as Paragraphs-10 and 11 are concerned, the same are formal in nature and are therefore,
required to be read along with the Election Petition as a whole.
18. Paragraph-12 contains the relief sought for. Paragraph-13 is also a formal paragraph giving
information about the Petitioner's deceased father and the total votes received by her and the sole
Respondent. This paragraph also has to be read along with the other paragraphs of the Election
Petition.
19. The sole respondent has contended that Paragraph-14 and its sub-paragraphs in the Election
Petition deserve to be struck out. The rival contentions raised in this regard and the analysis of this
Court is given herein below paragraph-wise.
19.1. It is stated that in paragraph-14 (A) and (B), the Election Petitioner has alleged that
non-disclosure by the Respondent of criminal antecedents and pending criminal cases in Form 26
affidavit are wholly unfounded and bereft of material facts and particulars as she has failed to plead
the details of the criminal cases, name of Police Station, name of Court etc. as also the source of
knowledge of the Election Petitioner. There is also no pleading that the voters were misled by such
alleged suppression. On the contrary, the sole Respondent has correctly disclosed all the penal
provisions under which the F.I.Rs. had been lodged against him in his Form 26 affidavit but the
Election Petitioner has tried to create confusion.
Mr. Agarwal would submit that in such view of the matter, the pleadings under Paragraph-14 (A)
and (B) have to be treated as unnecessary and vexatious. Besides, Mr. Agarwal would also submit
that as per the settled position of law, the allegation of suppression of criminal antecedents in the
affidavit in Form 26 amounts to corrupt practice. The Election Petitioner having made such
allegations has not supported the same by filing affidavit in Form 25 as per Section 83(1) of the R.P.
Act. The Election Petition therefore, deserves to be dismissed on such score alone. 19.2. It is stated
in opposition that according to the Election Petitioner, the sole Respondent in his affidavit in Form
26 under Col.5(ii), Clauses A to D has suppressed material information and furnished false and
misleading information in respect of 10 criminal cases pending against him. Further, neither the
sole Respondent nor his political party has published in widely circulated newspapers of the locality
disclosing criminal antecedents of the sole Respondent, which violates the dictum of the Supreme
Court as well as the directions of the Election Commission of India. Moreover, under
Paragraph-14(B), the Election Petitioner has specifically referred to four criminal cases pending
against the Respondent involving serious and heinous offences, which he did not disclose in his
Form 26 affidavit.
Mr. Mishra would submit that the fact that the sole Respondent denies the allegation as false implies
that the same is a triable issue. He further submits that the allegations will not amount to corrupt
practice within the meaning of Section 123 of the R.P.Act. Even assuming that the same amounts to
corrupt practice then also as per the settled position of law, the defect is curable in nature for which
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 6
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
the Election Petition is not liable to be dismissed at the threshold. 19.3. This Court has perused the
pleadings under Paragraph-14(A) and (B) carefully. In Paragraph-14-A, it is generally stated that the
sole Respondent deliberately suppressed his criminal antecedents due to which the voters were
misled. The details of the cases, four in number, have been specially mentioned under
Paragraph-14(B). Whether the allegation that the Respondent deliberately suppressed the pendency
of the said four cases amounts to corrupt practice or not can be answered by referring to the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Krishnamoorthy v. Sivakumar, (2015)2 wherein it was
held as follows;
"94. In view of the above, we would like to sum up our conclusions:
94.1. Disclosure of criminal antecedents of a candidate, especially, pertaining to
heinous or serious offence or offences relating to corruption or moral turpitude at the
time of filing of nomination paper as mandated by law is a categorical imperative.
94.2. When there is non-disclosure of the offences pertaining to the areas mentioned
in the preceding clause, it creates an impediment in the free exercise of electoral
right.
94.3. Concealment or suppression of this nature deprives the voters to make an
informed and advised choice as a consequence of which it would come within the
compartment of direct or indirect interference or attempt to interfere with the free
exercise of the right to vote by the electorate, on the part of the candidate. 94.4. As
the candidate has the special knowledge of the pending cases where cognizance has
been taken or charges have been framed and there is a non-disclosure on his part, it
would amount to undue influence and, therefore, the election is to be declared null
and void by the Election Tribunal under Section 100(1)(b) of the 1951 Act."
3 SCC 467 To the above extent therefore, the submission of Mr.Agarwal that the allegations amounts
to corrupt practice are acceptable. But then, whether mere non- submission of the affidavit in Form
25 shall entail dismissal of the entire Election Petition is a question to be considered. In this regard,
the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Thangjam Arun Kumar Vs. Yumkham Erabot
Singh &Ors.3 can be profitably referred to wherein, an earlier judgment of the Supreme Court
rendered in the case of A.Manju v. Prajwal Revanna (2022) 3 SCC 269 was referred to and quoted.
The relevant paragraphs of the judgment are reproduced herein below;
"14. The position of law that emerges for the above referred cases is clear. The
requirement to file an affidavit under the proviso to Section 83(1) (c) is not
mandatory. It is sufficient if there is substantial compliance. As the defect is curable,
an opportunity may be granted to file the necessary affidavit.
15. In the instant case, the election petition contained an affidavit and also a
verification. In this very affidavit, the election petitioner has sworn on oath that the
paragraphs where he has raised allegations of corrupt practice are true to the best of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 7
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
his knowledge. Though there is no separate and an independent affidavit with respect
to the allegations of corrupt practice, there is substantial [2023] 11 S.C.R. 392
compliance of the requirements under Section 83(1)(c) of the Act.
16. We are in agreement with the conclusion of the High Court that there is
substantial compliance of the requirements under Section 83(1)(c) of the Act and this
finding satisfies the test laid down by this Court in Siddeshwar(supra). Even the
subsequent decision of this Court in Revanna(supra) supports the final conclusion
arrived at by the High Court.
17. For the reasons stated above, we are of the opinion that the Appellant has not
made out a case for interfering with the judgment of the High Court. We, therefore,
proceed to dismiss C.A. Nos. 4179-4180 of 2023 arising out of the judgment and
order of the High Court dated 11.04.2023 in MC (El. Pet.) No. 67 of 2022 and MC (El.
Pet.)No. 135 of 2022."
[Emphasis Added] In the instant case also, as has already been stated herein before, the Election
Petition contains an affidavit as also verification. Therefore, even if there is no separate affidavit
with respect to the allegation of corrupt practice, it would be treated as substantial compliance of the
requirement of Section 83 (1)(C) of the Act. Nonetheless, the Election Petitioner can always be
granted opportunity to file such affidavit.
20. In so far as Paragraph-14 (C), (D) and (E) are concerned, it is stated by the sole Respondent that
the Election Petitioner has alleged that the Respondent in his Form No.26 affidavit under
Col.Nos.7(A) (ii), 7(A)(iv) and 7(A) (vi) concealed information and furnished wrong information
about his movable assets and of his spouse and dependents such as Bank accounts, L.I.C policies
and motor vehicles. According to the sole Respondent, the Election Petitioner has not disclosed the
source of her knowledge as regards suppression of financial particulars nor stated as to how the sole
Respondent had furnished erroneous information and how the voters were misled by the same. The
Election Petitioner has made false and misleading statements with regard to compliance of note
7(A)(ii) of Form 26 and instructions prescribed under HBRO Chapter-V- Clause 5.29.4 and
Chapter-XVIII-Clause-18.1 and Section 77 (2) of the Act. There is no pleading as to who are the
co-parceners of the Respondent and who else is the joint owner of the HUF property along with the
sole Respondent. The allegations under Paragraph-14(E) are false and baseless and lack material
facts and particulars as the sole Respondent has not disclosed the name of the Bank, amount
outstanding, nature of loan etc. The Election Petitioner has not stated what are the correct
liabilities/dues of the sole Respondent. According to Mr. Agarwal, in the absence of such material
facts and particulars the allegation made under Paragraphs-14 (C) to (E) cannot be held to
constitute a valid cause of action besides being vague and non-specific.
20.1. It is stated in opposition that the Election Petitioner has made specific allegations which can be
adjudicated during course of trial basing on documentary and oral evidence adduced by the parties.
It is however, clear that the sole Respondent did not disclose the details of Bank account opened for
his election expenditure in violation of Section 77(1) of the Act and different clauses of the HBRO.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 8
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
Mr. Mishra would argue on such basis that the concise statement of all the material facts and
particulars thereof have been pleaded, which disclose complete cause of action and constitute triable
issues. 20.2. Reading of Paragraphs-14 (C) to (E) would reveal that the Election Petitioner has made
specific allegations with regard to the omissions, discrepancies, etc. in the sole Respondent's
affidavit in Form 26 relating to bank deposits, insurance policies and investments, details of motor
vehicles, non-disclosure of agricultural land and ancestral property, partial disclosure of loan
amount, hypothecation etc. According to the Election Petitioner, these are material omissions and
suppression of facts which, despite objection being raised by the Election Petitioner's representative
during scrutiny, were ignored by the Returning Officer resulting in improper acceptance of the sole
Respondent's nomination. This Court fails to comprehend as to what more the Election Petitioner
could have pleaded inasmuch as all relevant details such as vehicle numbers, particulars of
agricultural lands, ancestral property, etc. have been given. What was disclosed and what was
withheld have been stated in reasonable detail. The issues raised can only be resolved through trial.
For the reasons indicated it cannot be said that the pleadings under the aforementioned paragraphs
do not constitute valid cause of action.
21. In so far as Paragraph-14(F) is concerned, it is stated that the allegation that by affixing adhesive
stamp and notarial fee in the Form 26 affidavit instead of utilizing non-judicial stamp paper, the
said affidavit is non-est in the eye of law, is wholly misplaced unfounded and misleading.
Mr. Agarwal has referred to different provisions of the Indian Stamp Act and the Odisha Stamp
Rules to basically contend that when non-judicial stamp paper is not available, the stamp duty can
be paid by affixing adhesive stamp as also by franking machine. Therefore, the contentions raised by
the Election Petitioner that the affidavit in From 26 is no affidavit cannot be accepted. According to
Mr. Agarwal therefore, the pleadings in Paragraph-14(F) being completely false with ulterior motive
to make a fishing and roving inquiry though this Court deserves to be struck out.
21.1. It is stated in opposition to the above that according to the Election Petitioner, the affidavit in
Form 26 submitted by the Respondent not having been engrossed/typed out on stamp paper is
invalid and non-est in the eye of law. Further, acceptance of such invalid affidavit by the Returning
Officer is illegal and improper despite objections raised by the representative of the Election
Petitioner. 21.2. Mr. B. Mishra, learned Senior counsel, submits that the admission that the affidavit
in Form 26 was not on stamp paper, attracts the power conferred under Order XII Rules 1 and 6 of
C.P.C.
Before delving into the merits of the rival contentions, this Court takes note of the fact that both the
parties have relied upon some judgments in support of their respective contentions. After perusing
the cited judgments, this Court does not deem it proper to refer to each one of them for the reason
that the judgments essentially state the consequences of non-submission of affidavit on proper
stamp papers. In the instant case, the allegations have to be proved. Whether the provisions of the
Stamp Act and Rules referred to by Mr. Agarwal would apply to the facts of the case can be
considered not at the threshold but at the time of trial. It would suffice to say that specific allegation
has been made by the Election Petitioner relating to the validity of the affidavit in Form 26
submitted by the sole Respondent and its improper acceptance. These are obviously triable issues
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 9
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
which can be proved through evidence adduced during trial. It cannot therefore be said that the
pleadings do not disclose valid cause of action so as to be struck out.
22. It is stated that the allegations made in Paragraph-14 (G) and (H) of the Election Petition
deserve to be struck out as the said allegations relate to one Amita Biswal (INC candidate), who is
not a party and therefore, the allegations cannot be adjudicated upon in her absence being contrary
to the principles of natural justice. It is further stated that the allegation that the acceptance of the
revised affidavit in Form 26 submitted by Amita Biswal through one Manish Kumar Bajpayee is
unnecessary, vexatious and frivolous because Section 33 and 33-A referred to by the Election
Petitioner nowhere prescribes that such affidavit is to be filed by the candidate herself or by her
proposer only. There is also no pleading about the source of knowledge of the Election Petitioner
about the filing of revised affidavit by Manish Kumar Bajpayee and that he is not the proposer of
Amita Biswal. The further allegation that Amita Biswal secured 5775 votes which is more than the
margin i.e. 1333 votes, should be construed as having materially affected the result of the election is
vague and bald. Mr. Agarwal argues that there is no pleading in the Election Petition with respect to
pattern of voting and the way polling went as amongst the different candidates.
22.1. It is stated in opposition that the Election Petitioner has alleged under Paragraph-14 (G) that
Amita Biswal had concealed material information about her assets and liabilities as well as her
spouse and that her affidavit in Form 26 was invalid. Non- impletion of Amita Biswal cannot be a
ground to strike out the pleadings since the Election Petitioner has not made any allegation of
corrupt practice against Amita Biswal but has prayed to declare the election of the sole Respondent
as void.
Mr. B. Mishra would argue that since no relief is claimed against Amita Biswal, but the sole prayer is
to declare the election of the sole Respondent as void, non-impletion of Amita Biswal in the case is
immaterial.
22.2. Section 82 of the R.P. Act deals with parties to the petition and reads as follows;
"82. Parties to the petition.--
A petitioner shall join as respondents to his petition--
(a) where the petitioner, in addition to claiming declaration that the election of all or
any of the returned candidates is void, claims a further declaration that he himself or
any other candidate has been duly elected, all the contesting candidates other than
the petitioner, and where no such further declaration is claimed, all the returned
candidates; and
(b) any other candidate against whom allegations of any corrupt practice are made in
the petition".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 10
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
From the pleadings in the aforementioned paragraphs and the contentions advanced, it is clear that
the Election Petition does not fall under any of the clauses of the provision. The sole prayer is to
declare the election of the sole Respondent as void. No further declaration is sought that the
Election Petitioner should have been held to be duly elected. Under such circumstances, this Court
is of the view that Amita Biswal is not a necessary party to the Election Petition.
Coming to the other contentions raised, reading of the pleadings under the aforementioned
paragraphs would reveal that the Petitioner has questioned the acceptance of the revised affidavit of
Amita Biswal by the Returning Officer on the ground that the same was submitted by one Manoj
Kumar Bjpayee, who was not her proposer. Further, the margin of victory of the sole Respondent
being only 1333, the Election Petitioner reasonably believes that had the nomination of Amita
Biswal been rejected, she might have received votes more than the margin out of the votes polled by
said Amita Biswal. Whether the nomination of Amita Biswal was improperly accepted for the
reasons indicated is a matter to be decided during trial on the basis of evidence. Since specific
allegation has been made by the Election Petitioner, the pleadings cannot be struck out as
unnecessary or vexatious. On the contrary, this Court finds that the same constitute valid cause of
action.
23. With regard to the averments made in Paragraph-14 (I) and (J), it is stated that the same are
bereft of material facts and particulars inasmuch as the details of the Polling Agents of Election
Petitioner and other contesting candidates at the said 43 Polling Stations have not been given, it has
not been stated whether the Polling Agents were present throughout till closure of Polling. There is
no pleading that there was any discrepancy in the entry regarding total number of votes polled and
counted, no pleading that Form 17(C) Part-1 was not supplied to the Polling Agents of the Election
Petitioner, the details of the Presiding Officer and Polling Officer, no pleading that any objection was
raised regarding non-supply of the form and whether they were filled up or not by the Presiding
Officer etc. Mr. Agarwal would argue that the Election Petitioner has made only vague allegations
without furnishing the material facts and particulars. In this regard, Mr. Agarwal has relied upon
several judgments. 23.1. It is stated in opposition that the very fact that the sole Respondent in his
Interlocutory Application has categorically denied the allegations as false implies that the same
involves triable issues which can be adjudicated basing on oral and documentary evidence. Further,
specific allegations have been made in respect of 14 Polling Stations and the defects relating to Form
17(C) Part-1, the number of votes which ought to be treated as void, have also been mentioned. So, it
cannot be said that the pleadings are either unnecessary or scandalous.
Mr. Mishra would argue that the facts pleaded are triable issues for which the pleadings cannot be
thrown out at the threshold.
23.2. Perusal of the pleadings under Paragraphs-14 (I) and (J) would reveal that the Election
Petitioner has made specific allegations that the respective Presiding Officers of 43 Polling Stations,
the numbers of which have also been stated, did not supply copy of the statutory Form No.17(C)
Part-1 to the respective Polling Agents of the Election Petitioner. The allegation being relatable to
non-supply of the statutory form, according to the considered view of this Court, the names of the
Presiding Officers and/or of the Polling Agents are not very relevant, at least at this stage. Only
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 11
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
because the names have not been given cannot nullify the allegation. Further, according to the
Election Petitioner because of non-compliance of the incurable defects, the total votes polled in the
14 Polling Stations i.e. 11508 should be rendered void. It is for the Election Petitioner to prove by
adducing evidence to substantiate her contention as above. This cannot be treated as an
unnecessary, frivolous or vexatious pleading or one without material facts or particulars.
24. With regard to the pleadings under Paragraph- 14(K), it is stated that the same are based on
surmises and conjectures without stating as to why 100 numbers of postal ballots should have been
counted in favour of the Election Petitioner out of 179 rejected postal ballots. On what ground the
postal ballots were rejected, the details of the counting agents who raised objection during counting,
who were present during counting, whether any objection was raised before Election Observer, the
details of counting Supervisor and her counting Agents, whether the Election Petitioner herself, her
election and counting Agents were present or not have not been pleaded. Further, false statements
have been made with regard to mismatch of Identification Number of the control unit of EVMs used
at the time of counting and those used at the time of Polling. The details of counting Agents and
counting Supervisors present, details of table and round of counting etc. have not been given. There
is no pleading that the Petitioner raised objection challenging the counting of votes. It is also not
pleaded that because of such mismatch, result of election was materially affected.
Mr. Agarwal would submit that the pleadings are vague and non-specific and in any case do not
contain the relevant material particulars.
24.1. It is stated in opposition that the Election Petitioner, referring to the instructions contained in
Handbook for Returning Officer has specifically pleaded that the counting of postal ballots is to be
commenced first and thereafter counting of the votes recorded in EVMs is to be done. In the instant
case, this process was not followed which has been mentioned in the pleading. It is also the specific
case of the Petitioner that 100 postal ballots polled in favour of the Petitioner were rejected on
flimsy grounds despite objections raised by her and her representatives. Further, it is specifically
alleged that there was mismatch of Control Unit Identification Numbers of the EVMs and on such
basis it has been contended that 6313 votes are liable to be declared as void, which is a large number
compared to the margin of loss of the Election Petitioner.
Mr. Mishra would argue that all these are triable issues, which the Petitioner will seek to prove by
adducing evidence during trial. Moreover, the margin of loss being very less and the number of votes
ought to be declared void being more than that, it is reasonably contended that had the objections
raised by the Election Petitioner been considered in proper perspective at the relevant time, the
result of the election would have been materially affected. 24.2. After going through the pleadings
under Paragraph-14(K) and the contentions raised, this Court finds that specific allegations have
been made by the Election Petitioner. These are obviously triable issues. Only because the ground of
rejection of the postal ballots was not given or the details of the Counting Agent who raised
objections were not given, cannot persuade the Court to strike out the pleadings on the ground of
vagueness or frivolity. To repeat, specific allegations have been made which constitute material facts
which are adequate to take the case to trial. It is for the Election Petitioner to substantiate her
allegation by adducing evidence at the time of trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 12
(An Application Under Sections 8 vs Dipali Das ... Opposite Party on 21 March, 2025
25. Paragraph-14(L) is basically formal in nature.
26. Paragraphs 15 to 18 are formal in nature and therefore, have to be read conjointly with the other
paragraphs containing specific allegations.
27. From a conspectus of the analysis made hereinbefore, this Court finds that no case has been
made out by the sole Respondent to dismiss the Election Petition at the threshold invoking power
under Order VII Rule 11 C.P.C. or to strike out any of the pleadings as per Order VI Rule 16 of C.P.C.
As has already been stated, this Court finds that the pleadings disclose material facts all of which are
triable issues and therefore, constitute valid cause of action for filing the Election Petition. The
contentions raised by the sole Respondent are therefore, bereft of any merit.
28. In the result, I.A. No.111/2024 being devoid of merit is therefore, dismissed. The Election
Petitioner is granted three weeks' time to file affidavit in Form 25, failing which, appropriate order
shall be passed with regard to maintainability of the Election Petition.
.................................. Sashikanta Mishra, Judge Designation: A.D.R.-cum-Addl. Principal Secretary
Reason: Authentication Ashok Kumar Behera Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date:
21-Mar-2025 14:14:09
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156349635/ 13
