"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The
Court Of on 2 December, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 31.08.2023
Pronounced on: 02.12.2023
CFA No. 21/2002
1 (i) Rattan Bhushan R/o Subash
Nagar, Udhampur.
(ii) Sham Kumar R/o Omara
Mohalla, Ward No. 13, Udhampur.
(iii) Jugal Kishore R/o Sheetla
Nagar, H. No. 59, Ward No. 9
Kishtwar.
(iv) Rajinder Kumar, R/o H. No.
23. Ward No. 10, Udhampur.
(v) Jatinder Kumar R/o H. No. 23.
Ward No. 10, Udhampur.
- All sons of late Shri Chuni Lal.
(vi) Smt. Vimla Gupta, W/o Shg.
Bhushan Gupta. R/o Adarsh
Colony, Udhampur.
(vii) Smt. Vijay Kumari W/o Shri
Sudesh Gupta, R/o Ward No. 3
Gupta Street, Ramban
(viii) Smt. Poonam Gupta, W/o Sh.
Sunil Kumar, R/o lower Laxmi
Nagar, Sarwal, Jammu
-all daughters of late Shri Chuni
Lal.
2. (i) Balbinder Kumar S/o late Sh.
Dhani Ram R/o H. No. 23, Ward
No. 10, Udhampur.
(ii) Chanchal Gupta, W/o Sh. Vijay
Gupta, R/o H. No. 38, Ward No. 4,
Chanani, Tehsil Udhampur.
(iii) Sunita Gupta W/o Sh. Pawan
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 1
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
Gupta R/o House No. 113, Kucha
Karamchand, Jammu.
2 CFA No. 21/2002
q
Through: Mr. Virender Bhat, Advocate.
vs
1. Purna Devi widow of Parmanand, ..... Respondent(s)
2. Ravinder Gupta;
3. Amit Gupta;
4. Pawan Kumar
-sons of Parmanand R/o Udhampur.
5. Mandu Bala D/o Parmanand w/o
Pawan Kumar, R/o Bhadrwah.
6. Sunita Gupta D/o Parmanand W/o
Arun Kumar R/o Adarsh Colony,
Udhampur.
Through: Mr. Abhishek Wazir, Advocate.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The preliminary decree dated 06.08.2002 passed in the suit titled "Purna Devi and others Vs.
Chuni Lal and another" by the court of learned Principal District Judge, Udhampur, (for short „the
trial court(cid:129)) thereby holding each of the brothers/co-sharers entitled to one-third share in the one
storeyed house bearing No. 23 comprising of 10 rooms, 3 Kitchens, 1 Shop, 2 Stores, 2 Compounds,
2 Passages, Veranda, 1 Bathroom, 1 Shed, 2 Staircases, 2 Latrines situated on the land measuring 60
ft x 65 ft comprising Survey No. 168/162 and 169/163 bearing Ward No. 7, Udhampur (hereinafter
to be referred as the "suit property") has been impugned by the appellants in this appeal.
2. The decree/judgment has been impugned on the following grounds:
(i) That the learned trial court has neither appreciated the evidence in its right
perspective nor applied the law properly to the facts of the case.
(ii) That the predecessor-in-interest of the respondents had filed a suit for partition
by concealing the fact of private partition affected between the parties in the year
1996, whereafter each of the brothers entered into possession of the respective
portion which fell in his share to the exclusion of the others.
(iii) That the learned trial court has failed to appreciate the real import of claim made
in Para 5 of the plaint wherein it was admitted by the predecessor-in-interest of the
respondents that three brothers had been in occupation of separate share in absence
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 2
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
of any formal partition.
(iv) That the learned trial court had not taken into consideration the fact that the
parties had been in occupation of the separate portion of the house and all of them
had constructed additional accommodation as per their own requirement out of their
personal income.
3. Mr. Virender Bhat, learned counsel for the appellant laid much stress that the learned trial court
has not appreciated the evidence properly, more particularly the admission made by the deceased
plaintiff in his plaint that parties got separated and were living separately in three separate portions
of the house. He further argued that there was admission by the deceased plaintiff in the document
executed between all the three brothers on 19.04.1987 whereby he had admitted that the property
stood already partitioned. He further argued that the appellants be permitted to lead additional
evidence to prove the execution of the document dated 19.04.1987.
4. Per contra, Mr. Abhishek Wazir, learned counsel for the respondents submitted that merely
because the parties had been residing in separate portions in the suit property would not mean that
the suit property stood already partitioned, more particularly when the parties were not in
possession of equal shares to which they were entitled to. He further submitted that no reliance can
be placed upon the document allegedly executed between the parties on 19.04.1987, more
particularly when the same was not produced before the trial court and even the alleged scribe,
namely, Sain Dass and two marginal witnesses Prem Chand and Dwarka Nath as mentioned in the
application have not deposed anything in respect of the execution of any such document between
the parties.
5. The brief facts necessary for disposal of the present appeal are that one Moti Ram had three sons,
namely, Parmanand, Chuni Lal and Dhani Ram. The predecessor-in-interest of the respondents i.e.
Parmanand in the year 1987, filed a suit for partition of the suit property by metes and bounds as
mentioned above against his two brothers, namely, Chuni Lal (defendant No.1) and Dhani Ram
(defendant No.2), thereby pleading that the house was built by their father and after the death of
their father, they had been in the possession of the suit house and residing there. It was further
stated that the parties got separated 15 years ago and had been living in three separate portions of
the house, which was a temporary arrangement and all the three brothers occupied the rooms
according to their needs at that time without there being any formal partition or arrangement in the
family. It was also pleaded by the predecessor-in-interest of the respondents i.e. plaintiff therein
that he was the worst sufferer under the above mentioned arrangement, as he was putting up along
with his family in a small and invaluable portion of the house, whereas the defendants had been in
occupation of more valuable and bigger portion than that of the plaintiff. The plaintiff further
claimed to have spent Rs. 16,000/- for repair and improvement of two rooms and likewise the
defendant No. 1 also constructed one room and one store.
6. The defendants objected the suit filed by the plaintiff by pleading in their written statement that
the father of the parties to the suit breathed his last in the year 1996 and the whole land was vacant
except three kacha rooms and one veranda. In the year 1987-88, the defendant No. 1 constructed 8
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 3
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
residential rooms, 1 Bathroom, 1 Kitchen and 1 Veranda by demolishing one kacha room leaving two
kacha rooms intact. The said construction was raised by the defendant No. 1 out of his own income.
In the year 1966, the plaintiff and defendant No. 2 got separated from defendant No. 1. As per verbal
family settlement, out of pacca construction mentioned above, four rooms and half veranda were
given to plaintiff and three rooms and half veranda were given to defendant No. 2. The staircase,
both rooms and one Deodi were kept joint. One room and two dilapidated kacha rooms unfit for
residence and open space fell in the share of the defendant No. 1. In the year 1976, the defendant No.
1 demolished the whole of the dilapidated portion and constructed 2 rooms, 1 Veranda and 1
Drawing Room out of his income after the family settlement mentioned above. Out of the pleading
of the parties following issues were framed by the learned trial court:
(i) Whether the suit property is a joint ancestral property of the parties? OPP
(ii) In case issue No. 1 is proved in affirmative, whether the property was partitioned
by means of family settlement where after improvements were made by the
defendants? OPD
(iii) In case issue No. 1 is proved and issue No. 2 is not proved, what are the shares of
the parties in the suit property? OPP
(iv) Whether the suit has not been properly valued for purpose of court fee and
jurisdiction? OPD
(v) Relief.
7. The plaintiff-Parmanand besides examining himself also examined five witnesses in support of his
claim, whereas the defendants besides examining themselves also examined 7 witnesses in rebuttal
and in support of their defence.
8. Since it has been urged by the appellants that the learned trial court has not appreciated the
evidence and the factum of partition already affected between the three brothers has been ignored, it
is necessary to have a brief resume of the relevant portion of the evidence led by the parties.
9. Plaintiff-Parmanand stated that the house was constructed by their father. He was 8-9 years of
age whereas the defendants were 11 and 13 years of age at the time of death of their father. His father
had a shop in Doda and after his demise, defendants took control of that shop and he along with his
mother continued to reside at Udhampur. Till 1963, all the brothers were living jointly and
thereafter started residing separately in the same house. The house has not been partitioned till date
but according to their needs, the parties are in occupation of the separate portion of the house. His
share is inadequate and he is entitled to one-third of the share in the suit house. During
cross-examination, he stated that at the time of death of his father there were four rooms in the
house. He admitted that after the death of father, kacha rooms were demolished and 8 new rooms
were constructed. The new rooms were constructed with the money earned by their father. The
rooms were constructed in the year 1997-98 BK. His mother expired in the year 1962. They had not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 4
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
partitioned the suit property and he denied that on 19.04.1987 a document in respect of the
partition of the property was executed by him.
10. PW 1-Jyoti Prakash (Neighbour of the parties) stated that the suit house was constructed by the
father of the parties and their father expired in the year 1939-40. The house was comprised of 3/4
rooms. Later the mother and parental aunt of the parties constructed new building. The defendants
looked after the business of their father after his demise. The plaintiff resided with his mother in
Udhampur. During cross-examination, he stated that he could not say as to how much money was
spent for re-construction of the house.
11. PW 2-Om Parkash stated that the house was constructed by the mother of the parties and had
not been partitioned. Each of the parties was entitled to one-third of the share. During
cross-examination, he stated that he had not seen the mother of the parties raising the construction
of the house.
12. PW 3-Bansi Lal (Brother-in-Law of the Plaintiff) stated that the house was constructed by the
mother and paternal aunt of the parties and the house was a joint property. During
cross-examination, he stated that the defendant No. 1 had been in possession of 4-5 rooms since
1964-65, whereas Parmanand was in possession of three rooms. He had constructed two rooms
more in the year 1973-74.
13. PW 4-Bir Singh stated that the house was joint property of the parties and was not partitioned.
The plaintiff was entitled to one-third share. During cross-examination, he deposed about the
surroundings of the house.
14. PW 5-Ashok Khajuria proved the site plan of the suit house (EXPWAK). He stated that the
defendant No. 1 did not permit him to measure the portion which was in his possession. He did not
take the signatures of the parties on the site plan. He prepared the site plan on the identification of
the plaintiff. He had not given the details of actual possession of all the parties. Site plan was
prepared in the year 1987. Parmanand had given him the site plan which he copied and prepared.
15. Defendant No. 1-Chuni Lal stated that the suit house was initially comprised of three Kacha
rooms and 1 Veranda and rest of the land was vacant and they used it as kitchen garden. House was
constructed by their father, who was having a shop in Doda. The father died in the year 1996 (BK).
In the year 1998 (BK) he demolished 1 Kacha Room and raised new house consisting of eight rooms,
one veranda, one bath room and water tank. That construction was raised jointly by the parties with
joint expenditure. After the demise of the father he went to Doda to look after the business. Later the
defendant No. 2 also shifted to Doda. The plaintiff remained at Udhampur. In the year 1947 they
suffered loss in the business and both of them came back to Udhampur in the year 1986. All the
three brothers partitioned their property amongst themselves. 4 rooms, 1 veranda came to the share
of the plaintiff whereas 1 pacca room and two kacha rooms came to his share. Deodi was kept
common. As per the terms of the partition, all the brothers retained their respective shares of the
house. Before partition, the plaintiff had gone to Kishtwar to live with his in-laws and after partition
he again went to Kishtwar and rented out his portion to Shakti Prakash Cinema Wala. Later the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 5
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
plaintiff also raised two more rooms over the part of the property in his share. Partition had taken
place verbally and no document was prepared in that regard. At the time of partition Hari Ram
Vaccinator from Doda was present, who had come from Doda to collect his salary. He enhanced his
share out of his own expenses. After Shakti Parkash, the plaintiff rented out his share to M/s Pritam
Dass Om Parkash, who used this portion as godown. Defendant No. 2 has also raised more rooms in
his share of the suit house. During cross-examination, he stated that after 26 years of demise of their
father, the partition was affected. The shop where the father worked in Doda belonged to his sister.
Their paternal aunt sometimes lived in the house of her in-laws and sometimes in Udhampur with
them because there was no one to look after her. In the year 1966, he returned from Doda and
within four months the house was partitioned. Before partition, Shakti Parkash was their joint
tenant and all of them used to take the rent rotation wise. After the partition, Shakti Prakash shifted
to portion of the plaintiff.
16. Defendant No. 2-Dhani Ram stated that they had partitioned the suit house. 1 room and 1
kitchen was constructed by him after partition and he spent Rs. 20,000-25,000/ on it and the
plaintiff did not raise any objection at the time of raising the construction. The plaintiff tried to
dismantle the mumty, whereupon a dispute arose between the parties, which was settled later, with
the intervention of Prem Chand, Inder Kumar, Sain Dass Dwarka Nath and Arun Kumar. However,
later the plaintiff resiled from the settlement. During cross- examination, he stated that the
defendant No. 1 was 10-12 years old at the time of death of his father. Their father had one more
shop and some land besides the suit property. The shop was sold by all of them and the money
received was spent on the marriage of their younger sister. In the year 1966, the suit property was
partitioned. One person from Doda was present at that time and none else was there to witness the
partition. Hari Ram employee of Medical Department belonging to Doda was the other person who
witnessed the partition. Three rooms came to his share. If the property is measured then the
defendant No. 1 would be having more share in his possession than that of the plaintiff and his
share. But they had themselves given more share to the defendant No. 1 because balance was to be
struck vis-a-vis Kacha rooms and pacca rooms.
17. DW 1-Prem Chand stated that the parties had been residing separately for the last 25-30 years
and they had partitioned the suit property amongst themselves in the year 1987. He had been to the
house of the parties to settle the dispute about the passage. Sain Dass, Dwarka Nath and one more
person went along with him to the house of the parties. It was settled that the plaintiff would
dismantle his water tank constructed 4 feet ahead of Deodi which was joint between the parties.
During cross-examination, he stated that no partition had taken place among the brothers in his
presence and he could not say whether the brothers were living in separate portions as per their
requirements. The passage was common between Dhani Ram and Parmanand. As per his estimate
Chuni Lal was having more property in his possession than that of the defendant No. 2 and the
plaintiff.
18. DW 2-Sain Dass stated that 11-12 years ago he was requested by the parties to settle the dispute
between them in respect of the passage. Prem Chand, Dwarka Nath, Inder and Arun Kalsotra were
also present. The dispute was settled. Dhani Ram was given 4 feet passage and Parmanand was also
given passage after the water tank was demolished. All the parties were satisfied with the settlement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 6
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
at that time. During cross-examination, he stated that he had no knowledge whether the defendant
had filed a suit against the plaintiff in the year 1985. He had not visited the house of the parties since
1987. He expressed ignorance as to whether the parties have partitioned the suit property or not.
19. DW 3-Ashwani Kumar stated that the parties resided separately in their share and he had no
knowledge whether the parties had affected a partition of the suit property or not. Dhani Ram had
converted one room in to shop which open towards the street whereas the plaintiff had covered his
share with the slab. Defendant-Chuni Lal dismantled Kacha room and constructed pacca room in its
place. Whatever addition/alteration was made in the respective shares, the parties had borne their
expenses. During cross-examination, he stated that the suit property was ancestral and not their self
acquired property.
20. DW 4-Mohan Lal stated about the construction raised by the parties and that all the brothers
were in possession of their separate shares but he was not present when the parties had affected the
partition. During cross-examination he stated that the partition took place in his presence 35 years
ago. At the time of partition Chuni Lal Nargotra was also present who had expired by then. Partition
was not in written form. He could not say as to the composition of the suit property at the time of
partition.
21. DW 5-Dwarka Nath stated that the parties had partitioned the suit property in the year 1987.
There was a dispute about the Deodi. Prem Chand, Sain Dass and Inder were present on spot. All
the parties were living in separate shares. Dispute was in respect of the common passage. It was
settled that the Deodi would be removed and there was no dispute in respect of the remaining
portion of the house. Said settlement was not written. During cross-examination, he stated that he
had heard that the parties had affected the partition. In the year 1997, only common passage was
partitioned and during earlier partition common passage was not partitioned.
22. DW 6-Shakti Prakash stated that he had taken the house on rent from Parmanand and mother of
Parmanand was alive at that time. He had taken three rooms and one small shed on rent. Later the
defendants shifted from Doda to Udhampur. They told him to vacate the house. They were joint
family. The defendants however permitted him to live in one portion of the house and he shifted
there. The rent of that portion was received by Parmanand. He had no knowledge whether the
parties had partitioned the said house or not.
23. DW 7- Charan Ji Lal stated that when the defendants arrived from Doda they took separate
residence. Shakti Prakash was living as a tenant adjacent to Deodi. When the defendants returned to
Udhampur, their mother had expired. The room in which Shakti used to live earlier was given to the
defendant Dhani Ram. Chuni Lal started living in the back portion of the house. Parmanand raised
one more story on the ground floor. Chuni Lal also constructed pacca rooms in place of kacha room.
All the brothers raised construction out of their own funds and he had no knowledge about the
family partition. During cross- examination, he stated the suit house was ancestral property of the
parties.
24. Issue No. 1:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 7
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
"Whether the suit property is a joint ancestral property of the parties?
OPP"
The onus to prove the issue No. 1 was on the plaintiff. From the evidence mentioned above, it is
proved that the house was an ancestral property of all the three brothers, as the defendant No.1 has
stated that the suit house was comprising of three kacha rooms and one veranda which was
constructed by their father and in the year 1998 (bk) he demolished one kacha room and
constructed new house comprising of 8 rooms, one veranda, 1 Bathroom and 1 underground tank
and this construction was raised jointly by the parties out of the common fund. Likewise, the
defendant No. 2 has also stated that the property belonged to their father. The learned trial court
after considering the evidence has come to conclusion that the suit property was an ancestral and
joint property between the parties and this Court does not find any wrong appreciation of the
evidence in arriving at the said conclusion by the learned trial court.
25. Issue No. 2:
"In case issue No. 1 is proved in affirmative, whether the property was partitioned by
means of family settlement where after improvements were made by the defendants?
OPD"
So far as issue No. 2 is concerned, it needs to be noted that once the property was held to be an
ancestral property, the heavy onus rested upon the defendants to prove that the property was
partitioned in the year 1966, after the demise of their father. The plaintiff has categorically stated
that the property was never partitioned and all the three brothers were in possession of their
separate shares as per their convenience and necessity. He further stated that his share was
inadequate and he was entitled to one-third of the share in the house. Defendant No. 1-Chuni Lal
stated that all the three brothers partitioned their ancestral property amongst themselves in
presence of Hari Ram and to the same extent, defendant No. 2 has also stated that the property i.e.
the suit house was partitioned by them. All other witnesses examined by the defendants have not
been able to corroborate the evidence of the defendants that the suit house was partitioned by all the
three brothers. DW1-Prem Chand admitted in cross-examination that no partition took place
amongst the brothers in his presence. DW2- Sain Dass, DW3-Ashwani Kumar, DW-6 Shakti
Parkash and DW7-Charan Ji Lal have stated that they have no personal knowledge whether the
parties have partitioned the suit property or not. DW 4-Mohan Lal has stated that the family
partition took place in his presence 35 years. A perusal of statements of defendants would reveal
that when the partition was affected between the parties, no one else except Hari Ram Vaccinator
from Doda was present on spot. As such, no reliance can be placed upon the statement of DW-4
Mohan Lal. PW-5 Dwarka Nath is hear say witness as he has stated that he had heard that the
parties had affected partition amongst themselves. Most of the witnesses who have been examined
by the defendants i.e. Prem Chand, Sain Dass and Dwarka Nath pertain to the dispute which arose
in the year 1987 in respect of use of common passage. It has come in the evidence of the defendants
that some construction was raised by them also in their respective portions. The defendants have
not been able to prove that partition of the suit house was affected by all the three brothers. Even if
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 8
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
it is proved that the parties have made improvements in their respective shares, the suit house
would not lose its character of being an ancestral property in absence of any proof of family
partition. Any improvement made by the co-sharer in his share of the joint property occupied by
him is always subject to final partition. The co-sharers living separately in the un-partitioned house
as per the arrangement made according to their convenience would not convert the status of an
un-partitioned property to a partitioned property until or unless it is proved that the said
arrangement was bonafide and not disadvantageous to any of the co- sharers. It has come in the
evidence of the defendant No. 2 that more property is in possession of the defendant No. 1 as
compared to defendant No. 2 and the plaintiff, though he has stated that it was because of the fact
that balance was required to be struck between the cost of kacha rooms and pacca rooms.
26. In Vineeta Sharma v. Rakesh Sharma, (2020) 9 SCC 1, the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court of India has held
as under:
"130. Earlier, an oral partition was permissible, and at the same time, the burden of
proof remained on the person who asserted that there was a partition. It is also
settled law that cesser of commonality is not conclusive proof of partition, merely by
the reason that the members are separated in food and residence for the convenience,
and separate residence at different places due to service or otherwise does not show
separation. Several acts, though not conclusive proof of partition, may lead to that
conclusion in conjunction with various other facts. Such as separate occupation of
portions, division of the income of the joint property, definement of shares in the
joint property in the revenue or land registration records, mutual transactions, as
observed in Bhagwani Kunwar v. Mohan Singh [AIR 1925 PC 132] and Digambar
Adhar Patil v. Devram Girdhar Patil [AIR 1995 SC 1728].
131. There is a general presumption that every Hindu family is presumed to be joint
unless the contrary is proved. It is open even if one coparcener has separated, to the
non-separating members to remain joint and to enjoy as members of a joint family.
No express agreement is required to remain joint. It may be inferred from how their
family business was carried on after one coparcener was separated from them.
Whether there was a separation of one coparcener from all other members of a joint
family by a decree of partition, the decree alone should be looked at to determine the
question was laid down in Palani Ammal ."
(emphasis added)
27. During the pendency of this appeal, the appellants also filed an application to produce additional
evidence to prove the execution of the document dated 19.04.1987 by pleading that the suit property
was already divided by private partition and the factum of partition was admitted by Parmanand,
the original plaintiff, in a document executed between the three brothers on 19.04.1987. It is also
pleaded in the application that the appellants had examined one Sain Dass, the scribe of the
document, Prem Chand and Dwarka Nath-two marginal witnesses in whose presence the said
document was executed between the parties. The said application was opposed by the respondents
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 9
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
stating therein that the document is not genuine and no reason has been assigned by the appellants
for its non-production before the trial court. Another application was filed by the appellants for
placing on record the document dated 19.04.1987.
28. A perusal of the application for leading additional evidence reveals that it has been stated by the
appellants that they have already examined scribe of document, namely, Sain Dass and two
marginal witnesses Prem Chand and Dwarka Nath. A perusal of the evidence of the deceased
plaintiff reveals that though he was cross-examined by the respondents/defendants that on
19.04.1987 a document envisaging the partition was allegedly executed by him, but no said
document was ever produced before the trial court. The witnesses as alleged by the appellants who
were the scribe and the marginal witnesses to the document too have deposed nothing about the
execution of such document. The appellants cannot as a matter of right ask for leading additional
evidence at the appellate stage. For leading additional evidence at the appellate stage, the appellants
have to make out a very strong case and the permission to lead additional evidence cannot be
granted in a routine manner. The conditions laid down in Order 41 Rule 27 CPC must be fulfilled
before a party can be permitted to lead additional evidence at the appellate stage. The appellants
have not been able to demonstrate the reasons for the non-production of the evidence before the
learned trial court when they were provided ample and sufficient opportunity by the learned trial
court to lead evidence but they did not lead that evidence, now sought to be led before this court.
The mere fact that the document is an important evidence can hardly constitute a "substantial
cause" within the ambit of Order 41 Rule 27 CPC, so as to permit the appellants to lead additional
evidence.
29. The Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court after examining its various earlier pronouncements has laid down the
guardrails for the Appellate Courts for the purpose of exercising power under Order 41 Rule 27 CPC,
in case titled "Union of India v. Ibrahim Uddin, (2012) 8 SCC 148", wherein it has been held as
under:
"36. The general principle is that the appellate court should not travel outside the
record of the lower court and cannot take any evidence in appeal. However, as an
exception, Order 41 Rule 27 CPC enables the appellate court to take additional
evidence in exceptional circumstances. The appellate court may permit additional
evidence only and only if the conditions laid down in this Rule are found to exist. The
parties are not entitled, as of right, to the admission of such evidence. Thus, the
provision does not apply, when on the basis of the evidence on record, the appellate
court can pronounce a satisfactory judgment. The matter is entirely within the
discretion of the court and is to be used sparingly. Such a discretion is only a judicial
discretion circumscribed by the limitation specified in the Rule itself. (Vide K.
Venkataramiah v. A. Seetharama Reddy [AIR 1963 SC 1526], Municipal Corpn. of
Greater Bombay v. Lala Pancham [AIR 1965 SC 1008], Soonda Ram v. Rameshwarlal
[AIR 1975 SC 479] and Syed Abdul Khader v. Rami Reddy [: AIR 1979 SC 553] .)
37. The appellate court should not ordinarily allow new evidence to be adduced in
order to enable a party to raise a new point in appeal. Similarly, where a party on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 10
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
whom the onus of proving a certain point lies fails to discharge the onus, he is not
entitled to a fresh opportunity to produce evidence, as the court can, in such a case,
pronounce judgment against him and does not require any additional evidence to
enable it to pronounce judgment. (Vide Haji Mohammed Ishaq v. Mohd. Iqbal and
Mohd. Ali and Co. [AIR 1978 SC 798] )
38. Under Order 41 Rule 27 CPC, the appellate court has the power to allow a
document to be produced and a witness to be examined. But the requirement of the
said court must be limited to those cases where it found it necessary to obtain such
evidence for enabling it to pronounce judgment. This provision does not entitle the
appellate court to let in fresh evidence at the appellate stage where even without such
evidence it can pronounce judgment in a case. It does not entitle the appellate court
to let in fresh evidence only for the purpose of pronouncing judgment in a particular
way. In other words, it is only for removing a lacuna in the evidence that the appellate
court is empowered to admit additional evidence. (Vide Lala Pancham [AIR 1965 SC
1008] .)
39. It is not the business of the appellate court to supplement the evidence adduced
by one party or the other in the lower court. Hence, in the absence of satisfactory
reasons for the non- production of the evidence in the trial court, additional evidence
should not be admitted in appeal as a party guilty of remissness in the lower court is
not entitled to the indulgence of being allowed to give further evidence under this
Rule. So a party who had ample opportunity to produce certain evidence in the lower
court but failed to do so or elected not to do so, cannot have it admitted in appeal.
(Vide State of U.P. v. Manbodhan Lal Srivastava [AIR 1957 SC 912] and S. Rajagopal
v. C.M. Armugam [AIR 1969 SC 101] .)
40. The inadvertence of the party or his inability to understand the legal issues
involved or the wrong advice of a pleader or the negligence of a pleader or that the
party did not realise the importance of a document does not constitute a "substantial
cause" within the meaning of this Rule. The mere fact that certain evidence is
important, is not in itself a sufficient ground for admitting that evidence in appeal.
41. The words "for any other substantial cause" must be read with the word "requires"
in the beginning of the sentence, so that it is only where, for any other substantial
cause, the appellate court requires additional evidence, that this Rule will apply e.g.
when evidence has been taken by the lower court so imperfectly that the appellate
court cannot pass a satisfactory judgment.
42. Whenever the appellate court admits additional evidence it should record its
reasons for doing so (sub-rule (2)). It is a salutary provision which operates as a
check against a too easy reception of evidence at a late stage of litigation and the
statement of reasons may inspire confidence and disarm objection. Another reason of
this requirement is that, where a further appeal lies from the decision, the record of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 11
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
reasons will be useful and necessary for the court of further appeal to see, if the
discretion under this Rule has been properly exercised by the court below. The
omission to record the reasons must, therefore, be treated as a serious defect. But this
provision is only directory and not mandatory, if the reception of such evidence can
be justified under the Rule.
43. The reasons need not be recorded in a separate order provided they are embodied
in the judgment of the appellate court. A mere reference to the peculiar
circumstances of the case, or mere statement that the evidence is necessary to
pronounce judgment, or that the additional evidence is required to be admitted in the
interests of justice, or that there is no reason to reject the prayer for the admission of
the additional evidence, is not enough compliance with the requirement as to
recording of reasons.
44. It is a settled legal proposition that not only administrative order, but also judicial
order must be supported by reasons, recorded in it. Thus, while deciding an issue, the
court is bound to give reasons for its conclusion. It is the duty and obligation on the
part of the court to record reasons while disposing of the case. The hallmark of order
and exercise of judicial power by a judicial forum is for the forum to disclose its
reasons by itself and giving of reasons has always been insisted upon as one of the
fundamentals of sound administration of the justice delivery system, to make it
known that there had been proper and due application of mind to the issue before the
court and also as an essential requisite of the principles of natural justice. The reason
is the heartbeat of every conclusion. It introduces clarity in an order and without the
same, the order becomes lifeless. Reasons substitute subjectivity with objectivity. The
absence of reasons renders an order indefensible/unsustainable, particularly when
the order is subject to further challenge before a higher forum. Recording of reasons
is the principle of natural justice and every judicial order must be supported by
reasons recorded in writing. It ensures transparency and fairness in decision-making.
The person who is adversely affected must know why his application has been
rejected. (Vide State of Orissa v. Dhaniram Luhar [(2004) 5 SCC 568] , State of
Uttaranchal v. Sunil Kumar Singh Negi [(2008) 11 SCC 205], Victoria Memorial Hall
v. Howrah Ganatantrik Nagrik Samity [(2010) 3 SCC 732] and Sant Lal Gupta v.
Modern Coop. Group Housing Society Ltd. [(2010) 13 SCC 336 )
45. In City Improvement Trust Board v. H. Narayanaiah [(1976) 4 SCC 9], while
dealing with the issue, a three-Judge Bench of this Court held as under :
"28. ... We are of the opinion that the High Court should have recorded its reasons to
show why it found the admission of such evidence to be necessary for some
substantial reason. And if it found it necessary to admit it, an opportunity should
have been given to the appellant to rebut any inference arising from its existence by
leading other evidence."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 12
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
A similar view has been reiterated by this Court in Basayya I. Mathad v. Rudrayya S. Mathad
[(2008) 3 SCC 120] .
46. A Constitution Bench of this Court in K. Venkataramiah [AIR 1963 SC 1526], while dealing with
the same issue held :
"13. It is very much to be desired that the courts of appeal should not overlook the
provisions of clause (2) of the Rule and should record their reasons for admitting
additional evidence. ... The omission to record the reason must therefore be treated
as a serious defect. Even so, we are unable to persuade ourselves that this provision is
mandatory."
In the said case, the Court after examining the record of the case came to the conclusion that the
appeal was heard for a long time and the application for taking additional evidence on record was
filed during the final hearing of the appeal. In such a fact situation, the order allowing such
application did not vitiate for want of reasons.
47. Where the additional evidence sought to be adduced removes the cloud of doubt over the case
and the evidence has a direct and important bearing on the main issue in the suit and interest of
justice clearly renders it imperative that it may be allowed to be permitted on record, such
application may be allowed.
48. To sum up on the issue, it may be held that an application for taking additional evidence on
record at a belated stage cannot be filed as a matter of right. The court can consider such an
application with circumspection, provided it is covered under either of the prerequisite conditions
incorporated in the statutory provisions itself. The discretion is to be exercised by the court
judicially taking into consideration the relevance of the document in respect of the issues involved in
the case and the circumstances under which such an evidence could not be led in the court below
and as to whether the applicant had prosecuted his case before the court below diligently and as to
whether such evidence is required to pronounce the judgment by the appellate court. In case the
court comes to the conclusion that the application filed comes within the four corners of the
statutory provisions itself, the evidence may be taken on record, however, the court must record
reasons as on what basis such an application has been allowed. However, the application should not
be moved at a belated stage.
(emphasis added)
30. In view of the above, this Court is of the considered opinion that the learned trial court has
rightly passed the judgment and the preliminary decree dated 06.08.2002, after due appreciation of
evidence in accordance with law and this Court does not find any reason to interfere with the same.
The application of the appellants for permitting them to lead additional evidence is also found to be
misconceived. Accordingly, the appeal titled "Rattan Bhushan & Ors v. Purna Devi & Ors." against
the judgment and decree dated 06.08.2002 in suit titled,"Purna Devi and others Vs. Chuni Lal and
another" by the court of learned Principal District Judge, Udhampur, is dismissed, along with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 13
"Purna Devi And Others vs . Chuni Lal And Another" By The Court Of on 2 December, 2023
miscellaneous applications.
31. Registry to prepare the decree sheet accordingly.
(RAJNESH OSWAL) JUDGE Jammu 02.12.2023 Sahil Padha Whether the order is speaking:
Yes/No. Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84357745/ 14
