(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur
Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
Author: M.V. Muralidaran
Bench: M.V. Muralidaran
Digitally
KABOR signed by Page 1 of 29
KABORAMBAM
AMBAM LARSON
LARSO Date:
2022.01.21 IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
N 15:14:58
+05'30' Cril. Petition No. 8 of 2017
(Through Video Conference)
Jacob John, aged about 45 years, S/o K. K. John, a resident
of A/S11, Govind Marg, Malviya Nagar, P.O. & P.S. - Malviya
Nagar, Jaipur, Rajasthan.
.... Petitioner/s
- Versus -
1. The State of Manipur represented by the Principal Secretary
(Home), Government of Manipur, Old Secretariat, Imphal
West, Manipur.
2. The Director General of Police, Manipur, Police Head
Quarters, Imphal West, Manipur.
3. The Superintendent of Police, Ukhrul, Manipur.
4. The Officer-in-Charge, Ukhrul Police Station, Manipur.
.... Respondent/s
BEFORE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.V. MURALIDARAN For the Petitioner : Mr. A. Mohendro,
Advocate For the Respondents : Mr. H. Samarjit, GA Date of Hearing : 22.12.2021 Judgment &
Order : 19.01.2022 JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV) This petition has been filed by the petitioner
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 1
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. seeking to quash FIR Case No.23(4)2013 on the file of the Ukhrul Police
Station registered under Sections 370(5)/376/34 IPC and under Section 6/10 of the Protection of
Children from Sexual Offences Act, 2012 (POCSO Act) against the petitioner on the ground that for
the same incident as stated in FIR Case No.23(4)2013, an FIR No.145 of 2013 was registered by the
Mansarovar PS, Jaipur City under Sections 244, 323, 354A, 376 IPC and under Sections 23, 28 of
Juvenile Justice Act and Sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of Protection of Children from Sexual
Offences Act, 2012 and under Sections 3/14 of Child Labour Act and under Section 24 of the
Orphanages and other Charitable Homes (Supervision and Control) Act, 1960 is pending.
[2] The case of the petitioner is that he is Christian by faith and is running a Children's Home in
Jaipur in the name and style "The Father's Children Homes" for both boys and girls separately by
giving education, shelter, food etc. to the poor and needy and under privileged children free of costs
for more than 13 years, especially from North East. The said Home is a registered Society.
[3] On 12.3.2013, the petitioner was arrested by the Mansarovar police in connection with FIR
No.145 of 2013 registered under Section 344, 366, 370(5) IPC and under Sections 23 and 28 of
Children Protection Act and the petitioner was subsequently released on bail as per the order of the
Sessions Judge, Jaipur on 21.3.2013. While enlarging the petitioner, the Sessions Judge, Jaipur
observed that the parents of the children gave affidavit stating that they had sent their children with
their own will and they were happy that with the help given by the petitioner by giving free
education, shelter and food and also parents were allowed to meet and take out for entertainment
from time to time. Thereafter, the petitioner was arrested by the Nagaland Police for the same
offence in connection with FIR No.6/2013 registered under Sections 344/346/363/376 IPC on the
file of Julukei Paren PS. Thereafter, based on the complaint given by the Chairman and Members of
Child Welfare Committee, a case was registered in FIR No.23(4)2013 on the file of Ukhrul PS under
Sections 370(5)/34 IPC and in the said case the petitioner was arrested and later on released on bail
on 12.8.2013. According to the petitioner, by the order dated 2.9.2016, FIR No.6/2013 was quashed
by the Gauhati High Court, Kohima Bench on the ground that there can be no successive FIRs in
Criminal Revision Petition No.5(K) of 2016.
[4] The specific case of the petitioner is that the respondents have collectively subjected the
petitioner to multiple prosecutions in three different States emanating from the multiple FIRs
registered against him. According to the petitioner, the multiple FIRs against the petitioner report
the same alleged offences which are made out from the raid conducted on 12.3.2013 at the
orphanages managed by the petitioner in Jaipur. The petitioner filed the instant petition to be
secured from the prejudice caused to him in defending multiple trails to prove his innocence. Hence,
this petition.
[5] Respondents 2 to 4 filed affidavit-in-opposition stating that on 7.4.2013 at 3.40 pm, the
Chairman and two other Members of the Child Welfare Committee, Ukhrul jointly lodged a
complaint to the Officer-in- Charge of Ukhtul Police Station stating that (1) Nganingmi Vashi, (2)
Leishipem Chamroy, (3) Anderson Yangya, (4) Leiyashim Lungleng and (5) Grace Vasha are
responsible for illegally taking the rescued children to the Father's Grace Home, Jaipur, Rajasthan
and on the basis of the said complaint, an FIR Case being No.23(4)2013 was registered and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 2
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
investigation proceeded. It is stated that in the course of investigation, one of the accused namely
Nganingmi Vashi was arrested and on interrogation, he admitted himself to have committed the
offence and stated that the petitioner directed him to send children particularly female to his Grace
Home. In his statement, Nganingmi Vashi stated that as directed by the petitioner, he sent around
13 children from Ukhrul District on two different occasions.
[6] It is stated that based on the statement given by the Nganingmi Vashi and based on the
investigation, the name of the petitioner was reflected in the FIR and arrested on 13.6.2013 from
Nagaland Jail, Dimapur under production warrant as per the order dated 6.6.2013 passed in
Criminal Misc. Case No.39 of 2013 on the file of the CJM, Ukhrul for the purpose of thorough
investigation of the case. According to the petitioner, after a thorough investigation of the case,
prima facie evidence against the petitioner was established and accordingly, a charge sheet was
submitted against the petitioner and five others before the Special Judge (POCSO), Manipur East. It
is also stated in the affidavit-in-opposition that though the place of occurrence may be one and the
same, the nature of offences, date of occurrences and victims are different in the FIR lodged at
Ukhrul Police Station. Hence, prayed for dismissal of the petition. [7] Learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that the instant FIR, which was registered subsequently on the offences
disclosed from the raid conducted at the petitioner's orphanages on 12.3.2013 are only documenting
the same incident in respect of the same occurrence or are in regard to the incidents which are same
and inherent parts of the same transaction and thus, the subsequent FIRs and investigations are
liable to bequashed.
[8] Learned counsel further submitted that the course adopted in the instant case, namely,
registration of the information as the second FIR in regard to the same incident and making a fresh
investigation when investigation in the first FIR No.145 of 2013 was pending is not permissible
under the scheme of the provisions of the Cr.P.C. as pointed out by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of T.T.Antony v. State of Kerala and others, reported in (2001) 6 SCC 181 and, therefore, the
investigation undertaken in FIR No.23(4)2013 and the report thereof is invalid. According to
learned counsel, subsequent FIRs are not covered under the exceptions to the rule laid down in
T.T.Antony's case (supra) and that a fresh FIR for the same cognizable offences or transaction of
offences is not permissible. Secondly, when the second FIR consists of alleged offences which are in
the nature of the cross case/cross complaint or counter complaint which presents a different version
of events concerning the same incident, such cross complaint may be permitted. He would submit
that a cursory glance of the subsequent FIRs registered after the registration of FIR No.145/2013
would reveal that none of them are covered under the exceptions to T.T.Antony's rule of prohibition
against the second FIR. [9] Learned counsel for the petitioner then submitted that the filing of the
second FIR and a fresh charge sheet for the same offence is contrary to the provisions of the Cr.P.C.
and a second FIR in respect of an offence or different offences committed in the course of the same
transaction is not only impermissible, but it violates Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, the FIR No.23(4)2013 of Ukhrul PS and its further proceedings are liable to be quashed.
[10] On the other hand, learned Government counsel appearing for the respondents submitted that
based on the written complaint lodged by the Chairman and two Members of the Child Welfare
Committee, Ukhrul, the instant FIR No.23(4)2013 was registered and the investigation proceeded
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 3
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
and that based on the statement made by one of the accused namely Nganingmi Vashi, the
petitioner was implicated in this case as he only directed Nganingmi Vashi to send children
particularly female to his Grace Home, Jaipur and accordingly, Nganingmi Vashi sent nearly 13
children from Ukhrul District to Grace Home, Jaipur.
[11] Learned Government counsel further submitted that not only the statement given by one of the
accused, but also based on the statements given by the victims, the involvement of the petitioner as
the main accused was established and the petitioner was arrested on 13.6.2013 from Dimapur Jail
pursuant to the order of the CJM, Ukhrul. In fact, the investigation reveal the involvement of the
petitioner in the crime and accordingly, after completion of the investigation, the respondent police
filed charge sheet against the petitioner and five others. [12] Learned Government counsel next
submitted that though the place of occurrence may be one and at the same place, but the nature of
offences, date of occurrences, co-accused, victims and modus operandi are different in the case
lodged at Ukhrul Police Station. According to learned counsel, as far as the case registered by the
Paren PS is concerned, the same was registered against the petitioner only, whereas in the case of
FIR lodged at Ukhrul PS, charge sheet was filed against six accused, which includes the petitioner.
According to learned Government counsel, the allegations made in the petition are totally baseless
and unfounded and prayed for dismissal of the petition.
[13] This Court considered the submissions made by learned counsel for the parties and also
perused the materials available on record. [14] The grievance of the petitioner is that on the same set
of allegations, three FIRs have been lodged and out of it, one has been quashed and that allegation
constituting offence of rape and POCSO were the same at Ukhrul and Nagaland as that of the
allegation made in connection with Jaipur case and, therefore, the Gauhati High Court quashed the
FIR taking it to be the second FIR of the same allegation. Since FIR No.145 of 2013 is pending, the
instant FIR No.23(4)2013 is not maintainable for the same offence and thus prayed for setting aside
the FIR No.23(4)2013.
[15] Per contra, it is the say of the respondent State that it is true that few allegations may be
common, but accused persons are different and even the date of offence is different in the cases
lodged at Ukhrul and at Mansarovar and therefore, the petitioner has to face the trial of the case in
FIR No.23(4)2013.
[16] For proper appreciation, the complaint lodged by Lata Singh, as stated in Column 12 of FIR
No.145 of 2013 of Mansarovar PS, is quoted hereunder:
" ... On 12th March, 2013, 29 children have been rescued from one of the Shelter
Home (illegal) operating from 51/6, Mansarover, Jaipur. The rescue was done in
collaboration with FXB India Suraksha, Rajasthan State Commission (RSCPCR)
Child Welfare Committee, Jaipur administration and local police. The children
rescued had been trafficked from North East, Punjab, Chhattisgarh and other parts of
India and were confined illegally at the Grace Home TFC in deplorable condition. The
children had been locked inside the home and were not allowed to go out either for
education or entertainment. The owner of the home, Pastor Jacob John was unable
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 4
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
to furnish any document for the Shelter Home. I request you to lodge an FIR against
Pastor Jacob John and other who are involved in trafficking."
[17] It appears that pursuant to the aforesaid complaint, investigation was conducted by the
Investigating Officer of Mansarover PS and it was found that the children had been locked inside the
Home and were not allowed to go out either for education or entertainment and the petitioner
sexually assaulted the victims. It also appears that based on the directions of the Police
Commissioner, Commissionerate, Jaipur, Rajasthan, a special team under the leadership of Shri
Gurusharan Rao, ACP was sent to Ukhrul, Imphal, Manipur for enquiry and, accordingly, the special
team enquired the victims and recorded their statements. In fact, the statements under Section 164
Cr.P.C. of the victims in Ukhrul and Imphal were recorded. According to the prosecution, the
petitioner had illegally kept 29 children (boys and girls) of Manipur, Nagaland, Assam, Nepal,
Chhattishgarh and Delhi in the House No.52/6, Mansarovar, Jaipur, including 13 children from
Manipur in his Home.
[18] As is evident from the records, based on the complaint lodged by Lata Singh, Coordinator of
Rajasthan State Commission of Protection of Child Right in concert with the Child Welfare Academy
and the local administration, 29 children (boys and girls) were rescued from the Home run by the
petitioner.
[19] However, it is the case of the petitioner that the children rescued from his Home were kept by
him with the permission of parents of the children and he had provided education, food etc. to them
and in fact, there was no complaint from the parents and that in their 161 Cr.P.C. statements, the
victims stated that they had come with the permission of their parents and boarding and lodging
facilities were proper at the place where they were resided and they were not allowed to go outside
the house freely, but used to go in park opposite to their house as and when the petitioner
permitted. According to learned counsel for the petitioner, all the victims state that they had neither
any problem nor harassed by any person in the house where they were resided and they used to talk
with their parents on phone there. Highlighting the aforesaid statements, learned counsel for the
petitioner submitted that the petitioner never illegally kept the children in his Home and the
petitioner has not sexually assaulted any of the children as alleged by the prosecution.
[20] On a perusal of the charge sheet filed by the Investigating Officer in the impugned FIR, this
Court finds that the statements of 10 victims girls have been recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C.,
wherein they all stated that they were raped and sexually assaulted by accused Jacob John
(petitioner herein) at Grace Home, Jaipur. Whether or not the petitioner illegally detained the
children or he sexually assaulted the children is the matter of trial. It cannot now be come to the
conclusion that the petitioner has not involved in the crime alleged against him.
[21] Learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that for the same offence, an FIR No.6 of 2013 was
registered by the Jalukie PS and after completion of the investigation, the Investigating Officer filed
charge sheet against the petitioner and by the order dated 27.1.2014, the District and Sessions
Judge, Peren has framed charges against the petitioner under Sections 354(A)(ii)(v)/344/346/376
IPC read with Sections 23/28 of Juvenile Justice Act, 2000. Challenging the order dated 27.1.2014,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 5
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
the petitioner has filed Crl. Revision Petition No.5(K) of 2016 before the Gauhati High Court on the
ground that there can be no successive FIRs against the petitioner for the same offence and the same
incident which has taken place in the same place i.e. Jaipur. By the order dated 2.9.2016, the order
dated 27.1.2014 of the District and Sessions Judge, Peren was quashed and accordingly, the
petitioner was discharged from the charges. Therefore, the instant FIR No.23(4)2013 is not
maintainable on the same offence. [22] At this juncture, it is pertinent to extract the complaint
dated 6.4.2013 lodged by the Chairman and two other Members of the Child Welfare Committee,
Ukhrul, which reads as under:
"Sir, Whereas, an information has been gathered from the statement given by the
above mentioned children that these under ... persons are responsible for carrying
the said children to the Grace Home Jaipur, Rajasthan.
They are:-
1. Mr. Ngainungrei Vashi of Teinem (Tuisem) village, P/S & P/O Somdal, Ukhrul
District accompanied by Phaishoyai and Phaibol
2. Leishipam Chamroy.
3. Anderson Yangya of Paorei Village, Ukhrul District accompanied by Angam.
4. Leiyashim Longleng of Paorei Village, Ukhrul District.
5. Grace Vasha, W/o Songachan Vasha of Greenland, Ukhrul accompanied by Soyao,
Shiratyo, Akan and Gracession.
The above identified persons be immediately book ... justice at the earliest possible time.
Kindly treat this as confidential."
[23] Based on the aforesaid complaint, initially, the respondent police registered the case in FIR
No.23(4)2013 against the above said five accused and on interrogation of accused Nganingmi, he
had stated that he sent 13 children from Ukhrul District, Manipur to Grace Home, Jaipur and the
statement of Nganingmi also prima facie reveal that he was aware of the illicit activities carried out
by the petitioner with the teachers and the students who were under his care at Grace Home, Jaipur.
Thus, based on the statements of the victims and the co-accused Nganingmi, the petitioner was cited
as prime accused in the instant FIR and accordingly, he was arrested and later on released on bail.
[24] Stating that on the similar offence as stated in FIR No.23(4)2013 on the file of Ukhrul PS,
already a case in FIR No.145 of 2013 is pending before the Mansarovar PS, Jaipur, learned counsel
for the petitioner urged that the successive FIRs against the petitioner for the same offence and the
same incident is not maintainable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 6
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
[25] It is apposite to mention at this juncture that FIR No.145 of 2013 was registered against the
petitioner and charge sheet was filed for the offences under Sections 344, 323, 354A, 376 IPC and
Sections 23 and 28 of the Juvenile Justice Act and under Sections 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9 and 10 of POCSO
Act and under Sections 3 and 14 of the Child Labour Act and under Section 24 of the Orphanages
and other Charitable Homes (Supervision and Control) Act. Whereas, the instant FIR namely FIR
No.23(4)2013 was initially registered by the Ukhrul PS against (1) Nganingmi Vashi, (2) Leishipam
Chamroy, (3) Anderson Yangpa, (4) Leiyashim Long and (5) Grace Vasha. Upon investigation, the
petitioner was implicated into the crime as prime accused and filed charge sheet on 6.10.2013
against six accused, including the petitioner for the offences under Sections 370(5), 376(2) (6) (i),
120-B IPC and under Sections 6, 10, 12 of POCSO Act. Thus, it is clear that though the place of
occurrence may be one and at the same place, the nature of offences, date of occurrences, accused,
victims are different. As stated supra, in the instant FIR, the Ukhrul PS filed charge sheet against six
accused and the specific statement of one of the accused Nganingmi Vashi is that as directed by the
petitioner, he trafficked the rescued girls from Ukhrul to Grace Home, Jaipur and as regards the FIR
lodged before the Mansarovar PS, Jaipur is concerned, the victims involved are two while in the
instant FIR and charge sheet of Ukhrul PS, the victims involved are 10 to 13, who were not
admittedly included as victims in FIR No.145 of 2013 on the file of Mansarovar PS as well as in the
charge sheet. [26] At this juncture, by citing the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases
of Babubhai v. State of Gujarat and others, (2010) 12 SCC 254 and P.Sreekumar v. State of Kerala
and others, (2018) 4 SCC 579, learned Government counsel submitted that if two FIRs pertain to
two different incidents/crimes, the second FIR is permissible. [27] In Babubhai (supra), the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, after considering the decision in the case of T.T.Antony (supra), held as under:
"16. In Upkar Singh v. Ved Prakash, (2004) 13 SCC 292, this Court considered the
judgment in T.T.Antony, (2001) 6 SCC 181 and explained that the judgment in the
said case doesnot exclude the registration of a complaint in the nature of
counterclaim from the purview of the court. What had been laid down by this Court
in the aforesaid case is that any further complaint by the same complainant against
the same accused, subsequent to the registration of a case, is prohibited under CrPC
because an investigation in this regard would have already started and further the
complaint against the same accused will amount to an improvement on the facts
mentioned in the original complaint, hence will be prohibited under Section 162
CrPC. However, this rule will not apply to a counterclaim by the accused in the first
complaint or on his behalf alleging a different version of the said incident. Thus, in
the case, there are rival versions in respect of the same episode, the investigating
agency would take the same on two different FIRs and investigation can be carried
under both of them by the same investigating agency and thus filing an FIR
pertaining to a counterclaim in respect of the same incident having a different
version of events, is permissible."
[28] In Sreekumar (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court held as under:
"29. The aforesaid principle was reiterated by this Court (two-Judge Bench) in
Surender Kaushik v. State of U.P. (2013) 5 SCC 148 in the following words:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 7
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
"24. From the aforesaid decisions, it is quite luminous that the lodgment of two FIRs
is not permissible in respect of one and the same incident. The concept of sameness
has been given a restricted meaning. It does not encompass filing of a counter-FIR
relating to the same or connected cognizable offence. What is prohibited is any
further complaint by the same complainant and others against the same accused
subsequent to the registration of the case under the Code, for an investigation in that
regard would have already commenced and allowing registration of further complaint
would amount to an improvement of the facts mentioned in the original complaint.
As is further made clear by the three-Judge Bench in Upkar Singh (2004) 13 SCC
292, the prohibition does not cover the allegations made by the accused in the first
FIR alleging different version of the same incident.
Thus, rival versions in respect of the same incident do tae different shapes and in that
event, lodgment of two FIRs ispermissible."
[29] Admittedly, in the case on hand, there are different versions of events. Firstly, the second FIR
was not filed by the same person, who had filed the first FIR. As stated supra, FIR No.145 of 2013
relates to the occurrence on 12.3.2013 and the accused involved therein is the petitioner only,
whereas in FIR No.24(3)2013, there are six accused involved, including the petitioner, wherein the
nature of offence and victims involved are different. Since FIR No.145 of 2013 was against the
petitioner alone based on one set of allegations, whereas the FIR No.24(3)2013 was based on the
allegations different from the allegations made in FIR No.145 of 2013, the aforesaid two FIRs have
to be decided separately. Therefore, the petitioner cannot contend that there can be no successive
FIRs in respect of the petitioner for the same incident.
[30] Since, the nature of offences in the two FIRs in FIR No.145 of 2013 and FIR No.24(3)2013 are
entirely different, the question of successive FIRs canvassed by the petitioner cannot be
countenanced and the same is rejected. Since serious allegation of trafficking levelled against the
petitioner and other accused and also sexual assault complained against the petitioner, the same has
to be taken seriously considering the problems faced by the children who were kept illegally in the
Homes run by the petitioner. Prima facie, there appears to be an overt act against the petitioner for
the commission of the offences alleged against him. [31] It is apposite to mention that child
trafficking is the act of illegally hiring or selling, transporting, receiving or sheltering children for
any form of exploitation. Children are abducted, worked as bonded laborers or forced to marry
early. Victims are recruited to manufacture drugs and weapons. A large number of children are
victims of forced labour, begging and sexual exploitation. Innocent children, boys and girls are
exposed to vulnerable situations, violence and sexual abuse. It is a violation of human rights and
children are deprived. It disrupts the mental and physical capacity of the child which is primary for
the development of every child.
[32] Children lose their childhood due to the practice of child trafficking. Children are robbed of
them, irrespective of their basic rights, economic status, caste or gender. Traffickers are aware of the
fact that children have less developed mental ability to understand wrong and right and are able to
reduce their trauma than adults. Thus, the children are an easy target. This practice deprives the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 8
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
child of proper development with love and family care. There is a need to make people aware and
educated about child trafficking. There should be strict laws to prevent child trafficking and these
laws shouldbe implemented effectively.
[33] The plea of the petitioners that the respondent police subjected the petitioner to unjust and
unfair trial spread across two different States wherein the petitioner is facing prosecution in two
different FIRs and the pursuant criminal proceedings all pertaining to the same incident of raid
dated 12.3.2013 conducted at the petitioner's orphanages in Jaipur disclosing the same set of
offences from the said incident, cannot be countenanced. As stated supra, the victims involved in
these cases are different and they are residing in different parts of the country and the victims
involved in FIR 23(4)2013 on the file of Ukhrul PS cannot be compelled to go Jaipur jurisdictional
Court and give evidence. Moreover, the two complaints are different nature of offences. Hence, this
Court is of the view that the petitioner has to face the trial of the two cases in two different States
and he cannot sought quashing of FIR No.23(4)2013 on the said ground. [34] Coming to the power
conferred under Section 482 CrPC to quash the criminal proceedings, the law is well settled that
criminal proceedings arising out of commercial transactions or matrimonial or family disputes when
having overwhelmingly and predominantly civil character may be quashed when parties have
resolved entire dispute amongst themselves, but such power cannot be used in respect of heinous
and serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape and dacoity etc. [35] Offences
under Sections 370(5), 376(2)(6)(i) IPC and Sections 6, 10 and 12 of the POCSO Act involved in the
instant case would fall in the category of heinous and serious offences and therefore, they are to be
treated as crime against the society and not against the individual alone and, thus, the criminal
proceedings in FIR No.23(4)2013 on the file of Ukhrul PS which have a serious impact on the
society cannot be quashed in exercise of powers under Section 482 CrPC on the ground made by the
petitioner. [36] The scope of the jurisdiction to quash an FIR either in the exercise of statutory
jurisdiction under Section 482 CrPC or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, the law is well
settled and the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a catena of decisions laid down clear principles and
indicated parameters which justify the quashing of an FIR. This Court is proposed to catalogue the
following two cases:
(i) R.P.Kapur v. State of Punjab, AIR 1960 SC 866.
(ii) State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal, AIR 1992 SC 604.
[37] In R.P.Kapur (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court held:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 9
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
"6. Before dealing with the merits of the appeal it is necessary to consider the nature and scope of
the inherent power of the High Court under Section 561-A of the Code. The said section saves the
inherent power of the High Courtto make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any order
under this Code or to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of
justice. There is no doubt that this inherent power cannot be exercised in regard to matters
specifically covered by the other provisions of the Code. In the present case the Magistrate before
whom the police report has been filed under Section 173 of the Code has yet not applied his mind to
the merits of the said report and it may be assumed in favour of the appellant that his request for the
quashing of the proceedings is not at the present stage covered by any specific provision of the Code.
It is well-established that the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised to quash
proceedings in a proper case either to prevent the abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to
secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily criminal proceedings instituted against an accused person
must be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the High Court would be reluctant to interfere
with the said proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It is not possible, desirable or expedient to lay
down any inflexible rule which would govern the exercise of this inherent jurisdiction. However, we
may indicate some categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction can and should be exercised
for quashing the proceedings. There may be cases where it may be possiblefor the High Court to take
the view that the institution or continuance of criminal proceedings against an accused person may
amount to the abuse of the process of the Court or that the quashing of the impugned proceedings
would secure the ends of justice. If the criminal proceeding in question is in respect of an offence
alleged to have been committed by an accused person and it manifestly appears that there is a legal
bar against the institution or continuance of the said proceeding the High Court would be justified
in quashing the proceeding on that ground. Absence of the requisite sanction may, for instance,
furnish cases under this category. Cases may also arise where the allegations in the first information
report or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do
not constitute the offence alleged; in such cases no question of appreciating evidence arises; it is a
matter merely of looking at the complaint or the first information report to decide whether the
offence alleged is disclosed or not. In such cases it would be legitimate for the High Court to hold
that it would be manifestly unjust to allow the process of the criminal court to be issued against the
accused person. A third category of cases in which the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be
successfully invoked may also arise. In cases falling under this category the allegations made against
the accused person do constitute offence alleged but there is either no legal evidence adduced in
support of the case or evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge. In dealing
with this class of cases it is important to bear in mind the distinction between a case where there is
no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is manifestly and clearly inconsistent with the
accusation made and cases where there is legal evidence which on its appreciation may or may not
support the accusation in question. In exercising its jurisdiction under Section 561-A the High Court
would not embark upon an enquiry as to whether the evidence in question is reliable or not. That is
the function of the trial Magistrate, and ordinarily it would not be open to any party to invoke the
High Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that on a reasonable appreciation of the evidence the
accusation made against the accused would not be sustained. Broadly stated that is the nature and
scope of the inherent jurisdiction of the High Court under Section 561-A in the matter of quashing
criminal proceedings, and that is the effect of the judicial decisions on the point (Vide: In Re:
Shripad G. Chandavarkar [AIR 1928 Bom 184] , Jagat Chandra Mozumdar v. Queen Empress
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 10
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
[(1899) ILR 26 Cal 786] , Shanker Singh (Dr) v. State of Punjab [(1954) 56 Punjab LR 54] ,
Nripendra Bhusan Ray v. Gobind Bandhu Majumdar [AIR 1924 Cal 1018] and Ramanathan
Chettiyar v. K. Sivarama Subrahmanya Ayyar [ILR 47 Mad 722]."
[38] In Bhajan Lal (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court held:
"102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the
Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a
series of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article
226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted
and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non- cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the
Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basisof which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code
or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the
institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific
provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the
grievance of the aggrieved party.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 11
(Through Video Conference) vs The State Of Manipur Represented By The ... on 19 January, 2022
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where
the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a viewto spite him due to private and personal
grudge.
103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that the power of quashing a criminal
proceeding should be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too
in the rarest of rare cases; that the court will not be justified in embarking upon an
enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the allegations made in the
FIR or the complaint and that the extraordinary or inherent powers do not confer an
arbitrary jurisdiction on the court to act according to its whim or caprice."
[39] Considering the facts and circumstances of the case and applying the law laid down by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the above mentioned decisions, the impugned FIR No.23(4)2013 on the
file of Ukhrul Police Station and the further proceedings of the said case do not merit interference,
as it is not a fit case that the impugned FIR is required to be quashed on any one of the grounds
raised by the petitioner to be sufficient ground. Since the offences involved in the instant case are
heinous and serious offences and are to be treated as crime against the society, this Court is of the
prima facie view that the petitioner has to face the trial of the cases in two different places. There is
no merit in the petition and, accordingly, the same is liable to be dismissed.
[40] In the result, the criminal petition is dismissed. No costs. [41] Registry is directed to issue copy
of this order to both the parties through their whatsapp/e-mail.
JUDGE FR/NFR
-Larson
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105685619/ 12
