A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- ....
... on 29 February, 2024
Bench: D. Dash, G. Satapathy
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P. (C) No.33521 of 2023
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of
the Constitution of India, 1950.
----
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance .... Petitioner Limited (earlier known as Sundaram BNP Paribas
Home Finance Limited), Chennai
-versus-
District Magistrate-Cum- .... Opposite Parties & Collector, Khordha & Others Appeared in this case
by Hybrid Arrangement (Virtual/Physical Mode):
=========================================================
For Petitioner - Mr. Nilakantha Dash and S.K.Aziz (Advocates) For Opposite Parties-
Mr. G.N. Rout, Addl. Standing Counsel for O.P.1 CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE D. DASH MR. JUSTICE G. SATAPATHY Date of Hering: 30.11.2023 :
Date of Judgment: 29.02.2024 D. Dash,J. The Petitioner is a Company incorporated
under Indian Companies Act, 1956 and regulated under the Reserve Bank of India
Act, 1934 being a Non-Banking Financial Institution under the guidelines of the
Reserve Bank of India, // 2 // basically deals with advancing of the loans for
construction of the house and other term loans against the properties.
By filing this writ petition, the Petitioner has invoked the jurisdiction of this Court
under Articles 226 & 227 of the Constitution of India, seeking quashment of an order
dated 14.09.2023, passed by the District Magistrate-cum-Collector, Khurda
(Opposite Party No.1) in Bank Misc. Case No.73 of 2016 in the matter of an
application under section 14 of the Securitization and Reconstruction of Financial
Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act, 2002 (for short, 'SARFAESI Act')
filed by the Petitioner seeking assistance in taking possession of the secured asset,
i.e., the immovable property on which security interest has been created towards the
loan advanced by the Petitioner-Company to the Opposite Party No.2
2. Facts necessary for the purpose are as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 1
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
The Petitioner has advanced loan to the Opposite Party No.2 to the tune of Rs.40
lacs. The Opposite Party No.3 is the co-
borrower/guarantor to the said loan. Since there was failure on their part to
discharge the obligations in timely depositing the instalments fixed for repayment
ultimately leading to financial indiscipline, taking recourse of the provision contained
in the SARFAESI Act, the Petitioner classified the said loan account as
Non-Performing Asset (NPA).
Notice under section 13 (2) of the SARFAESI Act was then issued to the Opposite
Party No.2 and 3 and published in Odia // 3 // as well as English Newspapers
following the Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002. Then the next notice
under section 13 (4) of the SARFAESI Act was also served upon the Opposite Party
No.2 & 3 and published in Odia as well as English daily newspapers.
3. Since the Petitioner found it difficult to take physical possession of the property in question, a
move was made resorting to the provisions contained in section 14 of the SARFAESI Act, seeking an
order from the Opposite Party No.1 as to provide assistance for taking physical possession of the
secured assets. The application has finally been rejected by order dated 14.09.2023, which has been
impugned in the present proceeding before us.
The reason for rejection of the application under section 14 of the SARFAESI Act filed by the
Petitioner is that the said property has been placed as surety while getting the husband of the
Opposite Party No.2 i.e. Opposite Party No.3 on bail in connection with a case pending trial before
the Designated Court under the Odisha Protection of Interest of the Depositors Act, 2011 (for short,
'the OPID Act') vide C.T Case No.13 of 2007 and secondly, which is more important is that on
account of pendency of the proceeding for confiscation of the said property vide I.A. No.6 of 2018
resorting to the provision of the OPID Act.
// 4 //
4. We have heard Mr.N.K.Dash, learned counsel for the Petitioner and Mr.G.N.Rout, learned
Additional Standing Counsel at length.
5. In the backdrop of the facts narrated above, further keeping in view of the submissions, as
advanced, it is now seen that the property in question which remained as the secured asset in the
hands of the Petitioner for recovery of the outstanding dues in connection with the loan advanced to
the Opposite Party No.2 for which the Opposite Party No.3 had mortgaged this immovable property;
the very same property is also the subject matter of a proceeding under section 4 of the OPID Act for
sale and ultimate utilization of the sale proceeds in making payment to the innocent depositors who
have been the victims under the Ponzi Company carrying out chit fund & illegal money circulation
activities so as to secure their interests. Therefore, the question now arises as to whether the
provisions contained in the SARFAESI Act would have a march over the relevant provisions
contained in the OPID Act or not.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 2
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
6. The purpose and objects of SARFAESI Act which came into force on 21.06.2002 is to regulate
securitization and reconstruction of financial assets and enforcement of security interest and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereof.
// 5 // On the other hand, the purpose of the OPID Act, which came into force with effect from
17.08.2013 is to secure the interest of the gullible depositors, who have been the victims in the hands
of the fraudster Companies carrying out illegal money circulation and chit fund activities.
The OPID envisages a situation where multitudes of small depositors are defrauded by dubious
corporations by luring them with unscrupulous schemes which promised Utopian returns. The
object of the Act is tailored to clear-cut situations where hapless depositors are defrauded by
dubious "schemes" floated by such dubious "Financial Establishments" as provided under section 2
(d) of the Act. It is imperative that the background of the Act needs to be understood before dealing
with the legislation. In recent times a legion of such dubious corporations have burgeoned in
different parts of the country which have been alluring naïve investors by promising them quixotic
returns under the schemes floated by them. Such companies are essentially sham or paper
companies with no real businesses, which arduously market such devious machinations in the form
of lucrative "schemes". Gullible common fold mostly acting out of the avarice invest Gullible
common folk mostly acting out of avarice invest in such schemes which promise them the moon,
hoping to make quick bucks Such schemes loosely find their origin in "collective investment
schemes" which were monitored by SEBI, the capital market regulator and guidelines // 6 // framed
by it from time to time. However, over the period, such Machiavellian paper companies began to
erupt across the country mostly in rural and backward areas having designed the "schemes," with a
promise to the depositors with high returns and sometimes even assured some sham services to give
it the colour of genuine transactions. This court, on numerous occasions has, unfortunately, come
across many such cases where thousands of gullible depositors have lost their hard- earned monies.
Cognizant of the shamelessly rampant advertising and marketing that were being carried out
(almost on a war footing) by such companies, the legislatures across various states of the country
were compelled to bring such enactments to curb the menace that was spreading fast and deep. It is
with this backdrop that the legislation in question needs to be viewed with proper perspective.
7. Repugnancy or inconsistency between the provisions of Central and State enactments can firstly
occur in case of a Central and a State Act on any field of entry mentioned in List III of the Seventh
Schedule (Concurrent List). To such a situation of repugnancy or inconsistency, the provisions of
Article 254 of the Constitution would apply. If there is such an inconsistency, Article 254(1) makes it
very clear that the Central law will prevail subject, however, to the provisions of Article 254(2) and
further subject to proviso to Article 254(2). The above position would be clear from the opinion
rendered by a three // 7 // Judges Bench of the Apex Court in M/s.Hoechst Pharmaceuticals
Limited & Others -V- State of Bihar; (1983) 4 SCC 45.
8. Para 67 of the aforesaid opinion, which may be usefully noticed is the following terms:-
"67. Article 254 of the Constitution makes provision first, as to what would happen in
the case of conflict between a Central and State law with regard to the subjects
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 3
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
enumerated in the Concurrent List, and secondly, for resolving such conflict. Article
254(1) enunciates the normal rule that in the event of a conflict between a Union and
a State law in the concurrent field, the former prevails over the latter. Clause (1) lays
down that if a State law relating to a concurrent subject is 'repugnant' to a Union law
relating to that subject, then, whether the Union law is prior or later in time, the
Union law will prevail and the State law shall, to the extent of such repugnancy, be
void. To the general rule laid down in clause (1), clause (2) engrafts an exception viz.,
that if the President assents to a State law which has been reserved for his
consideration, it will prevail notwithstanding its repugnancy to an earlier law of the
Union, both laws dealing with a concurrent subject. In such a case, the Central Act,
will give way to the State Act only to the extent of inconsistency between the two, and
no more. In short, the result of obtaining the assent of the President to a State Act
which is inconsistent with a previous Union law relating to a concurrent subject
would be that the State Act will prevail in that State and override the provisions of the
Central Act in their applicability to that State only. The predominance of the State law
may however be taken away if Parliament legislates under the proviso to clause (2).
The proviso to Article 254(2) empowers the Union Parliament to repeal or amend a
repugnant State law, either directly, or by itself enacting a law repugnant to the State
law with respect to the 'same matter'. Even though the subsequent law made by
Parliament does not expressly repeal a State law, even then, the State law will become
void as soon as the subsequent law of Parliament creating repugnancy is made. A
State law would be repugnant to the // 8 // Union law when there is direct conflict
between the two laws. Such repugnancy may also arise where both laws operate in
the same field and the two cannot possibly stand together: See Zaverbhai Amaidas v.
State of Bombay, (1955) 1 SCR 799; M. Karunanidhi v. Union of India, (1979) 3 SCR
254 and T. Barai v. Henry Ah Hoe, (1983) 1 SCC 177."
9. The above view has been reiterated in State of W.B. vs. Kesoram Industries Ltd. and Ors.;(2004)
10 SCC 201. There are several other pronouncements of the Apex Court on the aforesaid issue. The
same, however, would not require any mention as any such reference would be only a multiplication
of discussions on what appears to be a settled issue. In the present case, however, the question
before this Court is not one of repugnancy between a Central and a State law relatable to an Entry in
List III (Concurrent List). No further attention to the above aspect of the matter would, therefore, be
required.
10. Article 246 of the Constitution of India is in the following terms.
"246. Subject-matter of laws made by Parliament and by the Legislatures of States:-
(1) Notwithstanding anything in clauses (2) and (3), Parliament has exclusive power
to make laws with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List I in the Seventh
Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the 'Union List').
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 4
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
(2) Notwithstanding anything in clause (3), Parliament and, subject to clause (1), the
Legislature of any State also, have power to make laws with respect to any of the
matters enumerated in List III in the Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred
to as the 'Concurrent List').
// 9 // (3) Subject to clauses (1) and (2), the Legislature of any State has exclusive power to make
laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List II in the
Seventh Schedule (in this Constitution referred to as the 'State List'). (4) Parliament has power to
make laws with respect to any matter for any part of the territory of India not included (in a State)
notwithstanding that such matter is a matter enumerated in the State List"
11. The Hon'ble Apex Court, in case of K.K. Baskaran -V- State represented by its Secretary, Tamil
Nadu & Others; (2011) 3 SCC 793; while deciding the question as to the validity of Tamil Nadu
Protection of Interests of Depositors (in Financial Establishment) Act, 1997, has held:-
"17. We are of the opinion that the impugned Tamil Nadu Act enacted by the State
Legislature is not in pith and substance referable to the legislative heads contained in
List I of the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution though there may be some
overlapping. In our opinion, in pith and substance the said Act comes under the
entries in List II (the State List) of the Seventh Schedule.
18. It often happens that a legislation overlaps both Lists I as well as List II of the
Seventh Schedule. In such circumstances, the doctrine of pith and substance is
applied. We are of the opinion that in pith and substance the impugned State Act is
referable to Entries 1, 30 and 31 of List II of the Seventh Schedule and not Entries 43,
44 and 45 of List I of the Seventh Schedule.
19. It is well-settled that incidental trenching in exercise of ancillary powers into a
forbidden legislative territory is permissible vide Constitution Bench decision of this
court in State of West Bengal etc. vs. Kesoram Industries Ltd & Ors; (2004) 10 SCC
201 (vide paras 31(4), (5) and (6) and 129 (5).
Sharp and distinct lines of demarcation are not always // 10 // possible and it is often impossible to
prevent a certain amount of overlapping vide ITC Ltd. vs. State of Karnataka; 1985 (Supp) SCC 476
(para 17). We have to look at the legislation as a whole and there is a presumption that the
legislature does not exceed its constitutional limits.
20. The `financial companies' in the present case had not obtained any licence from the Reserve
Bank of India. Hence they are not governed by the Reserve Bank of India Act nor the Banking
Regulation Act, 1949.
21. The doctrine of pith and substance means that an enactment which substantially falls within the
powers expressly conferred by the Constitution upon a Legislature which enacted it cannot be held
to be invalid merely because it incidentally encroaches on matters assigned to another legislature.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 5
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
The Court must consider what constitutes in pith and substance the true subject matter of the
legislation. If on such examination it is found that the legislation is in substance one on a matter
assigned to the legislature then it must be held to be valid even though it incidentally trenches on
matters beyond its legislative competence vide Union of India vs. Shah Goverdhan L. Kabra
Teachers' College (2002) 8 SCC 228 (vide para 7).
22. For applying the doctrine of pith and substance regard is to be had to the enactment as a whole,
its main objects and the scope and effect of its provisions vide Bharat Hydro Power Corporation vs.
State of Assam (2004) 4 SCC 489 (vide para
15). For this purpose the language of the Entries in the Seventh Schedule should be given the widest
scope of which the meaning is fairly capable vide State of West Bengal vs. Kesoram Industries Ltd
(supra) (para 31(4), Union of India vs. Shah Goverdhan Kabra Teachers College (supra) (para 6),
ITC Ltd. vs. State of Karnataka (supra) (para 17).
23. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the subject-matter of the Tamil Nadu Act being
banking, falls within the legislative competence of Parliament under Entry 45 of List I. We do not
agree. Admittedly, none of the financial companies in question obtained any licence from the
Reserve // 11 // Bank of India. Hence they are not governed by the Reserve Bank of India Act or the
Banking Regulation Act. The activities of these financial companies do not, in our opinion, come
within the meaning of the term `banking' as defined in the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 or the
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934.
24. The Tamil Nadu Act was enacted to find out a solution for the problem of the depositors who
were deceived on a large scale by the fraudulent activities of certain financial establishments. There
was a disastrous consequence both in the economic as well as social life of such depositors who were
exploited by false promise of high return of interest. These financial institutions/establishments did
not come either under the Reserve Bank of India Act or the Banking Regulation act, and hence they
escaped from public control. By the impugned Act the State not only proposed to attach the
properties of such fraudulent establishments and the mala fide transferees, but also provided for the
sale of such properties and for distribution of the sale proceeds amongst the innocent depositors.
Hence, in our opinion, the doctrine of occupied field or repugnancy, has no application in the
present case.
25. The object of the Tamil Nadu Act was to give a speedy remedy to the innocent depositors who
were vulnerable to the temptation of earning high rates of interest and were victimized by the
financial establishments fraudulently. As regards Section 58A of the Companies Act, this prescribes
the conditions under which the deposits may be invited or accepted by the companies. On the other
hand, the aim and object of the Tamil Nadu Act is totally different.
26. The Tamil Nadu Act was enacted to ameliorate the conditions of thousands of depositors who
had fallen into the clutches of fraudulent financial establishments who had raised hopes of high rate
of interest and thus duped the depositors. Thus the Tamil Nadu Act is not focused on the transaction
of banking or the acceptance of deposit, but is focused on remedying the situation of the depositors
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 6
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
who were deceived by the fraudulent financial establishments. The impugned Tamil Nadu Act was
intended to deal with neither the banks // 12 // which do the business or banking and are governed
by the Reserve Bank of India Act and Banking Regulation Act, nor the non-banking financial
companies enacted under the Companies Act, 1956.
27. The Reserve Bank of India Act, the Banking Regulation Act and the Companies Act do not
occupy the field which the impugned Tamil Nadu Act occupies, though the latter may incidentally
trench upon the former. The main object of the Tamil Nadu Act is to provide a solution to wipe out
the tears of several lakhs of depositors to realize their dues effectively and speedily from the
fraudulent financial establishments which duped them or their vendees, without dragging them in a
legal battle from pillar to post. Hence, the decision of this Court in Delhi Cloth Mills (supra) has no
bearing on the constitutional validity of the Tamil Nadu Act.
28. In the case of the Tamil Nadu Act, the attachment of properties is intended to provide an
effective and speedy remedy to the aggrieved depositors for the realization of their dues. The
offences dealt with in the impugned Act are unique and have been enacted to deal with the economic
and social disorder in society, caused by the fraudulent activities of such financial establishments.
29. Under Section 3 & 4 of the Tamil Nadu Act, certain properties can be attached, and there is also
provision for interim orders for attachment after which a post decisional hearing is provided for. In
our opinion this is valid in view of the prevailing realities.
30. The Court should interpret the constitutional provisions against the social setting of the country
and not in the abstract. The Court must take into consideration the economic realities and
aspirations of the people and must further the social interest which is the purpose of legislation, as
held by Justices Holmes, Brandeis and Frankfurter of the U.S. Supreme Court in a series of
decisions. Hence the Courts cannot function in a vacuum. It is for this reason that Courts presume
in favour of constitutionality of the statute because there is always a presumption that the legislature
understands and correctly // 13 // appreciates the needs of its own people, vide Govt. of Andhra
Pradesh vs. P. Laxmi Devi (2008) 4 SCC 720.
31. We fail to see how there is any violation of Article 14, 19(1)(g) or 21 of the Constitution. The Act is
a salutary measure to remedy a great social evil. A systematic conspiracy was effected by certain
fraudulent financial establishments which not only committed fraud on the depositor, but also
siphoned off or diverted the depositor's funds mala fide. We are of the opinion that the act of the
financers in exploiting the depositors is a notorious abuse of faith of the depositors who innocently
deposited their money with the former for higher rate of interest. These depositors were often given
a small pass book as a token of acknowledgment of their deposit, which they considered as a
passport of their children for higher education or wedding of their daughters or as a policy of
medical insurance in the case of most of the aged depositors, but in reality in all cases it was an
unsecured promise executed on a waste paper. The senior citizens above 80 years, senior citizens
between 60 and 80 years, widows, handicapped, driven out by wards, retired government servants
and pensioners, and persons living below the poverty line constituted the bulk of the depositors.
Without the aid of the impugned Act, it would have been impossible to recover their deposits and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 7
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
interest thereon.
32. The conventional legal proceedings incurring huge expenses of court fees, advocates' fees, apart
from other inconveniences involved and the long delay in disposal of cases due to docket explosion
in Courts, would not have made it possible for the depositors to recover their money, leave alone the
interest thereon. Hence, in our opinion the impugned Act has rightly been enacted to enable the
depositors to recover their money speedily by taking strong steps in this connection.
33. The State being the custodian of the welfare of the citizens as parens patriae cannot be a silent
spectator without finding a solution for this malady. The financial swindlers, who are nothing but
cheats and charlatans having no social responsibility, but only a lust for easy money by making false
// 14 // promise of attractive returns for the gullible investors, had to be dealt with strongly. The
small amounts collected from a substantial number of individual depositors culminated into huge
amounts of money. These collections were diverted in the name of third parties and finally one day
the fraudulent financers closed their financial establishments leaving the innocent depositors in the
lurch.
12. In our given situation of repugnancy or inconsistency is between to a subsequent State law
(OPID Act) covered by Entry 1, 30 & 31 of List II of the Seventh Schedule and an earlier Central law
(SARFAESI Act) relatable to Entries 43, 44 & 45 of the List I of the Seventh Schedule. How such a
situation is to be resolved and answered and which legislation would have the primacy is the moot
question that arises for consideration in the present appeals.
13. In interpreting Article 246 regard must be had to the constitutional scheme which visualises a
federal structure giving full autonomy to the Union Parliament as well as to the State legislatures in
their respective/demarcated fields of legislation. The problem may, however, become a little more
complex than what may seemingly appear as the two legislations may very well be within the
respective domains of the concerned legislatures and, yet, there may be intrusion into areas that fall
beyond the assigned fields of legislation. In such a situation it will be plain duty of the Constitutional
Court to see if the conflict can be resolved by acknowledging the mutual existence of the two
legislations. If that is not possible, then by virtue of the provisions of Article 246(1), the
Parliamentary legislation would prevail and // 15 // the State legislation will have to give way
notwithstanding the fact that the State legislation is within the demarcated field (List II). This is the
principle of federal supremacy which Article 246 of the Constitution embodies. The said principle
will, however, prevail provided the pre- condition exists, namely, the Parliamentary legislation is the
dominant legislation and the State legislation, though within its own field, has the effect of
encroaching on a vital sphere of the subject or entry to which the dominant legislation is referable.
This is the principle that is discernible from the Constitution Bench judgment of this Court in State
of West Bengal and Ors. vs. Committee for Protection of Democratic Rights, West Bengal and Ors.;
(2010) 3 SCC 571 Paragraphs 25, 26 and 27 which illuminates the issue may be conveniently
extracted below:-
"25. The non obstante clause in Article 246(1) contemplates the predominance or
supremacy of the Union Legislature. This power is not encumbered by anything
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 8
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
contained in clauses (2) and (3) for these clauses themselves are expressly limited
and made subject to the non obstante clause in Article 246(1). The State Legislature
has exclusive power to make laws for such State or any part thereof with respect to
any of the matters enumerated in List II in the Seventh Schedule and it also has the
power to make laws with respect to any matters enumerated in List III (Concurrent
List). The exclusive power of the State Legislature to legislate with respect to any of
the matters enumerated in List II has to be exercised subject to clause (1) i.e. the
exclusive power of Parliament to legislate with respect to matters enumerated in List
I. As a consequence, if there is a conflict between an entry in List I and an entry in
List II, which is not capable of reconciliation, the power of Parliament to legislate
with respect to a matter enumerated // 16 // in List II must supersede pro tanto the
exercise of power of the State Legislature.
26. Both Parliament and the State Legislature have concurrent powers of legislation
with respect to any of the matters enumerated in List III. The words
"notwithstanding anything contained in clauses (2) and (3)" in Article 246(1) and the
words "subject to clauses (1) and (2)"
in Article 246(3) lay down the principle of federal supremacy viz. that in case of inevitable conflict
between the Union and State powers, the Union power as enumerated in List I shall prevail over the
State power as enumerated in Lists II and III and in case of an overlapping between Lists II and III,
the latter shall prevail.
27. Though, undoubtedly, the Constitution exhibits supremacy of Parliament over the State
Legislatures, yet the principle of federal supremacy laid down in Article 246 of the Constitution
cannot be resorted to unless there is an irreconcilable direct conflict between the entries in the
Union and the State Lists. Thus, there is no quarrel with the broad proposition that under the
Constitution there is a clear demarcation of legislative powers between the Union and the States and
they have to confine themselves within the field entrusted to them. It may also be borne in mind that
the function of the lists is not to confer powers; they merely demarcate the legislative
field........................"
14. Equally illuminating is the view available in the opinion of the Apex Court rendered in re. Special
Reference No. 1 of 2001[4], which is reproduced below.
"13. The Constitution of India delineates the contours of the powers enjoyed by the
State Legislature and Parliament in respect of various subjects enumerated in the
Seventh Schedule. The rules relating to distribution of powers are to be gathered
from the various provisions contained in Part // 17 // XI and the legislative heads
mentioned in the three lists of the Schedule. The legislative powers of both the Union
and State Legislatures are given in precise terms. Entries in the lists are themselves
not powers of legislation, but fields of legislation. However, an entry in one list
cannot be so interpreted as to make it cancel or obliterate another entry or make
another entry meaningless. In case of apparent conflict, it is the duty of the court to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 9
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
iron out the crease and avoid conflict by reconciling the conflict. If any entry overlaps
or is in apparent conflict with another entry, every attempt shall be made to
harmonise the same.
14. When the question arose about reconciling Entry 45 of List I, duties of excise, and
Entry 18 of List II, taxes on the sale of goods, of the Government of India Act, 1935,
Sir Maurice Gwyer, C.J. in Central Provinces and Berar Act No. XIV of 1938, In re,
(1939) FCR 18, at pp. 42-44 observed:-
"......a grant of the power in general terms, standing by itself, would no doubt be
construed in the wider sense, but it may be qualified by other express provisions in
the same enactment, by the implications of the context, and even by considerations
arising out of what appears to be the general scheme of the Act."
It was further observed: -
"........an endeavour must be made to solve it, as the Judicial Committee have said, by
having recourse to the context and scheme of the Act, and a reconciliation attempted
between two apparently conflicting jurisdictions by reading the two entries together
and by interpreting, and, where necessary modifying the language of the one by that
of the other. If indeed such a reconciliation should prove impossible, then, and only
then, will the non obstante clause operate and the federal power prevail."
15. Although Parliament cannot legislate on any of the entries in the State List, it may do so
incidentally while essentially dealing with // 18 // the subject coming within the purview of the
entry in the Union List. Conversely, the State Legislature also while making legislation may
incidentally trench upon the subject covered in the Union List. Such incidental encroachment in
either event need not make the legislation ultra vires the Constitution. The doctrine of pith and
substance is sometimes invoked to find out the nature and content of the legislation. However, when
there is an irreconcilable conflict between the two legislations, the Central legislation shall prevail.
However, every attempt would be made to reconcile the conflict."
16. The federal structure under the constitutional scheme can also work to nullify an incidental
encroachment made by the Parliamentary legislation on a subject of a State legislation where the
dominant legislation is the State legislation. An attempt to keep the aforesaid constitutional balance
intact and give a limited operation to the doctrine of federal supremacy can be discerned in the
concurring judgment of in ITC Ltd. vs. Agricultural Produce Market Committee and Ors.; (2002) 9
SCC 232, wherein after quoting the observations of the Apex Court in the case of S.R. Bomai vs.
Union of India; (1994) 3 SCC 1 (para 276), the Hon'ble Judge has gone to observe as follows (para
94 of the report):-
"276. The fact that under the scheme of our Constitution, greater power is conferred
upon the Centre vis-à-vis the States does not mean that States are mere appendages
of the Centre. Within the sphere allotted to them, States are supreme. The Centre
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 10
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
cannot tamper with their powers. More particularly, the courts should not adopt an
approach, an interpretation, which has the effect of or // 19 // tends to have the effect
of whittling down the powers reserved to the States.
94. Although Parliament cannot legislate on any of the entries in the State List, it may
do so incidentally while essentially legislating within the entries under the Union
List. Conversely, the State Legislatures may encroach on the Union List, when such
an encroachment is merely ancillary to an exercise of power intrinsically under the
State List. The fact of encroachment does not affect the vires of the law even as
regards the area of encroachment. [A.S. Krishna vs. State of Madras, AIR 1957 SC
297; Chaturbhai M. Patel vs. Union of India, (1960) 2 SCR 362; State of Rajasthan vs.
G. Chawla, AIR 1959 SC 544; Ishwari Khetan Sugar Mills (P) Ltd. vs. State of U.P.,
(1980) 4 SCC 136]. This principle commonly known as the doctrine of pith and
substance, does not amount to an extension of the legislative fields. Therefore, such
incidental encroachment in either event does not deprive the State Legislature in the
first case or Parliament in the second, of their exclusive powers under the entry so
encroached upon. In the event the incidental encroachment conflicts with legislation
actually enacted by the dominant power, the dominant legislation will prevail."
17. The aforesaid view in the concurring judgment of Ruma Pal, J. in ITC Ltd. vs. Agricultural
Produce Market Committee and Ors. (supra), seems to have been echoed in a later pronouncement
of this Court in Vishal N. Kalsaria vs. Bank of India; (2016)3 SCC 762, wherein the Apex Court had
held that the provisions of the Act of 2002 will not have an overriding effect on the provisions of the
State Rent Control Acts.
// 20 //
18. In the case at hand, the conflict between the Central and State is on account of an apparent over
stepping by the provisions of the State Act dealing with the security of the innocent depositors who
have fallen as the victims in the hands of the fraudster Companies into an area of banking covered
by the Central Act, which is to regulate the securitization and reconstruction of financial asset and
enforcement of security interest etc., The test therefore would be to find out as to which is the
dominant legislation having regard to the area of encroachment.
19. The provisions of SARFAESI Act enable the financial institution to take possession of any
property whereupon security interest has been created in its favour, more particularly, section 13 of
the SARFAESI Act enable the financial institution to take process of sale such property of any
person to realize its dues and section 14 of the said Act stands to render assistance to the financial
institution to take process of the said property for the purpose.
The above Central Act had from the beginning in section- 35 as under: -
"35. The provisions of this Act to override other laws. - The provisions of this Act
shall have effect, notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 11
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
other law for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any
such law."
// 21 // The objects and reasons are that the provisions shall override other laws and the provisions
of the Act shall have effect notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other
law for the time being in force or any instrument having effect by virtue of any such law.
The above provision was there from the beginning and thereafter the OPID Act came into force on
17.08.2013 after having received the assent of the President on 12.08.2013.
20. Coming to the State Legislation which has received the assent of the President on 12.08.2013 i.e.
OPID Act, whose interplay with the SARFAESI Act is under test, we too find section-3 of the OPID
Act beginning with non-obstante at clause, reads as under:-
"3. Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, -
(i) where, upon complaints received from a number of depositors that any Financial
Establishment defaults the return of deposits after maturity or fails to pay interest on
deposit or fails to provide the service for which deposit has been made, or
(ii) where the Government have reason to believe that any Financial Establishment is
acting in a calculated manner with an intention to defraud the depositors, and if the
Government are satisfied that such Financial Establishment is not likely to return the
deposits or to make payment of interest or to provide the service, the Government
may, in order to protect the interest of the depositors of such Financial // 22 //
Establishment, pass an ad-interim order attaching the money or other property
alleged to have been procured either in the name of the Financial Establishment or in
the name of any other person from and out of the deposits collected by the Financial
Establishment, or if it transpires that such money or other property is not available
for attachment or not sufficient for repayment of the deposits, such other property of
the said Financial Establishment or the Promoter, Director, Partner or Manager or
Member of the said Financial Establishment or a person who has borrowed money
from the Financial Establishment to the extent of his default or such other properties
of that person in whose name properties where purchased from and out of the
deposits collected by the Financial Establishment, as the Government may think fit
and transfer the control over the said money or property to the Competent Authority"
The other important provisions i.e. section 9 of the OPID Act indicating the follow up actions read as
follows: -
"9. Powers of Designated Court regarding attachment, sale, etc.: -
(1) Upon receipt of an application under section 4, the Designated Court shall issue to
the Financial Establishment or to any other person whose property is attached by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 12
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
Government under section 3, a notice accompanied by the application and affidavits
and of the evidence, if any, recorded, calling upon the said Establishment or the said
person to show cause on a date to be specified in the notice as to why the order of
attachment should not be made absolute and the properties so attached be sold in
public auction.
// 23 // (2) The Designated Court shall also issue such notice to all other persons represented to it
as having or being likely to claim any interest or title in the property of the Financial Establishment
or the person to whom the notice is issued under sub-section (1), calling upon such person to appear
on the same date as that specified in the notice and make objection if he so desires to the attachment
of the property or any portion thereof on the ground that he has an interest in such property or
portion thereof.
(3) Any person claiming an interest in the property attached or any portion thereof may,
notwithstanding that no notice has been served upon him under this section, make an objection as
aforesaid to the Designated Court at any time before an order is passed under sub-section (4) or
sub-section (6).
(4) If no cause is shown and no objections are made on or before the specified date, the Designated
Court shall forthwith pass an order making the ad-interm order of attachment absolute and direct
the Competent Authority to sell the property so attached by public auction and realize the sale
proceeds.
(5) If cause is shown or any objection is made as aforesaid the Designated Court shall proceed to
investigate the same and in so doing, as regards the examination of the parties and in all others
respects, the Designated Court shall, subject to the provisions of this Act, follow the procedure and
exercise all the powers of a court in hearing a suit under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and any
person making an objection shall be required to adduce evidence to show that on the date of the
attachment he had some interest in the property attached.
(6) After investigation under sub-section (5), the Designated Court shall pass an order, within a
period of one hundred and eighty days from the date of receipt of an application // 24 // under
sub-section (3) of section 4, either making the ad- interim order of attachment absolute or varying it
by releasing a portion of the property from attachment or cancelling the ad-interim order of
attachment and then direct the Competent Authority to sell the property so attached by public
auction and realize the sale proceeds:
Provided that the Designated Court shall not release from attachment any interest,
which it is satisfied that the Financial Establishment or the person referred to in sub-
section (1) has in the property, unless it is also satisfied that there will remain under
attachment an amount or properly of a value not less than the value that is required
for repayment to the depositors of such Financial Establishment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 13
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
(7) The Designated Court shall, on an application by the Competent Authority, pass
such order or issue such direction as may be necessary for the equitable distribution
among the depositors of the money attached or realized out of the sale."
21. The SARFAESI Act is relatable to entry of banking which is included in entries in 43, 44 & 45 of
list 1 of the 7th Schedule. Sale of mortgaged property by a bank is inseparable and integral part of
the business of banking. The object of the State Act as already noted on the other hand is the
basically concerned with refund/return of money to the gullible depositors who have been
defrauded. The words found in the statement of object and reasons viz. in the public interest, in
order to regulate the activities of such financial establishment therefore, mean that the OPID Act
had been enacted to protect the interest of the depositors. Therefore, the State Act having been
assented to by the President on 12.08.2013, the provision contained in the OPID // 25 // Act will
prevail notwithstanding its repugnancy to the SARFAESI Act. The SARFAESI Act will give way to
the OPID Act only to the extent of the inconsistency between the two and no more. In short, with the
assent of the President to the State OPID Act, some provisions of which stand in conflict/
inconsistent with the provision of SARFAESI Act, said provisions of the OPID Act will prevail in the
State of Odisha and over ride the provision of SARFAESI Act to said extent and the attachment as
provided in OPID Act may stand on the way of the same in taking over possession as the secured
asset and transfer for recovery of the loan dues at the behest of the Bank/Financial Institution
advancing the loan.
22. The above, however, having remained as the position, till coming into force of the provision
contained in section 26E of the SARFAESI Act w.e.f. 01.09.2016 which reads as under:-
"26E. Priority to secured creditors.-Notwithstanding anything contained in any other
law for the time being in force, after the registration of security interest, the debts due
to any secured creditor shall be paid in priority over all other debts and all revenues,
taxes, cesses and other rates payable to the Central Government or State Government
or local authority.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this section, it is hereby clarified that on or after
the commencement of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 (31 of 2016), in
cases where insolvency or bankruptcy proceedings are pending in respect of secured
assets of the borrower, priority to secured // 26 // creditors in payment of debt shall
be subject to the provisions of that Code."
23. It provides that notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in any other law for
the time being in force, after registration of the security interest, the debts due to any secured
creditor shall be paid in priority over all other debts and all revenue taxes and cesses and other rates
payable to Central Government or State Government or local authority. This priority is however
subject to the provisions of Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code.
As per the OPID Act, the money being realized by sale of the attached property, as per order of the
Designated Court, the same is essentially for distribution amongst the depositors. Therefore, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 14
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
State Government by virtue of the statutory provisions and pressing the same into service use to sale
the property as if it has been confiscated and has vested with the state and thus being the owner and
then playing the role of a welfare State distribute the same to the innocent duped depositors as per
the order of the Designated Court. Upon sale of the property, the funds collected remains in the
hands of the State awaiting further order of the Designated Court.
24. At this juncture, we feel it proper to refer to the Full Bench decision of the Bombay High Court in
case of "Jalagaon Janta Sahakari Bank Ltd. and another vs. Joint Commissioner of Sales Tax Nodal
9, Mumbai and Anr.; 2022 (5) Mh. L.J. 691". The Hon'ble // 27 // Full Bench has clearly held hat if
the security interest of the secured creditor is registered with the Central Registry of Securitization
Asset Reconstruction and Security Interest of India (CERSAI), then the secured creditor would get
priority over the dues of the Government. The relevant portions of the decision reads as thus:-
"84. ..............The next query that would obviously follow is:
whether the word 'priority' appearing in section 26E of the SARFAESI Act, i.e.,
"...paid in priority over all other debts and all revenues, taxes, cesses and other rates
payable to the Central Government or State Government or local authority", was used
without a purpose? This reply has to be in the negative.
85. Priority means precedence or going before (Black's Law Dictionary). In the
present context, it would mean the right to enforce a claim in preference to others. In
view of the splurge of 'first charge' used in multiple legislation, the Parliament
advisedly used the word 'priority over all other dues' in the SARFAESI Act to obviate
any confusion as to inter-se distribution of proceeds received from sale of properties
of the borrower/dealer. If a secured asset has been disposed of by sale by taking
recourse to the Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002 it would appear to be
reasonable to hold, particularly having regard to the non-
obstante clauses in sections 31 B and section 26, that the dues of the secured creditor shall have
'priority' over all other including all revenues, taxes, cesses and other rates payable to the Central
Government or State Government or local authority.
86. A debt that is secured or which, by reason of the provisions of a statute, becomes a 'first charge'
on the // 28 // property, in view of the plain language of Article 372 of the Constitution, must be
held to prevail over a Crown debt, which is an unsecured one. The law, as it stands even today, is
that a Crown debt enjoys no priority over secured debts. This principle has been repeatedly
reaffirmed including, inter alia, in the decision of the Supreme Court reported in (2000) 5 SCC 694
(Dena Bank vs. Bhikhabhai Prabhudas Parekh & Co.) where the Court observed:"
"10. However, the Crown's preferential right to recovery of debts over other creditors
is confined to ordinary or unsecured creditors. The common law of England or the
principles of equity and good conscience (as applicable to India) do not accord the
Crown a preferential right for recovery of its debts over a mortgagee or pledgee of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 15
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
goods or a secured creditor. It is only in cases where the Crown's right and that of the
subject meet at one and the same time that the Crown is in general preferred. Where
the right of the subject is complete and perfect before that of the King commences,
the rule does not apply, for there is no point of time at which the two rights are at
conflict, nor can there be a question which of the two ought to prevail in a case where
one, that of the subject, has prevailed already. In Giles v. Grover it has been held that
the Crown has no precedence over a pledge of goods. In Bank of Bihar v. State of
Bihar the principle has been ealizedd by this Court holding that the rights of the
pawnee who has parted with money in favour of the pawnor on the security of the
goods cannot be extinguished even by lawful seizure of goods by making money
available to other creditors of the pawnor without the claim of the pawnee being first
fully satisfied. Rashbehary Ghose states in Law of Mortgage (TLL, 7th Edn., p. 386) -
'It seems a government debt in India is not entitled to precedence over a prior
secured debt'."
// 29 //
87. It would also not be inapposite to draw guidance from the decision of the Supreme Court
reported in (2006) 10 SCC 452 (ICICI Bank Ltd. vs. SIDCO Leathers Ltd.) where the Court ruled as
follows:
"41. While enacting a statute, Parliament cannot be presumed to have taken away a
right in property. Right to property is a constitutional right. Right to recover the
money lent by enforcing a mortgage would also be a right to enforce an interest in the
property. The provisions of the Transfer of Property Act provide for different types of
charges. In terms of Section 48 of the Transfer of Property Act claim of the first
charge-holder shall prevail over the claim of the second charge-holder and in a given
case where the debts due to both, the first charge- holder and the second
charge-holder, are to be ealized from the property belonging to the mortgagor, the
first charge-holder will have to be repaid first. There is no dispute as regards the said
legal position.
42. Such a valuable right, having regard to the legal position as obtaining in common
law as also under the provisions of the Transfer of Property Act, must be deemed to
have been known to Parliament. Thus, while enacting the Companies Act, Parliament
cannot be held to have intended to deprive the first charge-holder of the said right.
Such a valuable right, therefore, must be held to have been kept preserved. [See
Workmen v. Firestone Tyre and Rubber Co. of India (P) Ltd., (1973) 1 SCC 813].
43. If Parliament while amending the provisions of the Companies Act intended to
take away such a valuable right of the first charge-holder, we see no reason why it
could not have stated so explicitly.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 16
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
Deprivation of legal right existing in favour of a person cannot be presumed in construing the // 30
// statute. It is in fact the other way round and thus, a contrary presumption shall have to be raised.
44. Section 529(1)I of the Companies Act speaks about the respective rights of the secured creditors
which would mean the respective rights of secured creditors vis-à-vis unsecured creditors. It does
not envisage respective rights amongst the secured creditors. Merely because Section 529 does not
specifically provide for the rights of priorities over the mortgaged assets, that, in our opinion, would
not mean that the provisions of Section 48 of the Transfer of Property Act in relation to a company,
which has undergone liquidation, shall stand obliterated.
45. If we were to accept that inter se priority of secured creditors gets obliterated by merely
responding to a public notice wherein it is specifically stated that on his failure to do so, he will be
excluded from the benefits of the dividends that may be distributed by the Official Liquidator, the
same would lead to deprivation of the secured creditor of his right over the security and would bring
him on par with an unsecured creditor. The logical sequitur of such an inference would be that even
unsecured creditors would be placed on par with the secured creditors. This could not have been the
intendment of the legislation."
88. Bare perusal of the 2016 Amending Act would show that the dues of the Central/State
Governments were in the specific contemplation of the Parliament while it amended the RDDB Act
and the SARFAESI Act, both of which make specific reference to debts and all revenues, taxes,
cesses and other rates payable to the Central Government or State Government or local authority
and ordains that the dues of a secured creditor will have 'priority', i.e., take precedence.
Significantly, the statute // 31 // goes quite far and it is not only revenues, taxes, cesses and other
rates payable to the State Government or any local authority but also those payable to the Central
Government that would have to stand in the queue after the secured creditor for payment of its
dues.
89. The effect of using the word 'priority' in section 26E of the SARFAESI Act, according to us, is
this. The rights accorded to 'first charge' holders by Central as well as State legislation having been
known to the Parliament, in such a situation, what the Parliament intended by exercising its
legislative power by introducing amendments in the SARFAESI Act, more particularly by
incorporating section 26E therein, was to explicitly make the valuable right of the 'first charge'
holder, subordinate to the dues of a second creditor. The rights of such of the first charge holders
accorded by several legislations enacted by the State, having regard to the language in which section
26E is couched, would rank subordinate to the right of the secured creditor as defined in section
2(1)(zd) subject, of course, to compliance with the other provisions of the statute. Acceptance of the
contra- arguments of learned counsel for the State/respondents would undo what the Parliament
has chosen to do.
************************
92. In view of the foregoing discussion, we have no hesitation to hold that the dues of a secured
creditor (subject of course to CERSAI registration) and subject to proceedings under the I & B Code
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 17
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
would rank superior to the dues of the relevant department of the State Government."
(emphasis supplied) It has also been held in that case of Jalagaon Janta Sahakari Bank Ltd. and Anr.
(supra) at para 189 to 192 thereof that:-
// 32 //
189. In the case at hand, we have seen that the secured creditor had registered the
security interest with CERSAI on 25th October 2017. Post enforcement of Chapter
IV-A of the SARFAESI Act, under sub-section (4) of section 26B of the SARFAESI
Act, the department of the Government which professes to recover any tax or other
Government dues, is enjoined to register such claim with CERSAI.
190. It does not appear that the respondent no. 1 registered its claim or attachment
over the secured asset with CERSAI, post enforcement of Chapter IV-A of the
SARFAESI Act. Sub-section (2) of section 26C provides that any attachment order
subsequent to the registration of the security interest with CERSAI, shall be subject
to such prior registered claim.
191. In our view, in the instant case, with the enforcement of Chapter IV-A of the
SARFAESI Act, the claim of the respondent no.7 Bank, the secured creditor, was
extolled to a higher pedestal and the subsequent act of recording a charge in the
record of right of the secured asset cannot dilute the right of priority in payment,
under sections 26C(2) and 26 of the SARFAESI Act. As a necessary corollary, the
non-registration of the claim and/or attachment order by the respondent no.1 under
section 26B(4) of the SARFAESI Act, can only be at the peril of the department. Mere
recording of the purported charge in the record of right of the secured asset, in the
absence of the registration with CERSAI, in our considered view, cannot be to the
detriment of the auction purchaser, though the auction sale was on "as is where is
and as is what is basis".
192. Mr. Sen, learned senior advocate appearing for the petitioner submitted that in
the event the Court is persuaded to allow the writ petition, it is necessary to extend
the time to adjudicate the stamp duty on the sale // 33 // certificate and register the
same. There are provisions in the Maharashtra Stamp Act, 1958 (sections 31 and 32)
and the Registration Act, 1908 (sections 23 and 25) which stipulate the time for
tendering the instrument for adjudication, determination of stamp duty thereon and
registration of the instrument from the date of its execution. Since the petitioner had
instantaneously lodged the sale certificate for adjudication, we are inclined to direct
that the time commencing from the lodging of the said sale certificate till the decision
of this writ petition, be excluded from consideration in computing the statutory
period for adjudication of the stamp duty and registration of the instrument."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 18
A.F.R. Sundaram Home Finance vs District Magistrate-Cum- .... ... on 29 February, 2024
25. Accordingly, after the above amendment of SARFAESI Act by introduction of the
provision of Section 26E, which again begins with the non obstante clause, the matter
stands at rest as said provision overrides the provisions contained in the OPID Act
subject of course on fulfillment of certain conditions.
As per the settled position of law, if legislature confers the later enactment with a non-obstante
clause, it means that the legislature wanted the subsequent/later enactment to prevail. Thus, a
'priority' conferred/provided under section 26E of the SARFAESI Act subject to the conditions as
laid down being fulfilled would prevail over the recovery mechanism of the OPID Act, which even
though had received the Presidential assent after the SARFAESI Act, the very amendment to
SARFAESI Act with introduction of section 26E in the said Act coming into force thereafter carrying
a non-abstante clause // 34 // would have a march over all said provisions of the OPID Act which
had its march over the SARFAESI when it had come into force after the Presidential assent.
26. In the wake of all the aforesaid, since we find that the above aspects have not been touched in
the impugned order dated 14.09.2023, passed by the District Magistrate-cum- Collector, Khurda
(Opposite Party No.1) in Misc. Case No.73 of 2016 upon an application under section 14 of the
SARFAESI Act we are inclined to quash the said order impugned before us and remit the matter for
fresh disposal in accordance with law, keeping in view the discussions made hereinabove and within
the ambit and scope of section 14 of the SARFAESI Act.
(D. Dash), Judge.
G. Satapathy, I agree.
(G. Satapathy), Judge.
Narayan
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151233677/ 19
