Abdul Majeed vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Rural ... on 3 March, 2025
Abdul Majeed vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Rural ... on 3
March, 2025
Author: Abdul Moin
Bench: Abdul Moin
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:12762
Court No. - 5
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 1653 of 2023
Petitioner :- Abdul Majeed
Respondent :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Rural Development And 4 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Qazi Mohd.Ahmad,Punit Kumar Shukla,Rajendra Kumar Dubey
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Abdul Moin,J.
Supplementary counter affidavit filed today by the learned Standing counsel be kept on record.
Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned Standing counsel appearing on behalf of the
State-respondents.
Under challenge is the order dated 06.01.2023, a copy of which is annexure 1 to the writ petition
whereby the services of the petitioner have been terminated in terms of paragraph 15.3.1 of the
Standard Operating Procedure on Complaints (hereinafter referred to as "SOP").
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/73942736/ 1
Abdul Majeed vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Rural ... on 3 March, 2025
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the contesting parties state that the crux of the issue has
already been indicated in detail in the order dated 27.01.2025 which for the sake of convenience is
reproduced below:-
"Heard.
By means of the order dated 06.01.2023, a copy of which is annexure 1 to the
petition, after giving a show cause notice to the petitioner, his contractual services
had been terminated by the respondents.
The contention is that a perusal of the show cause notice dated 02.11.2022, a copy of
which is annexure 5 to the petition, would indicate that the show cause notice
pertains to the alleged work which has been said to have been done by the petitioner
in Gram Panchayat Arthapur.
Placing reliance on the assignment of duty chart indicated in the office order dated
07.12.2021, a copy of which is annexure 3 to the petition, the contention is that the
Gram Panchayat Arthapur was being manned by Shri Lavkush Kumar who was
working as a Computer Operator, as finds place at Serial No.3 of the said order, while
so far the petitioner is concerned, he has not been assigned duties pertaining to any
particular gram panchayat as would be apparent from the said duty chart of the said
office order.
Reliance has also been placed on the specific averment made in paragraph 3 of the
supplementary rejoinder affidavit dated 19.11.2024.
The further argument of the learned counsel for the petitioner is that by means of the
order dated 19.12.2022, a copy of which is annexure 8 to the petition, the petitioner
has already been imposed with a recovery along with others and consequently, there
cannot be any occasion for terminating his services on the said allegation, more
particularly, when he has already been imposed with a penalty and the termination
would amount to double jeopardy.
Learned Standing counsel prays for and is granted two weeks' time to file a
supplementary counter affidavit indicating as to how the petitioner has been
terminated from service for the work alleged to have been done in Gram Panchayat
Arthapur, more particularly, when as per the office chart, the petitioner was not
posted as Computer Operator in Gram Panchayat Arthapur.
While filing the supplementary counter affidavit, copy of the para 15.3.1 of the
Standard Operating Procedure on Complaints of the master circular 2018-19 as
referred to in the order impugned dated 06.01.2023 would also be brought on record.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/73942736/ 2
Abdul Majeed vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Rural ... on 3 March, 2025
As the matter has been heard at length, as such, list this case on 13.02.2025 at 02:15
P.M. for further hearing."
From a perusal of the aforesaid order dated 27.01.2025 it emerges that the contractual services of
the petitioner have been terminated by the order impugned dated 06.01.2023.
The grounds taken by learned counsel for the petitioner for challenging the aforesaid order are that
(a) the Gram Panchayat, Arthapur was being run by Sri Luv Kush who was working as a Computer
Operator while the petitioner had not been assigned any specific duty pertaining to the Arthapur
Gram Panchayat and the Show Cause Notice that had been issued to him indicated about the work
not done by the petitioner in Gram Panchayat, Arthapur (b) that the petitioner has already been
punished with the recovery along with others vide order dated 19.12.2022 and consequently,
termination of his services would amount to double jeopardy.
This Court vide order dated 27.01.2025 had required the learned Standing counsel to file a
supplementary counter affidavit duly bringing on record paragraph 15.3.1 of the SOP.
Supplementary counter affidavit has been filed today.
Learned Standing counsel argues that so far as ground (a) taken by the petitioner, a perusal of the
order dated 07.12.2021, a copy of which is annexure 3 to the writ petition would indicate that
although Sri Luv Kush Kumar had been assigned the work in Gram Panchayat, Arthapur yet
assignment of duty of the petitioner as has been made in the said order itself indicates that the
petitioner had been given the charge of the entire feeding work including the documents etc. which
he failed to discharge. It is contended that the petitioner was in-charge for feeding for the entire
block and not only pertaining to village Arthapur and when he failed to do the feeding work and the
other work that had been assigned to him consequently, his services have been terminated.
So far as ground (b) is concerned, Sri Asthana, learned Standing counsel has placed reliance on
Clause (III) of the SOP, a copy of which is annexure 2 to the supplementary counter affidavit to
contend that where financial irregularities are established, following measures shall be invariably
ensured namely (a) recovery of embezzled fund (b) FIR against those found guilty (c) departmental
proceedings against those found guilty and (d) which does not pertain to the petitioner.
Contention is that apart from the recovery imposed on the petitioner, the contractual services of the
petitioner have also been terminated considering Clause (III) (iii) of Clause 15.3.1 of the SOP and as
such, there is no infirmity in the same.
Heard learned counsel appearing on behalf of the contesting parties and perused the records.
From a perusal of the records it emerges that the contractual services of the petitioner have been
terminated vide order dated 06.01.2023. While terminating the services, reliance has been placed
on Clause 15.3.1 of the SOP.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/73942736/ 3
Abdul Majeed vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Rural ... on 3 March, 2025
So far as Clause 15.3.1 of the SOP is concerned, it entails following punishments namely (a) recovery
of embezzled fund (b) FIR against those found guilty (c) departmental proceedings against those
found guilty.
The respondents have incidentally already adopted the measure of recovery of the alleged embezzled
fund from the petitioner as emerges from a perusal of the order dated 19.12.2022, a copy of which is
annexure 8 to the writ petition whereby a recovery of Rs. 14,862/- has been made from the
petitioner. Incidentally, the said order indicates that the recovery from the petitioner along with
others is being made in terms of Clause 15.3.1 of the SOP more particularly paragraph (III).
Admittedly, no departmental proceedings have initiated against the petitioner. Obviously no such
departmental proceedings could be initiated as the petitioner is not a regular employee of the
respondents. Thus, the termination of the contractual services of the petitioner, although purporting
it to be one of the measures as provided under Clause 15.3.1 of the SOP, would go beyond what is
provided under the aforesaid clause of the SOP inasmuch as the said clause does not pertain to the
termination of the contractual services of a contractual employee.
So far as the argument of the learned Standing counsel that the petitioner had been assigned the
entire feeding work and not only the work pertaining to Gram Panchayat, Arthapur the same has
credence and thus is not considered to be a ground favourable to the petitioner.
Keeping in view the aforesaid discussion, the writ petition is allowed. The order impugned dated
06.01.2023, a copy of which is annexure 1 to the writ petition is quashed.
Consequences to follow.
However, it is provided that in case the respondents are of the view that the petitioner has violated
any of the terms and conditions of his contract then it would be open for the respondents to take
action against the petitioner in terms of the contract but the aforesaid incident would not be a
ground for taking of a fresh action against the petitioner in terms of the liberty being granted now by
this Court.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Pachhere/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/73942736/ 4
