Abdul Qayoom Sheikh vs Ut Of Jk Through P/S Achabal And Another on 30 April, 2025
Abdul Qayoom Sheikh vs Ut Of Jk Through P/S Achabal And
Another on 30 April, 2025
S. No. 40
Regular Cause List
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
CRM(M) no. 32/2022
CrlM no. 136/2022
Pronounced on: 30.04.2025
Abdul Qayoom Sheikh ...Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: None
Vs.
UT of JK through P/S Achabal and another ...Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Bikramdeep Singh, Dy. AG with Ms. Nowbahar Khan, AC
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL-JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. Petitioner is seeking quashing of FIR no.08/2021 registered with Police Station Achabal,
Anantnag, for offences punishable under Section 354, 354-A, 451, 506, 376 and 511 IPC as well as
the charge sheet filed and pending before the court of Additional Sessions Judge, Anantnag. The
aforesaid relief is being sought by the petitioner precisely on the grounds:
a) Petitioner has been involved in a false and frivolous FIR.
b) Bail granted vide order dated 16.10.2021 was dismissed on 29.12.2021.
c) Allegations made against applicant/accused are false, frivolous and vexatious and lack in material
substance.
d) FIR does not disclose the commission of offence.
e) There is no corroboration with regard to FIR and statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C.
f) FIR lodged against petitioner is totally bad in law and cannot stand the test of reasonability and
law by virtue of the glaring contradiction and in absence of corroboration the offence of 376 IPC is
not made out.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71876786/ 1
Abdul Qayoom Sheikh vs Ut Of Jk Through P/S Achabal And Another on 30 April, 2025
2. On 09.10.2021, prosecutrix lodged a written report before Police Station Achabal, alleging therein
that petitioner abused her and that when she was coming back to her home after fetching bread,
petitioner abused her and used foul language. On the next day also, petitioner wrongfully restrained
her and threatened to kill her. On the basis of this report, police registered FIR No.108/2021 for
offences under Section 341, 306 IPC and started investigation of the case. The statement of
prosecutrix under Section 161 Cr.P.C. was recorded. Given prosecutrix's statement offences under
Section 354, 354-A and 451 IPC were added to the case.
3. It is stated that statement of prosecutrix was also recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. before the
Judicial Magistrate, 1 st Class, Shangus. In her statement, she deposed that on 08.10.2021 at about
9.30 AM, when she was all along in her house, petitioner entered her house and told her that he had
something to tell her. She further stated that petitioner caught hold of her hand and when she raised
an alarm, petitioner gagged her mouth and touched private parts of her body. She further stated that
she was laid on the ground by petitioner who sat on top of her and touched private parts of her body
and tried to commit rape upon her. The prosecutrix went on to state that she hit petitioner with a
broom and escaped from his clutches. She called her sister and when she came on spot, petitioner
offered her Rs.10,000/- and apologized to her but she refused to take the money; whereafter
petitioner gave a beating to her on her shoulder with a broom. She further stated that she went to
hospital and also submitted an application with police but the same was not entertained by police.
On next day also, when prosecutrix went out of her house to fetch bread, petitioner wrongfully
restrained her and used foul language against her. Further petitioner threatened to kidnap her. The
prosecutrix further alleged that petitioner is a political worker and he wants to get her ration card
cancelled.
4. After investigation of the case, offences under Section 354, 354-A, 451, 506, 376, 511 IPC were
found established against petitioner and, accordingly, charge sheet was laid before learned Trial
court. It appears that Trial court vide its order dated 29.12.2021, has rejected bail application of
petitioner by observing that offences alleged to have been committed by petitioner is against the
society and is having far reaching consequences.
5. Heard and considered. I have gone through record on the file.
6. Instant petition has been filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash FIR as well as charge-sheet.
Section 482 Cr.P.C. provides that nothing in the Code of Criminal Procedure limits or affects
inherent powers of the high Court to make such orders as may be necessary to give effect to any
order under the Code of Criminal Procedure, or to prevent abuse of the process of any Court or
otherwise to secure ends of justice.
7. The Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Suraj Kumar Sahoo, (2005) 13 SCC 540, has sounded a
note of caution about the powers of High Court to be exercised in terms of Section 561-A Cr.P.C.,
corresponding to Section 482 of Central Code. Their lordships enunciated that the High Court being
the highest Court of a State should normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case
where the entire facts are incomplete and hazy, more so, when the evidence has not been collected
and produced before the Court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, being of magnitude
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71876786/ 2
Abdul Qayoom Sheikh vs Ut Of Jk Through P/S Achabal And Another on 30 April, 2025
and cannot be seen in their true perspective without sufficient material before the Court. While
exercising inherent jurisdiction as observed by their Lordships, it is not permissible for the Court to
act as if it was a Trial Court. It would be none of the duties of the High Court to appreciate the
evidence to conclude whether the material produced are sufficient or not for holding the accused
guilty.
8. It would also be proper to refer to judgment of the Supreme Court in Janta Dal v. H. S.
Chowdhary, AIR 1993 SC 892, while summarizing the principles in the light of which inherent
powers can be exercised, has observed:
"132. The criminal Courts are clothed with inherent power to make such orders as
may be necessary for the ends of justice. Such power though unrestricted and
undefined should not be capriciously or arbitrarily exercised, but should be exercised
in appropriate cases, ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the
administration of which alone the Courts exist. The powers possessed by the High
Court under Section 482 of the Code are very wide and the very plenitude of the
power requires great caution in its exercise. Courts must be careful to see that its
decision in exercise of this power is based on sound principles.
133. The Judicial Committee in (1) Emperor v. Nazir Ahmad and (2) Lala Jai Ram
Das v. Emperor has taken the view that Section 561-A of the old Code gave no new
powers but only provided that those which the Court already inherently possessed
should be preserved. This view holds the field till date.
134. This Court in Dr Raghubir Sharon v. The State of Bihar had an occasion to
examine the extent of inherent power of the High Court and its jurisdiction when to
be exercised. Mudholkar, J speaking for himself and Raghubar Dayal, J after
referring a series of decisions of the Privy Council and of the various High Courts
held thus:
...every High Court as the highest court exercising criminal jurisdiction in a State has
inherent power to make any order for the purpose of securing the ends of justice....
Being an extraordinary power it will, however, not be pressed in aid except for
remedying a flagrant abuse by a subordinate Court to is powers....
135. See Talab Hazi Hussain v. Madhukar Purshottam Mondkar and Anr., [1958] SCR
1226 and Pampapathy v. State of Mysore [1966] (Supp.) SCR
477.
136. Thus, the inherent power under this Section can be exercised by the High Court
(1) to give effect to any order passed under the Code; or (2) to prevent abuse of the
process of any Court; or (3) otherwise to secure the ends of justice. In relation to
exercise of inherent powers of the High Court, it has been observed in Madhu Limaye
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71876786/ 3
Abdul Qayoom Sheikh vs Ut Of Jk Through P/S Achabal And Another on 30 April, 2025
v. State of Maharashtra that the power in not to be resorted to if there is a specific
provision in the Code for the redress of grievance of the aggrieved party and that it
should be exercised very sparingly to prevent abuse of process of any Court or
otherwise to secure the ends of justice and that it should not be exercised as against
the express bar of law engrafted in any other provision of the Code.
Vide (1) Talab Hazi Hussain v. Madhukar Purshotam; (2) Khushi Ram v. Hashim and Ors. AIR 1959
SC 542; and (3) State of Orissa v. Ram Chander Agarwala.
137. This inherent power conferred by Section 482 of the Code should not be exercised to stifle a
legitimate prosecution. The High Court being the highest Court of a State should normally retrain
from giving a premature decision in a case wherein the entire facts are extremely incomplete and
hazy, more so when the evidence has not been collected and produced before the Court and the
issues involved whether factual or legal are of great magnitude and cannot be seen in their true
perspective without sufficient material. Of course, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in regard
to the cases in which the High Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction to quashing the
proceedings at any stage. This Court in State of Haryana and Ors. v. Ch. Bhajan Lal and Ors [1990] 3
Supp. SCR 256 to which both of us were parties have dealt with this question at length and
enunciated the law listing out the circumstances under which the High Court can exercise its
jurisdiction in quashing proceedings. We do not, therefore, think it necessary in the present case to
extensively deal with the import and intendment of the powers under Sections 397, 401 and 482 of
the Code.
9. The Supreme Court in Satvinder Kaur v. State, AIR 1999 SC 3597, has held that appreciation of
evidence is the function of the Court when seized of the matter. At the stage of investigation, the
material collected by an investigating officer cannot be judicially scrutinized for arriving at a
conclusion (in the said case about the jurisdiction of the police station). It was also observed that for
the purpose of exercising its power under Section 482 Cr. PC, to quash an FIR or a complaint, the
High Court would have to proceed entirely on the basis of the allegation made in the complaint or
the documents accompanying the same per se, it has no jurisdiction to examine the correctness of
otherwise of the allegations.
10. In the light of settled legal position, it requires to be underscored that the inherent jurisdiction
under Section 561-A Cr.P.C. has to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution.
11. Since there is sufficient material on record regarding prima facie involvement of petitioner in the
case and police having conducted investigation concluded that the offences against accused are
proved.
12. Having regard to allegations and report of investigation, it cannot be said that the petitioner is
being prosecuted falsely or the investigation of trial would amount to abuse of process of law.
13. The Supreme Court in another case of State of Andhra Pradesh v.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71876786/ 4
Abdul Qayoom Sheikh vs Ut Of Jk Through P/S Achabal And Another on 30 April, 2025
Golconda Linga Swamy, reported in (2004) 6 SCC 522, while dealing with inherent powers of the
High Court under Section 482 Cr. P.C., has observed and held as under:
"5. Exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code in a case of this nature is the
exception and not the rule. The Section does not confer any new powers on the High
Court. It only saves the inherent power which the Court possessed before the
enactment of the Code. It envisages three circumstances under which the inherent
jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code,
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of
justice. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible rule which
would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative enactment dealing
with procedure can provide for all cases that may possibly arise. Courts, therefore,
have inherent powers apart from express provisions of law which are necessary for
proper discharge of functions and duties imposed upon them by law. That is the
doctrine which finds expression in the Section which merely recognizes and preserves
inherent powers of the High Courts. All courts, whether civil or criminal possess, in
the absence of any express provision, as inherent in their constitution, all such
powers as are necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong in course of
administration of justice on the principle quando lex aliquid alique concedit,
conceditur et id sine quo res ipsa esse non potest (when the law gives a person
anything it gives him that without which it cannot exist). While exercising powers
under the Section, the Court does not function as a court of appeal or revision.
Inherent jurisdiction under the Section though wide has to be exercised sparingly,
carefully and with caution and only when such exercise is justified by the tests
specifically laid down in the Section itself. It is to be exercised ex debito justitiae to do
real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone courts exist.
Authority of the court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to
abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power to prevent such
abuse. It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would
result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercises of the powers court
would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that initiation or continuance of
it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of these proceedings would
otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the complaint,
the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to be
quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the complainant
has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted
in toto. xxxxxxxxx
7. In dealing with the last category, it is important to bear in mind the distinction
between a case where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is
clearly inconsistent with the accusations made, and a case where there is legal
evidence which, on appreciation, may or may not support the accusations. When
exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court would not
ordinarily embark upon an enquiry whether the evidence in question is reliable or not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71876786/ 5
Abdul Qayoom Sheikh vs Ut Of Jk Through P/S Achabal And Another on 30 April, 2025
or whether on a reasonable appreciation of it accusation would not be sustained. That
is the function of the trial Judge. Judicial process no doubt should not be an
instrument of oppression, or, needless harassment. Court should be circumspect and
judicious in exercising discretion and should take all relevant facts and circumstances
into consideration before issuing process, lest it would be an instrument in the hands
of a private complainant to unleash vendetta to harass any person needlessly. At the
same time the Section is not an instrument handed over to an accused to short-circuit
a prosecution and bring about its sudden death. The scope of exercise of power under
Section 482 of the Code and the categories of cases where the High Court may
exercise its power under it relating to cognizable offences to prevent abuse of process
of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice were set out in some detail by
this Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (1992 Supp (1) SCC 335)......
xxxxxxx 8 As noted above, the powers possessed by the High Court under Section
482 of the Code are very wide and the very plenitude of the power requires great
caution in its exercise. Court must be careful to see that its decision in exercise of this
power is based on sound principles. The inherent power should not be exercised to
stifle a legitimate prosecution. High Court being the highest Court of a State should
normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case where the entire facts
are incomplete and hazy, more so when the evidence has not been collected and
produced before the Court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of
magnitude and cannot be seen in their true perspective without sufficient material.
Of course, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in regard to cases in which the High
Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the proceeding at any
stage. (See : The Janata Dal etc. v. H.S. Chowdhary and others, etc. (AIR 1993 SC
892), Dr. Raghubir Saran v. State of Bihar and another (AIR 1964 SC 1)). It would not
be proper for the High Court to analyse the case of the complainant in the light of all
probabilities in order to determine whether a conviction would be sustainable and on
such premises, arrive at a conclusion that the proceedings are to be quashed. It would
be erroneous to assess the material before it and conclude that the complaint cannot
be proceeded with. In proceeding instituted on complaint, exercise of the inherent
powers to quash the proceedings is called for only in a case where the complaint does
not disclose any offence or is frivolous, vexatious or oppressive. If the allegations set
out in the complaint do not constitute the offence of which cognizance has been taken
by the Magistrate, it is open to the High Court to quash the same in exercise of the
inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code. It is not, however, necessary that
there should be meticulous analysis of the case before the trial to find out whether the
case would end in conviction or acquittal. The complaint/F.I.R. has to be read as a
whole. If it appears that on consideration of the allegations in the light of the
statement made on oath of the complainant or disclosed in the F.I.R. that the
ingredients of the offence or offences are disclosed and there is no material to show
that the complaint/F.I.R. is mala fide, frivolous or vexatious, in that event there
would be no justification for interference by the High Court. When an information is
lodged at the police station and an offence is registered, then the mala fides of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71876786/ 6
Abdul Qayoom Sheikh vs Ut Of Jk Through P/S Achabal And Another on 30 April, 2025
informant would be of secondary importance. It is the material collected during the
investigation and evidence led in Court which decides the fate of the accused person.
The allegations of mala fides against the informant are of no consequence and cannot
by itself be the basis for quashing the proceeding."
14.Even the Supreme Court in the case of State of Maharashtra v. Arun Gulab Gawali, (2010) 9 SCC
701, set-aside the order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, by which criminal
complaint/FIR was quashed on prayer made by complainant himself. While quashing and
setting-aside the order passed by the High Court, the Supreme Court in paras 13 and 27 to 29 has
observed and held as under:
"13. The power of quashing criminal proceedings has to be exercised very sparingly
and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases and the Court cannot
be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or
otherwise of allegations made in the F.I.R./Complaint, unless the allegations are so
patently absurd and inherently improbable so that no prudent person can ever reach
such a conclusion. The extraordinary and inherent powers of the Court do not confer
an arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court to act according to its whims or caprice.
However, the Court, under its inherent powers, can neither intervene at an uncalled
for stage nor it can `soft-pedal the course of justice' at a crucial stage of
investigation/ proceedings. The provisions of Articles 226, 227 of the Constitution of
India and Section 482of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter called as
'Cr.P.C.') are a device to advance justice and not to frustrate it. The power of judicial
review is discretionary, however, it must be exercised to prevent the miscarriage of
justice and for correcting some grave errors and to ensure that esteem of
administration of justice remains clean and pure. However, there are no limits of
power of the Court, but the more the power, the more due care and caution is to be
exercised in invoking these powers. (Vide State of W.B. v. Swapan Kumar Guha
[(1982) 1 SCC 561 : 1982 SCC (Cri) 283 : AIR 1982 SC 949] , Pepsi Foods Ltd. v.
Special Judicial Magistrate [(1998) 5 SCC 749 : 1998 SCC (Cri) 1400] , G. Sagar Suri
v. State of U.P. [(2000) 2 SCC 636 :
2000 SCC (Cri) 513 : AIR 2000 SC 754] and Ajay Mitra v. State of M.P. [(2003) 3
SCC 11 : 2003 SCC (Cri) 703] ) xxx xxxx xxxx
27. The High Court proceeded on the perception that as the complainant himself was
not supporting the complaint, he would not support the case of the prosecution and
there would be no chance of conviction, thus the trial itself would be a futile exercise.
Quashing of FIR/Complaint on such a ground cannot be held to be justified in law.
Ordinarily, the Court of Sessions is empowered to discharge an accused under
Section 227 Cr.P.C. even before initiating the trial. The accused can, therefore, move
the Trial Court itself for such a relief and the Trial Court would be in a better position
to analyse and pass an order as it is possessed of all the powers and the material to do
so. It is, therefore, not necessary to invoke the jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71876786/ 7
Abdul Qayoom Sheikh vs Ut Of Jk Through P/S Achabal And Another on 30 April, 2025
for the quashing of a prosecution in such a case. The reliance on affidavits by the
High Court would be a weak, hazy and unreliable source for adjudication on the fate
of a trial. The presumption that an accused would never be convicted on the material
available is too risky a proposition to be accepted readily, particularly in heinous
offences like extortion.
28. A claim founded on a denial by the complainant even before the trial commences
coupled with an allegation that the police had compelled the lodging of a false FIR, is
a matter which requires further investigation as the charge is levelled against the
police. If the prosecution is quashed, then neither the Trial Court nor the
Investigating Agency has any opportunity to go into this question, which may require
consideration. The State is the prosecutor and all prosecution is the social and legal
responsibility of the State. An offence committed is a crime against a society and not
against a victim alone. The victim under undue pressure or influence of the accused
or under any threat or compulsion may resile back but that would not absolve the
State from bringing the accused to book, who has committed an offence and has
violated the law of the land.
29. Thus, while exercising such power the court has to act cautiously before
proceeding to quash a prosecution in respect of an offence which hits and affects the
society at large. It should be a case where no other view is possible nor any
investigation or inquiry is further required.
There cannot be a general proposition of law, so as to fit in as a straitjacket formula for the exercise
of such power. Each case will have to be judged on its own merit and the facts warranting exercise of
such power. More so, it was not a case of civil nature where there could be a possibility of
compromise or involving an offence which may be compoundable under Section 320 Cr.P.C., where
the Court could apply the ratio of the case in Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia [(1988) 1 SCC 692 :
1988 SCC (Cri) 234 : AIR 1988 SC 709]."
15.The Supreme Court in Arun Gulab Gawali (supra) observed that the High Court in the said case
proceeded on the perception that since complainant therein had not supported the complaint, he
would not support the case of prosecution and there would be no chance of conviction, thus the trial
itself would be a futile exercise. The Supreme Court held that quashing of FIR/complaint on such a
ground cannot be held to be justified in law. It was said by the Supreme Court that ordinarily, the
court of Sessions was empowered to discharge an accused under Section 227 Cr.P.C. even before
initiating the trial. The accused could, therefore, move the Trial Court itself for such a relief and the
Trial Court would be in a better position to analyse and pass an order as it is possessed of all the
powers and the material to do so. It was, therefore, unnecessary to invoke jurisdiction under Section
482 Cr.P.C. to quash a prosecution in such a case. The reliance on affidavits by the High Court
would be a weak, hazy and unreliable source for adjudication on the fate of a trial and the
presumption that an accused would never be convicted on the material available was too risky. The
Supreme Court further elaborated that a claim founded on a denial by complainant even before trial
commences coupled with an allegation that police had compelled lodging of a false FIR, was a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71876786/ 8
Abdul Qayoom Sheikh vs Ut Of Jk Through P/S Achabal And Another on 30 April, 2025
matter that required further investigation. If prosecution was quashed, then neither Trial Court nor
Investigating Agency had any opportunity to go into that question, which might have required
consideration. The State was the prosecutor and all prosecution was social and legal responsibility of
the State. The Supreme Court also went to say that an offence committed is a crime against a society
and not against a victim alone. The victim, under undue pressure or influence of the accused or
under any threat or compulsion, may resile back but that would not absolve the State from bringing
the accused to book, who has committed an offence and has violated the law of the land.
16.Power of quashing criminal proceedings has to be exercised very sparingly and with
circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases. The Court cannot be justified in embarking
upon an enquiry about reliability or genuineness or otherwise of allegations made in the
F.I.R./Complaint, unless the allegations are so patently absurd and inherently improbable so that no
prudent person can ever reach such a conclusion.
17.The judicial conscience of the High Court should persuade it to quash such criminal proceedings
in exercise of the powers vested in it under Section 482 Cr.P.C., if answer to all the steps, as
enumerated herein after, is in affirmative, has been so said by the Supreme Court in Rajiv Thapar v
Madan Lal Kapoor, 2013 (3) SCC 330:-
"Based on the factors canvassed in the foregoing paragraphs, we would delineate the
following steps to determine the veracity of a prayer for quashing, raised by an
accused by invoking the power vested in the High Court under Section 482 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure:
i. Step one, whether the material relied upon by the accused is sound, reasonable, and
indubitable, i.e., the material is of sterling and impeccable quality?
ii. Step two, whether the material relied upon by the accused, would rule out the
assertions contained in the charges levelled against the accused, i.e., the material is
sufficient to reject and overrule the factual assertions contained in the complaint, i.e.,
the material is such, as would persuade a reasonable person to dismiss and condemn
the factual basis of the accusations as false.
iii. Step three, whether the material relied upon by the accused, has not been refuted
by the prosecution/ complainant; and/or the material is such, that it cannot be
justifiably refuted by the prosecution/ complainant?
iv. Step four, whether proceeding with the trial would result in an abuse of process of
the court, and would not serve the ends of justice?"
18.The Supreme Court in State of Telangana v. Habib Abdullah Jeelani, reported in 2017 (2) SCC
779, has held that the powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. or under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India to quash the FIR, are to be exercised in a very sparing manner as is not to be used to choke or
smother the prosecution that is legitimate. The inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71876786/ 9
Abdul Qayoom Sheikh vs Ut Of Jk Through P/S Achabal And Another on 30 April, 2025
jurisdiction on the High Court to act according to whim or caprice. Such power has to be exercised
sparingly, with circumspection and in the rarest of rare cases. The inherent powers in a matter of
quashing FIR have to be exercised sparingly and with caution and only when such exercise is
justifying by the test specifically laid down in the provision itself. The power under Section 482
Cr.P.C. is a very wide but conferment of the wide power requires the Court to be more conscious. It
casts an onerous and more
19. It cannot be said that a complaint does not disclose commission of offence. Whether or not
allegations in a complaint are true is to be decided on the basis of evidence to be led at the trial in
the complaint case. It certainly is not a case in which criminal trial should be cut short inasmuch as
quashing of complaint would result in grave miscarriage of justice. After saying this, the Supreme
Court in Nagpur Steel & Alloys (P) Ltd v. P. Radhakrishna, 1997 SCC (Cri) 1073, restored the
complaint and directed the Magistrate to proceed with the complaint.
20. The above settled position of law has also been reiterated by the Supreme Court in Priti Saraf &
anr v. State of NCT of Delhi & anr, (2021) 16 SCC 142, and it has been said that inherent power of
the High Court is an extraordinary power which has to be exercised with great care and
circumspection before embarking to scrutinize a complaint/FIR/charge-sheet in deciding whether
the case is the rarest of rare cases, to scuttle the prosecution at its inception. It has also been held by
the Supreme Court whether allegations in the complaint are otherwise correct or not has to be
decided on the basis of evidence to be led during the course of trial.
21. The Supreme Court in State of M.P. v. Laxmi Narayan, (2019) 5 SCC 588, has held that whether
an FIR is quashable or not would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case and while
considering that question, the Court has to apply its mind to (i) whether the crime is one against the
society or against an individual alone, nature of the dispute, (ii) seriousness and how the crime was
committed (iii) whether offence(s) is one under a special statute (iv) stage of proceedings and how
the accused managed to compromise with the complainant.
22. Viewing the matter in the above backdrop, I am of the opinion that this Court would not be
justified in embarking upon an enquiry as sought for by petitioner herein regarding his stand about
the prosecution story or for returning any finding as to the nature of allegations levelled in
impugned FIR. The facts as projected by the petitioner before this Court are half backed and it is not
deemed apposite, at this stage, to conclude that the allegations levelled against petitioner are
vexatious in nature and so there is abuse of process of Court. Therefore, the petition entails
dismissal and is, accordingly, dismissed.
(VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL) JUDGE SRINAGAR 30.04.2025 "Imtiyaz"
Whether approved for reporting? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71876786/ 10
