Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
Author: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
Bench: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP(Crl) No. 69/2022 (O&M).
Reserved on: 14.08.2023
Pronounced on: 23.08.2023
Abdul Hamid Khan .....Petitioner
Through: Mr. S. S. Ahmed, Advocate
Mr. Zulqarnain CHoudhary,
Mr. Sayed Majid Shah, Adv.
Mr. M. Aleem Beg, Adv.
Vs
UT of J&K and ors. ..... Respondents
Through: Mrs. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
Mr. Eishaan Dadhichi, GA
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE WASIM SADIQ NARGAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
PRAYER OF THE PETITIONER
1. Instant petition has been filed by the petitioner (hereinafter to be referred as detenue) through his
nephew, namely Farooq Ahmad Khan seeking quashment of detention order No.30/PSA of 2022
dated 18.10.2022 passed by District Magistrate, Ramban, respondent No. 2 herein, whereby the
detenue has been detained under Section 8 of the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act, 1978
(hereinafter to be referred as, the PSA) and has been lodged in the Central Jail Kot Bhalwal, besides
seeking writ of Mandamus commanding the respondents to release him forthwith and pay him
compensation. ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER
2. It is specific case of the detenue that he is neither involved nor indulged in any illegal or
anti-national activity in his whole life and is a peace loving citizen and believes in the sovereignty
and integrity of India. The short submission advanced in this petition by the learned counsel for the
petitioner is that order of detention passed by the detaining authority is illegal, arbitrary and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 1
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
without any lawful justification as the whole material which has been relied upon by the detaining
authority has not been supplied to the detenue with the result that the detenue has been denied of
making an effective representation to the respondents. It is stated that the detenue has been served
with a copy of the detention order No.30/PSA of 2022 dated 18.10.2022 and also communication
No.DMR/651-53 dated 18.10.2022 along with grounds of detention bearing No. DMR/636-43 dated
18.10.2022. Further case of the detenue is that detaining authority i.e. respondent No. 2 has solely
relied upon the dossier submitted by respondent No. 3 vide communication No.
CB/DOSSER/22/14159 dated 12.10.2022 as the detenue was legally entitled for the copy of the said
dossier but the same was not furnished to him and also the material, on the basis of the which, the
said dossier has been framed and the order of detention has been passed has also not been supplied
to him.
3. Further contention of the detenue is that detaining authority has passed the order of detention on
the basis of police dossier and also number of other DD reports which were never entered in the
daily dairy of the Police Station, Banihal regarding so called activities of the detenue which,
ultimately, led to the passing of the order of detention by respondent No.2.
4. It is specific case of the detenue that all the material relied upon by the detaining authority which
led to the passing of the order of detention has not been supplied and inaction on the part of the
respondents is violative of the constitutional rights of the detenue to make effective representation.
It is further averred that although the detaining authority in communication No. DMR/651- 53
dated 18.10.2022 has conveyed the detenue that he can file representation before the Government
against the order of detention and consequently, the detenue filed a detailed representation to the
Government in absence of the material supplied to him, and the said representation although was
received by the respondents, yet the respondents have not accorded any consideration, despite lapse
of considerable period.
5. Learned counsel submits that even a detailed representation has already been preferred before
the Chairman Advisory Board constituted under PSA and the outcome of the same has not been
conveyed to the detenue as on date, which vitiates the detention passed against him. He further
argues that the detenue is not involved in any criminal activity or any anti national activity as
alleged in the dossier and it was incumbent on the part of detaining authority to arrive at subjective
satisfaction before passing the order of detention and detaining authority was under a legal
obligation to specify the compelling reasons which led to the passing of the detention order.
According to learned counsel for the detenue, it vitiates the order of detention and the order of
detention cannot sustain the test of law and liable to quashed.
6. Further case which has been advanced by the learned counsel for the detenue is that the detenue
was detained on 18.10.2022 and was lodged at Police Station, Banihal and from there, he was shifted
to P/S Ramban and subsequently, he was shifted to Police Station, Pacca Danga on 19.10.2022 and
finally on 20.10.2022, he was lodged in Central Jail Kot Bhalwal, Jammu. It is also stated that on
20.10.2022, the respondents conveyed the grounds of detention to the detenue belatedly and thus
non-furnishing of the grounds of detention at the earliest by the respondents, as per learned
counsel, violates the fundamental rights of the detenue guaranteed and enshrined under Article
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 2
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
22(5) of the Constitution of India which mandates that when any person is detained in pursuance of
an order made under the Public Safety Act, the authority making the order shall, as soon as may be,
communicate to such person the grounds on which the order has been made and shall afford him
the earliest opportunity of making a representation against the order.
7. Another ground which has been advanced by the learned counsel for the detenue is that the
detention even otherwise, cannot sustain the test of law and is vitiated on the ground that detaining
authority has deliberately and intentionally preferred not to inform the detenue that he can make
representation to the detaining authority. He further submits that if the detaining authority would
have provided all the material and informed the detenue about his right to make an effective
representation before the detaining authority, in that eventuality, the detenue would have been in a
position to make an effective representation before detaining authority. Thus, the procedure, as
envisaged under law, has not been followed and on this ground alone, the order of detention cannot
sustain the test of law and is liable to be set aside.
8. It has been further argued by learned counsel for the detenue that impugned detention exhibits
total non application of mind as the order of detention has been passed mechanically. With a view to
substantiate his claim, learned counsel for the detenue brought the attention of this Court to
averments pleaded in ground (v), wherein, he has given a detail of other detention orders passed by
the detaining authority and a perusal whereof, reveals that impugned detention order is a cyclostyle
copy of other detention orders and the language used is per verbatim the same, which has been
reproduced in the detention order which is subject matter of the present petition. The details of
other detention orders are as under:
"(a) Order No. 26/PSA of 2022 dated 18.10.2022
(b) Order No. 27/PSA of 2022 dated 18.10.2022
(c) Order No. 28/PSA of 2022 dated 18.10.2022
(d) Order No. 29/PSA of 2022 dated 18.10.2022
(e) Order No. 30/PSA of 2022 dated 18.10.2022"
9. According to Mr. Ahmed, learned counsel appearing for the detenue, there is no application of
mind by the detaining authority before arriving at the subjective satisfaction and in absence of that,
the order impugned cannot sustain the test of law and is liable to be set aside.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE RESPONDENTS
10. Per contra, separate replies stand filed on behalf of the respondents No. 2 and 3. While the case
was being argued, Mr. Eishaan Dadhichi, learned GA appearing for the respondent No. 3 was
directed to ascertain from the record and to apprise this court whether the whole material (with
particular reference to the dossier and the DD reports) which led to the passing of the order of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 3
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
detention has been supplied to the detenue. Learned counsel, after examining the record, has fairly
admitted on the basis of record that the copy of the dossier and the DD reports which were the basis
of passing the order of detention, have not been supplied to the detenue. He has also referred to the
execution report which has been placed on record as annexure 2 along with the reply filed by
respondent No.3, a perusal whereof, reveals that detention order (one leaf), notice of detention (01
leaf), grounds of detention (03 leaves, Dossier of detention (nil) Copies of FIR, Statements of
witnesses and other related relevant documents (nil) (total 05 leaves) have been handed over to the
above said detenue at Central Jail, Kot Bhalwal, Jammu on 20.10.2022 against the proper receipt.
11. Learned counsel for the respondents further submits that insofar as the contention of the learned
counsel for the detenue that the detenue has not been informed for making an effective
representation to the Government as well as the detaining authority is concerned, the same is
falsified in light of the execution report, wherein detenue has been informed well in advance to file
representation to the Government as well as detaining authority against his detention order if he so
desires and this aspect of the matter finds mention in the execution report where the detenue is
signatory and has acknowledged the same. Thus, the contention of the learned counsel for the
detenue, as per learned counsel for the respondents, is contrary to the record and is liable to be
rejected.
12. Further stand taken by the respondents is that respondent No. 2 has taken all the material facts
and circumstances into account and after due application of mind passed the order of detention
under the provisions of Section 8 of PSA. He further submits that detenue has been found involved
in anti national, anti social and harmful activities which are highly prejudicial to the peace,
prosperity, tranquility, integrity and security of UT of the J&K, particularly, in Banihal area. Further
case of the respondents is that contents of the grounds of detention and the order of detention were
read over to the detenue in English and explained to him in Urdu language which he understood
fully as is evident from a bare perusal of the execution report which has been placed on record along
with reply.
13. Insofar as, the reply filed by the detaining authority is concerned, respondents have taken a
specific stand that the dossier which has been supplied by the Police agency has been examined in
light of the legal position and circumstances related to the case and, accordingly, detaining authority
has passed order of detention after arriving at a subjective satisfaction. The specific case which has
been projected by the respondents is that detenue was a notorious person and was in contact with
militant, namely, Qasim associated with LeT outfit living in Pakistan through his mobile No. using
social media apps. It is contended that anti national criminal activities committed by the detenue
are of serious in nature which involved spreading enmity between people of different religion/region
and were detrimental to the harmony as well as security of the UT of J&K, particularly, district
Banihal and, accordingly, detaining authority, after keeping in view all the material facts and
circumstances passed the order of detention after arriving at a subjective satisfaction. It has been
further stated that Home Department has also approved the detention of the detenue vide order No.
Home/PB-V/2889 of 2022 dated 18.11.2022.
LEGAL ANALYSIS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 4
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
14. The specific allegation of the detenue that order of detention passed by the detaining authority
against him is without application of mind and is a cyclostyle copy of the other detention orders the
details of which find mention in ground (v) of the petition using the same language per verbatim has
not been specifically denied by the respondents in the reply. However, learned counsel for the
respondents submitted that he will be producing the record in this regard with a view to satisfy this
Court whether detaining authority has applied its mind independently in all the cases after arriving
at a subjective satisfaction or else whether the same language has been used in all the six detention
orders per verbatim as alleged by the detenue. However, despite repeated requests, the record has
not been supplied to this Court with a view to ascertain the aforesaid allegation of the detenue and,
accordingly, this Court draws adverse inference against the respondents and in absence of any
specific reply, the averment of the detenue is admitted.
15. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
16. Personal liberty, a cornerstone of democratic societies is guaranteed under the Constitution. It
encapsulates the essence of freedom, self-expression, and autonomy, while also recognizing the
responsibility to prevent harm to others. A person is not to be deprived of his personal liberty except
in accordance with the procedure established under law as laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
in catena of judgments, which has to be just and fair. The personal liberty may be curtailed, where a
person faces a criminal charge or is convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment. Where
a person is facing the trial on a criminal charge and is temporarily deprived of his personal liberty
because of the criminal charge framed against him, he has an opportunity to defend himself and to
be acquitted of the charge in case the prosecution fails to bring home his guilt. Where such a person
is convicted of offence, he still has satisfaction of having been given the adequate opportunity to
contest the charge and also adduce the evidence in his defence.
17. The framers of the Constitution of India have incorporated Article 22 in the Constitution of
India, so as to leave room for placing a person under the preventive detention without a formal
charge and trial, and without such a person being held guilty of an offence and sentenced to
imprisonment by a competent court. Its aim and object are to save the society from the activities
that are likely to deprive a large number of people of their right to the life and peaceful co-existence.
In such a case it would be dangerous for the people at large, to wait and watch as by the time the
ordinary law is set into motion, the person, having the dangerous designs, would execute his plans,
exposing the general public to risk and causing the colossal damage to the life and property. It is, for
that reason, necessary to take the preventive measures and prevent a person bent upon to perpetrate
the mischief from translating his ideas into action. Article 22 of the Constitution of India, therefore,
leaves scope for enactment of the preventive detention laws.
18. The essential concept of preventive detention is that detention of a person is not to punish him
for something he has done, but to prevent him from doing so. It is typically used as a tool to
safeguard public safety and security, especially in situations where there is a reasonable belief that
an individual poses a threat to society. The ordinary criminal process is not to be circumvented by
ready resort to preventive detention. The order of preventive detention is passed with a view to
prevent the person from committing such illegal activities in future which may be prejudicial,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 5
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
harmful and disturbing the public order. The preventive detention is a serious invasion of personal
liberty and the normal methods open to a person charged with commission of any offence to
disprove the charge or to prove his innocence at the trial are not available to the person preventively
detained and, therefore, in prevention detention jurisprudence whatever little safeguards the
Constitution and the enactments authorizing such detention provide are of utmost importance and
must be strictly adhered to. The basis of detention is satisfaction of the executive of a reasonable
probability of likelihood of detenue acting in a manner similar to his past acts and preventing him
by detention from doing the same.
19. In the present case, vague allegations have been leveled against the detenue that his activities are
threat to the security, public order and peaceful atmosphere of Banihal and its adjoining areas and
for his anti-national, anti- social, highly harmful activities prejudicial to peace, prosperity,
tranquility, integrity and security of UT of J&K, the order of detention has been passed without
specifying the details of such incidents or evidence which vitiates the order of detention as the same
is without application of mind. Assuming that there were some allegations against the detenue
viz-a-viz alleged criminal activities then the respondents ought to have resorted to the criminal law
rather than taking recourse to the preventive laws and the compelling reasons for resorting to the
preventive detention have not been spelled out in the grounds of detention.
20. Reliance is placed on the judgment passed by the Hon`ble Supreme Court in Haradhan Saha v.
State of W.B. reported as (1975) 3 SCC 198, wherein it has been made clear that the preventive
detention and prosecution or not synonyms and have different purposes. The relevant extract of the
observation made by the court is as under:
"32. The power of preventive detention is qualitatively different from punitive
detention. The power of preventive detention is a precautionary power exercised in
reasonable anticipation. It may or may not relate to an offence. It is not a parallel
proceeding. It does not overlap with prosecution even if it relies on certain facts for
which prosecution may be launched or may have been launched. An order of
preventive detention, may be made before or during prosecution. An order of
preventive detention may be made with or without prosecution and in anticipation or
after discharge or even acquittal. The pendency of prosecution is no bar to an order of
preventive detention. An order of preventive detention is also not a bar to
prosecution.
33. Article 14 is inapplicable because preventive detention and prosecution are not
synonymous. The purposes are different. The authorities are different. The nature of
proceedings is different. In a prosecution an accused is sought to be punished for a
past act. In preventive detention, the past act is merely the material for inference
about the future course of probable conduct on the part of the detenu."
21. Again in Jaya Mala v. Home Secretary, Government of J&K (1), reported as (1982) 2 SCC 538,
the Hon`ble Supreme Court has held that if every infraction of law having a penal sanction by itself
is a ground for detention danger looms large that the normal criminal trials, and criminal courts set
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 6
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
up for administering justice will be substituted by detention laws, the relevant extract whereof is
reproduced as under:
"7. .......It is not for a moment suggested that power under the preventive detention
law cannot be exercised where a criminal conduct which could not be easily
prevented, checked or thwarted, would not provide a ground sufficient for detention
under the preventive detention laws. But it is equally important to bear in mind that
every minor infraction of law cannot be upgraded to the height of an activity
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. Non-application of mind of the
detaining authority becomes evident from the frivolity of grounds on which the
detention order is founded."
22. Recently in Pramod Singla v. Union of India and Others reported as 2023 SCC OnLine SC 374,
Hon`ble Supreme Court has held as under:
"25. ......... preventive detention laws in India are a colonial legacy, and have a great
potential to be abused and misused. Laws that have the ability to confer arbitrary
powers to the state, must in all circumstances, be very critically examined, and must
be used only in the rarest of rare cases. In cases of preventive detention, where the
detenue is held in arrest not for a crime he has committed, but for a potential crime
he may commit, the Courts must always give every benefit of doubt in favour of the
detenue, and even the slightest of errors in procedural compliances must result in
favour of the detenue."
23. From the record it is clear that the respondent No.3 has failed to gather any evidence to
implicate the detenue under any substantive law and has also failed to gather any incriminating
material against the detenue to satisfy the requirements of substantive law to book or apprehend the
detenue. Even the respondent No.2, i.e. the Detaining Authority has failed to derive any satisfaction
in the impugned order as to why the detenue could not be apprehended or booked under any
substantive law and as to what were the compelling circumstances which necessitated the detention
of the detenue under special provisions of the PSA. As such, there were no such compelling reasons
warranting the detention of the detenue under the preventive detention law.
24. The requirement of law is that whole of the record, on which the detention order is based, has to
be made available to the detenue in the language that he/she understands. It is pertinent to mention
here that while going through the documents, particularly the execution report, annexed with the
objections filed on behalf of respondent, it is evident that the detenue has received copy of detention
order (01 leaf), Notice of detention (01 leaf), grounds of detention (03 leaves), dossier of detention
(nil), Copies of FIR, Statements of witnesses and other related relevant documents (nil) (total 05
leaves). It is, therefore, clear from the execution report, which forms part of the detention record,
that only detention order, notice of detention and grounds of detention (05) leaves have been
provided to the detenue. However, copy of the police dossier has not at all been supplied to the
detenue which is an important document and is the basis of passing the order of detention. The
contention of the detenue that whole of the material relied upon by the detaining authority, while
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 7
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
framing the grounds of detention has not been supplied to him, appears to be well-founded in the
light of the documents annexed with the objections and the statement of learned counsel for the
respondents, where, the learned counsel fairly admitted that the dossier and the DD reports have
not been supplied to the detenue. Thus, the failure on the part of the detaining authority to supply
whole material renders detention illegal and unsustainable.
25. A perusal of the copy of the representation annexed with the petition shows that the detenue has
specifically averred in the said representation that he has not been served with the dossier
submitted by the Senior Superintendent of Police, Ramban to the District Magistrate, Ramban.
Thus, the stand of the detenue right from the inception is that he has not been provided the whole
material which has formed the basis of grounds of detention. Obviously, the constitutional right of
the detenue has been marred for non supply of these vital documents in making an effective
representation before the Advisory Board. Thus, vital safeguards against the arbitrary use of law of
preventive detention have been observed in breach by the respondents in this case, rendering the
impugned order of detention unsustainable in law.
26. It needs no emphasis that detenue cannot be expected to make a meaningful exercise of his
Constitutional and Statutory rights guaranteed under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India and
Section 13 of the J&K Public Safety Act, 1978, unless and until the material on which detention order
is based, is supplied to detenue. It is only after detenue has all the said material available that he can
make an effort to convince firstly detaining authority and thereafter the Government that their
apprehensions concerning activities of detenue are baseless and misplaced. If detenue is not
supplied the material, on which detention order is based, he will not be in a position to make an
effective representation against his detention order. Failure on part of detaining authority to supply
material, relied at the time of making detention order to detenue, renders detention order illegal and
unsustainable. While saying so, I draw the support from the law laid down in Thahira Haris Etc. Etc.
v. Government of Karnataka, AIR 2009 SC 2184; Union of India v. Ranu Bhandari, 2008, Cr. L. J.
4567; Dhannajoy Dass v. District Magistrate, AIR, 1982 SC 1315; Sofia WP (Crl) No. 205/2021
Gulam Mohd Bham v. State of Maharashtra & Ors. AIR 1999 SC 3051; and Syed Aasiya Indrabi v.
State of J&K & Ors, 2009 (1) S.L.J 219.
27. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Abdul Latif Abdul Wahab Sheikh v. B.K. Jha & Anr reported as
1987 (2) SCC 22 has made it clear that it is only the procedural requirements, which are the only
safeguards available to detenue, that are to be followed and complied with as the Court is not
expected to go behind the subjective satisfaction of detaining authority. In the present case, the
procedural requirements, as discoursed and noted above, have not been followed and complied with
by respondents in letter and spirit and as a corollary thereof, petition requires to be allowed.
28. A similar view has been expressed by the Hon`ble Supreme Court in Sophia Gulam Mohd. Bham
v. State of Maharashtra & Ors. (AIR 1999 SC 3051). The relevant para is reproduced as under:
"The right to be communicated the grounds of detention flows from Article 22(5)
while the right to be supplied all the material on which the grounds are based flows
from the right given to the detenue to make a representation against the order of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 8
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
detention. A representation can be made and the order of detention can be assailed
only when all the grounds on which the order is based are communicated to the
detenue and the material on which those grounds are based are also disclosed and
copies thereof are supplied to the person detained, in his own language."
29. An identical view has been expressed by Hon`ble Supreme Court in Sarabjeet Singh Mokha v.
District Magistrate, Jabalpur and ors. reported as 2021 SCC Online SC 1019, wherein at para 22 it
has been held as under:
"22. The communication of the grounds is in aid of facilitating the right of the
detenue to submit a representation against the order of detention. In the absence of
the grounds being communicated, the detenue would be left in the dark in regard to
the reasons which have led to the order of detention. The importance which the
constitutional provision ascribes to the communication of the grounds as well as the
affording of an opportunity to make a representation is evident from the use of the
expression "as soon as may be" in the first part in relation to communicating the
grounds and allowing the detenue "the earliest opportunity" of availing of the right to
submit a representation. Article 22(5) reflects a keen awareness of the framers of the
Constitution that preventive detention leads to the detention of a person without trial
and hence, it incorporates procedural safeguards which mandate an immediacy in
terms of time. The significance of Article 22 is that the representation which has been
submitted by the detenue must be disposed of at an early date. The communication of
the grounds of detention, as soon as may be, and the affording of the earliest
constitutional significance unless the detaining authority deals with the
representation and communicates its decision with expedition."
30. In this context, this Court in Salman Ahmad Dar v. State of Jammu and Kashmir and others
WP(Crl) No.405/2019 [decided on 05.08.2021] has held that failure on part of detaining authority
to supply material, relied at the time of making detention order to detenue, renders detention order
illegal and unsustainable, para 12 whereof may be usefully quoted:
"12 ...So, it is on the basis of dossier and other connected material/documents that
impugned detention order has been passed by detaining authority. Grounds of
detention, when looked into, gives reference of two FIRs to have been registered
against detenue. Involvement of detenue in aforesaid cases appears to have weighed
with detaining authority, while making detention order. The detention record, as
noted above, does not indicate that copies of statements recorded under Section 161
Cr. P.C. in above FIRs and other material collected in connection with investigation
of aforesaid cases, was ever supplied to detenue; even copy dossier has not been
furnished to detenue on the edifice thereof, impugned detention order has been
issued."
Aforesaid material, thus, assumes importance in the facts and circumstances of the case. It needs no
emphasis, that detenue cannot be expected to make a meaningful exercise of his Constitutional and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 9
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
Statutory rights guaranteed under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India and Section 13 of the
J&K Public Safety Act, 1978, unless and until the material on which detention order is based, is
supplied to him. It is only after detenue has all the said material available that he can make an effort
to convince detaining authority and thereafter the Government that their apprehensions vis-à-vis
his activities are baseless and misplaced. If detenue is not supplied the material, on which detention
order is based, he will not be in a position to make an effective representation against his detention
order. Failure on part of detaining authority to supply material, relied at the time of making
detention order to detenue, renders detention order illegal and unsustainable."
31. After going through the record, it is evident that the grounds of detention are reproduction of the
contents of the dossier and I have no hesitation in holding that the grounds of detention being
replica of the dossier, exhibits total non-application of mind by the detaining authority, and in the
process, arriving at subjective satisfaction has become a casualty which is a prerequisite for passing
the detention order. It is incumbent on part of the detaining authority to have applied its mind
independently after going through all the material supplied, should have arrived at a conclusion. But
in the present case, the detaining authority has passed the order in a casual manner as the grounds
of detention are replica of the dossier. While formulating the grounds of detention, the Detaining
Authority has to apply its own mind independently after arriving at a subjective satisfaction and the
Detaining Authority cannot simply reiterate whatever is written in the dossier.
32. I draw support to the above preposition of law from the judgment passed by the Apex Court in
case titled Jai Singh and ors vs. State of J&K reported as (AIR 1985 SC 764, the operative portion of
which is reproduced as under:
"First taking up the case of Jai Singh, the first of the petitioners before us, a perusal
of the grounds of detention WP (Crl) No. 131/2021 shows that it is a verbatim
reproduction of the dossier submitted by the Senior Superintendent of Police,
Udhampur, to the District Magistrate requesting that a detention order may kindly be
issued. At the top of the dossier, the name is mentioned as Sardar Jai Singh, father's
name is mentioned as Sardar Ram Singh and theaddress is given as village Bharakh,
Tehsil Reasi. Thereafter it is recited "The subject is an important member of ......"
Thereafter follow various allegations against Jai Singh, paragraph by paragraph. In the grounds of
detention, all that the District Magistrate has done is to change the first three words "the subject is"
into "you Jai Singh, S/o Ram Singh, resident of village Bharakh, Tehsil Reasi". Thereafter word for
word the police dossier is repeated and the word "he" wherever it occurs referring to Jai Singh in the
dossier is changed into "you" in the grounds of detention. We are afraid it is difficult to find proof of
non-application of mind. The liberty of a subject is a serious matter and is not to be trifled with in
this casual, indifferent and routine manner."
33. On the similar lines, this Court in case of Noor-ud-Din Shah v. State of J&K &Ors. reported as
1989 SLJ 1, quashed the detention order as it was found that grounds of detention was reproduction
of the dossier supplied to the detaining authority and held that it amounted to non-application of
mind. The Court observed:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 10
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
"I have thoroughly by examined the dossier submitted by the Superintendent of
Police, Anantnag, to District Magistrate, Anantnag as also the grounds of detention
formulated by the latter for the detention of the detenue in the present case, and I
find the said grounds of detention are nothing but the verbatim reproduction of the
dossier as forwarded by the Police to the detaining authority. He has only changed
the number of paragraphs, trying in vain to give it a different shape. This is in fact a
case of non-application of mind on the detaining authority. Without applying his own
mind to the facts of the case, he has acted as an agent of the police. It was his legal
duty to find out if the allegations leveled by the police against the detenue in the
dossier were really going to effect the maintenance of public order, as a result of the
activities, allegedly, committed by him. He had also to find out whether such
activities were going to affect the public order is future also as a result of which it was
necessary to detain the detenu, so as to prevent him from doing so. After all, the
preventive detention envisaged under the Act is in fact only to prevent a person from
acting in any manner which may be prejudicial to the maintenance of public order,
and not to punish him for his past penal acts. The learned District Magistrate appears
to have passed the impugned order in a routine manner being in different to the
import of preventive WP(Crl) No. 131/2021 detention as or detained in the Act,
Passing of an order without application of mind goes to the root of its validity, and in
that case, the question of going into the genuineness or otherwise of the grounds does
not arise. Having found that the detaining authority has not applied his mind to the
facts of the case while passing the impugned order, it is not necessary to go to the
merits of the grounds of detention, as mandated by Section 10- A of the Act."
34. The same principle has been followed by this Court in Balbir Chand v. UT of J&K and ors. in
WP(Crl) No. 54/2020 decided on 01.09.2021, the relevant extract whereof is as under:
"10. While going through the file and the detention record produced by learned
counsel for respondents, I have also an occasion to go through the Dossier prepared
by police. While comparing grounds of detention with dossier, it comes to fore that
grounds of detention are ditto copy of dossier. It is made clear here that detaining
authority may get inputs from different agencies, including Senior Superintendent of
Police of concerned District, but responsibility to formulate grounds of detention,
however, exclusively rests with detaining authority. It is detaining authority, who has
to go through the reports and other inputs received by him from concerned police
and other agencies and on such perusal arrive at a subjective satisfaction that a
person is to be placed under preventive detention. It is, thus, for detaining authority
to formulate grounds of detention and satisfy itself that grounds of detention so
formulated warrant passing of order of preventive detention. Perusal of grounds of
detention, in the present case, would show that it is a verbatim copy of Dossier of
Senior Superintendent of Police, submitted by him to the concerned Magistrate. This
Court as regards the verbatim reproduction of the Dossier in grounds of detention, in
the case of Naba Lone v. District Magistrate 1988 SLJ 300, while dealing with a case
where a similar situation arose, has observed:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 11
Abdul Hamid Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Ors on 23 August, 2023
"The grounds of detention supplied to the detenue is a copy of the police dossier,
which was placed before the District Magistrate for his subjective satisfaction in order
to detain the detenue. This shows total non-application of mind on the part of the
detaining authority. He has dittoed the Police direction without applying his mind to
the facts of the case."
35. From the above settled legal position, it is clear that if grounds of detention and dossier are
similar in language, it would tantamount to non- application of mind on the part of detaining
authority. The impugned order of detention, therefore, cannot sustain the test of law, and is liable to
be quashed. CONCLUSION
36. Having regard to what has been observed and discussed hereinabove, the impugned order of
detention passed against the detenue is held to be not sustainable in the eyes of law and the same
deserves to be quashed. Accordingly, the present petition is allowed and the detention order No.
30/PSA of 2020 dated 18.10.2022 passed by District Magistrate, Ramban is quashed. Accordingly,
detenue, namely, Abdul Hamid Khan S/o Ghulam Hassan Khan R/o Tethar, Tehsil Banihal, District
Ramban, is ordered to be released from the preventive custody forthwith, provided he is not
involved in any other case.
37. Disposed of along with connected CM(s).
(Wasim Sadiq Nargal) Judge Jammu 23.08.2023 Paramjeet Whether the order is speaking? Yes
Whether the order is reportable? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32362678/ 12
