Abdul Rasheed And 6 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 2 January, 2025
Abdul Rasheed And 6 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 2
January, 2025
Author: Prakash Padia
Bench: Prakash Padia
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:169
Court No. - 7
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 40796 of 2024
Petitioner :- Abdul Rasheed And 6 Others
Respondent :- State Of Up And 2 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Mujiburrahman,Mushir Khan
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Prakash Padia,J.
1. The order dated 18.10.2024 passed by the respondent no.2 namely Sub Divisional Magistrate,
Naugarh, District Siddharthnagar in Case No.T202317630108978 (Buttunnisha Vs. Abdul Rasheed
& others) is under challenge in the present writ petition.
2. By the aforesaid order the application for condonation of delay in the appeal filed by the
respondent no.3 was allowed imposing cost of Rs.3500/-.
3. It is argued by counsel for the petitioners that against the order dated 30.11.2000 passed by the
Tehsildar, Naugarh, District Siddharth Nagar under Section 34 of the U.P. Revenue Code, an appeal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149247104/ 1
Abdul Rasheed And 6 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 2 January, 2025
was filed by the respondent no.3-Butunnisha before the respondent no.2-Sub Divisional Magistrate,
Naugarh, District Siddharth Nagar, under Section 207 of the U.P. Land Revenue Act, 1901. The
aforesaid appeal was filed after more than 22 years. Along-with said appeal an application for
condonation of delay was also filed. Objections were filed against the aforesaid delay condonation
application by the present writ petitioners but without considering the objections submitted by the
petitioners the application for condonation of delay filed by the respondent no.3 was allowed.
4. Heard learned counsel for the petitioners, learned Standing Counsel for the respondent nos.1 & 2
and perused the records.
5. In view of the order proposed to be passed herein, no useful purpose would be served by putting
the respondent no.3 to notice and keeping this petition pending before this Court. However, in case
the respondent no.3 feels aggrieved by the order his/her right to seek modification/variation of the
order is being kept reserved.
6. From perusal of the record, it is clear that the order impugned dated 18.10.2024 passed by the
respondent no.2 is absolutely non speaking order and no reasons whatsoever has been mentioned in
the entire order by the respondent no.2 while allowing the application for condonation of delay.
7. Law in this connection is well settled that judicial/administrative authorities are duty bound to
pass reasoned and speaking order. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Assistant
Commissioner Commercial Tax Department, Works Contract & Leasing, Kota v. M/s Shukla &
Brothers Civil Appeal No..... of 2010/SLP (C) NO. 16466 of 2009) has held that the Reasons are the
soul of orders. Non-recording of reasons could lead to dual infirmities; firstly, it may cause prejudice
to the affected party and secondly, more particularly, hamper the proper administration of justice.
The relevant portion of the aforesaid judgement reads as follows:-
"Reasons are the soul of orders. Non-recording of reasons could lead to dual
infirmities; firstly, it may cause prejudice to the affected party and secondly, more
particularly, hamper the proper administration of justice. These principles are not
only applicable to administrative or executive actions, but they apply with equal force
and, in fact, with a greater degree of precision to judicial pronouncements. A
judgment without reasons causes prejudice to the person against whom it is
pronounced, as that litigant is unable to know the ground which weighed with the
Court in rejecting his claim and also causes impediments in his taking adequate and
appropriate grounds before the higher Court in the event of challenge to that
judgment."
8. The Hon'ble Apex Court again in the case of Kranti Associate Private Limited and another Vs.
Masood Ahmed Khan and others reported in (2010) 9 SCC 496 has held that recording of reasons
also operates as a valid restraint on any possible arbitrary exercise of judicial and quasi judicial or
even administrative power. The Paragraph Nos.46 & 47 of the aforesaid judgement reads as
follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149247104/ 2
Abdul Rasheed And 6 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 2 January, 2025
"46. The position in the United States has been indicated by this Court in S.N.
Mukherjee (1990) 4 SCC 594 of the judgment. This Court held that in the United
States the courts have always insisted on the recording of reasons by administrative
authorities in exercise of their powers. It was further held that such recording of
reasons is required as "the courts cannot exercise their duty of review unless they are
advised of the considerations underlying the action under review". In S.N. Mukherjee
this Court relied on the decisions of the US Court in Securities and Exchange d
Commission v. Chenery Corpn. 421 US 560 80 (542) and Dunlop v. Bachowski 421
US 560 80 (1942) in support of its opinion discussed above.
47. Summarising the above discussion, this Court holds:
(a) In India the judicial trend has always been to record reasons, even in
administrative decisions, if such decisions affect anyone prejudicially.
(b) A quasi-judicial authority must record reasons in support of its conclusions.
(c) Insistence on recording of reasons is meant to serve the wider principle of justice
that justice must not only be done it must also appear to be done as well.
(d) Recording of reasons also operates as a valid restraint on any possible arbitrary
exercise of judicial and quasi-judicial or even administrative power.
(e) Reasons reassure that discretion has been exercised by the decision-maker on
relevant grounds and by disregarding extraneous considerations.
(f) Reasons have virtually become as indispensable a component of a
decision-making process as observing principles of natural justice by judicial,
quasi-judicial and even by administrative bodies.
(g) Reasons facilitate the process of judicial review by superior courts.
(h) The ongoing judicial trend in all countries committed to rule of law and
constitutional governance is in favour of reasoned decisions based on relevant facts.
This is virtually the lifeblood of judicial decision-making justifying the principle that
reason is the soul of justice.
(i) Judicial or even quasi-judicial opinions these days can be as different as the judges
and authorities who deliver them. All these decisions serve one common purpose
which is to demonstrate by reason that the relevant factors have been objectively
considered. This is important for sustaining the litigants' faith in the justice delivery
system.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149247104/ 3
Abdul Rasheed And 6 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 2 January, 2025
(j) Insistence on reason is a requirement for both judicial accountability and
transparency.
(k) If a judge or a quasi-judicial authority is not candid enough about his/her
decision-making process then it is impossible to know whether the person deciding is
faithful to the doctrine of precedent or to principles of incrementalism.
(l) Reasons in support of decisions must be cogent, clear and succinct. A pretence of
reasons or "rubber-stamp reasons" is not to be equated with a valid decision-making
process.
(m) It cannot be doubted that transparency is the sine qua non of restraint on abuse
of judicial powers. Transparency in decision-making not only makes the judges and
decision-makers less prone to errors but also makes them subject to broader scrutiny.
(See David Shapiro in Defence of Judicial Candor).
(n) Since the requirement to record reasons emanates from the broad doctrine of
fairness in decision-making, the said requirement is now virtually a component of
human rights and was considered part of Strasbourg Jurisprudence. See Ruiz Torija
v. Spain (1994) 19 EHRR 553, at 562 para 29 and Anya v. University of Oxford 2001
EWCA Civ 405 (CA), wherein the Court referred to Article 6 of the European
Convention of Human Rights which requires, adequate and intelligent reasons must
be given for judicial decisions".
(o) In all common law jurisdictions judgments play a vital role in setting up precedents for the
future. Therefore, for development of law, requirement of giving reasons for the decision is of the
essence and is virtually a part of due process?."
9. The only question for consideration is as to whether any finding given by the revenue court
without giving any reason could be upheld or not.
10. Reasons are the backbone of the order and only from the deciphered as to what persuaded the
authority to draw a particular conclusion. Once the petitioner is not aware of the reasons, then this
Court can ignore the availability of alternative remedy because in absence of reasons, the petitioner
is not in a position to meet out the grounds on which his application was rejected.
11. The Supreme Court in the case of Central Board of Trustees v. M/s Indore Composite Pvt. Ltd.
decided in C.A. No.7240/2018 has held as under:
"14. Indeed, in the absence of any application of judicial mind to the factual and legal
controversy involved in the appeal and without there being any discussion,
appreciation, reasoning and categorical findings on the issues and why the findings
impugned in the writ petition deserve to be upheld or reversed, while dealing with
the arguments of the parties in the light of legal principles applicable to the case, it is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149247104/ 4
Abdul Rasheed And 6 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 2 January, 2025
difficult for this Court to sustain such order of the Division Bench. The only
expression used by the Division Bench in disposing of the writ petition is "on due
consideration". It is not clear to us as to what was that due consideration which
persuaded the Division Bench to dispose of the writ petition because we find that in
the earlier paras only facts are set out.
15. Time and again, this Court has emphasized on the Courts the need to pass
reasoned order in every case which must contain the narration of the bare facts of the
case of the parties to the lis, the issues arising in the case, the submissions urged by
the parties, the legal principles applicable to the issues involved and the reasons in
support of the findings on all the issues arising in the case and urged by the learned
counsel for the parties in support of its conclusion.It is really unfortunate that the
Division Bench failed to keep in mind these principles while disposing of the writ
petition. Such order, in our view, has undoubtedly caused prejudice to the parties
because it deprived them to know the reasons as to why one party has won and other
has lost. We can never countenance the manner in which such order was passed by
the High Court which has compelled us to remand the matter to the High Court for
deciding the writ petition afresh on merits."
12. The Supreme Court in the case of Brijmani Devi v. Pappu Kumar, reported in (2022) 4 SCC 497
has held as under :-
"32. On the aspect of the duty to accord reasons for a decision arrived at by a court, or
for that matter, even a quasi-judicial authority, it would be useful to refer to a
judgment of this Court in Kranti Associates (P) Ltd. v. Masood Ahmed Khan [Kranti
Associates (P) Ltd. v. Masood Ahmed Khan, (2010) 9 SCC 496 (2010) 3 SCC (Civ)
852], wherein after referring to a number of judgments this Court summarised at
para 47 the law on the point. The relevant principles for the purpose of this case are
extracted as under:
32.1. Insistence on recording of reasons is meant to serve the wider principle of
justice that justice must not only be done it must also appear to be done as well.
32.2. Recording of reasons also operates as a valid restraint on any possible arbitrary
exercise of judicial and quasi-judicial or even administrative power.
32.3. Reasons reassure that discretion has been exercised by the decision-maker on
relevant grounds and by disregarding extraneous considerations.
32.4. Reasons have virtually become as indispensable a component of a
decision-making process as observing principles of natural justice by judicial,
quasi-judicial and even by administrative bodies.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149247104/ 5
Abdul Rasheed And 6 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 2 January, 2025
32.5. The ongoing judicial trend in all countries committed to rule of law and
constitutional governance is in favour of reasoned decisions based on relevant facts.
This is virtually the lifeblood of judicial decision-making justifying the principle that
reason is the soul of justice.
32.6. Judicial or even quasi-judicial opinions these days can be as different as the
Judges and authorities who deliver them. All these decisions serve one common
purpose which is to demonstrate by reason that the relevant factors have been
objectively considered. This is important for sustaining the litigants' faith in the
justice delivery system.
32.7. Insistence on reason is a requirement for both judicial accountability and
transparency.
32.8. If a Judge or a quasi-judicial authority is not candid enough about his/her
decision- making process then it is impossible to know whether the person deciding
is faithful to the doctrine of precedent or to principles of incrementalism.
32.9. Reasons in support of decisions must be cogent, clear and succinct. A pretence
of reasons or "rubber-stamp reasons" is not to be equated with a valid
decision-making process.
32.10. It cannot be doubted that transparency is the sine qua non of restraint on
abuse of judicial powers. Transparency in decision-making not only makes the
Judges and decision-makers less prone to errors but also makes them subject to
broader scrutiny. (See David Shapiro in Defence of Judicial Candor [ (1987) 100
Harvard Law Review 731-37]) 32.11. In all common law jurisdictions judgments play
a vital role in setting up precedents for the future. Therefore, for development of law,
requirement of giving reasons for the decision is of the essence and is virtually a part
of "due process".
13. In this view of the matter, the Court is of the prima facie opinion that the order impugned dated
18.10.2024 has been passed without application of mind and bad in the eyes of law hence same is
liable to be set aside and is hereby set aside.
14. The writ petition is allowed. This order will not restrain the respondent no.2 to pass a fresh order
strictly in accordance with law.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 Pramod Tripathi
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/149247104/ 6
