Abhay Singh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. on 27 March, 2025
Abhay Singh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. on 27
March, 2025
Author: Manish Mathur
Bench: Manish Mathur
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:17663
Court No. - 13
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 695 of 2025
Applicant :- Abhay Singh
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko.
Counsel for Applicant :- Azizullah Khan,Mohammad Alishah Faruqi,Najmussaquib
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Nalin Arora,Rishabh Pandey,Rishabh Singh,Satendra Kumar (Singh)
Hon'ble Manish Mathur,J.
1. Heard learned counsel for applicant, learned A.G.A. for State as well as learned counsel for
informant. Rejoinder affidavit filed today is taken on record.
2. First bail application has been filed with regard to F.I.R. No. 0142/2024, under Section 66 D, I.T.
(Amendment), Act, 2008 & under Section 318(2) 319(2), 338, 336 (2), 340, 61(2) A BNS, 2023,
Police Station -Cyber Crime, District- Lucknow.
3. As per contents of F.I.R., the incident is said to have taken place on 21. 08.2024 when the
informant was placed under digital arrest for one and half days and was defrauded of an amount of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10253200/ 1
Abhay Singh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. on 27 March, 2025
rupees forty eight lacs due to impersonation of certain persons as police authorities.
4. Learned counsel for applicant submits that the applicant has been falsely implicated in the
allegations levelled against him and that even in the investigation, there is neither any recovery from
the applicant nor any statement of any credible witness against him. It is further submitted that it is
only on the basis of information given by Police informant. It is also submitted that although charge
sheet in the matter has already been filed but as per the evidence collected, there is no direct
involvement of applicant in the charges levelled against him. He has also adverted to orders passed
by this Court in the cases of Criminal Misc. Bail Application No. 69 of 2025 (Pankaj Surela versus
State of U.P.),Criminal Misc. Bail Application No. 741 of 2025 (Anshul Mahor versus State of U.P.)
and Criminal Misc. Bail Application No. 2233 of 2025 (Sagar Singh versus State of U.P.) whereby
two co-accused have been enlarged on bail on the same allegations and evidence. It is also submitted
that in case the applicant is granted bail, he undertakes not to misuse the same and cooperate in
trial proceedings.
5. Learned counsel for opposite parties have refuted submissions advanced by learned counsel for
applicant with the submission that charge-sheet has already been filed against applicant who has
been arrested on the basis of information supplied by police informer. His role is that of providing
Bank details to the main accused. It is also submitted that the order cited by learned counsel for
applicant do not indicate any parity with him.
6. Hon'ble the Supreme Court in Sanjay Chandra v. Central Bureau of Investigation, reported in
(2012) 1 SCC 40 has specifically held that bail is to be a norm and an under-trial is not required to be
in jail for ever pending trial. Relevant paragraphs of the judgment are as under :-
"21. In bail applications, generally, it has been laid down from the earliest times that
the object of bail is to secure the appearance of the accused person at his trial by
reasonable amount of bail. The object of bail is neither punitive nor preventative.
Deprivation of liberty must be considered a punishment, unless it is required to
ensure that an accused person will stand his trial when called upon. The courts owe
more than verbal respect to the principle that punishment begins after conviction,
and that every man is deemed to be innocent until duly tried and duly found guilty."
"27. This Court, time and again, has stated that bail is the rule and committal to jail
an exception. It has also observed that refusal of bail is a restriction on the personal
liberty of the individual guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution."
7. Considering submissions advanced by learned counsel for parties and perusal of material on
record, prima facie, subject to evidence it appears that co-accused in the F.I.R. as indicated herein
above have already been enlarged on bail by Co-ordinate Benches of this Court. As now the only
evidence against the applicant tip off supplied by police informer. It is noticeable that F.I.R. has
been filed against unknown persons.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10253200/ 2
Abhay Singh vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. on 27 March, 2025
8. In the counter affidavit also it appears that main accused is said Nagendra Kumar Abhinandan
Pathak and therefore the role of the applicant appears to be distinguishable from that of main
accused but it appears to be in parity with the other persons who have already enlarged on bail.This
Court finds that the applicant is entitled to be released on bail in this case.
9. Accordingly, the bail application is allowed.
10. Let applicant, Abhay Singh, involved in the aforesaid case crime be released on bail on his
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court
concerned with the following conditions which are being imposed in the interest of justice:-
(i) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any
adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence when the witnesses are present in court.
In case of default of this condition, it shall be open for the trial court to treat it as
abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders in accordance with law.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present before the trial court on each date fixed, either
personally or through his counsel. In case of his absence, without sufficient cause, the
trial court may proceed against him under Section 269 BNS of the Indian Penal Code.
(iii) In case, the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during trial and in order to
secure his presence proclamation under Section 84 BNS is issued and the applicant
fails to appear before the court on the date fixed in such proclamation, then, the trial
court shall initiate proceedings against him, in accordance with law, under Section
209 BNS of the Indian Penal Code.
(iv) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the trial court on the dates
fixed for (i) opening of the case, (ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement
under Section 351 BNS. If in the opinion of the trial court, absence of the applicant is
deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the trial court to treat
such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance with
law.
Order Date :- 27.3.2025 Subodh/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10253200/ 3
