Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16
September, 2023
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 06.09.2023
Pronounced on : 16.09.2023
LPA No.107/2019
Abhishek Khajuria, Age 25 years,
S/o Sh. Ram Paul Sharma,
R/o Village Samwan, Tehsil Khour
District Jammu ...Appellant(s)
Through:- Mr. S.S.Ahmed, Advocate with
M/s Sheikh Najeeb & Rahul Raina,
Advocates
V/s
1. The State of Jammu and Kashmir
Through its Commissioner/Secretary,
Revenue Department, Civil Secretariat, Jammu
2. The Commissioner/Secretary to Govt., of J&K,
Finance Department, Civil Secretariat, Jammu
3. The Director General, Accountss and Treasuries,
J&K Government, Jammu.
4. The Deputy Commissioner, Jammu.
5. The Sub-Divisional Magistrate,
Khour, District Jammu.
6. The Tehsildar, Khour, District jammu.
7. Bharti Sharma D/o Sukhdev Raj
R/o Dhar, Khour, Pallanwala,
Tehsil Khour District Jammu.
...Respondent(s)
Through:-Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG for R-1 to 6
Mr. Sunil Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Ankesh Chandel, Advocate for R-7
2 LPA No.107/2019
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 1
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Sanjeev Kumar-J
1. This intra-court appeal by the appellant-Abhishek Khajuria is directed against the judgment and
order dated 03.05.2019 passed by a learned Single Judge [―the Writ Court(cid:129)] in SWP No.679/2018
titled Abhishek Khajuria v. State of J&K and others, whereby the Writ Court has upheld the order of
the Deputy Commissioner, Jammu dated 17.02.2018 and dismissed the writ petition of the
appellant.
2. Before we turn to consider the grounds of challenge urged by the learned counsel for the appellant
to assail the impugned judgment, we deem it appropriate to give brief resume of factual antecedents
leading up to the filing of this appeal.
3. The appellant was born in the year 1993 in village Samwan Pallanwala Tehsil Khour District
Jammu, an area adjoining to the Actual Line of Control (ALC). In the year 1999, due to disturbance
on the border, the appellant, who was six years old, was forced to shift and take temporary residence
along with his parents in the township of Akhnoor. It is where the appellant was brought up and
received education. At the time of shifting from Samwan to Akhnoor, both the parents of the
appellant were serving in the School Education Department and were posted in Akhnoor only.
4. On an application filed by the appellant for grant of certificate of being a member of Socially and
Educationally Backward Class (Resident of area adjoining Line of Actual Control), the Tehsildar,
Akhnoor issued requisite category certificate in favour of the appellant, which was delivered to him
by the Tehsildar concerned under his hand and seal on 23rd September, 2008. The certificate issued
was to remain valid for a period of five years from the date of issue thereof.
5. Admittedly, the category certificate issued in favour of the appellant was not assailed by anybody
and it remained in operation for prescribed period of five years. However, on the expiry of the
period of validity of the category certificate issued in favour of the appellant on 23rd September,
2013, an application was moved by the appellant for renewal thereof under Rules. The Competent
Authority considered the application and renewed the ALC certificate issued in favour of the
appellant for a further period of five years on 23rd September, 2013.
6. It seems and is substantiated by the material on record, the appellant as well as respondent No.7
along with other candidates belonging to ALC category responded to an advertisement notification
issued by the J&K Services Selection Board for filling up the post of Accountss Assistants. In the
selection process conducted by the J&K SSB, the name of the appellant figured in the waitlist ahead
of respondent No.7 in the category of ALC. This, as is contended by the appellant, made respondent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 2
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
No.7 to rake up the controversy with regard to validity of ALC certificate issued in favour of the
appellant in the year 2008 and renewed in the year 2013. Respondent No.7 moved the office of
Deputy Commissioner, Jammu by filing a petition styled as ―Appeal/Revision(cid:129) to seek quashment
of the ALC certificate issued in favour of the appellant.
7. On being put on notice by the Deputy Commissioner, the appellant contested the application by
filing his objections. The Deputy Commissioner considered the entire issue in the light of relevant
record and the rival contentions of both the sides and came to the conclusion that the certificate of
ALC category issued in favour of the appellant in the year 2008 and renewed in the year 2013 by the
Tehsildar, Akhnoor was contrary to and in violation of Jammu & Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004
[―the Act of 2004(cid:129)] and the J&K Reservation Rules, 2005 framed thereuder. Accordingly, vide his
order dated 17.02.2018, the Deputy Commissioner, Jammu cancelled the certificate of ALC category
issued in favour of the appellant.
8. Aggrieved, the appellant filed SWP No.679/2018, which, upon completion of pleadings, was taken
up by the Writ Court for consideration and disposal. Vide judgment dated 03.05.2019, impugned in
this appeal, the Writ Court dismissed the writ petition and upheld the order impugned in the writ
petition passed by the Deputy Commissioner, Jammu cancelling ALC certificate issued in favour of
the appellant.
Arguments of learned counsel for the appellant
9. The impugned judgment is assailed by the appellant inter alia on the ground that the appellant
along with his family is permanent resident of village Samwan, an area near Actual Line of Control
and, therefore, could not be denied the category certificate of ALC on the ground that since 1999, the
appellant along with his parents is putting up in Akhnoor town, which falls outside the area
adjoining actual line of control and that the income of the family of the appellant exceeds the ceiling
prescribed under the Act of 2004 and rules framed thereunder.
10. It is argued by Mr. S.S.Ahmed, learned counsel representing the appellant, that in terms of
proviso to Clause (ix) of Section 2(o) of the Act of 2004, the income ceiling shall not apply to a
person, who has lived and completed his entire school education from an area adjoining Actual Line
of Control and in case such schooling is not available in such area from the nearest adjoining area.
Learned counsel submits that the aforesaid provisos has not been correctly interpreted and
appreciated, either by the Deputy Commissioner, Jammu or by the Writ Court and both have fallen
in error in holding the applicant not eligible to the issuance of ALC category certificate. He contends
that the appellant could not complete his entire school education while living in ALC area after the
year 1999 due to the circumstances beyond his control. He argues that due to tension between India
and Pakistan and continuous shelling on the border, the appellant along with family had to migrate
and settle temporary in Akhnoor township. At that point of time, the appellant was only six years old
and, therefore, was forced by the circumstances to take education in the schools located in the
township of Akhnoor. It is submitted that due to unfavourable conditions prevailing on the border,
people of Pallanwala area including those of village Samwan were shifted by the Government to
village Palwan, which is situated at a distance of only 4-5 kilometer from Akhnoor. He, therefore,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 3
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
contents that the Writ Court ought to have considered this aspect and considered the appellant and
his family also residing in Palwan and applied the proviso on the ground that the appellant had got
his education from a school in Akhnoor, which was nearest adjoining area to his place of deemed
residence.
11. Learned counsel urges this Court to interpret the provision of Section 2(o)(ix) and the proviso
appended thereto in a manner that furthers the object of reservation underlying the Act of 2004 and
the Rules framed thereunder. He also finds fault with the manner in which the highly belated appeal
filed by respondent No.7 was entertained and allowed by the Deputy Commissioner, Jammu.
Learned counsel appearing for the appellant, however, does not dispute that both the parents of the
appellant are employed in the School Education Department and that their annual income is much
higher than the ceiling prescribed under Section 2(o)(ix) of the Act of 2004. Much stress was laid by
the learned counsel for the appellant on the argument that the Deputy Commissioner, Jammu as
also the Writ Court could not appreciate the fact that the appellant was prevented from living in his
village and receiving education from the schools situated in such area because of the circumstances
beyond his control.
Submissions of the respondents:
12. The official respondents represented by Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG and respondent No.7
represented by Mr. Sunil Sethi, senior Advocate have supported the reasoning given by the Writ
Court to dismiss the writ petition of the appellant and to uphold the order of the Deputy
Commissioner, Jammu. It is submitted by Mr. Sethi, learned senior counsel appearing for
respondent No.7, that the object of providing reservation in favour of persons residents of an area
adjoining Line of Actual Control, who on Accounts of location of their residence suffer from
psychological stress and anxiety, is that they are provided level play field to compete with the
candidates living in other areas having access to better schools and education. It is argued that if a
person, who because of reasons, within or beyond his control, shifts to a place which has better
schools and education and receives such education, cannot be said to have suffered disadvantage of
living in an area adjoining Actual Line of Control.
Discussion and Analysis
13. The facts are not much in dispute. We believe and our belief is supported by the material on
record that the appellant was born in the year 1999 to his parents in village Samwan, an area
adjoining Actual Line of Control. He lived in the said area till the year 1999 when he along with his
parents shifted to and took temporary residence in the township of Akhnoor. Both the parents of the
appellant are serving in the Education Department. The appellant and his family was forced to shift
from village Samwan to a safer area of Akhnoor because of the hostile and averse circumstances
prevailing on the border in the wake of Kargil war. It has also come on record in the report of the
Revenue officer that the people of Pallanwala area including village Samwan were mostly shifted
and relocated to village Palwan, a village situated at a distance of about 27 kilometer from Samwan.
The appellant, who had his parents serving in the Education Department, however, could afford to
shift to Akhnoor and provide better schooling to the appellant. In the year 2008, on an application
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 4
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
filed by the appellant, ALC category certificate was issued in his favour by the then Tehsildar
Akhnoor.
14. Indisputably, the aforesaid certificate was not questioned by anybody. As is provided under the
Rules of 2005 and is also indicated in the category certificate issued on 23.09.2008, the certificate
once issued was to remain valid for a period of five years. On the expiry of validity of the certificate,
the appellant applied for renewal and the same was renewed by the competent authority on
29.08.2013. Renewed category certificate issued in favour of the appellant in the year 2013 could
have also gone unchallenged had name of the appellant not figured in the select/waitlist of the
Accounts Assistants issued by the J&KSSB. Respondent No.7 was also a candidate in the selection
and was next in the order of merit to the appellant in the ALC category. As is rightly contended on
behalf of the appellant, this competing interest of respondent No.7 made him to rake up the
controversy with regard to the ineligibility of the appellant to seek such category certificate.
15. Before the select list could be given effect to and the appellant appointed by the competent
authority, respondent No.7 approached the Deputy Commissioner, Jammu and mounted challenge
to the ALC category certificate issued in favour of the appellant in the year 2008 and renewed in the
year 2013 by the Tehsildar, Akhnoor. We have already discussed in detail that the Deputy
Commissioner agreed with the submissions made on behalf of respondent No.7 and on scrutiny of
record concluded that the category certificate issued in favour of the appellant in the year 2008 and
renewed in the year 2013 was not in consonance with the provisions of the Act of 2004 and the
Rules framed thereunder. The Writ Court did not find any legal infirmity or procedural impropriety
with the order passed by the Deputy Commissioner and resultantly dismissed the writ petition of the
appellant.
16. We have given our thoughtful consideration to the rival contentions and the material on record.
The entire controversy raised in this appeal hinges upon the interpretation and correct
understanding of the relevant provisions dealing with the entitlement of a person to the issue of
category certificate of ALC.
17. Before we embark upon to analyze all the relevant provisions, we deem it necessary to observe
that reservation in appointment has its genesis to Article 16(4) of the Constitution of India and the
avowed object of providing reservation in appointments is giving level playing field to socially and
educationally backward and economically weaker sections of the society so that they can compete
for employment with those who are privileged and have better access to education and other
amenities of life.
18. With a view to give effect to reservation in appointments, the State legislature enacted the
Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004 [―the Act of 2004(cid:129)]. Apart from other identified classes
of citizens for providing reservation like Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes , the Act of 2004
identified Socially and Educationally Backward classes also for giving them the benefit of
reservation. The Act of 2004 defines socially and educationally backward classes in Section 2(o),
which for facility of reference is set out below:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 5
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
―2. Definitions.--- In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,---
.............................................. ..................................................
(o) ―socially and educationally backward classes(cid:129) mean--
(i) persons residing in the backward area ;
(ii) the persons residing in the area adjoining Actual Line of Control and
International Border ;
(iii) weak and under-privileged classes (social castes), declared as such under
notification SRO-394 dated 5-9-1981 read with notification SRO-272 dated 3-7-1982
and notification SRO271 dated 22-8-1988 as amended from time to time :
(iv) the persons belonging to pahari community, clan or tribe having distinct cultural,
ethnic and linguistic identity to be identified in such manner as may be prescribed
and by such Authority as may be appointed by the Government in this behalf ; and
Provided that the Government may, on the recommendations of a Commission to be
constituted by the Government in this behalf], make inclusions in, and exclusion
from, the said category from time to time :
Provided further that the persons specified below and their children shall be excluded
from the category of socially and educationally backward classes:--
(i) Governor (serving or retired) ;
(ii) Chief Justice and Judges (serving or retired) of High Court or the
Supreme Court of India ;
(iii) Chief Minister and Ex-Chief Minister ;
(iv) Ministers and Ex-Ministers of Cabinet rank ;
(iv) Ministers of State and Deputy Ministers having more than one term ;
(v) Chairman and members of Jammu and Kashmir Public Service
Commission or the Union Public Service Commission ;
(vii) Members of the State Legislature (elected and nominated both) having more
than one term irrespective of the period under the second term ;
(viii) Members of All India Services ;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 6
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
(ix) any person whose annual income from all sources, determined in the prescribed
manner, exceeds 1 rupees eight lacs or such amount as may be notified by the
Government from time to time in accordance with the prescribed norms Provided
that the income ceiling shall not apply to a person who has lived and completed
entire school education from an area identified as Backward or Actual Line of Control
or International Border], as the case may be, and in case such schooling is not
available in such area, from the nearest adjoining area ;
(x) such other persons as the Government may notify from time to time ;
19. As is evident from a reading of Clause (ii) of Section 2(o), the person residing in the area
adjoining Actual Line of Control and International Border are included in the definition of term
―socially and educationally backward classes(cid:129) The area adjoining Actual Line of Control is
separately defined in Section 2(c), which reads thus:-
"(c) "areas adjoining the actual line of control"
means the area declared as such by the Government from time to time;"
20. The definition of socially and educationally backward classes, which takes within its sweep
persons residing in the area adjoining Actual Line of Control is hedged by first and second proviso
appended to Section 2(o). Certain persons and their children have been excluded from the category
of socially and educationally backward classes i.e. Governor (serving or retired); Chief Justice and
judges (serving or retired) of High court or the Supreme Court of India' Chief Minister and Ex-Chief
Minister; Ministers and Ex-Ministers of Cabinet rank etc etc. What is, however, relevant for our
purposes is that apart from the first proviso, Clause (ix) excludes from the category of socially and
educationally backward classes any person whose annual income from all sources exceeds Rs.8.00
lakhs or such amount as may be notified by the Government from time to time in accordance with
the prescribed norms. We make it clear that the amount of Rs.8.00 lakhs was introduced by SRO 7
of 2019 dated 07.01.2019 and at the relevant point of time when the ALC certificate of the appellant
was renewed the ceiling limit was Rs.4,50,000/-. What would further come out from reading of
Section 2(o), in particular, second proviso appended thereto is that income ceiling shall not apply to
a person, if he fulfills following conditions:-
a) He has lived in the area identified as ALC;
b) Completed his entire school education from such area; and
c) If no schooling is available in such area, from the nearest
adjoining area.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 7
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
21. On examining the admitted factual position obtaining in the case, we find that the appellant, who
along with his family is a resident of village Samwan, an area adjoining Actual Line of Control
suffers from the disability to obtain the category certificate of socially and educationally backward
classes for the reason that his annual income from all sources exceeds the ceiling limit prescribed in
Section 2(o)(ix). The appellant, admittedly, does not fulfill three requirements provided in second
proviso to come out of the aforesaid disability.
22. Admittedly, the appellant has only lived in village Samwan till the age of six years and thereafter
has lived and completed his entire school education from an area which is outside the area identified
as adjoining Actual Line of Control. The appellant cannot successfully contend that by living and
completing his entire school education from Akhnoor town he has fulfilled the requirement of
getting education from the nearest adjoining area. We are saying so because, as per the proviso, the
entire school education is required to be completed by the person, asking for waiver of ceiling
condition, from an area identified as ALC and it is only when such schooling is not available in such
area, he may complete his school education from the nearest adjoining area.
23. Nearest adjoining area would mean the area must be adjoining to ALC area and nearest among
the adjoining areas. The area identified as ALC in the instant case is obviously village Samwan,
which is at a distance of approximately 31 kilometers from the township of Akhnoor. The nearest
adjoining area to the identified area as ALC (Samwan) is village Kaleeth located at a distance of
approximately 14 kilometers. This is so certified by Mr. R.K. Shrivastava, AE (Civil),
Second-in-command, GREF.
24. The argument of Mr. S.S.Ahmed, learned counsel for the appellant, that Akhnoor should be held
to be the nearest adjoining area for the purposes of application of the proviso on the ground that
Akhnoor is situated at a distance of 4-5 km from Palwan is also without any substance. We cannot
rewrite Section 2(o) to read down the expression ―nearest adjoining area(cid:129) to mean an area situate
nearest to the area where the people after their migration from ALC area have settled. Obviously,
such contingency was not conceived by the legislature and, therefore, no such provision was made in
the Act of 2004 and the rules framed thereunder. The nearest adjoining area by its plain meaning
would mean the area which is in the closest vicinity of the area identified as ALC under the Act of
2004. We are, therefore, in agreement with the learned Deputy Commissioner, Jammu that to come
out of the income ceiling disability provided under Clause (ix) of Section 2(o), it was necessary for
the appellant to demonstrate and prove before the Competent Authority that not only he had lived
in but had also completed his entire school education from an area identified as ALC. We are also
not impressed by the argument of Mr. S.S.Ahmed that Palwan, where most of the people subjected
to forced migration by the circumstances beyond their control from ALC area were settled, should be
taken to be the ALC area for the purposes of applicability of second proviso of Section 2(o).
25. As we have already held that when the language of a statute is clear and unequivocal, Courts
cannot embark upon putting any interpretation other than the literal interpretation. We have also
pointed out three requirements envisaged under the proviso, which, if fulfilled, would bring the case
of an applicant seeking ALC category certificate out of the income ceiling condition provided in
Clause (ix) of Section 2(o) of the Act of 2004.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 8
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
26. As is aptly observed by the Writ Court that ―Migration(cid:129), in all circumstances, is not a curse but
many a times it turns out to be a boon and a blessing in disguise. In the instant case, the migration
of populace from border areas was triggered by unsavory circumstances created by Kargil war and
hostilities by our neighbouring country. The people from Samwan were also forced to migrate and
leave their home and hearth. Those who were forced to stay in camps in tented accommodations
were, of course, visited with difficulties and miseries. However, those like the appellant and his
family who were well off got the opportunity to provide residence and education to the appellant in
better educational institutions in the township of Akhnoor. The disability which appellant would
have suffered by being resident of Samwan did not come in his way in getting better education by
having access to better schools and better amenities of life. Viewed thus, the contention of learned
counsel for the appellant that he was forced to shift from his native village Samwan and, therefore,
cannot be deprived of ALC category status on the ground that he did not live and receive education
in such area clearly lacks logic and is completely unacceptable.
27. Having held thus, we would like to deal with another argument of learned counsel for the
appellant based upon his understanding of Rule 21 of the Rules of 2005. Learned counsel for the
appellant referred to Clause (iii) of Rule 21 to submit that a person claiming the benefit on the
ground that he belongs to an identified area near the Line of Actual Control must establish that
he/she has resided in the area for a period not less than 15 years prior to the application and is
actually residing in the said area. However, such person shall not be disentitled from claiming such
benefit only on the ground that his/her father or person on whom he/she is dependent is living in a
place which is not identified as area near Line of Actual Control on Accounts of his employment,
business or other professional or vocational reasons etc. He, therefore, submits that the appellant
could not live in the ALC area for a period of fifteen years on Accounts of employment of his both
parents and, therefore, is not disentitled from claiming the benefit of reservation only on the ground
that he had not been residing in the area for a period not less than fifteen years prior to the date of
application or that he is not actually residing in the said area.
28. We have given thoughtful consideration to aforesaid argument of learned counsel for the
appellant and find that the same does not hold merit on close scrutiny. True it is that under Rule
21(iii), a person claiming benefit of reservation on the ground that he belongs to an area near Line of
Actual Control is required to establish before the Competent Authority that he has resided in the
area for a minimum period of fifteen years prior to the date of application and is actually residing on
the said date in the said area. There is, however, proviso appended to Clause (iii), which carves out
an exception by providing that a person shall not be disentitled from claiming the benefit only on
the ground that his father or the person on whom he/she is dependent is living in a place which is
not identified as area near Line of Actual Control on Accounts of following:-
a) employment;
b) business;
c) other professional or vocational reasons;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 9
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
d) migration from one place to another within respective division due to security
reasons.
We are, however, at loss to understand as to how this provision in Rule 21 would help the appellant.
29. To summarize and sum up, we say and hold, that for claiming the benefit of reservation by a
person on the ground that he belongs to identified area near Line of Actual Control, a person is
required to establish following:-
i) He/she belongs to an area identified near Line of Actual Control (before SRO 321 of
2019 dated 27.05.2019 a person claiming the benefit was to establish that he was a
resident of an area near Line of Control);
ii) That he or she has resided in the area for a period not less than fifteen years prior
to the date of application;
iii) He or she is actually residing in the said area on the date of application;
iv) He or she shall not be disentitled from claiming the benefit only on the ground
that his or her father or the person on whom he or she is dependent is living in a
place outside such area identified as ALC are on Accounts of his (a) employment; or
(b) business; or (c) other professional or vocational reasons; or (d) migration from
one place to another.
v) He or she shall not be entitled to issue of certificate of ALC, if his annual income
from all sources would exceed the ceiling limit prescribed under Clause (ix) of Section
2(o).
vi) He/she shall not be disentitled to seek the benefit of being a person belonging to
socially and educationally backward classes on Accounts of income ceiling provided
under Clause (ix) (supra) provided he establishes before the Competent Authority :-
a) That he/she had lived and completed entire education in the ALC area; or
b) In case such schooling is not available in ALC area from the nearest adjoining area.
30. From the above discussion, it is evident and abundantly clear that a person who resides in the
area adjoining Actual Line of Control belongs to socially and educationally backward class under the
Act of 2004 and the Rules framed thereunder and is entitled to the benefit of reservation in
appointment to the government service. Ordinarily, a person residing in the area adjoining Actual
Line of Control would be entitled to be issued a certificate of category belonging to socially and
educationally backward class (ALC) but this right to claim the certificate is hedged by and subject to
meeting the requirements of Cause (ix) of Section 2(o) and Rule 21(3) of the Rules of 2004. The
proviso to Clause (3) of Rule 20 discussed elaborately herein above, exclude from the category of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 10
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
socially and educationally backward classes a person whose annual income exceeds the ceiling
prescribed under Clause (ix) providing further that such income ceiling shall not come in the way of
the applicant seeking ALC category certificate provided he establishes before the Competent
Authority that he has lived and completed his entire education in ALC area or where such schooling
is not available, in the adjoining area. This requirement is independent of the requirements
provided in Rule 21 (iii), which provides that for claiming benefit of ALC category, a person must
establish that he has resided in ALC area for a period not less than fifteen years from the date of
application and is residing in such area on the date of application. There is, however, an exception
carved out to the aforesaid provision, which we have already discussed herein above. The two
requirements are entirely different, one provided under the Act of legislature and the other under
subordinate legislation. Both operate in different directions and to claim exemption both provide for
establishing certain requirements.
31. Having held thus, we now proceed to consider the argument of learned counsel for the appellant
that the Deputy Commissioner, Jammu passed the impugned order of cancellation of ALC certificate
issued in favour of the appellant by entertaining the appeal beyond limitation provided under
Section 17 of the Act of 2004.
32. Chapter V of the Act of 2004 inter alia includes provision of appeal and revision provided
separately under Sections 17 and 18 thereof. There is no dispute with regard to the fact that any
person who is aggrieved by an order of Competent Authority passed under Section 16 is entitled to
file an appeal within a period of ninety days from the date of the order. However, under Section 18,
the Appellate Authority may, either suo moto or on an application made to it, call for the records of
the proceedings or orders made, by any Competent Authority for the purposes of satisfying itself to
the legality or propriety of such proceedings or orders and pass such orders in reference thereto as it
deems fit. There is, however, no period of limitation prescribed for exercising the power of revision
either suo moto or on an application made to it by any person.
33. At this juncture, we deem it appropriate to set out Sections 16, 17 and 18 of the Act of 2004
herein below:-
―16. Issuance of certificate.---- The Competent Authority shall, within fifteen days
from the date of the receipt of the application and for reasons to be recorded in
writing either accept the application or reject it. On acceptance of the application, the
authority shall immediately issue the requisite certificate to the applicant in the
prescribed form.
17. Appeals.--- (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Competent Authority
under section 16, may, at any time before the expiry of ninety days from the date of
the order, prefer an appeal to--
(i) Deputy Commissioner, if the order appealed against is passed by an officer below
the rank of Deputy Commissioner in his capacity as Competent Authority ; or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 11
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
(ii) Divisional Commissioner, if the order appealed against is passed by Deputy
Commissioner in his capacity as Competent Authority.
(2) The Appellate Authority shall, within 30 days from the date of receipt of the
appeal, pass such orders on it as it deems fit :
Provided that no order shall be made against any person without affording him a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.
18. Revision. The Appellate Authority may, suo moto or on an application made to it,
call for the records of the proceedings taken, or orders made, by any Competent
Authority for purposes of satisfying itself as to the legality or propriety of such
proceedings or orders and may pass such orders in reference thereto as it deems fit :
Provided that no order shall be made against any person without affording him a
reasonable opportunity of being heard.(cid:129) Sections 16, 17 and 18 are required to be
read along with Rules 23, 24 and 25 of the Rules of 2005, which for facility of
reference are also reproduced hereunder:-
―23. Issuance of Certificate. - The Competent Authority shall within 15 days from the
date of the receipt of the application for reasons to be recorded in writing either
accept the application or reject it. On the acceptance of the application, the authority
shall immediately issue the requisite certificate to the applicant in Form VIII, IX, X,
XI, XII, XIII, XIV, as the case may be.
24. Validity and Renewal. - The certificates issued to residents of Backward Areas or
Areas near the Line of Actual Control shall be valid for a period of five years at a time
and the certificates shall be renewable after following the procedure prescribed for
issuance of such certificate.
25. Appeals. - (1) Any person aggrieved by an order of rejection of the Competent
Authority under rule 23 may, prefer an appeal to the appellate authority under
section 17 of the Act.(cid:129)
34. From a conjoint reading of Sections 16, 17 and 18 of the Act of 2004 and the Rule 25, it clearly
transpires that intention of the legislature is to provide remedy of appeal only to a person who is
aggrieved by an order of rejection of his application for issuance of relevant category certificate. It is
because of this reason and clear intent, Rule 25 clearly lays down that an appeal to the Appellate
Authority under Section 17 of the Act of 2004 would lie at the instance of a person aggrieved by an
order of rejection of the Competent Authority under Rule 23. The remedy of a person other than a
person who is aggrieved by order of rejection of his application for grant of category certificate is to
invoke the revisional jurisdiction of the Appellate Authority under Section 18 of the Act of 2004.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 12
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
35. As we have held herein above, Section 18 of the Act of 2004 does not lay down any period of
limitation for invoking such power whether suo moto or on an application made to it. In the instant
case, respondent No.7 had no reason to be aware of the issuance of ALC certificate in favour of the
appellant till she was confronted with the name of the appellant figuring in the select/waitlist of
Accounts Assistants under ALC category. This led the respondent No.7 to enquire into the matter
and lodge her protest before the Appellate Authority i.e. Deputy Commissioner, Jammu, which she
did by filing an application styled as appeal/revision.
36. We need no emphasis when we say that it is not the nomenclature but the substance of the
application that matters and is relevant. If the power exercised by the Deputy Commissioner,
Jammu (Appellate Authority) is traceable to Section 18 of the Act of 2004, it cannot be said that the
order passed by the Deputy Commissioner is without jurisdiction for the reason that what was
invoked by the applicant was the appellate power and that too beyond the period of limitation
prescribed. We find no force in the arguments made by Mr. S.S.Ahmed on this issue.
37. Lastly, Mr. S.S.Ahmed argued that even if the Court for some reasons concurs with the view
taken by the Writ Court yet this Court must in the exercise of its equitable jurisdiction save the
selection and appointment of the appellant. He submits that it is not anybody's case that the
appellant has obtained the category certificate by fraud or mis- representation and as such, could be
blamed for any illegality or irregularity, if any, committed by the Competent Authority while issuing
or renewing the category certificate of the appellant. He relies upon several judgments of this Court
as also Hon'ble Supreme Court to contend that in such a situation, this Court in the exercise of
extraordinary equitable writ jurisdiction must save the selection and appointment of the appellant.
38. We have considered this aspect of the matter also in light of the judgments cited by Mr.
S.S.Ahmed. While we do not dispute the proposition of law that in appropriate cases Hon'ble the
Supreme Court exercising its plenary jurisdiction under Article 142 of the Constitution of India and
this Court in exercise of equitable jurisdiction vested under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
have refused to set aside selection/appointment made in irregular manner where it was found that
irregularity or procedural impropriety committed by the selection body was not attributable to any
act or omission on the part of the selectees/appointees.
39. In the instant case, as is evident from the affidavit submitted by Mr. Prabh Dayal Sharma
(Retired Tehsildar, Akhnoor), who had renewed the ALC category certificate in favour of the
appellant, the father of the appellant had obtained the renewal of the category certificate by mis-
representation and without disclosing that the annual income of the family exceeded the limit as
prescribed under the Act of 2004 and the rules framed thereunder. He has admitted that he granted
renewal of the certificate without insisting for this aspect due to heavy rush of the work.
40. Be that as it may, we cannot ignore the affidavit of the Competent Authority, which renewed the
category certificate of the appellant, indicating that the ALC certificate of the appellant was got
renewed by his father by not stating true facts.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 13
Abhishek Khajuria vs The State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 16 September, 2023
41. Be that as it may, in the instant case when the appellant filed SWP No.679/2018, the appellant
was undergoing training at National Zonal Accountsancy Training Institute, Jammu and was to be
posted in some Government department after conclusion of aforesaid training in June, 2018.
However, with the dismissal of the writ petition and upholding of the order of the Deputy
Commissioner cancelling his ALC category certificate by the Writ Court, the appellant was not
posted by the Finance Department in any of the department. He was not even released the salary as
was claimed by him through the medium of CM No.4741/2022. That apart, respondent No.7, who
holds a valid ALC category certificate issued by the Competent Authority, cannot be deprived of her
right to appointment only on the ground that the appellant has been considered and appointed over
and above her on the basis of a certificate, which the Deputy Commissioner, Writ Court and we have
found issued in violation of and contrary to the provisions of the Act of 2004 and the rules framed
thereunder.
42. We also take note of the fact that because of the pendency of this litigation and the challenge
mounted by respondent No.7 to the category certificate immediately after selection of the appellant
before the Deputy Commissioner, equity cannot be said to have tilted in fravour of the appellant.
The judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for the appellant are decided on their own facts
and do not have universal application in the matter of invoking and applying equitable jurisdiction.
42. For the foregoing reasons, we find no merit in this appeal and the same is, accordingly,
dismissed.
(Puneet Gupta) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
JAMMU
16.09.2023
Vinod,PS
Whether the order is speaking : Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101981259/ 14
