Abrar Amin Butt vs State (Now Union Territory) Of J&K And ... on 17 August, 2023
Abrar Amin Butt vs State (Now Union Territory) Of J&K And ...
on 17 August, 2023
Bench: Tashi Rabstan, Rahul Bharti
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR
AT JAMMU
RP No.9/2019
Reserved on: 11.08.2023
Pronounced on:17.08.2023.
Abrar Amin Butt
...Petitioner(s)
Through:- Mr. Sudershan Sharma, Advocate with
Mr. Achal Sharma, Advocate.
Versus
State (now Union Territory) of J&K and Others
...Respondent(s)
Through:- Mr. Vishal Bharti, Dy. AG with
Mr. Shubham Kumar Kaith, Advocate.
Coram:- HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE TASHI RABSTAN, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAHUL BHARTI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Tashi Rabstan, J:-
01. By medium of the instant review petition, the review petitioner as being the
appellant in LPASW No.189/2016 is seeking review of judgment passed on
31.12.2018 in LPASW No. 189/2016, on the grounds detailed out as under;
"(i) That the judgment dated 31.12.2018 is required to be reviewed on the ground that
prior to the order dated 10.06.2010 passed by respondent no.1 there were circulars
issued by Education Department whereby the life of select panel was kept for one
year and accordingly immediately after termination of the respondent No.6, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85097140/ 1
Abrar Amin Butt vs State (Now Union Territory) Of J&K And ... on 17 August, 2023
candidature of the petitioner herein was recommended by respondents No.3 and 4
well within time i.e. in the month of February, 2010 for approval of respondent No.2
which was accorded on 14.06.2010, but due to the interim order passed by Hon'ble
Court in SWP No. 1150/2010, the engagement order could not be issued in favour of
the review petitioner herein and it was only when the aforesaid writ petition was
decided on 31.10.2011 and enquiry was conducted, the engagement order was issued
on 03.02.2012 in favour of the review petitioner herein by respondent No.4. The
observation of this Hon'ble Court in its judgment dated 31.12.2018 that the life of
panel had already expired is contrary to record and that in the facts of the case the
delay in issuing the engagement order was only on account of interim orders passed
by this Hon'ble court in the aforesaid writ petition.
ii) That the order/judgment is required to be reviewed on the ground that if the
aforesaid post of RET is re-advertised, then in any case, the respondent No.5 who has
been permitted by the Hon'ble Singe Judge to be allowed to participate in the
selection process alongwith the petitioner herein cannot be in a position to apply as
he has already crossed his upper age limit. The respondent No.6 who did not press
the aforesaid petitions in view of his appointment as Asstt. Engineer, as such, was not
allowed by the Hon'ble Single Bench to participate in the fresh selection process, the
net result of re-advertising the aforesaid post will definitely be a futile exercise
because alongwith the petitioner herein there will be many more new candidates
available for applying except the private respondent.
iii) That the order/judgment dated 31.12.2018 is further sought to be reviewed on the
ground that the order/judgment dated 06.12.2016 is highly prejudicial to the rights of
the petitioner herein who was also pursuing his higher studies as an engineering
student and left the same in between and joined as RET on 03.02.2012 and remained
serving as such upto April, 2012 when the petitioner herein was not allowed to mark
his attendance in view of the interim directions passed in SWP No. 502/2012.
iv) That the order/judgment is further sought to be reviewed on the ground that the
Circular dated 01.11.2009 issued by Director School Education, Kashmir, which
prescribes one year life for the panel was kept in abeyance by this Hon'ble Court vide
order dated 07.04.2010 i.e. after the period when the name of the petitioner herein
was recommended for his engagement as RET, so any order/circular issued in this
regard can have only prospective effect but not retrospective effect, but in the instant
case, when the name of the petitioner herein was recommended for his engagement
as RET there was no circular other than circular dated 01.11.2009 which prescribes
the life of panel for one year, but this Hon'ble Court without considering this aspect
of the matter, dismissed the appeal by observing that the petitioner herein was
engaged during the currency of circular dated 10.06.2010 when the fact remains that
the petitioner herein was engaged must before issuance of circular dated 10.06.2010
which is not applicable in the case of petitioner herein.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85097140/ 2
Abrar Amin Butt vs State (Now Union Territory) Of J&K And ... on 17 August, 2023
v) That the order/judgment dated 31.12.2018 is further sought to be reviewed on the
ground that the petitioner herein's engagement is under a Scheme and is not holding
a civil post and under the Scheme the concerned Authorities are well within their
rights to formulate the guidelines for engagement of RETs and likewise circulars for
implementation of Scheme and accordingly, the respondents decided that in case of
resignation or termination of an RET within a period of one year from the approval of
respondent No.2, the next candidate in the panel can be considered within a period of
one year and subsequently vide order dated 10.06.2010 issued by respondent No.1,
the period has now been fixed as six months, so in any case, the petitioner's case falls
within the period when the validity of panel was kept as one year, though the fact
remains that the recommendation of respondent Nos. 3 and 4 was prior to six
months.
vi) That the order/judgment dated 31.12.2018 is further sought to be reviewed on the
ground that alongwith the petitioner herein, the cases of similarly situated candidates
were also recommended and approved and accordingly engaged on the basis of
Circular dated 01.11.2009 as is evident from panel prepared by ZEO Nagseni,
Kishtwar, in which one Sandeep Singh figuring at Serial No.1 was terminated and
candidate figuring at S. No. 2 was proposed for selection as RET and ultimately
appointed as RET in UPS Arzi Village Kawartanji. It is pertinent to mention here that
the approval in both the cases of petitioner herein and the candidate figuring at S.
No.2 in the aforesaid panel namely Rittu Sharma was granted by Director School
Education on the same date i.e. vide order dated 14.06.2010."
02. Heard learned counsel for the petitioner, perused the pleadings on record and considered the
matter.
03. What requires to be stated, at the outset, is that in the instant review petition, the review
petitioner has touched the merits of the case, which in a review petition, is unwarranted as per well
settled position of law. The grounds urged in the review petition have already been considered and
decided with findings returned thereon by the Court. If the review petitioner was aggrieved of the
said findings, he ought to have availed the remedy under law for challenging the judgment in
reference in appropriate Court. In fact, the instant review petition on grounds enumerated therein
appears to be an appeal in disguise. The grounds taken by the review petitioner are either that the
findings recorded by the Court are not legally tenable, or that the same are perverse, or that the
same are unacceptable. A judgment may be wrong, erroneous, incorrect, legally untenable, etc. but
nevertheless remains a valid judgment in the eyes of law against which the only course available for
the aggrieved party is to go in appeal against the said judgment. Such grounds do not constitute
errors of fact or of law on the face of the record as would call for a review.
04. A review cannot also be used as a tool for changing the opinion/ view of the Court
giving/rendering the judgment/order. In a review petition, it is only an error which is apparent on
the face of the record that can be considered and gone into by the Court. It is not available to the
Court, dealing with review petition, to re-appreciate the facts and circumstances de-novo and fetch a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85097140/ 3
Abrar Amin Butt vs State (Now Union Territory) Of J&K And ... on 17 August, 2023
different conclusion even if that is possible. Conclusion arrived at on appreciation of facts and
circumstances of a given case and after hearing the rival parties, cannot be assailed in a review
petition unless it is shown that there is an error apparent on the face of the record.
05. So far as the grievance of the review petitioner on merits of the case is concerned, virtually the
review petitioner seeks the same relief which he had sought at the time of arguing the main matter
and had been negated.
06. Once such a prayer has been refused, no review petition would lie which would mean rehearing
of the original matter. It is well settled law that the power of review cannot be confused with
appellate power which enables a superior Court to correct all errors committed by a subordinate
Court. It is not rehearing of an original matter. A repetition of old and overruled argument is not
enough to reopen concluded adjudications. The power of review has to be exercised with extreme
care, caution and circumspection, that too, only in exceptional cases.
06. Law on the subject is no more res integra. The Apex Court of the country, in case titled 'Kamlesh
Verma v. Mayawati & Ors.' reported in '(2013) 8 Supreme Court Cases 320', while dealing with a
similar issue, at paragraph Nos. 13, 15 to 19, laid down as under:
"13. Review of the earlier order cannot be done unless the court is satisfied that
material error, manifest on the face of the order, undermines its soundness or results
in miscarriage of justice. This Court, in Col. Avtar Singh Sekhon v. Union of India &
Ors. [1980 (Supp) SCC 562], held as under:
"12. A review is not a routine procedure. Here we resolved to hear Shri Kapil at length
to remove any feeling that the party has been hurt without being heard. But we
cannot review our earlier order unless satisfied that material error, manifest on the
face of the order, undermines its soundness or results in miscarriage of justice. In
Sow Chandra Kante v. Sheikh Habib this Court observed:
"1. .... A review of a judgment is a serious step and reluctant resort to it is proper only
where a glaring omission or patent mistake or like grave error has crept in earlier by
judicial fallibility.... The present stage is not a virgin ground but review of an earlier
order which has the normal feature of finality."
15. An error which is not self-evident and has to be detected by a process of reasoning can hardly be
said to be an error apparent on the face of the record justifying the Court to exercise its power of
review. A review is by no means an appeal in disguise whereby an erroneous decision is re-heard
and corrected, but lies only for patent error. This Court, in Parsion Devi & Ors. v. Sumitri Devi &
Ors., [JT 1997 (8) SC 480: (1997) 8 SCC 715], held as under:
"7. It is well settled that review proceedings have to be strictly confined to the ambit
and scope of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. In Thungabhadra Industries Ltd. v. Govt. of A.P.
this Court opined:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85097140/ 4
Abrar Amin Butt vs State (Now Union Territory) Of J&K And ... on 17 August, 2023
"11. What, however, we are now concerned with is whether the statement in the order
of September 1959 that the case did not involve any substantial question of law is an
'error apparent on the face of the record'. The fact that on the earlier occasion the
Court held on an identical state of facts that a substantial question of law arose would
not per se be conclusive, for the earlier order itself might be erroneous. Similarly,
even if the statement was wrong, it would not follow that it was an 'error apparent on
the face of the record', for there is a distinction which is real, though it might not
always be capable of exposition, between a mere erroneous decision and a decision
which could be characterized as vitiated by 'error apparent'. A review is by no means
an appeal in disguise whereby an erroneous decision is reheard and corrected, but
lies only for patent error.
8. Again, in Meera Bhanja v. Nirmala Kumari Choudhury while quoting with
approval a passage from Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma v. Aribam Pishak Sharma this
Court once again held that review proceedings are not by way of an appeal and have
to be strictly confined to the scope and ambit of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC.
9. Under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC a judgment may be open to review inter alia if there is
a mistake or an error apparent on the face of the record. An error which is not
self-evident and has to be detected by a process of reasoning, can hardly be said to be
an error apparent on the face of the record justifying the court to exercise its power of
review under Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. In exercise of the jurisdiction under Order 47
Rule 1 CPC it is not permissible for an erroneous decision to be 'reheard and
corrected'. A review petition, it must be remembered has a limited purpose and
cannot be allowed to be 'an appeal in disguise."
16. Error contemplated under the rule must be such which is apparent on the face of the record and
not an error which has to be fished out and searched. It must be an error of inadvertence. The power
of review can be exercised for correction of a mistake but not to substitute a view. The mere
possibility of two views on the subject is not a ground for review. This Court, in Lily Thomas & Ors.
v. Union of India & Ors., [(2000) 6 SCC 224], held as under:
"54. Article 137 empowers this Court to review its judgments subject to the provisions
of any law made by Parliament or any rules made under Article 145 of the
Constitution. The Supreme Court Rules made in exercise of the powers under Article
145 of the Constitution prescribe that in civil cases, review lies on any of the grounds
specified in Order 47 Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure which provides:
1. Application for review of judgment. -
(1) Any person considering himself aggrieved-
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal
has been preferred,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85097140/ 5
Abrar Amin Butt vs State (Now Union Territory) Of J&K And ... on 17 August, 2023
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed, or
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, and who, from the
discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due
diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time
when the decree was passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or error
apparent on the face of the record, or for any other sufficient reason, desires to obtain
a review of the decree passed or order made against him, may apply for a review of
judgment to the court which passed the decree or made the order.' Under Order 40
Rule 1 of the Supreme Court Rules no review lies except on the ground of error
apparent on the face of the record in criminal cases. Order XL Rule 5 of the Supreme
Court Rules provides that after an application for review has been disposed of no
further application shall be entertained in the same matter.
-----------------
56. It follows, therefore, that the power of review can be exercised for correction of a mistake but not
to substitute a view. Such powers can be exercised within the limits of the statute dealing with the
exercise of power. The review cannot be treated like an appeal in disguise. The mere possibility of
two views on the subject is not a ground for review. Once a review petition is dismissed no further
petition of review can be entertained. The rule of law of following the practice of the binding nature
of the larger Benches and not taking different views by the Benches of coordinated jurisdiction of
equal strength has to be followed and practised. However, this Court in exercise of its powers under
Article 136 or Article 32 of the Constitution and upon satisfaction that the earlier judgments have
resulted in deprivation of fundamental rights of a citizen or rights created under any other statute,
can take a different view notwithstanding the earlier judgment.
58. Otherwise also no ground as envisaged under Order XL of the Supreme Court Rules read with
Order 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure has been pleaded in the review petition or canvassed before
us using the arguments for the purposes of reviewing the judgment in Sarla Mudgal case, [JT 1995
(4) SC 331] It is not the case of the petitioners that they have discovered any new and important
matter which after the exercise of due diligence was not within their knowledge or could not be
brought to the notice of the Court at the time of passing of the judgment. All pleas raised before us
were in fact addressed for and on behalf of the petitioners before the Bench which, after considering
those pleas, passed the judgment in Sarla Mudgal case. We have also not found any mistake or error
apparent on the face of the record requiring a review. Error contemplated under the rule must be
such which is apparent on the face of the record and not an error which has to be fished out and
searched. It must be an error of inadvertence. No such error has been pointed out by the learned
counsel appearing for the parties seeking review of the judgment. The only arguments advanced
were that the judgment interpreting Section 494 amounted to violation of some of the fundamental
rights. No other sufficient cause has been shown for reviewing the judgment. The words 'any other
sufficient reason appearing in Order 47 Rule 1 CPC' must mean 'a reason sufficient on grounds at
least analogous to those specified in the rule' as was held in Chhajju Ram v. Neki, [AIR 1922 PC 112]
and approved by this Court in Moran Mar Basselios Catholicos v. Most Rev. Mar Poulose
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85097140/ 6
Abrar Amin Butt vs State (Now Union Territory) Of J&K And ... on 17 August, 2023
Athanasius, [AIR 1954 SC 526] Error apparent on the face of the proceedings is an error which is
based on clear ignorance or disregard of the provisions of law. In T.C. Basappa v. T. Nagappa, [AIR
1954 SC 440] this Court held that such error is an error which is a patent error and not a mere
wrong decision. In Hari Vishnu Kamath v. Ahmad Ishaque [AIR 1955 SC 233], it was held:
"23. .... It is essential that it should be something more than a mere error; it must be
one which must be manifest on the face of the record. The real difficulty with
reference to this matter, however, is not so much in the statement of the principle as
in its application to the facts of a particular case.
When does an error cease to be mere error, and become an error apparent on the face
of the record? Learned counsel on either side were unable to suggest any clear-cut
rule by which the boundary between the two classes of errors could be demarcated.
Mr. Pathak for the first respondent contended on the strength of certain observations
of Chagla, C.J. in - 'Batuk K. Vyas v. Surat Borough Municipality, [AIR 1953 Bom
133′] that no error could be said to be apparent on the face of the record if it was not
self-evident and if it required an examination or argument to establish it. This test
might afford a satisfactory basis for decision in the majority of cases. But there must
be cases in which even this test might break down, because judicial opinions also
differ, and an error that might be considered by one Judge as self- evident might not
be so considered by another. The fact is that what is an error apparent on the face of
the record cannot be defined precisely or exhaustively, there being an element of
indefiniteness inherent in its very nature, and it must be left to be determined
judicially on the facts of each case.' Therefore, it can safely be held that the
petitioners have not made out any case within the meaning of Article 137 read with
Order XL of the Supreme Court Rules and Order 47 Rule 1 CPC for reviewing the
judgment in Sarla Mudgal case. The petition is misconceived and bereft of any
substance."
17. In a review petition, it is not open to the Court to re-appreciate the evidence and reach a different
conclusion, even if that is possible. Conclusion arrived at on appreciation of evidence cannot be
assailed in a review petition unless it is shown that there is an error apparent on the face of the
record or for some reason akin thereto. This Court, in Kerala State Electricity Board v. Hitech
Electrothermics & Hydropower Ltd. & Ors., [JT 2005 (7) SC 485], held as under:
"10. .........In a review petition it is not open to this Court to re- appreciate the
evidence and reach a different conclusion, even if that is possible. Learned counsel
for the Board at best sought to impress us that the correspondence exchanged
between the parties did not support the conclusion reached by this Court. We are
afraid such a submission cannot be permitted to be advanced in a review petition.
The appreciation of evidence on record is fully within the domain of the appellate
court. If on appreciation of the evidence produced, the court records a finding of fact
and reaches a conclusion, that conclusion cannot be assailed in a review petition
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85097140/ 7
Abrar Amin Butt vs State (Now Union Territory) Of J&K And ... on 17 August, 2023
unless it is shown that there is an error apparent on the face of the record or for some
reason akin thereto. It has not been contended before us that there is any error
apparent on the face of the record. To permit the review petitioner to argue on a
question of appreciation of evidence would amount to converting a review petition
into an appeal in disguise."
18. Review is not re-hearing of an original matter. The power of review cannot be confused with
appellate power which enables a superior court to correct all errors committed by a subordinate
court. A repetition of old and overruled argument is not enough to re-open concluded adjudications.
This Court, in Jain Studios Ltd. v. Shin Satellite Public Co. Ltd., [JT 2006 (7) SC 40: (2006) 5 SCC
501], held as under:
"11. So far as the grievance of the applicant on merits is concerned, the learned
counsel for the opponent is right in submitting that virtually the applicant seeks the
same relief which had been sought at the time of arguing the main matter and had
been negatived. Once such a prayer had been refused, no review petition would lie
which would convert rehearing of the original matter. It is settled law that the power
of review cannot be confused with appellate power which enables a superior court to
correct all errors committed by a subordinate court. It is not rehearing of an original
matter. A repetition of old and overruled argument is not enough to reopen
concluded adjudications. The power of review can be exercised with extreme care,
caution and circumspection and only in exceptional cases.
12. When a prayer to appoint an arbitrator by the applicant herein had been made at
the time when the arbitration petition was heard and was rejected, the same relief
cannot be sought by an indirect method by filing a review petition. Such petition, in
my opinion, is in the nature of 'second innings' which is impermissible and
unwarranted and cannot be granted."
19. Review proceedings are not by way of an appeal and have to be strictly confined to the scope and
ambit of Order XLVII Rule 1 of CPC. In review jurisdiction, mere disagreement with the view of the
judgment cannot be the ground for invoking the same. As long as the point is already dealt with and
answered, the parties are not entitled to challenge the impugned judgment in the guise that an
alternative view is possible under the review jurisdiction."
07. A cue can, in this behalf, be also had from the decision rendered by a Division Bench of this
Court in the case of 'State of JK & Ors. vs. Govt. Handloom Silk Weaving Factory & Ors.', reported in
'2016 (2) JKJ 795(HC)', of which, wherein, it has been held as follows:
"13. At the very outset it needs to be kept in mind that review jurisdiction of the Court
is limited. It is settled law that it is only an error apparent on the face of the record
which can be considered and one into by the Court. In the present review petition,
the grounds of facts of law urged in review petitions, as narrated above, including the
submissions made at the Bar by the learned Counsels appearing in these review
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85097140/ 8
Abrar Amin Butt vs State (Now Union Territory) Of J&K And ... on 17 August, 2023
Petitions, which in content and substance were the same as taken in the respective
review petitions, cannot in any manner be considered as errors on the face of record.
Instead the grounds sought to be raised and urged may constitute grounds of appeal
alone. In fact, the instant review petitions on grounds enumerated herein appear to
be disguised Second Appeals. As noticed above, the grounds taken by the review
petitioners are either that the findings recorded by the Court are not legally tenable,
or that the same are perverse, or that the same are unacceptable. A judgment may be
wrong, erroneous incorrect, perverse, legally untenable, etc. etc., the only course
available for the aggrieved party is to go in appeal. Such grounds do not constitute
errors of fact or of law on the face of the record as would call for a review."
08. From a bare perusal of the law laid down above, it is manifestly clear that the scope of review is
very limited. The power of review is exercised when some mistake or error, apparent on the face of
the record, is found. A mistake or an error, apparent on the face of the record, means a mistake or
an error which is, prima facie, visible and does not require any detailed examination. Such an error
must strike one on mere looking at the record and should not require any long-drawn process of
reasoning on the points where there may, conceivably, be two opinions. In the present case, the
review petitioner has not been able to point out any error, apparent on the face of the record, but, on
the contrary, under the guise of the instant review petition, the review petitioner is challenging the
order passed by this Court, before this very court.
09. In the above background coupled with the law discussed hereinabove, we do not find any error,
apparent on the face of the record in the order dated 31.12.2018, passed by this Court in LPASW
bearing No. 189/2016, as would warrant its recall on review, therefore, the review petition being
without merit shall stand dismissed.
(Rahul Bharti) (Tashi Rabstan)
Judge Judge
Jammu
17.08.2023
Raj Kumar
Whether the order is speaking? Yes
Whether the order is reportable? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/85097140/ 9
