Aditya Murti vs Central Bureau Of Investigation/Anti ... on 1 May, 2025
Aditya Murti vs Central Bureau Of Investigation/Anti ... on 1 May,
2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:25135
A.F.R.
Court No. - 15
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 3726 of 2025
Applicant :- Aditya Murti
Opposite Party :- Central Bureau Of Investigation/Anti Corruption Bureau Lko.
Counsel for Applicant :- Purnendu Chakravarty,Ambrish Singh Yadav,Amit Jaiswal Ojus Law,Pranjal Jain
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Anurag Kumar Singh
Hon'ble Subhash Vidyarthi J.
1. Heard Sri Purnendu Chakravarty, the learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Anurag Kumar
Singh, learned counsel for the C.B.I.
2. By means of the instant application filed under Section 528 of Bhartiya Nagrik Suraksha Sanhita
(which will hereinafter be referred to as 'BNSS'), the applicant has challenged the validity of an
order dated 24.04.2025 passed by the Special Judge, CBI-5, Lucknow in Case No. 07/2012, arising
out of F.I.R. No. RC0062010A0015, under Section 120-B I.P.C. read with Sections 420, 468, 471
and Section 13(1) (d)/13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, P.S. CBI/ACB, District Lucknow
and has sought permission to travel abroad to USA and France from 03.05.2025 to 22.05.2025 to
attend the wedding function of son of the applicant's cousin and to enjoy a family pleasure trip.
3. The applicant had filed an application dated 03.02.2025 before the trial Court seeking permission
to go abroad for the aforesaid period stating that he is a Consultant in Sri Ram Murti Smarak
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194924861/ 1
Aditya Murti vs Central Bureau Of Investigation/Anti ... on 1 May, 2025
Institute of Medical Sciences run by SRMS Trust, which is a public charitable Trust established in
the year 1990. Son of the applicant's cousin (grand-son of sister of the applicant's father) is an
American citizen residing at San Jose, USA, and he has invited the applicant to attend his wedding
function at San Diego, California, USA.
4. As per the invitation sent to the applicant through e-mail, the wedding celebrations are scheduled
between 03.05.2025 to 13.05.2025 at San Diego, California, USA. After the wedding event, the
applicant and his family members have planned a trip to Paris and Nice (France) before returning to
India. The travel tickets of the applicant and his wife have already been purchased.
5. The F.I.R. giving rise to the matter was lodged in the year 2010. After investigation, a
charge-sheet was submitted for offences under Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C. and
Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act and the substantive
offence under Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, on
01.07.2011. The trial Court framed charges against the applicant for the offences under Section
120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C. and Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1) (d) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act and no charge has been framed against the applicant for the substantive offence
under Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act. Statements of
36 prosecution witnesses have already been recorded and after recording of the statements under
Section 313 Cr.P.C., the matter is fixed for defence evidence. The trial Court has recorded the
submission made on behalf of the applicant that the applicant has travelled abroad on numerous
earlier occasions with permission of the trial Court and he has not misused the liberty on any
occasion and he has submitted that in his absence he will be represented by his counsel and the trial
will not be delayed.
6. The trial Court has also recorded that the present case is one of the oldest matters and it is
included amongst the cases regarding which an action plan has been made by the High Court for
early disposal. Progress of the case is being monitored by the High Court as well as by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court. In these circumstances, in case the applicant is granted permission to travel abroad
it might cause unwarranted delay in the disposal of the matter. The trial court rejected the
application for permission to travel for the aforesaid reasons.
7. Sri. Purnendu Chakravarty, the learned Counsel for the applicant has submitted that applicant's
father is a trustee of S.R.M. Medical College and the applicant is merely a Consultant in the Medical
College run by that Trust. The applicant's father is not traveling abroad. There is no possibility of the
applicant not coming back to face the trial. He further submitted that the trial is continuing for the
past about one and half decades and the absence of the applicant for merely 22 days will not make a
significant difference.
8. The learned Counsel for the applicant has submitted that the applicant has a Fundamental Right
to travel abroad and the denial of this Fundamental Right is unsustainable in law. In support of this
submission he has relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Maneka
Gandhi Vs. Union of India and another: (1978) 1 SCC 248.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194924861/ 2
Aditya Murti vs Central Bureau Of Investigation/Anti ... on 1 May, 2025
9. Sri. Chakravarty has submitted that the applicant had sought permission to travel abroad on
numerous earlier occasions for similar purposes, like family pleasure trips, and the permission was
always granted. The applicant has not misused the liberty granted by the trial court on any occasion
and he has always appeared to face the trial after coming back to India after his travel abroad. He
has relied upon the judgment in the case of Parvez Noordin Lokhandwalla Vs State of Maharashtra
and another: (2020) 10 SCC 77, in which the Hon'ble Supreme Court has set aside the High Court's
order refusing permission to the appellant for travelling abroad when he had already travelled
abroad on numerous earlier occasions and had not misused the liberty on any occasion.
10. Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India: (1978) 1 SCC 248, was decided by a Constitution Bench of
seven Hon'ble Judges of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Briefly stated, facts of the case were that the
petitioner held a passport issued to her on 01.06.1976. On 04.07.1977 she received a letter from the
Regional Passport Officer, Delhi intimating her that it had been decided by the Government of India
to impound her passport under Section 10(3)(c) of the Passports Act, 1967 in public interest and
requiring her to surrender the passport within seven days from the date of receipt of the letter. The
petitioner immediately addressed a letter to the Regional Passport Officer requesting him to furnish
a copy of the statement of reasons for making the order as provided in Section 10(5) to which a reply
was sent by the Government of India, Ministry of External Affairs on 06.07.1977 stating inter alia
that the Government had decided "in the interest of the general public" not to furnish her a copy of
the statement of reasons for the making of the order. The petitioner thereupon filed a Writ Petition
before the Hon'ble Supreme Court challenging the action of the Government in impounding her
passport and declining to give reasons for doing so. The principal challenge set out in the petition
against the legality of the action of the Government was based mainly on the ground that Section
10(3)(c), insofar as it empowers the Passport Authority to impound a passport "in the interests of
the general public" is violative of the equality clause contained in Article 14 of the Constitution, since
the condition denoted by these words is vague and undefined and the power conferred by this
provision is, therefore, excessive and suffers from the vice of "over-breadth". The petition also
contained a challenge that an order under Section 10(3)(c) impounding a passport could not be
made by the Passport Authority without giving an opportunity to the holder of the passport to be
heard in defence. On 20.07.1977 an interim order was made directing that the passport of the
petitioner should continue to remain deposited with the Registrar of the Court pending the hearing
and final disposal of the petition.
Hon'ble P.N. Bhagwati J, speaking for himself and N. L. Untwalia and S. Murtaza Fazal Ali J held
that: -
"19....It would thus be seen that even if a right is not specifically named in Article
19(1), it may still be a fundamental right covered by some clause of that article, if it is
an integral part of a named fundamental right or partakes of the same basic nature
and character as that fundamental right. It is not enough that a right claimed by the
petitioner flows or emanates from a named fundamental right or that its existence is
necessary in order to make the exercise of the named fundamental right meaningful
and effective. Every activity which facilitates the exercise of a named fundamental
right is not necessarily comprehended in that fundamental right nor can it be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194924861/ 3
Aditya Murti vs Central Bureau Of Investigation/Anti ... on 1 May, 2025
regarded as such merely because it may not be possible otherwise to effectively
exercise that fundamental right. The contrary construction would lead to
incongruous results and the entire scheme of Article 19(1) which confers different
rights and sanctions different restrictions according to different standards depending
upon the nature of the right will be upset. What is necessary to be seen is, and that is
the test which must be applied, whether the right claimed by the petitioner is an
integral part of a named fundamental right or partakes of the same basic nature and
character as the named fundamental right so that the exercise of such right is in
reality and substance nothing but an instance of the exercise of the named
fundamental right. If this be the correct test, as we apprehend it is, the right to go
abroad cannot in all circumstances be regarded as included in freedom of speech and
expression. Mr Justice Douglas said in Kent v. Dulles that "Freedom of movement
across frontiers in either direction, and inside frontiers as well, was a part of our
heritage. Travel abroad, like travel within the country, may be necessary for
livelihood. It may be as close to the heart of the individual as the choice of what he
eats, or wears, or reads. Freedom of movement is basic in our scheme of values." And
what the learned Judge said in regard to freedom of movement in his country holds
good in our country as well. Freedom of movement has been a part of our ancient
tradition which always upheld the dignity of man and saw in him the embodiment of
the Divine. The Vedic seers knew no limitations either in the locomotion of the
human body or in the flight of the soul to higher planes of consciousness. Even in the
post-Upanishadic period, followed by the Buddistic era and the early centuries after
Christ, the people of this country went to foreign lands in pursuit of trade and
business or in search of knowledge or with a view to shedding on others the light of
knowledge imparted to them by their ancient sages and seers. India expanded outside
her borders : her ships crossed the ocean and the fine superfluity of her wealth
brimmed over to the east as well as to the west. Her cultural messengers and envoys
spread her arts and epics in South-East Asia and her religions conquered China and
Japan and other far Eastern countries and spread westward as far as Palestine and
Alexandria. Even at the end of the last and the beginning of the present century, our
people sailed across the seas to settle down in the African countries. Freedom of
movement at home and abroad is a part of our heritage and, as already pointed out, it
is a highly cherished right essential to the growth and development of the human
personality and its importance cannot be over-emphasised. But it cannot be said to
be part of the right of free speech and expression. It is not of the same basic nature
and character as freedom of speech and expression. When a person goes abroad, he
may do so for a variety of reasons and it may not necessarily and always be for
exercise of freedom of speech and expression. Every travel abroad is not an exercise
of right of free speech and expression and it would not be correct to say that
whenever there is a restriction on the right to go abroad, ex necessitae it involves
violation of freedom of speech and expression. It is no doubt true that going abroad
may be necessary in a given case for exercise of freedom-of speech and expression,
but that does not make it an integral part of the right of free speech and expression.
Every activity that may be necessary for exercise of freedom of speech and expression
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194924861/ 4
Aditya Murti vs Central Bureau Of Investigation/Anti ... on 1 May, 2025
or that may facilitate such exercise or make it meaningful and effective cannot be
elevated to the status of a fundamental right as if it were part of the fundamental
right of free speech and expression. Otherwise, practically every activity would
become part of some fundamental right or the other and the object of making certain
rights only as fundamental rights with different permissible restrictions would be
frustrated.
* * *
34. The right to go abroad cannot, therefore, be regarded as included in freedom of
speech and expression guaranteed under Article 19(1)(a) on the theory of peripheral
or concomitant right. This theory has been firmly rejected in the All-India Bank
Employees Association case and we cannot countenance any attempt to revive it, as
that would completely upset the scheme of Article 19(1) and to quote the words of
Rajagopal Ayyanger, J., speaking on behalf of the Court in All-India Bank Employees
Association case "by a series of ever-expanding concentric circles in the shape of
rights concomitant to concomitant rights and so on, lead to an almost grotesque
result". So also, for the same reasons, the right to go abroad cannot be treated as part
of the right to carry on trade, business, profession or calling guaranteed under Article
19(1)(g). The right to go abroad is clearly not a guaranteed right under any clause of
Article 19(1) and Section 10(3)(c) which authorises imposition of restrictions on the
right to go abroad by impounding of passport cannot be held to be void as offending
Article 19(1)(a) or (g), as its direct and inevitable impact is on the right to go abroad
and not on the right of free speech and expression or the right to carry on trade,
business, profession or calling."
(Emphasis added) Hon'ble Y. V. Chandrachud J and V. R. Krishna Iyer J concurred with the
aforesaid view expressed by Bhagwati J. Thus, Maneka Gandhi (Supra) does not hold that the right
to travel abroad is a Fundamental Right.
11. Interestingly, in Maneka Gandhi (Supra), a statement was made on behalf of the Government
that the Government was agreeable to considering any representation that may be made by the
petitioner in respect of the impounding of her passport and giving her an opportunity in the matter.
The opportunity will be given within two weeks of the receipt of the representation. In the event of
the decision of impounding the passport having confirmed, the duration of the impounding will not
exceed a period of six months from the date of the decision that may be taken on the petitioner's
representation. Having regard to the aforesaid statement, the Supreme Court held that it was
unnecessary to interfere with the impugned order and, accordingly, the Writ Petition was disposed
off without passing any formal order, but it was ordered that the passport will remain in the custody
of the Registrar of the Supreme Court until further orders.
12. Therefore, Maneka Gandhi (Supra) does not lay down that a person charged with commission of
offences of criminal conspiracy for cheating and misconduct by a public servant, and who has been
enlarged on bail, has a Fundamental Right to travel abroad for attending the wedding of a relative in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194924861/ 5
Aditya Murti vs Central Bureau Of Investigation/Anti ... on 1 May, 2025
one country and to enjoy a pleasure trip in another country.
13. Parvez Noordin Lokhandwalla (Supra) case had its genesis in a private complaint which was filed
alleging that the appellant had fabricated a power of attorney by forging the signature of his brother.
The Magistrate passed an order directing an investigation under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. Thereafter a
first information report was registered against the appellant for the offences punishable under
Sections 420, 467, 468, 469, 470, 471 and 474 read with Section 34 I.P.C. The appellant was an
Indian citizen and held an Indian passport. He had been residing in the USA since 1985 and he held
a Green Card enabling him to reside in the USA. The appellant arrived in India on 10.01.2020. He
was arrested on 21.02.2020 in pursuance of a lookout notice issued on the basis of the FIR. The
High Court had granted bail to the appellant subject to certain conditions, including the condition
that he would surrender his passport and/or Green Card with the investigating agency and he would
not leave jurisdiction of Thane Police Commissionerate without prior permission of the trial court.
The applicant sought permission to travel to the USA for revalidation of his Green Card. The High
Court rejected the permission. The Hon'ble Supreme Court allowed the appeal by holding that: -
"22. The private complaint which is the genesis of the present proceedings was
instituted in January 2014. The gravamen of the allegation is that the appellant has
forged and fabricated the power of attorney of 19-12-2011 of his brother Shalin. Mr
Jha submits that, as a matter of fact, the power of attorney has not been used at any
point; his brother was present in India at the time when conveyance was entered
into; and that his brother has never raised any objection. However, we are not
inclined to go into these factual aspects at the present stage. It would suffice to note
that the co-accused was granted bail by the Sessions Judge, Thane on 16-4-2018. We
are called upon to decide only whether the appellant should be permitted to travel to
the US for eight weeks. In evaluating this issue, we must have regard to the nature of
the allegations, the conduct of the appellant and above all, the need to ensure that he
does not pose a risk of evading the prosecution. The details which have been
furnished to the Court by the appellant, indicate that he has regularly travelled
between the US and India on as many as sixteen occasions between 2015 and 2020.
He has maintained a close contact with India. The view of the High Court that he has
no contact with India is contrary to the material on record. The lodging of an FIR
should not in the facts of the present case be a bar on the travel of the appellant to the
US for eight weeks to attend to the business of revalidating his Green Card."
(Emphasis added)
14. Thus the Hon'ble Supreme Court had granted permission to Parvez Noordin Lokhandwalla after
taking into consideration that the F.I.R. against him had been lodged on the basis of a private
complaint that he had fabricated a power of attorney by forging the signature of his brother, which
power of attorney had not been used at any occasion. The appellant was a green card holder and he
had been residing in the USA since the year 1985. He had to travel to USA for revalidation of his
Green Card.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194924861/ 6
Aditya Murti vs Central Bureau Of Investigation/Anti ... on 1 May, 2025
15. It is settled law that a precedent has to be understood and applied keeping in view the factual
background in which the case was decided and the question involved in the case that was decided.
The difference in factual backgrounds of cases may make a world of difference in application of the
principles of law. In Parasa Raja Manikyala Rao v. State of A.P., (2003) 12 SCC 306: 2003 SCC
OnLine SC 1142, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that: -
"9. Each case, more particularly a criminal case, depends on its own facts and a close
similarity between one case and another is not enough to warrant like treatment
because a significant detail may alter the entire aspect. In deciding such cases, one
should avoid the temptation to decide cases (as said by Cordozo) by matching the
colour of one case against the colour of another."
16. The present applicant is an accused in an FIR lodged by CBI and the case is not based on any
private complaint. The applicant is seeking permission to travel abroad for attending the wedding
ceremony of a relative in USA and to enjoy a family pleasure trip in France. This purpose is not an
essential purpose like revalidation of a Green Card. Therefore, the facts of the present case are in no
manner similar to the facts of Parvez Noordin Lokhandwalla (Supra) and the applicant cannot get
any benefit of it.
17. The proceedings against the applicant have been initiated by an FIR lodged by the Central
Bureau of Investigation and the trial Court has charged him for commission of offences under
Section 120-B read with Section 420 I.P.C. and Section 13(2) read with Section 13(1) (d) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act. The trial pending since 2011 has now reached the stage of defence
evidence. At this stage, he wants to travel abroad merely to attend the wedding ceremony of a
grand-son of his father's sister, who is not his immediate family member. After attending the
wedding at San Diego, California, USA, the applicant wants to have a family pleasure trip to France.
18. An accused person who has been enlarged on bail can be granted permission to travel abroad for
some pressing necessity like medical treatment, attending essential official duties and the like. An
accused person who has been enlarged on bail cannot seek permission as of right to travel to
another country merely for attending the marriage of a relative and having a pleasure trip to another
country. Wedding of a relative in a foreign country and pleasure trip to another country are not at all
essential purposes for an under-trial accused person's visit abroad.
19. Merely, because the trial Court had earlier granted permission to the applicant to travel abroad
for non-essential objects on numerous, he does not get a right to travel abroad for non-essential
objects this time also, when the trial has reached the stage of defence evidence.
20. The learned counsel for the applicant submitted that this reason has not been assigned by the
trial Court and the trial Court has merely rejected the application on the ground that since the trial
has reached at the stage of defence evidence, the applicant cannot be granted permission for travel
abroad.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194924861/ 7
Aditya Murti vs Central Bureau Of Investigation/Anti ... on 1 May, 2025
21. While exercising the inherent powers of this Court recognized by Section 528 BNSS, this Court's
power is not confined to scrutiny of the reasons assigned by the trial court. Besides seeking quashing
of the order passed by the trial Court, the applicant has requested this Court to pass an order
granting him permission to travel abroad and in these circumstances, this Court can certainly to
look into the justification of the prayer made by the applicant so as to assess whether the permission
sought can be granted to the applicant.
22. In Jitendra v. State of U.P., 2022 SCC OnLine All 674, this Court has held that a person who has
been arrested and released on bail subject to the conditions imposed by the Court, remains subject
to the directions issued by the Court and he shall be deemed to be in constructive custody of the
Court. Therefore, the applicant does not enjoy the full liberties of a free man and reasonable
restrictions can be imposed upon his freedom, including the restriction of his going out of the
Country.
23. In view of the foregoing discussion, I am of the considered view that the trial Court has not
committed any illegality in rejecting the application seeking permission for the applicant for his
travel to the USA for attending the marriage of a relative and to France to enjoy a family pleasure
trip, when the trial has reached the stage of defence evidence. The applicant does not have the right
to travel to USA for attending the marriage of his relative and to France to enjoy a family pleasure
trip when the trial of the case filed by CBI, in which the applicant is an accused, has reached the
stage of defence evidence.
24. The application seeking permission for the applicant's travel abroad as well as the application
under Section 528 BNSS lack merits and are, accordingly, rejected.
Order Date: 01.05.2025 Arvind (Subhash Vidyarthi J.)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194924861/ 8
