Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 KAR 1139
Bench: G.Narendar, M.Nagaprasanna
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
®
KALABURAGI BENCH
DATED THIS THE 29TH DAY OF MAY, 2020
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE G.NARENDAR
AND
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE M.NAGAPRASANNA
WRIT PETITION No.203239 OF 2019 (GM-KLA)
BETWEEN:
AEJAZ HUSSAIN S/O. ASHRAF HUSSAIN
AGE: 58 YEARS, OCC: CHIEF OFFICER, TMC
SHORAPUR, DIST. YADGIRI
R/O. H.NO.5-408, KCT COLLEGE ROAD,
MADINA COLONY, KALABURAGI - 585101
... PETITIONER
(BY SRI BABURAO MANGANE, ADVOCATE FOR
SRI ASHOK B. MULAGE, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. THE STATE OF KARNATAKA
DEPARTMENT OF URBAN DEVELOPMENT
M.S.BUILDING, BENGALURU - 32
REPRESENTED BY ITS UNDER SECRETARY
2. THE UPA-LOKAYUKTA
KARNATAKA LOKAYUKTA
MULTI STORIED BUILDING
DR. B.R.AMBEDKAR VEEDI
BENGALURU - 560 001
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 1
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
3. THE REGISTRAR (ENQUIRIES-4)
2
KARNATAKA LOKAYUKTA
MULTI STORIED BUILDING
DR. B. R. AMBEDKAR VEEDI
BENGALURU - 560 001
4. THE SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE
KARNATAKA LOKAYUKTA
AIWAN-E-SHAHI
KALABURAGI
5. THE TOWN MUNICIPAL COUNCIL
SHORAPUR, DIST. YADGIRI
6. THE DIRECTOR
MUNICIPAL ADMINISTRATION, 9TH FLOOR
VISHWESHWARAIAH TOWER
DR. B.R.AMBEDKAR VEEDHI
BENGALURU - 560 001
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SMT. ANURADHA M. DESAI, GOVERNMENT ADVOCATE FOR
R1, R4 AND R6
SRI SUBHASH MALLAPUR, ADVOCATE FOR R2 AND R3
SRI CHAITANYA KUMAR C.M., ADVOCATE FOR R5)
---
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226
AND 227 OF CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO QUASH THE
ENQUIRY REPORT DATED 11.06.2018 PASSED BY 3RD
RESPONDENT, RECOMMENDATION OF THE UPA-LOKAYUKTHA
DATED 13.06.2018 OF THE 2ND RESPONDENT AND THE
GOVERNMENT ORDER DATED 14.06.2019 PASSED BY 1ST
RESPONDENT, IN THE INTEREST OF JUSTICE AND EQUITY.
THIS WRIT PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND
RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 26.02.2020, THIS DAY
NAGAPRASANNA J., PRONOUNCED THE FOLLOWING:
3
ORDER
The petitioner being aggrieved by the report of the Enquiry Officer dated 11.06.2018,
recommendation of the Upa-lokayuktha dated 13.06.2018 and the Government Order dated
14.06.2019, by which, the respondent has imposed a composite penalty of compulsory retirement
and permanently withholding 40% of the pension on the petitioner, resulting in the instant writ
petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 2
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
2. The material facts that are necessary for the appreciation of the issue in this writ petition are as
follows:
The petitioner was appointed as a Sanitary Inspector, Grade 2 on 23.02.1983 by the
Director of Municipal Administration, Bengaluru and at the relevant point of time, he
was working as an in-charge Chief Officer of Town Municipal Council, Shorapur,
District, Yadgiri. While discharging his duties as an in-
charge Chief Officer of Town Municipal Council, Sedam, a case came to be registered
against him in Crime No.7/2005 under Sections 7, 13(1)(D) read with 13(2) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, and after filing the charge sheet, the same was
registered as Special Case No.150/2006, before the Principal Sessions Judge,
Kalaburgi.
3. The Criminal Court after a full fledged trial, acquitted the petitioner off the charges levelled
against him under Sections 7, 13(1)(D) read with 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act. The
order of acquittal was challenged by the Lokayukta before this Court in Criminal Appeal
No.3683/2010 and during the pendency of the said criminal appeal, on the basis of the same set of
facts, the Lokayukta prepared a report under Section 12(3) of the Karnataka Lokayukta Act, 1984
(hereinafter referred to as 'the Act, 1984') and furnished the same to the State Government seeking
entrustment of Departmental Enquiry to itself. In turn, the State Government by order dated
22.03.2011, entrusted the conduct of Departmental Enquiry to the hands of the second respondent -
Lokayukta. Pursuant to which, a charge sheet was issued against the petitioner on 29.03.2011.
4. During the pendency of the proceedings before the Lokayukta on the departmental side, the
aforesaid criminal appeal came to be dismissed on 14.07.2016, affirming the findings of the Criminal
Court, which had acquitted the petitioner. Even after the acquittal, the disciplinary proceedings
continued and the Enquiry Officer on 11.06.2018, submitted his report holding the petitioner guilty
of the charges levelled against him in terms of the charge sheet that was issued to the petitioner and
contrary to the judgment of the criminal Court and as affirmed by this Court. Pursuant to the report
of the Enquiry Officer, a recommendation was made by the Upa-Lokayukta on 13.06.2019,
recommending imposition of penalty of compulsory retirement and also permanently withholding
40% of the pension payable to the petitioner.
5. A second show cause notice, enclosing the report of the Enquiry Officer and the recommendations
of the Lokayukta was issued to the petitioner asking him to show cause why he should not be visited
with the penalty as recorded by Lokayuktha. The petitioner by reply dated 26.12.2018, submitted
that he had been acquitted off the charges levelled against him in the aforesaid criminal case and
conducting enquiry on the same set of facts should be closed. The Government, not accepting the
reply of the petitioner, imposed penalty of compulsory retirement and permanently withholding of
40% of his pension. Challenging the report of the Enquiry Officer, recommendation of the second
respondent and the order passed by the Government, the petitioner has filed the instant petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 3
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
6. We have heard Sri Baburao Mangane for Sri Ashok B. Mulange, learned counsel for the petitioner,
Smt. Anuradha M. Desai, learned Government Advocate for respondent Nos.1, 4 and 6, Sri Subhash
Mallapur, learned counsel for respondent Nos.2 and 3 and Sri Chaitanya Kumar C.M., learned
counsel for respondent No.5 and perused the papers.
7. Learned counsel for the petitioner would contend that he has been honorably acquitted by the
trial Court vide judgment dated 30.03.2010 in Special Case No.150/2006 and the said acquittal is
affirmed by this Court vide judgment dated 14.07.2016 and the Departmental Enquiry being on the
same set of facts should not have been continued by the second respondent and the penalty imposed
by the Government on such enquiry is vitiated.
8. The learned counsel further contended that the petitioner is an employee of the Department of
Municipal Administration and the Disciplinary Authority is the Director of Municipal
Administration and therefore, the impugned order dated 14.06.2019 at Annexure 'G' passed by the
Secretary, Urban Development Department is incompetent.
9. He further contends that prior to the order of entrustment under Rule 14A of the Karnataka Civil
Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules,
1957'), for departmental enquiry to the 2nd respondent, the matter was never placed before the
Disciplinary Authority namely, the Director of Municipal Administration but the Department of
Urban Development has entrusted the enquiry to Lokayukta and the same is void-ab-initio.
Referring to the definition of 'Government Servant' under the Act, 1984, he would submit that the
petitioner was not a Government Servant and hence, the Government ought not to have referred the
matter to the Lokayukta.
10. Lastly, he contends that the imposition of punishment i.e., compulsory retirement and
permanently withholding 40% of pension is grossly disproportionate to the charges proved and it is
wholly excessive. To buttress his submissions, the learned counsel would place reliance on the
following judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, which are as follows:
i. M. PAUL ANTHONY Vs. BHARAT GOLD MINES LIMITED reported in (1993) 3
SCC 679;
ii. G.M.TANK Vs. STATE OF GUJARAT [(2006) 5 reported in SCC 446 : 2006 SCC
(L&S) 1121 : AIR 2006 SC 2129] and iii. S. BHASKAR REDDY Vs.
SUPERINTENDENT OF POLICE reported in (2015) 2 SCC 365.
11. Per contra, learned Government Advocate for the State would contend that the order of penalty
imposed on the petitioner was on independent application of mind and considering the gravity of
misconduct committed by the petitioner, the Government in the Department of Urban Development
was competent to entrust the enquiry at the outset and has rightly imposed the penalty of
compulsory retirement and permanently withholding 40% of the petitioner's pension and she would
support the impugned order.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 4
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
12. Learned counsel representing the Lokayukta contends that the trial in the criminal case and the
departmental enquiry are entirely different. The two can be held and continued simultaneously or
departmental enquiry can be conducted even after acquittal of the government servant by the
criminal Court. According to him, it is settled principle of law that the findings of the criminal Court
will not have any bearing upon the conduct and the result of the departmental enquiry, as the two
are independent. Learned counsel places reliance on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of SHASHI BHUSAN PRASAD VS INSPECTOR GENERAL, CISF reported in (2019) 7 SCC
797.
13. Learned counsel for the fifth respondent adopts the submission made by the Government
Advocate and supported the impugned order.
14. We have given our anxious consideration to the submissions made by the learned advocates for
the parties and have perused the averments and material on record.
15. In furtherance of which, the following the points arise for our consideration:
(i) Whether the government in the Department of Urban Development is competent
to entrust the Departmental Enquiry against the petitioner to the 2nd respondent
Upa-
Lokayukta?
(ii) Whether the acquittal of the petitioner by the criminal Court would have any bearing on the
departmental enquiry and the resultant penalty imposed?
16. Re. Point No.1:
The contention of the petitioner is that, the entrustment of the Departmental Enquiry
under Rule 14A of the Rules, 1957, by the Department of Urban Development is
wholly without jurisdiction as the petitioner is an employee of Department of
Municipal Administration. The enquiry was entrusted under Rule 14A of the Rules,
1957 by the Department of Urban Development. To consider this contention of the
petitioner, the relevant Section 2(4) of the Act, 1984 is required to be extracted.
Section 2(4) of the Act, 1984, which reads thus;
"Section 2(4): "Competent authority"
in relation to a public servant means, -
(a) Xxxx
(b) Xxxx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 5
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
(c) Xxxx
(d) in the case of any other public servant, such authority as may be prescribed;"
Section 2(4)(d) as extracted herein above depicts that in case of any other public
servant would be the competent authority and on such prescription as may be made
under the Karnataka Lokayukta Rules, 1985 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Rules,
1985). Rule 3 of the Rules, 1985, reads thus:
"3. Competent Authority - In respect of the public servants referred to in sub- clause
(d) of clause (4) of section 2, the Government of Karnataka shall be the Competent
Authority."
It is in terms of Rule 3 as extracted above, in respect of public servants referred to in Section 2(4) of
the Act, 1984, the Government of Karnataka would be the competent authority. In the instant case,
the order of entrustment is by the Department of Urban Development. Thus, the Government in the
Department of Urban Development under which the Director of Municipal Administration also
functions, is the competent authority to entrust the enquiry pertaining to an employee of the
Department of Municipal Administration to the Lokayukta. Thus, the contention of the petitioner
that the Government is not competent to entrust the enquiry to the Upa- Lokayukta is unacceptable
to us. Hence, we hold point No.1 against the petitioner.
17. Re. Point No.2:
Before embarking upon the facts obtaining in the case on hand, it is germane to
notice the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court with regard to the order of
acquittal having a bearing on the Departmental Enquiry. The Hon'ble Supreme Court
in the case of M. PAUL ANTHONY V. BHARAT GOLD MINES LTD.
reported in (1999) 3 SCC 679, at paragraph Nos.34 and 35 has held as follows:
"34. There is yet another reason for discarding the whole of the case of the
respondents. As pointed out earlier, the criminal case as also the departmental
proceedings were based on identical set of facts, namely, "the raid conducted at the
appellant's residence and recovery of incriminating articles therefrom". The findings
recorded by the enquiry officer, a copy of which has been placed before us, indicate
that the charges framed against the appellant were sought to be proved by police
officers and panch witnesses, who had raided the house of the appellant and had
effected recovery. They were the only witnesses examined by the enquiry officer and
the enquiry officer, relying upon their statements, came to the conclusion that the
charges were established against the appellant. The same witnesses were examined in
the criminal case but the Court, on a consideration of the entire evidence, came to the
conclusion that no search was conducted nor was any recovery made from the
residence of the appellant. The whole case of the prosecution was thrown out and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 6
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
appellant was acquitted. In this situation, therefore, where the appellant is acquitted
by a judicial pronouncement with the finding that the "raid and recovery" at the
residence of the appellant were not proved, it would be unjust, unfair and rather
oppressive to allow the findings recorded at the ex parte departmental proceedings to
stand.
35. Since the facts and the evidence in both the proceedings, namely, the
departmental proceedings and the criminal case were the same without there being
any iota of difference, the distinction, which is usually drawn as between the
departmental proceedings and the criminal case on the basis of approach and burden
of proof, would not be applicable to the instant case. "
18. This principle was again considered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of G.M. TANK Vs.
STATE OF GUJARAT, reported in (2006) 5 SCC 446, wherein at paragraph Nos.30 and 31, which
was held thus:
"30. The judgments relied on by the learned counsel appearing for the respondents
are distinguishable on facts and on law. In this case, the departmental proceedings
and the criminal case are based on identical and similar set of facts and the charge in
a departmental case against the appellant and the charge before the criminal court
are one and the same. It is true that the nature of charge in the departmental
proceedings and in the criminal case is grave. The nature of the case launched against
the appellant on the basis of evidence and material collected against him during
enquiry and investigation and as reflected in the charge-sheet, factors mentioned are
one and the same. In other words, charges, evidence, witnesses and circumstances
are one and the same. In the present case, criminal and departmental proceedings
have already noticed or granted on the same set of facts, namely, raid conducted at
the appellant's residence, recovery of articles therefrom. The Investigating Officer Mr
V.B. Raval and other departmental witnesses were the only witnesses examined by
the enquiry officer who by relying upon their statement came to the conclusion that
the charges were established against the appellant. The same witnesses were
examined in the criminal case and the criminal court on the examination came to the
conclusion that the prosecution has not proved the guilt alleged against the appellant
beyond any reasonable doubt and acquitted the appellant by its judicial
pronouncement with the finding that the charge has not been proved. It is also to be
noticed that the judicial pronouncement was made after a regular trial and on hot
contest. Under these circumstances, it would be unjust and unfair and rather
oppressive to allow the findings recorded in the departmental proceedings to stand.
31. In our opinion, such facts and evidence in the departmental as well as criminal
proceedings were the same without there being any iota of difference, the appellant
should succeed. The distinction which is usually proved between the departmental
and criminal proceedings on the basis of the approach and burden of proof would not
be applicable in the instant case. Though the finding recorded in the domestic
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 7
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
enquiry was found to be valid by the courts below, when there was an honourable
acquittal of the employee during the pendency of the proceedings challenging the
dismissal, the same requires to be taken note of and the decision in Paul Anthony
case [(1999) 3 SCC 679 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 810] will apply. We, therefore, hold that the
appeal filed by the appellant deserves to be allowed."
19. Both the afore extracted judgments were again reiterated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of S. BHASKAR REDDY Vs. SUPT. OF POLICE reported in (2015) 2 SCC 365 and the relevant
paragraph Nos.21 to 26, which are as under:
21. It is an undisputed fact that the charges in the criminal case and the disciplinary
proceedings conducted against the appellants by the first respondent are similar. The
appellants have faced the criminal trial before the Sessions Judge, Chittoor on the
charge of murder and other offences of IPC and the Scheduled Castes and the
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act. Our attention was drawn to the said
judgment which is produced at Ext. P-7, to evidence the fact that the charges in both
the proceedings of the criminal case and the disciplinary proceeding are similar.
From perusal of the charge-sheet issued in the disciplinary proceedings and the
enquiry report submitted by the enquiry officer and the judgment in the criminal
case, it is clear that they are almost similar and one and the same. In the criminal
trial, the appellants have been acquitted honourably for want of evidence on record.
The trial Judge has categorically recorded the finding of fact on proper appreciation
and evaluation of evidence on record and held that the charges framed in the criminal
case are not proved against the appellants and therefore they have been honourably
acquitted for the offences punishable under Section 3(1)(x) of the Scheduled Castes
and the Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act and under Sections 307 and
302 read with Section 34 IPC. The law declared by this Court with regard to
honourable acquittal of the accused for criminal offences means that they are
acquitted for want of evidence to prove the charges.
22. The meaning of the expression "honourable acquittal" was discussed by this Court
in detail in Inspector General of Police v. S. Samuthiram [(2013) 1 SCC 598 : (2013) 1
SCC (Cri) 566 : (2013) 1 SCC (L&S) 229] , the relevant paragraph from the said case
reads as under: (SCC p. 609, para 24) "24. The meaning of the expression
'honourable acquittal' came up for consideration before this Court in RBI v. Bhopal
Singh Panchal [(1994) 1 SCC 541 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 594 : (1994) 26 ATC 619] . In that
case, this Court has considered the impact of Regulation 46(4) dealing with
honourable acquittal by a criminal court on the disciplinary proceedings. In that
context, this Court held that the mere acquittal does not entitle an employee to
reinstatement in service, the acquittal, it was held, has to be honourable. The
expressions 'honourable acquittal', 'acquitted of blame', 'fully exonerated' are
unknown to the Code of Criminal Procedure or the Penal Code, which are coined by
judicial pronouncements. It is difficult to define precisely what is meant by the
expression 'honourably acquitted'. When the accused is acquitted after full
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 8
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
consideration of prosecution evidence and that the prosecution had miserably failed
to prove the charges levelled against the accused, it can possibly be said that the
accused was honourably acquitted."
(emphasis supplied) After examining the principles laid down in the abovesaid case, the same was
reiterated by this Court in a recent decision in Joginder Singh v. UT of Chandigarh [(2015) 2 SCC
377] .
23. Further, in Capt. M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. [Capt. M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat
Gold Mines Ltd., (1999) 3 SCC 679 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 810 :
(1999) 2 SCR 257] this Court has held as under: (SCC p. 695, paras 34-35) "34. There
is yet another reason for discarding the whole of the case of the respondents. As
pointed out earlier, the criminal case as also the departmental proceedings were
based on identical set of facts, namely, 'the raid conducted at the appellant's
residence and recovery of incriminating articles therefrom'. The findings recorded by
the enquiry officer, a copy of which has been placed before us, indicate that the
charges framed against the appellant were sought to be proved by police officers and
panch witnesses, who had raided the house of the appellant and had effected
recovery. They were the only witnesses examined by the enquiry officer and the
enquiry officer, relying upon their statements, came to the conclusion that the
charges were established against the appellant. The same witnesses were examined in
the criminal case but the Court, on a consideration of the entire evidence, came to the
conclusion that no search was conducted nor was any recovery made from the
residence of the appellant. The whole case of the prosecution was thrown out and the
appellant was acquitted. In this situation, therefore, where the appellant is acquitted
by a judicial pronouncement with the finding that the 'raid and recovery' at the
residence of the appellant were not proved, it would be unjust, unfair and rather
oppressive to allow the findings recorded at the ex parte departmental proceedings to
stand.
35. Since the facts and the evidence in both the proceedings, namely, the
departmental proceedings and the criminal case were the same without there being
any iota of difference, the distinction, which is usually drawn as between the
departmental proceedings and the criminal case on the basis of approach and burden
of proof, would not be applicable to the instant case."
(emphasis supplied)
24. Further, in G.M. Tank v. State of Gujarat [(2006) 5 SCC 446 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 1121 : AIR 2006
SC 2129] this Court held as under: (SCC pp. 456 & 460-61, paras 20 & 30-31) "20. ... Likewise, the
criminal proceedings were initiated against the appellant for the alleged charges punishable under
the provisions of the PC Act on the same set of facts and evidence. It was submitted that the
departmental proceedings and the criminal case are based on identical and similar (verbatim) set of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 9
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
facts and evidence. The appellant has been honourably acquitted by the competent court on the
same set of facts, evidence and witness and, therefore, the dismissal order based on the same set of
facts and evidence on the departmental side is liable to be set aside in the interest of justice.
***
30. The judgments relied on by the learned counsel appearing for the respondents are
distinguishable on facts and on law. ... It is true that the nature of charge in the departmental
proceedings and in the criminal case is grave. The nature of the case launched against the appellant
on the basis of evidence and material collected against him during enquiry and investigation and as
reflected in the charge-sheet, factors mentioned are one and the same. In other words, charges,
evidence, witnesses and circumstances are one and the same. In the present case, criminal and
departmental proceedings have already noticed or granted on the same set of facts, namely, raid
conducted at the appellant's residence, recovery of articles therefrom. The Investigating Officer Mr
V.B. Raval and other departmental witnesses were the only witnesses examined by the enquiry
officer who by relying upon their statement came to the conclusion that the charges were established
against the appellant. The same witnesses were examined in the criminal case and the criminal court
on the examination came to the conclusion that the prosecution has not proved the guilt alleged
against the appellant beyond any reasonable doubt and acquitted the appellant by its judicial
pronouncement with the finding that the charge has not been proved. It is also to be noticed that the
judicial pronouncement was made after a regular trial and on hot contest. Under these
circumstances, it would be unjust and unfair and rather oppressive to allow the findings recorded in
the departmental proceedings to stand.
31. In our opinion, such facts and evidence in the departmental as well as criminal proceedings were
the same without there being any iota of difference, the appellant should succeed. The distinction
which is usually proved between the departmental and criminal proceedings on the basis of the
approach and burden of proof would not be applicable in the instant case. Though the finding
recorded in the domestic enquiry was found to be valid by the courts below, when there was an
honourable acquittal of the employee during the pendency of the proceedings challenging the
dismissal, the same requires to be taken note of and the decision in Paul Anthony case [Capt. M.
Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd., (1999) 3 SCC 679 :
1999 SCC (L&S) 810 : (1999) 2 SCR 257] will apply. We, therefore, hold that the
appeal filed by the appellant deserves to be allowed."
25. The High Court has not considered and examined this legal aspect of the matter
while setting aside the impugned judgment and order of the Tribunal. The Tribunal
has also not considered the same. We have examined this important factual and legal
aspect of the case which was brought to our notice in these proceedings and we hold
that both the High Court and Tribunal have erred in not considering this important
undisputed fact regarding honourable acquittal of the appellants on the charges in
the criminal case which are similar in the disciplinary proceedings.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 10
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
26. We have answered the alternative legal contention urged on behalf of the
appellants by accepting the judgment and order of the Sessions Judge, in which case
they have been acquitted honourably from the charges which are more or less similar
to the charges levelled against the appellants in the disciplinary proceedings by
applying the decisions of this Court referred to supra. Therefore, we have to set aside
the orders of dismissal passed against the appellants by accepting the alternative
legal plea as urged above having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case.
20. Based upon the bedrock of the law declared by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
aforementioned judgments, the facts obtaining in the case on hand will have to be
considered.
21. The alleged acts of the petitioner gave rise to two proceedings. One, setting the
criminal law in motion and the other a Departmental Enquiry. Both of them were on
the same set of facts. The competent criminal Court after a full fledged trial, acquitted
the petitioner off the charges levelled against him in the criminal case. The relevant
paragraphs of the order of the criminal Court which deals with acquittal, reads as
follows:
"10. xxxxxxxxxxxxx PW-2 who is pancha to the mahazars at Ex.P.4 and P.3 has
deposed in his evidence in corroboration with the evidence given by PW-1 regarding
the mahazar conducted on 15.11.2005 and 16.11.2005 and also deposed in his
evidence in detail regarding the demonstration conducted in the Lokayukta office and
also regarding seizure of the money from the accused in his office. He has further
deposed in his evidence stating hat the statement of accused was written by one
Phalaksh wherein he has stated that he has received a sum of Rs.1,000/- from the
complainant as a late fee and road cutting fee. During the course of the cross-
examination it is elicited from the mouth of this witness that he had not entered the
Meeting Hall and he do not know who were all present in the Meeting Hall.
11. xxxxx
12. xxxxx
13. xxxxx
14. After due and anxious consideration of the entire evidence obtaining in the case, I
have no hesitation to hold that the prosecution has not succeeded in providing
beyond all reasonable doubt the charges leveled against the accused. Though the
prosecution has produced some evidence as regards the allegation and charges, such
evidence in my considered view is not at all sufficient to find the accused guilty
positively and conclusively. A reasonable doubt arises in the mind of the court about
the credibility and acceptability of the case of the prosecution as spoken by PW-1,
PW- 2 and PW-4 with slander support from the witnesses like PW-6, PW-7 and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 11
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
PW-8. The evidence given by PW-1 appears to be only an after thought and it cannot
be relied upon.
15. The prosecution has also led the evidence of PW-3 who has deposed in his
evidence stating that on 20.02.2006 he received requisition from the Lokayukta,
Bangalore for sanction of prosecution.
After going through the file he has issued the sanction as per Ex.P.9. On careful
examination of the evidence of PW-3 it appears that PW-3 without properly verifying
the materials on record has mechanically issued sanction as requested by the
Lokayukta police to prosecute the accused. The prosecution has also led the evidence
of PW-5 who has produced the documents such as Inward, Outward Registers,
Attendance Registers and other documents as per Ex.P.13, P.18, P.19. Hence, the
evidence of PW-5 is also not much material. The prosecution has also led the
evidence of PW-6, the Head Constable, Lokayukta Police Station, PW-7 PI, Karnataka
Lokayukta, PW-8 Police Inspector, Lokayukta who have deposed in detail regarding
the demonstration mahazar conducted at Ex.P.4 and also deposed regarding the
seizure mahazar at Ex.P.3. During the course of the cross- examination of PW-8 he
has admitted that he has not conducted any investigation to know whether the
accused demanded the bribe money from the complainant prior to 15.11.2005. On
assessing the overall evidence adduced by the prosecution on all the aspects of the
matter and due appreciation of the entire evidence and attending circumstances, I am
of the considered view that the prosecution has filed to bring home the guilt of the
accused. The benefit of reasonable doubt is to be extended to the accused and
consequently the benefit of exoneration to him. Accordingly, I answer the point
under consideration in the negative."
(emphasis supplied) If a cumulative analysis of the afore extracted paragraphs from the judgment of
the criminal Court is made, it is clear that the prosecution has failed to establish the guilt of the
accused beyond all reasonable doubt. It is in this context, the criminal Court has used the words "the
benefit of reasonable doubt". It is a clear case of acquittal on merits. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in
the case of DEPUTY INSPECTOR GENERAL OF POLICE Vs. S. SAMUTHIRAM reported in (2013) 1
SCC 598, at paragraph No.24 has held as follows:
"24. The meaning of the expression 'honourable acquittal" came up for consideration
before this Court in RBI v. Bhopal Singh Panchal (1994) 1 SCC 541. In that case, this
Court has considered the impact of Regulation 46(4) dealing with honourable
acquittal by a criminal court on the disciplinary proceedings. In that context, this
Court held that the mere acquittal does not entitle an employee to reinstatement in
service, the acquittal, it was held, has to be honourable. The expressions "honourable
acquittal", "acquitted of blame", "fully exonerated" are unknown to the Code of
Criminal Procedure or the Penal Code, which are coined by judicial pronouncements.
It is difficult to define precisely what is meant by the expression "honourably
acquitted". When the accused is acquitted after full consideration of prosecution
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 12
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
evidence and that the prosecution had miserably failed to prove the charges levelled
against the accused, it can possibly be said that the accused was honourably
acquitted."
It is in terms of the law declared by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the above extracted judgment, the
acquittal of the petitioner can be held as an acquittal on merits and honourable.
22. On the same set of facts, a Departmental Enquiry was held long after the order of the acquittal
dated 30.03.2010. The Departmental Enquiry was continued and the Enquiry Officer submitted his
report on 11.06.2018, after about 13 years of the incident and 8 years after the order of the acquittal.
It is germane to notice the evidence that was placed before the Enquiry Officer, the list of witnesses
and exhibits, which are as follows:
"ANNEXURE LIST OF WITNESSES EXAMINED ON BEHALF OF DISCIPLINARY
AUTHORITY:
PW-1 :- Sri Rajendra (complainant) - (PW.1 in the special case No.150/2006) PW-2 :-
Sri Shankaragowda (pancha witness) - (PW.2 in the special case No.150/2006) PW-3
:- Sri Palakshaiah (shadow panch witness) - (PW.4 in the special case No.150/2006)
PW-4 :- Sri Ramappa Patil (I.O.) - (PW.8 in the special case No.150/2006) LIST OF
WITNESSES EXAMINED ON BEHALF OF THE DEFENCE:
NIL LIST OF EXHIBITS MARKED ON BEHALF OF DISCIPLINARY AUTHORITY
Ex.P-1: Certified copy of the complaint Ex.P-2: Certified copy of the Entrustment
Mahazar Ex.P-3: Certified copy of the explanation of DGO Ex.P-4: Certified copy of
the Trap Mahazar Ex.P-5: Certified copy of the file of the complainant (containing 8
sheets) Ex.P-6: Certified copy of the FIR Ex.P-7: Xerox copy of the notes
denomination and numbers mentioned sheet Ex.P-8: Xerox copy of the photos on the
white sheet (total three sheets) Ex.P-9: Xerox copy of the photos on the white sheet at
the time of trap mahazar (total three sheets) Ex.P-10: Certified copy of the rough
sketch Ex.P-11: Certified copy of the chemical examination report LIST OF
EXHIBITS MARKED ON BEHALF OF DGO:
Ex.D-1: Certified copy of the deposition of Sri Ramappa Patil in Special case
No.150/2006 Dated this the 11th day of June, 2018 (Somaraju) Additional Registrar
Enquiries-4, Karnataka Lokayukta, Bangalore."
PW.1 - Sri Rajendra who was examined in the Departmental Enquiry was also examined as PW.1 in
the criminal case. Likewise, PW.2 was examined as PW.2 in the criminal case as well. PW.3 who was
a shadow witness was examined as PW.4 in the criminal case. PW.4 - Sri Ramappa Patil, the
Investigating Officer was common witness in both the Departmental Enquiry and criminal case.
Based upon the very same evidence before the Criminal Court which was reiterated in the
Departmental Enquiry, the Enquiry Officer holds it differently in his report at para Nos.18 and 19,
which reads as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 13
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
"18. PW1 to PW3 have been cross-examined at length and except some minor
discrepancies there is no major discrepancy to discard their evidence stated above.
PW1 to PW3 have no ill-will of any kind against the DGO and there is absolutely no
reasons to discard their evidence.
19. In Ex.P3 is the coy of the statement of the DGO immediately after trap in which
the DGO was admitted that he has received two notes of denomination of Rs.500/-
from PW1. In the same it is stated that PW1 instead of paying road cutting charges
asked by him has given him two notes of the denomination for Rs.500/- as bribe. It is
pertinent to note that even the receipt of the bribe amount without demand also
amounts to misconduct. In Ex.P3 it is not stated that the DGO refused to receive the
said amount. On the and he has received the amount and kept the same in his pant
pocket and went to the meeting hall which clearly shows that the DGO has received
the amount from PW1 knowing that it is the illegal gratification only."
The Enquiry Officer strangely holds that even if there is no demand the receipt of money amounts to
misconduct. The defence of the petitioner is completely ignored by the Enquiry Officer as it was
clear that two notes of Rs.500/- were taken towards payment of road cutting charges. Deliberately
ignoring the evidence that was in favour of the petitioner which the Criminal Court had considered
to acquit the petitioner, the Enquiry Officer holds the petitioner guilty of the allegations. No other
evidence was placed before the Enquiry Officer by the second respondent. The Enquiry Officer
considers the very same evidence of the very same witnesses which was earlier considered by the
criminal Court and examines the very same documents, but comes to a different conclusion on the
ground that the Evidence Act is not applicable to departmental proceedings and in a Departmental
Enquiry, the guilt has to be proved on preponderance of probability and in the case of the petitioner,
the probabilities of his demand and acceptance of the bribe amount were preponderant and hence,
on that ground the Enquiry Officer holds the petitioner has failed to maintain absolute integrity and
has acted in a manner unbecoming of a government servant.
23. Thus, the criminal case and the Departmental Enquiry in the instant case were not only based
upon same set of facts but the charges in Departmental Enquiry were sought to be proved with the
same set of documents and witnesses. It is in this context, the acquittal of the petitioner assumes
significance. In our considered view, in the facts of this case, the order of acquittal passed by the
criminal Court and its affirmation by this Court will have a bearing on the Departmental Enquiry
and the resultant penalty.
24. In terms of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the afore extracted judgments, it
becomes clear that if both the proceedings namely, the criminal trial and the Departmental Enquiry
are based upon the same set of facts, circumstances, documents and witnesses, the order of penalty
imposed in the Departmental Enquiry would get effaced.
25. Insofar as the judgment of the larger Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court relied by the 2nd
respondent in the case of SHASHI BHUSAN PRASAD VS. INSPECTOR GENERAL, CISF reported
in (2019) 7 SCC 797, at paragraph Nos.16 to 22, which read thus:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 14
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
"16. The facts noticed by us which have been inquired in a disciplinary inquiry and in
the judicial proceedings undisputedly are based on different allegations and the set of
evidence not based on the same facts and circumstances and in the given situation,
the very submission made by the appellant of taking the benefit of acquittal in a
judicial proceedings instituted against him on the plea of having nexus with the
disciplinary inquiry loses its foundation.
17. The scope of departmental enquiry and judicial proceedings and the effect of
acquittal by a criminal court has been examined by a three-Judge Bench of this Court
in A.P. SRTC v. Mohd. Yousuf Miya [A.P. SRTC v. Mohd. Yousuf Miya, (1997) 2 SCC
699 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 548] .
The relevant paragraph is as under: (SCC pp. 704-05, para 8) "8. ... The purpose of departmental
enquiry and of prosecution are two different and distinct aspects. The criminal prosecution is
launched for an offence for violation of a duty, the offender owes to the society or for breach of
which law has provided that the offender shall make satisfaction to the public. So crime is an act of
commission in violation of law or of omission of public duty. The departmental enquiry is to
maintain discipline in the service and efficiency of public service. It would, therefore, be expedient
that the disciplinary proceedings are conducted and completed as expeditiously as possible. It is not,
therefore, desirable to lay down any guidelines as inflexible rules in which the departmental
proceedings may or may not be stayed pending trial in criminal case against the delinquent officer.
Each case requires to be considered in the backdrop of its own facts and circumstances. There would
be no bar to proceed simultaneously with departmental enquiry and trial of a criminal case unless
the charge in the criminal trial is of grave nature involving complicated questions of fact and law.
Offence generally implies infringement of public (sic duty), as distinguished from mere private
rights punishable under criminal law. When trial for criminal offence is conducted it should be in
accordance with proof of the offence as per the evidence defined under the provisions of the
Evidence Act.
Converse is the case of departmental enquiry. The enquiry in a departmental proceeding relates to
conduct or breach of duty of the delinquent officer to punish him for his misconduct defined under
the relevant statutory rules or law. That the strict standard of proof or applicability of the Evidence
Act stands excluded is a settled legal position. The enquiry in the departmental proceedings relates
to the conduct of the delinquent officer and proof in that behalf is not as high as in an offence in
criminal charge. It is seen that invariably the departmental enquiry has to be conducted
expeditiously so as to effectuate efficiency in public administration and the criminal trial will take its
own course. The nature of evidence in criminal trial is entirely different from the departmental
proceedings. In the former, prosecution is to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt on the
touchstone of human conduct. The standard of proof in the departmental proceedings is not the
same as of the criminal trial. The evidence also is different from the standard point of the Evidence
Act. The evidence required in the departmental enquiry is not regulated by the Evidence Act. Under
these circumstances, what is required to be seen is whether the departmental enquiry would
seriously prejudice the delinquent in his defence at the trial in a criminal case. It is always a question
of fact to be considered in each case depending on its own facts and circumstances. In this case, we
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 15
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
have seen that the charge is failure to anticipate the accident and prevention thereof. It has nothing
to do with the culpability of the offence under Sections 304-A and 338 IPC. Under these
circumstances, the High Court was not right in staying the proceedings."
(emphasis supplied)
18. The exposition has been further affirmed by a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Ajit Kumar Nag
v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. [Ajit Kumar Nag v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd., (2005) 7 SCC 764 : 2005 SCC
(L&S) 1020] This Court held as under: (SCC p. 776, para 11) "11. As far as acquittal of the appellant
by a criminal court is concerned, in our opinion, the said order does not preclude the Corporation
from taking an action if it is otherwise permissible. In our judgment, the law is fairly well settled.
Acquittal by a criminal court would not debar an employer from exercising power in accordance
with the Rules and Regulations in force. The two proceedings, criminal and departmental, are
entirely different. They operate in different fields and have different objectives. Whereas the object
of criminal trial is to inflict appropriate punishment on the offender, the purpose of enquiry
proceedings is to deal with the delinquent departmentally and to impose penalty in accordance with
the service rules. In a criminal trial, incriminating statement made by the accused in certain
circumstances or before certain officers is totally inadmissible in evidence. Such strict rules of
evidence and procedure would not apply to departmental proceedings. The degree of proof which is
necessary to order a conviction is different from the degree of proof necessary to record the
commission of delinquency. The rule relating to appreciation of evidence in the two proceedings is
also not similar. In criminal law, burden of proof is on the prosecution and unless the prosecution is
able to prove the guilt of the accused "beyond reasonable doubt", he cannot be convicted by a court
of law. In a departmental enquiry, on the other hand, penalty can be imposed on the delinquent
officer on a finding recorded on the basis of "preponderance of probability". Acquittal of the
appellant by a Judicial Magistrate, therefore, does not ipso facto absolve him from the liability
under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the Corporation. We are, therefore, unable to uphold the
contention of the appellant that since he was acquitted by a criminal court, the impugned order [Ajit
Kumar Nag v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd., 2004 SCC OnLine Cal 59 : (2004) 4 LLN 512] dismissing him
from service deserves to be quashed and set aside."
(emphasis supplied)
19. We are in full agreement with the exposition of law laid down by this Court and it is fairly well
settled that two proceedings criminal and departmental are entirely different. They operate in
different fields and have different objectives. Whereas the object of criminal trial is to inflict
appropriate punishment on an offender, the purpose of enquiry proceedings is to deal with the
delinquent departmentally and to impose penalty in accordance with the service rules. The degree of
proof which is necessary to order a conviction is different from the degree of proof necessary to
record the commission of delinquency. Even the rule relating to appreciation of evidence in the two
proceedings is also not similar. In criminal law, burden of proof is on the prosecution and unless the
prosecution is able to prove the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt, he cannot be
convicted by a court of law whereas in the departmental enquiry, penalty can be imposed on the
delinquent on a finding recorded on the basis of "preponderance of probability". Acquittal by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 16
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
court of competent jurisdiction in a judicial proceeding does not ipso facto absolve the delinquent
from the liability under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the authority. This what has been considered
by the High Court in the impugned judgment [Shashi Bhusan Prasad v. CISF, 2008 SCC OnLine Ori
544 : 2008 Lab IC 3733] in detail and needs no interference by this Court.
20. The judgment in M. Paul Anthony case [M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd., (1999) 3
SCC 679 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 810] on which the learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance
was a case where a question arose for consideration as to whether the departmental proceedings and
proceedings in a criminal case on the basis of same sets of facts and evidence can be continued
simultaneously and this Court answered in para 22 as under: (SCC p. 691) "22. The conclusions
which are deducible from various decisions of this Court referred to above are:
(i) Departmental proceedings and proceedings in a criminal case can proceed
simultaneously as there is no bar in their being conducted simultaneously, though
separately.
(ii) If the departmental proceedings and the criminal case are based on identical and
similar set of facts and the charge in the criminal case against the delinquent
employee is of a grave nature which involves complicated questions of law and fact, it
would be desirable to stay the departmental proceedings till the conclusion of the
criminal case.
(iii) Whether the nature of a charge in a criminal case is grave and whether
complicated questions of fact and law are involved in that case, will depend upon the
nature of offence, the nature of the case launched against the employee on the basis
of evidence and material collected against him during investigation or as reflected in
the charge-sheet.
(iv) The factors mentioned at (ii) and (iii) above cannot be considered in isolation to
stay the departmental proceedings but due regard has to be given to the fact that the
departmental proceedings cannot be unduly delayed.
(v) If the criminal case does not proceed or its disposal is being unduly delayed, the
departmental proceedings, even if they were stayed on account of the pendency of the
criminal case, can be resumed and proceeded with so as to conclude them at an early
date, so that if the employee is found not guilty his honour may be vindicated and in
case he is found guilty, the administration may get rid of him at the earliest."
21. It may not be of assistance to the appellant in the instant case for the reason that the charge
levelled against the appellant in the criminal case and departmental proceedings of which detailed
reference has been made were on different sets of facts and evidence having no
nexus/co-relationship. The kind of criminal act/delinquency which he had committed in discharge
of his duties in the course of employment. That apart, much before the judgment of the criminal
case could be pronounced, the departmental enquiry was concluded and after the enquiry officer
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 17
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
had held him guilty, he was punished with the penalty of dismissal from service.
22. The judgment in G.M. Tank case [G.M. Tank v. State of Gujarat, (2006) 5 SCC 446 : 2006 SCC
(L&S) 1121] on which the learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance was a case where this
Court had proceeded on the premise that the charges in the criminal case and departmental enquiry
are grounded upon the same sets of facts and evidence. This may not be of any assistance to the
appellant as we have observed that in the instant case the charge in the criminal case and
departmental enquiry were different having no nexus/co-relationship based on different sets of facts
and evidence which has been independently enquired in the disciplinary proceedings and in a
criminal trial and acquittal in the criminal proceedings would not absolve the appellant from the
liability under the disciplinary proceedings instituted against him in which he had been held guilty
and in sequel thereto punished with the penalty of dismissal from service." If the above extracted
paragraphs of the judgment in the case of SHASHI BHUSHAN (supra) are noticed, it becomes clear
that the Hon'ble Supreme Court was considering a case were the charges levelled against the
appellant therein in the criminal case and the department proceedings were based on different set of
facts having no nexus / co- relationship and the other circumstance before the Hon'ble Supreme
Court was that the penalty in the Departmental Enquiry has been imposed upon the appellant
therein, which was before the judgment of the criminal case could be pronounced. Both these factors
would render the judgment in the case of SHASHI BHUSHAN (supra) inapplicable with the facts of
the case on hand. As observed hereinabove, in the instant case, both the criminal case and the
Departmental Enquiry were based upon same set of facts, same witnesses and documents. Thus, it
was on the basis of the same evidence. The other factor that is distinguishable is that, the order of
acquittal in the instant case was in the year 2010 and the order of penalty in the Departmental
Enquiry was imposed in the year 2019 long after the order of acquittal and its affirmation by this
Court. Thus, the judgment in the case of SHASHI BHUSHAN (supra) would not be applicable to the
facts of the case but the judgments in the cases of M. PAUL ANTHONY, G.M.TANK and BHASKAR
REDDY would be applicable to the case on hand.
26. We are acutely aware of the fact that there would be no bar to continue the disciplinary
proceedings even after acquittal but the facts and circumstances of the each case will have to be
taken into consideration. In the instant case, though there was no bar to continue the Departmental
Enquiry, the fact remains that both the criminal case and the Departmental Enquiry were based
upon same circumstances, same set of facts and same witnesses and documents. There was not an
iota of difference between the facts and evidence in the criminal case and the Departmental Enquiry.
Thus, the law laid down in the cases of M. PAUL ANTHONY, G.M.TANK and BHASKAR REDDY,
covers the instant case on all fours and as a result of which the petitioner is entitled to succeed in the
Departmental Enquiry. Hence, we hold point No.2 in favour of the petitioner.
27. For the aforementioned reasons, in our considered view, the order of the penalty passed by the
State Government which is based upon the report of the Enquiry Officer dated 11.06.2018 and the
recommendation of the 2nd respondent Upa- Lokayuktha dated 13.06.2018 warrants appropriate
interference.
28. Hence, we pass the following order;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 18
Aejaz Hussain vs The State Of Karnataka & Ors on 29 May, 2020
(i) The writ petition is allowed.
(ii). (a) The report of the Enquiry Officer dated 11.06.2018 at Annexure 'C', (b) The recommendation
of the 2nd respondent dated 13.06.2018 at Annexure 'D' and
(c) The Government Order dated 14.06.2019 at Annexure 'G', are all set aside.
(iii) The petitioner shall be reinstated into service with all consequential benefits that would flow
from such reinstatement, within a period of three months from the date of receipt of the copy of this
order.
Sd/-
JUDGE Sd/-
JUDGE nvj
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174710292/ 19
