Afr D. Maleswar Patra vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 August, 2021
Afr D. Maleswar Patra vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ...
on 6 August, 2021
Author: B.R.Sarangi
Bench: B.R.Sarangi
ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
WPC (OAC) NO. 913 OF 2017
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227
of the Constitution of India.
---------------
AFR D. Maleswar Patra ..... Petitioner
-Versus-
State of Odisha and others ..... Opp. Parties For Petitioner : M/s. S. Mohanty, B. Biswal and S.C.
Mohanty, Advocates For Opp. Parties : Mr. M. Balabantaray, Standing Counsel P R E S E N T:
THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI Date of hearing and judgment :
06.08.2021 DR. B.R. SARANGI, J. The petitioner, by means of this writ petition,
seeks to quash the order dated 10.04.2017 in Annexure-3, so far as it relates to the
petitioner, whereby the petitioner, whose name appears at serial no.9 and who had
been appointed as ORS Group-B Officer by way of // 2 // promotion, has been
reverted to his parent post, i.e., Sr. Clerk, Collectorate of Nabarangpur.
2. The factual matrix of the case, in precise, is that an advertisement for recruitment to the post of
Odisha Revenue Service (ORS) Group-B by way of promotion was issued by opposite party
no.1-Principal Secretary to the Government of Odisha, Revenue and Disaster Management
Department. The petitioner, along with other employees, applied for the post. As the petitioner was
found suitable, he was duly selected and recruited to ORS Group-B. On being appointed in ORS
Group-B by way of promotion against the Recruitment Year 2012, he was posted as Assistant
Collector, Koraput, pursuant to which he joined in his new assignment and discharged his duty.
While so continuing, he was transferred and posted as Additional Tahasildar, Sorada in the district
of Ganjam, where he joined and was continuing. At that stage, the opposite party no.1 reverted the
petitioner to his parent post on the basis of recommendation by the Review Selection Committee
held // 3 // in pursuance of the orders of the Odisha Administrative Tribunal passed in O.A. No.
2595 of 2014 and other similar cases. Aggrieved thereby, the petitioner filed O.A. No. 913 (C) of 2017
before the Odisha Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench, Cuttack and on abolition of the tribunal,
the said Original Application was transferred to this Court, by virtue of order dated 31.10.2019
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197204868/ 1
Afr D. Maleswar Patra vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 August, 2021
passed by a Division Bench of this Court in W.P.(C) No. 20359 of 2019, and registered as above.
3. Mr. S. Mohanty, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that a perusal of the notification
dated 10.04.2017 at Annexure-3 would go to show that the petitioner, who was working as ORS
Group-B officer on being promoted in terms of Rule-4(b) of Odisha Revenue Service Group 'B'
(Recruitment) Rules, 2011 against the Recruitment Year, 2012, has been reverted to his parent post,
as per recommendation of the Review Selection Committee held in pursuance of orders of the
Odisha Administrative Tribunal passed in O.A. No. 2595 of 2014 and other similar cases. It is
further contended // 4 // that the petitioner was not a party to the said Original Applications and, as
such, the impugned order of reversion has been passed without complying the principles of natural
justice and without giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner, particularly when there was no
allegation against the petitioner so as to pass an order of reversion.
4. Mr. M. Balabantaray, learned Standing Counsel for the State contended that since the tribunal
has directed that the persons having less merits than the applicants before it having been selected
and given promotion, they should be reverted and benefit should be extended to the applicants
before it and consequentially the order impugned has been passed reverting the persons who had
been considered less meritorious than the applicants in the Original Applications. Therefore, no
illegality or irregularity has been committed by the authority so as to warrant interference by this
Court. As a result, the writ petition does not merit consideration and the same is liable to be
dismissed.
// 5 //
5. This Court heard Mr. S. Mohanty, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. M. Balabantaray,
learned Standing Counsel appearing for the State opposite parties by hybrid mode. Perused the
records and with the consent of the parties, the matter is being disposed of finally at the stage of
admission.
6. On the basis of the undisputed facts and rival contentions raised by learned counsel for the
parties, it is emerged that admittedly the petitioner was working as Senior Clerk in the Collectorate
of Nabarangpur and he, having got outstanding CCRs which have been placed on record as
Annexure-7, was given promotion and appointed as ORS Group-B Officer in terms of Rule-4(b) of
Odisha Revenue Service Group 'B' (Recruitment) Rules, 2011 against the Recruitment Year, 2012.
There is an entry in the CCR for the year 2009-2010 "Extraordinary. A perfect Confidential
Assistant." In the counter affidavit, it is contended that since there was no specific rating according
to the ratings determined in the modalities for selection of ORS officers, the same was not taken into
// 6 // consideration. Since the Collector has given the endorsement in the CCR, it is not expected
on the part of the petitioner to know the same. More so, all other Collectors having given
'outstanding' ratings, basing upon the same the petitioner was given promotion and, as such, he was
discharging the duty as Additional Tahasildar, Sorada. Therefore, because of the order passed by the
tribunal in O.A. No. 2595 of 2014, the petitioner should not have been reverted to the parent post
without following due procedure and without applying the principles of natural justice. More so, he
was not a party to the main Original Application.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197204868/ 2
Afr D. Maleswar Patra vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 August, 2021
7. The soul of natural justice is 'fair play in action' In HK (An Infant) in re, 1967 1 All ER 226 (DC),
Lord Parker, CJ, preferred to describe natural justice as 'a duty to act fairly'.
In Fairmount Investments Ltd. v. Secy of State for Environment, 1976 2 All ER 865 (HL), Lord
Russel of Killowen somewhat picturesquely described natural justice as 'a fair crack of the whip' // 7
// In R. v. Secy. Of State for Home Affairs, ex p. Hosenball, Geoffrey Lane, LJ, 1977 3 All ER 452
(DC & CA), preferred the homely phrase 'common fairness' in defining natural justice.
8. A.K. Kraipak and others v. Union of India, AIR 1970 SC 150= (1969) 2 SCC 262, is a landmark in
the growth of this doctrine. Speaking for the Constitution Bench, Hegde,J. observed thus:
"If the purpose of the rules of natural justice is to prevent miscarriage of justice one
fails to see why those rules should be made inapplicable to administrative enquiries.
Often times it is not easy to draw the line that demarcates administrative enquiries
from quasi-judicial enquiries. Enquiries which were considered administrative at one
time are now being considered as quasi-judicial in character. Arriving at a just
decision is the aim of both quasi-judicial enquiries as well as administrative
enquiries. An unjust decision in an administrative enquiry may have far reaching
effect than a decision in a quasi- judicial enquiry".
In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India, AIR 1978 SC 597 = (1978) 1 SCC 248, law has done further
blooming of this concept. This decision has established beyond doubt that even in an administrative
proceeding // 8 // involving civil consequences doctrine of natural justice must be held to be
applicable.
9. In Swadeshi Cotton Mills v. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 818, the meaning of 'natural justice'
came for consideration before the apex Court and the apex Court observed as follows:-
"The phrase is not capable of a static and precise definition. It cannot be imprisoned
in the straight-jacket of a cast-iron formula. Historically, "natural justice" has been
used in a way "which implies the existence of moral principles of self evident and
unarguable truth". "Natural justice" by Paul Jackson, 2nd Ed., page-1. In course of
time, judges nurtured in the traditions of British jurispruduence, often invoked it in
conjuction with a reference to "equity and good conscience". Legal experts of earlier
generations did not draw any distinction between "natural justice" and "natural law".
"Natural justice" was considered as "that part of natural law which relates to the
administration of justice."
10. In Basudeo Tiwary v Sido Kanhu University and others (1998) 8 SCC 194, the apex Court held
that natural justice is an antithesis of arbitrariness. It, therefore, follows that audi alteram partem,
which is facet of natural justice is a requirement of Art.14.
// 9 //
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197204868/ 3
Afr D. Maleswar Patra vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 August, 2021
11. In Nagarjuna Construction Company Limited v. Government of Andhra Pradesh, (2008) 16 SCC
276, the apex Court held as follows:
"The rule of law demands that the power to determine questions affecting rights of
citizens would impose the limitation that the power should be exercised in
conformity with the principles of natural justice. Thus, whenever a man's rights are
affected by decisions taken under statutory powers, the court would presume the
existence of a duty to observe the rules of natural justice. It is important to note in
this context the normal rule that whenever it is necessary to ensure against the failure
of justice, the principles of natural justice must be read into a provision. Such a
course is not permissible where the rule excludes expressly or by necessary
intendment, the application of the principles of natural justice, but in that event, the
validity of that rule may fall for consideration."
12. The apex Court in Uma Nath Panday and others v State of U.P. and others, AIR 2009 SC 2375,
held that natural justice is the essence of fair adjudication, deeply rooted in tradition and
conscience, to be ranked as fundamental. The purpose of following the principles of natural justice is
the prevention of miscarriage of justice.
// 10 //
13. Natural justice, another name of which is common sense justice, is the name of those principles
which constitute the minimum requirement of justice and without adherence to which justice would
be a travesty. Natural justice accordingly stands for that "fundamental quality of fairness which
being adopted, justice not only be done but also appears to be done".
14. Reverting back to the factual matrix of the present case, the petitioner in para-5 of the writ
petition has specifically pleaded as follows:-
"5. That it is n admitted fact that the petitioner was/is not a party to the case which
has been reflected in the impugned order. The petitioner has also no knowledge
about that case. The law is well settled that an employee shall not be punished
without giving him any opportunity of hearing."
Though a counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of opposite party no.2, but no reply
controverting such assertion has been given, as would be evident from para-5 and 6 of the counter
affidavit. In absence of specific denial to such averments made by the petitioner, it is admitted // 11
// that no opportunity of hearing was given to the petitioner by the opposite parties.
15. While entertaining the Original Application, Odisha Administrative Tribunal, Cuttack Bench,
Cuttack passed an interim order on 13.04.2017 to the following effect:-
"Learned counsel for the applicant submitted copy of the order dt. 12.4.2017 in OA
No.924 (C)/2017 passed by a division bench of this Tribunal and submitted that in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197204868/ 4
Afr D. Maleswar Patra vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 August, 2021
the said OA it has been directed to maintain status quo of the applicant. As the
present case is identical in nature, similar order may be passed.
Considering the submission, issue notice on admission and list this matter along with
all other similar cases in the 1st week of May, 2017 and till then status quo of the
applicant as on date be maintained."
Pursuant to such interim order, the petitioner is continuing as ORS Group-B Officer and the order of
reversion passed in Annexure-3, so far as it relates to the petitioner, has not been given effect to.
16. Therefore, in view of the principles of law laid down by the apex Court, as referred to above, this
Court is of the considered view that the impugned order of // 12 // reversion in Annexure-3 dated
10.04.2017, so far as it relates to the petitioner, cannot sustain in the eye of law and the same is
liable to be quashed and hereby quashed. The matter is remitted back to the authority concerned to
reconsider the same and pass appropriate order by affording opportunity of hearing to the petitioner
in compliance of the principles of natural justice.
17. The writ petition thus stands disposed of. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
As the restrictions due to resurgence of COVID- 19 situation are continuing, learned counsel for the
parties may utilize a print out of the order available in the High Court's website, at par with certified
copy, subject to attestation by the concerned advocate, in the manner prescribed, vide Court's Notice
No.4587 dated 25th March, 2020, as modified by Court's notice no. 4798 dated 15th April, 2021.
..............................
DR. B.R. SARANGI, JUDGE Orissa High Court, Cuttack The 6th August, 2021, GDS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/197204868/ 5
