Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
Author: Sashikanta Mishra
Bench: Sashikanta Mishra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
ABLAPL No. 11777 of 2023
ABLAPL No. 13978 of 2023 &
ABLAPL No. 13980 of 2023
(Applications under Section 438 of the Criminal Procedure
Code)
---------------
ABLAPL No. 11777 of 2023
AFR
Sanjay Kumar Sarangi ...... Petitioner
-Versus-
State of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite Parties
ABLAPL No. 13978 of 2023
Pratham Patra @ Ghatak Patra ...... Petitioner
-Versus-
State of Odisha .... Opposite Party
ABLAPL No. 13980 of 2023
Pratham Patra @ Ghatak Patra ...... Petitioner
-Versus-
State of Odisha .... Opposite Party
Advocate(s) appeared in these cases:-
_______________________________________________________
For Petitioner(s) :S.K.Mohapatra,L.Achari,
Advocates.
(in ABLAPL No. 11777 of 2023)
Page 1 of 37
Mr. D.Panda, Advocate with
M/s. A.Mohanty, P.Patnaik,
J.Sahoo, Advocates.
(In ABLAPL No. 13978 of 2023)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 1
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
Mr. S.C.Mohapatra, Sr. Advocate
with M/s. A.Mohanty, P.Patnaik,
J.Sahoo, Advocates.
(In ABLAPL No. 13980 of 2023)
For Opp. Parties : Mr. S.K. Mishra, ASC
for the State.
M/s. S.N.Mishra & K.Panda,
Advocates
(For O.P.-2 in ABLAPL No.
11777 of 2023)
_______________________________________________________
CORAM:
JUSTICE SASHIKANTA MISHRA
JUDGMENT
10th April, 2024 SASHIKANTA MISHRA, J. These applications for anticipatory bail involve the
following question of law:-
Whether an application for anticipatory bail is maintainable at the instance of a
person who is already in custody in connection with a different case.
This Court has extensively heard Mr. Soura Chandra Mohapatra, learned Senior
counsel assisted by Mr. S. Kanungo, learned counsel for the petitioner in ABLAPL
No. 11777 of 2023, Mr. Debasis Panda, learned counsel for the petitioner in ABLAPL
No. 13978 of 2023 and Mr. Abhas Mohanty, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner in ABLAPL No. 13980 of 2023. This Court has also heard Mr. Sangram
Keshari Mishra, learned Additional Standing counsel for the State.
2. Reference to certain relevant facts of these cases would be in order at the outset.
The petitioner in ABLAPL No. 11777 of 2023, is apprehending arrest in connection with EOW P.S.
Case No. 07 of 21.02.2023, under Section 419/ 420/ 467/ 468/ 471/120 B of IPC. He is in custody
since 04.09.2023 in connection with Special Crime Unit P.S. Case No. 3, dated 10.08.2023, under
Sections 419/420/ 465/ 467/ 468/471/ 120 B of IPC.
The petitioner in ABLAPL No. 13978 of 2023, is apprehending arrest in connection with Kalimela
P.S. Case No. 208 of 2023 under Section 20(b)(ii)(c)/27(a)/29 of NDPS Act r/w Section
353/186/341/506 of IPC. He is already in custody since 30.08.2023 in connection with Kalimella
P.S. Case No. 216/30.08.2023.
The petitioner in ABLAPL No. 13980 of 2023, is apprehending arrest in connection with Kalimella
P.S. Case No. 212 of 2023 under Section 20 (b)(ii)(c)/25(1)(a)/27(a) and 29 of NDPS Act. He is in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 2
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
custody since 30.08.2023 in connection with Kalimella P.S. Case No. 216 dated 30.08.2023.
3. The question, whether the petitioners being already in custody albeit in connection with different
cases can maintain the applications for anticipatory bail has been raised at the threshold by the
Court. The parties have addressed the Court on said question making extensive arguments. Mr.
S.C.Mohapatra, learned Senior counsel, leading the arguments on behalf of all the petitioners, has
primarily argued that liberty being one of the most cherished objects of the Constitution as
guaranteed under Article 21 of Constitution has to be protected at all costs. Only because the
petitioner is already in custody, it does not mean that he cannot seek to protect his liberty in
connection with another case registered against him. Tracing the legislative history of the provision
under Section 438 of Cr.P.C., Mr. Mohapatra would argue that such provision was not there in the
Code of the Criminal Procedure, 1889. It was made part of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 with
the specific intention to protect the liberty of a person, who may be subjected to undue harassment
or humiliation being taken into custody unnecessarily. The provision confers wide powers on the
Court of Session and the High Court to protect the liberty of a person and such power is not
curtailed or limited in any manner, save and except in the manner provided in the provision itself.
Mr. Mohapatra further submits that save any exceptions contained in other statutes, like SC & ST
(POA) Act etc. a person accused of any other offence is entitled to seek protection from the arbitrary
exercise of the power of arrest by the police.
4. Per contra, Mr S.K.Mishra, referring to the language employed in Section 438 of Cr.P.C. would
contend that the power to protect a person in the event of his arrest obviously cannot be invoked in a
case where a person has already been arrested though in connection with another offence. He
submits that the order under Section 438 comes into operation only when a person is arrested. In
such event, he is released on bail. But when a person is already in custody in connection with
another case, he obviously cannot be arrested again or taken into custody. He can only be remanded
on the order of the concerned Court. Mr. Mishra concludes his arguments by submitting that the
power under Section 438 cannot therefore, be invoked to stop an accused in custody from being
remanded in connection with a case on the orders of this Court.
5. Both sides have relied upon several judgments in support of their respective contentions. Mr.
Mohapatra has relied upon the judgment of the Bombay High Court in the case of Alnesh Akil
Somjee vs. State of Maharasthra1, and the case of Amar S. Mulchandani vs. State of Maharasthra2.
Mr. Mohapatra has also relied upon the oft- quoted judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia vs. State of Punjab3 and Sushila Aggarwal v State (NCT of Delhi)4. On the
other hand Mr. S.K.Mishra has relied upon the judgment of the Rajasthan High Court in the case of
Sunil Kallami vs. State of Rajsthan5 and judgment of the Allahabad High Court in the case of Rajesh
Kumar Sharma vs. CBI6.
6. It is seen that the High Courts of Rajasthan and Allahabad have taken the view that a person
already in custody cannot seek anticipatory bail in connection with another case. In the case of Sunil
Kallami (Supra) a learned Single Judge of the Rajasthan High Court took note 1 2021 SCC Online
Bom 5276 2 2023 SCC Online Bom 2394 3 (1980) 2 SCC 565 4 (2018) 7 SCC 731 5 2021 SCC Online
Raj 1654 6 2022 SCC online ALL 832 of the celebrated judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 3
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and the scope of exercise of powers under Section 438 of Cr.P.C. The learned
Single Judge further took note of the relevant provisions relating to arrest and held that "Upon
reading Section 46 Cr.P.C.(supra), it is apparent that arrest would mean actually touch or confine
the body of the person to custody of the police officer. Section 167 of Cr.P.C. lays down that the
custody may be given to the police for the purpose of investigation (called as remand) or be sent to
jail (called as judicial custody). Thus the essential part of arrest in placing the corpus, body of the
person in custody of the police authorities whether of a police station or before him or in a
concerned jail". Having held as such, the learned single Judge held as follows:
"19. The natural corollary is therefore that a person who is already in custody cannot
have reasons to believe that he shall be arrested as he stands already arrested. In view
thereof, the precondition of bail application to be moved under Section 438 Cr.P.C.
i.e. reasons to believe that he may be arrested" do not survive since a person is
already arrested in another case and is in custody whether before the police or in
jail."
The learned Single Judge thereafter, referred to the observation of the Supreme Court in the case of
Narinderjit Singh Sahni (supra) and ultimately held as follows.
"24. However, keeping in view observations in Narinderjit Singh Sahni, (supra) and
considering that the purpose of preventive arrest by a direction of the court on an
application under Section 438 Cr.P.C. would be an order in vacuum. As a person is
already in custody with the police this Court is of the view that such an anticipatory
bail application under Section 438 Cr.P.C. would not lie and would be nothing but
travesty of justice in allowing anticipatory bail to such an accused who is already in
custody.
25. Examining the issue from another angle if such an application is held to be
maintainable the result would be that if an accused is arrested say for an offence
committed of abduction and another case is registered against him for having
committed murder and third case is- registered against him for having stolen the car
which was used for abduction in a different police station and the said accused is
granted anticipatory bail in respect to the offence of stealing of the car or in respect to
the offence of having committed murder the concerned Police Investigating Agency
where FIRs have been registered would be prevented from conducting individual
investigation and making recoveries as anticipatory bail once granted would continue
to operate without limitation as laid down by the Apex Court in Sushila Aggarwal,
(supra). The concept of anticipatory bail, as envisaged under-Section 438 Cr.P.C.
would stand frustrated. The provisions of grant of anticipatory bail are essentially to
prevent the concerned person from litigation initiated with the object of injuring and
humiliating the applicant by haying him so arrested and for a person who stands
already arrested, such a factor does not remain available.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 4
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
26. In view of above discussion, this Court holds that the anticipatory bail would not
lie and would not be maintainable if a person is already arrested and is in custody of
police or judicial custody in relation to another criminal case which may be for
similar offence or for different offences."
The aforesaid judgment of the Rajasthan High Court was followed in toto by the Allahabad High
Court in the case of Rajesh Kumar Sharma (supra).
7. It is apposite at this stage to refer to the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Narinderjit
Singh Sahni (supra) wherein taking note of the fact that the writ petitioners were already in custody
being arrested in connection with cases involving cognizable offences, the Supreme Court held as
follows:
"51. On the score of anticipatory bail, it is trite knowledge that Section 438 CrPC is
made applicable only in the event of there being an apprehension of arrest. The
petitioners in the writ petitions herein are all inside the prison bars upon arrest
against all cognizable offences, and in the wake of the aforesaid question relieving the
petitioners from unnecessary disgrace and harassment would not arise."
8. As against the judgments cited in the preceding paragraphs holding the view that the anticipatory
bail application in such a situation is not maintainable, the Single Judge of Bombay High Court in
the case of Alnesh Akil Somjee (supra) relied upon the following observations of the Constitution
Bench judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Sushila Agrawal(supra), and held as follows: "9.
The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Sushila A Aggarwal (supra), while dealing with the scope of
Section 438 of the Cr. P.C. has followed the decision in the case of Shri. Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v.
State of Punjab and regarding the bar or restriction on the exercise of power to grant anticipatory
bail, the Hon'ble Apex Court has held as follows:
"62.......In this background, it is important to notice that the only bar, or restriction,
imposed by Parliament upon the exercise of the power (to grant anticipatory bail) is
by way of a positive restriction i.e. in the case where accused are alleged to have
committed offences punishable under Section 376 (3) or Section 376-AB or Section
376-DA or Section 376-DB of the Penal Code. In other words, Parliament has now
denied jurisdiction of the courts (i.e. Court of Session and High Courts) from
granting anticipatory bail to those accused of such offences. The amendment [Code of
Criminal Procedure Amendment Act, 2018 introduced Section 438(4)] reads as
follows:
"438. (4) Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any
person on accusation of having committed an offence under sub-section (3) of
Section 376 or Section 376-AB or Section 376-DA or Section 376-DB of the Penal
Code, 1860".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 5
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
63. Clearly, therefore, where Parliament wished to exclude or restrict the power of courts, under
Section 438 of the Code, it did so in categorical terms. Parliament's omission to restrict the right of
citizens, accused of other offences from the right to seek anticipatory bail, necessarily leads one to
assume that neither a blanket restriction can be read into by this Court, nor can inflexible guidelines
in the exercise of discretion, be insisted upon-that would amount to judicial legislation"." Having
referred to the observations of the Supreme Court as above, the learned Single Judge of the Bombay
High Court thereafter held:
"15. In my considered opinion, there was no proper interpretation of Section 438 of
the Cr. P.C. at the hands of learned Additional Sessions Judge. Accused has every
right, even if he is arrested in number of cases, to move in each of offence registered
against him irrespective of the fact that he is already in custody but for different
offence, for the reason that the application (s) will have to be heard and decided on
merits independent of another crime in which he is already in custody.
16. One cannot and must not venture, under the garb of interpretation, to
substantiate its own meaning than the plain and simple particular though provided
by statute. What has not been said cannot be inferred unless the provision itself gives
room for speculation. If the purpose behind the intendment is discernible sans
obscurity and ambiguity, there is no place for supposition."
9. Before proceeding to analyse the judgments quoted above, this court would prefer to make an
independent study of the problem with reference to the statute. At the outset this Court would
remind itself of the salutary principle that liberty is one of the most cherished objects of our
constitution as guaranteed under Article 21. As has been argued by learned Senior counsel, there
was no provision in the old Code (Cr.P.C. 1889) conferring power on the Court to grant pre-arrest
bail. Such power was conferred only in the new Code (Cr.P.C.1973). Section 438 (1), which is
relevant, reads as follows;
"(1) Where any person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on accusation of
having committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the
Court of Session for a direction under this section that in the event of such arrest he
shall be released on bail; and that Court may, after taking into consideration,
inter-alia, the following factors, namely--
1. the nature and gravity of the accusation;
2. the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has previously undergone
imprisonment on conviction by a Court in respect of any cognizable offence;
3. the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice; and.
4. where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or humiliating the applicant by
having him so arrested, either reject the application forthwith or issue an interim order for the grant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 6
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
of anticipatory bail; Provided that, where the High Court or, as the case may be, the Court of
Session, has not passed any interim order under this Sub-Section or has rejected the application for
grant of anticipatory bail, it shall be open to an officer in-charge of a police station to arrest, without
warrant the applicant on the basis of the accusation apprehended in such application." The
legislative intent behind the enactment of the above provision as can be culled out from the
language employed therein is, to protect a person from the ignominy of being arrested and thereby
being subjected to undue humiliation and loss of dignity. This is all the more necessary when a
person is sought to be implicated on false accusations.
10. Whether such power can be curbed, curtailed or limited in any manner was also considered by
the Supreme Court in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia (supra) as well as Sushila Agarwal (supra). In Sushila
Agarwal (supra), the following observations made in Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia were quoted with
approval:
"38. The Supreme Court further clarified that it was impermissible to import
restrictions which were not found in the phraseology of Section 438 to whittle down
the discretion advisedly vested by the Parliament in the High Court and Court of
Session, premised on the guarantee of personal liberty under Article 21 of the
Constitution of India. The observations in paragraphs 53, 56, 63 and 69 read as
under:
...............
"53. It is quite evident, therefore, that the pre-dominant thinking of the larger,
Constitution Bench, in Sibbia (supra), was that given the premium and the value that
the Constitution and Article 21 placed on liberty-and given that a tendency was
noticed, of harassment - at times by unwarranted arrests, the provision for
anticipatory bail was made. It was not hedged with any conditions or
limitations-either as to its duration, or as to the kind of alleged offences that an
applicant was accused of having committed. The courts had the discretion to impose
such limitations (like co-operation with investigation, not tampering with evidence,
not leaving the country etc) as were reasonable and necessary in the peculiar
circumstances of a given case.
However, there was no invariable or inflexible rule that the applicant had to make out a special case,
or that the relief was to be of limited duration, in a point of time, or was unavailable for any
particular class of offences.
56. The reason for enactment of Section 438 in the Code was Parliamentary acceptance of the crucial
underpinning of personal liberty in a free and democratic country. Parliament wished to foster
respect for personal liberty and accord primacy to a fundamental tenet of criminal jurisprudence,
that everyone is presumed to be innocent till he or she is found guilty. Life and liberty are the
cherished attributes of every individual. The urge for freedom is natural to each human being.
Section 438 is a procedural provision concerned with the personal liberty of each individual, who is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 7
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
entitled to the benefit of the presumption of innocence. As denial of bail amounts to deprivation of
personal liberty, the court should lean against the imposition of unnecessary restrictions on the
scope of Section 438, especially when not imposed by the legislature.
...............
63. Clearly, therefore, where the Parliament wished to exclude or restrict the power of courts, under
Seciton 438 of the Code, it did so in categorical terms. Parliament's omission to restrict the right of
citizens, accused of other offences from the right to seek anticipatory bail, necessarily leads one to
assume that neither a blanket restriction can be read into by this court, nor can inflexible guidelines
in the exercise of discretion, be insisted upon-that would amount to judicial legislation. ..............
69. It is important to notice, here that there is nothing in the provisions of Section 438 which
suggests that Parliament intended to restrict its operation, either as regards the time period, or in
terms of the nature of the offences in respect of which, an applicant had to be denied bail, or which
special considerations were to apply. In this context, it is relevant to recollect that the court would
avoid imposing restrictions or conditions in a provision in the absence of an apparent or manifest
absurdity, flowing from the plain and literal interpretation of the statute (Ref Chandra Mohan v.
State of Uttar Pradesh10)."
Thus, the position that emerges is, the power under Section 438 of Cr. P.C. cannot be whittled down
or curbed, save and except as provided under Sub-Section 4 thereof which is quoted herein below:
"(4)Nothing in this section shall apply to any case involving the arrest of any person
on accusation of having committed an offence under sub-section (3) of section 376 or
section 376AB or section 376DA or section 376DB of the Indian Penal Code"
11. As has been argued by learned Senior counsel, there are restrictions with regard to exercise of the
power under Section 438 in some statutes like Section 18 of the SC and ST Act etc. Thus, save and
except under the conditions mentioned above, the power under Section 438 cannot be curtailed.
12. Whether such power would extend to a person already in custody is now to be examined. In the
present context, custody would mean judicial custody consequent upon arrest and under orders of
the Court. It has been argued that such a person, against whom another case is registered, cannot
obviously be rearrested as there is no provision for re-arrest under the Code of Criminal Procedure.
In case of such a person, the Investigating Agency/prosecution, if it feels necessary for the purpose
of investigation can only seek an order of remand from the court and in such event, it would get the
liberty of interrogating him in connection with the case or of taking further steps in investigation
like discovery of material evidence on his statement etc as contemplated under Section 27 of the
Indian Evidence Act. Learned State counsel Mr. Mishra, has argued that the order of remand cannot
be equated with arrest and there cannot be any apprehension of arrest on the part of the accused to
invoke the power under Section 438 of Cr.P.C.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 8
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
In view of the argument as above, it would be profitable to refer to the relevant provisions of the
Code relating to Arrest, as mentioned under Chapter-V titled 'Arrest of Persons' containing Sections
41 to 60 A. Section 41 reads as follows;
"41.When police officer may arrest without warrant - (1) Any police officer may
without an order from a Magistrate and without a warrant, arrest any person;
1. who has been concerned in any cognizable offence, or against whom a reasonable
complaint has been made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable
suspicion exists, of his having been so concerned; or
2. who has in his possession without lawful excuse, the burden of proving which
excuse shall lie on such person, any implement of house-breaking; or
3. who has been proclaimed as an offender either under this Code or by order of the
State Government; or
4. in whose possession anything is found which may reasonably be suspected to be
stolen property and who may reasonably be suspected of having committed an
offence with reference to such thing; or
5. who obstructs a police officer while in the execution of his duty, or who has
escaped, or attempts to escape, from lawful custody; or
6. who is reasonable suspected of being a deserter from any of the Armed Forces of
the Union; or
7. who has been concerned in, or against whom a reasonable complaint has been
made, or credible information has been received, or a reasonable suspicion exists, of
his having been concerned in, any act committed at any place out of India which, if
committed in India, would have been punishable as an offence, and for which he is,
under any law relating to extradition, or otherwise, liable to be apprehended or
detained in custody in India; or
8. who, being a released convict, commits a breach of any rule made under
Sub-Section (5) of section 356; or
9. for whose arrest any requisition, whether written or oral, has been received from
another police officer, provided that the requisition specifies the person to be
arrested and the offence or other cause for which the arrest is to be made and it
appears therefrom that the person might lawfully be arrested without a warrant by
the officer who issued the requisition. (2)Any officer in charge of a police station may,
in like manner, arrest or cause to be arrested any person, belonging to one or more of
the categories of person specified in section 109 or section110.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 9
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
Section 46 of the Code reads as follows:
"46.Arrest how made-(1)In making an arrest the police officer or other person
making the same shall actually touch or confine the body of the person to be arrested,
unless there be a submission to the custody by word or action.
(2)If such person forcibly resists the endeavour to arrest him, or attempts to evade
the arrest, such police officer or other person may use all means necessary to effect
the arrest. (3)Nothing in this section gives a right to cause the death of a person who
is not accused of an offence punishable with death or with imprisonment for life.
(4)Save in exceptional circumstances, no women shall be arrested after sunset and
before sunrise, and where such exceptional circumstances exist, the woman police
officer shall, by making a written report, obtain the prior permission of the Judicial
Magistrate of the first class within whose local jurisdiction the offence is committed
or the arrest is to be made."
Section 60 A of the Code reads as follows:
"60A. Arrest to be made strictly according to the Code No arrest shall be made except
in accordance with the provisions of this Code or any other law for the time being in
force providing for arrest"
Thus, arrest means physical confinement of a person with or without the order of the Court. What is
remand? Remand is governed under Section 167(2) of Cr.P.C. which is quoted herein below:
"(2) The Magistrate to whom an accused person is forwarded under this section may,
whether he has or has not jurisdiction to try the case, from time to time, authorise the
detention of the accused in such custody as such Magistrate thinks fit, a term not
exceeding fifteen days in the whole; and if he has no jurisdiction to try the case or
commit it for trial, and considers further detention unnecessary, he may order the
accused to be forwarded to a Magistrate having such jurisdiction;
Provided that--
1. the Magistrate may authorise the detention of the accused person, otherwise than in the custody
of the police, beyond the period of fifteen days, if he is satisfied that adequate grounds exist for
doing so, but no Magistrate shall authorise the detention of the accused person in custody under this
paragraph for a total period exceeding--
1. ninety days, where the investigation relates to an offence punishable with death, imprisonment for
life or imprisonment for a term of not less than ten years;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 10
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
2. sixty days, where the investigation relates to any other offence, and, on the expiry of the said
period of ninety days, or sixty days, as the case may be, the accused person shall be released on bail
if he is prepared to and does furnish bail, and every person released on bail under this Sub-Section
shall be deemed to be to released under the provisions of Chapter XXXIII for the purposes of that
Chapter;
2. no Magistrate shall authorise detention in any custody under this section unless the accused is
produced before him;
3. no Magistrate of the second class, not specially empowered in this behalf by the High Court, shall
authorize detention in the custody of the police."
But then, this provision is applicable to a case where the accused is already arrested and
charge-sheet has not been filed. There is no specific provision in the code governing a situation
where a person is required to be arrested/remanded in connection with a new case when he is
already in custody in connection with another case. As has already been stated, in such a situation
he can only be remanded in connection with the new case on the order of the Court. Can the order of
the remand in such a situation be equated with an act of arrest? Had the accused not been in
custody it would be open to police to arrest him following the procedure laid down in Chapter V
referred above. Since he is already arrested and in custody, he can only be taken on remand for the
purpose of investigation, if required. Thus, but for his detention in connection with another case, he
would have been arrested in connection with the new case if the investigation agency so wanted.
Now, what is the purpose and effect of remand? In ordinary circumstances, when a person is
arrested he is subjected to investigation as provided in the relevant provisions of the Code such as
Sections 160/161/162 and Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act. In other words, the purpose of
remand as in case of arrest is to collect evidence during investigation. It basically amounts to the
same thing. The question that falls for consideration in such a situation is, whether an order under
Section 438 of Cr.P.C. can be issued in relation to an order of remand. In case of arrest, such an
order would be to release him but in case of remand can such an order be passed?
13. To illustrate, a person is in custody in connection with a case and a new case is registered against
him for commission of some other offence. Two recourses are available to the police in such a
situation - firstly to seek an order of remand from the Court if the presence of the accused is
required for investigation or secondly, to arrest him, as and when he is released from custody in
connection with the previous case. It is only in the second scenario that an order of anticipatory bail
can become effective because only then can he be 'arrested'. It is trite law that the distinction
between an order in case of custody bail and anticipatory bail is that the former is passed when the
accused is already arrested and in custody and operates as soon as it is passed (subject to
submission of bail bonds etc), while the latter operates at a future time - when the person not being
in custody, is arrested. This, according to the considered view of this Court, is the crux of the issue.
To amplify, since an order granting anticipatory bail becomes effective only when the person is
arrested and as it is not possible to arrest a person already in custody, it follows that when, on being
released from custody in the former case, he is sought to be arrested in the new case, there is no
reason why he shall be restrained from moving the Court beforehand to arm himself with necessary
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 11
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
protection in the form of anticipatory bail to protect himself from such a situation. If such an order
is passed by the Court in his favour, it shall become effective if and when he is arrested as normally
happens. The only catch is, he cannot be arrested as long as he is in custody in the first- mentioned
case. So, his right to obtain an order in the new case beforehand that can be effective only upon his
release from the first-mentioned case cannot be denied under the scheme of the Code.
14. Another aspect must also be taken into consideration
- when a person is in custody in connection with a case and a new case gets registered against him, it
is, for all practical purposes a separate case altogether. This implies all rights conferred by the
statute on the accused consequent upon registration of a case against him as well as the
investigating agency are independently protected. There is no provision in the Code that takes away
the right of the accused to seek his liberty or of the investigating agency to investigate into the case
only because he is in custody in another case. As already stated, the accused can exercise his right of
moving the court for anticipatory bail which would of course be effective only upon his release from
the earlier case and in the event of his arrest in the subsequent case. Similarly, the right of the
investigating agency to investigate/interrogate in the subsequent case can be exercised by seeking
remand of the accused from the court in the subsequent case. Both these scenarios are not mutually
exclusive and can operate at their respective and appropriate times. The investigating agency, if it
feels necessary for the purpose of interrogation/investigation can seek remand of the accused whilst
he is in custody in connection with the previous case and if such prayer is allowed, the accused can
no longer pray for grant of anticipatory bail as then he would be technically in custody in connection
with the subsequent case also. Then, he can only seek regular or custody bail. It is also to be
considered that if the prosecution has the power to register a case against a person who is in custody
in connection with another case how can the accused be deprived of his right to seek protection of
his liberty in such case? This would militate against the very principle underlying Article 21 of the
Constitution as also Section 438 of the Code.
15. This takes the court to the reasoning adopted by the learned single judge of Rajasthan High
Court in the case of Sunil Kallami (supra) that ".....the concerned Police Investigating Agency where
FIRs have been registered would be prevented from conducting individual investigation and making
recoveries as anticipatory bail once granted would continue to operate without limitation as laid
down by the Apex Court in Sushila Aggarwal, (supra)...."
With great respect, this Court is unable to persuade itself to agree with the above-quoted reasoning
in view of the fact that grant of anticipatory bail does not and cannot grant the accused a licence to
avoid investigation or clothe him with any immunity there-from. In fact, sub-section (2) of Section
438 holds the answer to this question as follows:
(2) When the High Court or the Court of Session makes a direction under sub-section
(1), it may include such conditions in such directions in the light of the facts of the
particular case, as it may think fit, including -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 12
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
(i) a condition that the person shall make himself available for interrogation by a
police officer as and when required;
xxxxxxxxxxxxxxx It is needless to mention that an order under sub- section (1) can be passed only
upon hearing the Public Prosecutor. Hence, the prosecution can always insist upon inclusion of such
a condition by the court in the order grating anticipatory bail. And in so far as 'recoveries' are
concerned, as already stated, it is always open to the investigating agency to pray for remand of the
accused, as long as he is in custody, for such purpose and an order granting anticipatory bail has not
been passed.
Since these aspects have not been taken into consideration by the Rajasthan and Allahabad High
Courts in the cases cited supra, this Court is unable to agree with the views expressed therein. This
Court rather feels persuaded to agree with the reasoning adopted by the Bombay High Court in the
case of Alnesh Akil Somjee (supra) and Amar S Mulachandani (supra).
16. In the case of Narinderjit Singh Sahni (supra) the Supreme Court, in a writ application filed
under Article 32 was considering the pleas of several petitioners who, despite being granted bail in
one case were continued to be detained on the strength of production warrants issued in several
other cases registered against them in different police stations across the country. This, according to
the petitioners, was infraction of Article 21, which the Supreme Court did not accept. It was under
such fact-situation that it was held that they being in custody cannot pray for anticipatory bail. The
Court was persuaded to hold thus more so in the absence of any proof of infraction of Article
21. The facts of the cases at hand are however entirely different. Firstly, there is nothing on record to
show nor stated by the State Counsel that any production warrant has been issued against the
petitioners in the subsequent cases. Secondly, despite making the observation as referred above, the
Supreme Court was not seized with the specific question of maintainability of anticipatory bail
application by an accused already in custody. In the humble opinion of this Court, therefore, the
decision in Narinderjit Singh Sahni can be distinguished from the facts of the cases at hand.
16. From a conspectus of the analysis made hereinbefore thus, this Court holds as follows:
(i) There is no statutory bar for an accused in custody in connection with a case to
pray for grant of anticipatory bail in another case registered against him;
(ii) Anticipatory bail, if granted, shall however be effective only if he is arrested in
connection with the subsequent case consequent upon his release from custody in the
previous case;
(iii) The investigating agency, if it feels necessary for the purpose of
interrogation/investigation can seek remand of the accused whilst he is in custody in
connection with the previous case and in which no order granting anticipatory bail
has yet been passed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 13
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
If such order granting remand is passed, it would no longer be open to the accused to seek
anticipatory bail but he can seek regular bail.
17. In the cases at hand, the prosecution has not sought for nor obtained any order from the Court
for remand of the petitioners in the subsequent cases registered against them. Thus, this Court holds
that the Anticipatory Bail applications are maintainable. Having held so, this Court shall now
examine the merits of the same.
18. As already stated, the petitioner in ABLAPL No. 11777 of 2023 is apprehending arrest in
connection with EOW P.S. Case No. 07 of 21.02.2023, under Section 419/ 420/ 467/ 468/ 471/120
B of IPC. He is in custody since 04.09.2023 in connection with Special Crime Unit P.S. Case No. 3,
dated 10.08.2023, under Sections 419/420/ 465/ 467/ 468/471/ 120 B of IPC. It has been alleged
that the informant, who is the owner of a plot of land came to know while surfing the Bhulekh portal
of Govt. of Odisha on the internet that a ROR had been issued in respect of the said land in favour of
one Rajendra Kumar Sahu. This was done behind his back for which he lodged the FIR. During
investigation it came to light that someone had impersonated him and managed to sell the land and
register the sale-deed in the office of the Sub-Registrar thereby committing fraud. In so far as the
petitioner is concerned, he is a Section Officer in the office of the Sub- Registrar and claims that he
could not have had any personal knowledge about the so-called impersonation and had acted
bonafide on the basis of documents produced at the time of registration of the deed. Other officers
including the Sub-Registrar had also verified and scrutinized all documents and being satisfied that
they were in order, registered the deed. So, the petitioner cannot be singled out and blamed for the
entire occurrence.
19. Learned State Counsel opposed the prayer for bail by submitting that the petitioner is a habitual
offender and is already in custody in a case involving cheating and forgery. Moreover taking note of
his involvement the concerned authorities have placed him under suspension from service. He,
therefore, deserves no leniency.
20. Having considered the nature of the accusations, rival submissions and materials available in
the case record, this Court finds that the petitioner is in fact, in custody in a case involving similar
offences such as, Sections 419/420/465/467/468/471/120-B IPC. However, nothing has been
brought on record by the State to suggest that his custodial interrogation in the subsequent case is
necessary. It has also not been shown as to the extent of financial gain made by the petitioner in the
alleged occurrence, if at all. Under such circumstances, having him arrested in connection with the
subsequent case appears unnecessary. I am, therefore, inclined to allow the prayer for bail. It is
directed that in the event of arrest the petitioner shall be released on bail by the arresting officer on
such terms and conditions as he may deem fit and proper to impose including the condition that he
shall make himself available for investigation as and when required by the investigating officer and
render full cooperation to him. ABLAPL No. 11777 of 2023 is therefore, allowed.
21. The petitioner in ABLAPL No. 13978 of 2023, is apprehending arrest in connection with
Kalimela P.S. Case No. 208 of 2023 under Section 20(b)(ii)(c)/27(a)/29 of NDPS Act r/w Section
353/186/341/506 of IPC. He is already in custody since 30.08.2023 in connection with Kalimella
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 14
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
P.S. Case No. 216/30.08.2023. It is alleged that on 26.08.2023 upon receiving reliable information
about purchase and dumping of contraband Ganja by the petitioner, the SI of Kalimela PS rushed to
the spot where he found a lady guarding the contraband there. On seeing the police she tried to
escape and also attempted to assault the police staff by brandishing an axe but was ultimately
apprehended. On interrogation, she disclosed the name of the petitioner as being the financier and
dealer in the contraband who had obtained the same from Kalimela area for the purpose of sale. She
further disclosed that the petitioner and his associates had gone towards Kalimela side to arrange
vehicles for transportation of the contraband. In the raid Ganja weighing 300 kgs were found and
seized.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that there is absolutely no proof of the petitioner's
presence at the spot at the relevant time or of possessing the contraband. Even as per the
prosecution case, the involvement of the petitioner is sought to be proved through the confession of
the co-accused, which is not admissible.
22. Learned State Counsel opposes the prayer for bail by submitting that the petitioner being a
regular trader in contraband is involved in the occurrence in question as it is difficult to believe that
a lady would be dealing with such trade without help. In these circumstances, her confessional
statement cannot be ignored.
23. This Court finds from a reading of the FIR that there is absolutely no mention of the petitioner
having been present at the spot. It is also the prosecution case that the contraband was seized from
the exclusive and conscious possession of the lady co-accused Gangi Madkami @ Kasalamma @
Kaslur @ Kasla Madhi and nothing was seized from the petitioner. There is no other evidence, save
and except the confessional statement of co-accused Gangi to show that the petitioner had procured
the Ganja, packed it, dumped it at the spot and was preparing to transport it for sale. It is needless
to mention that the confession of a co-accused is not admissible evidence. Thus, this Court finds that
prima facie, there is no admissible evidence to show the complicity of the petitioner. The ratio laid
down in the case of Tofan Singh versus State of Tamil Nadu7 would squarely apply to the facts of the
present case.
24. In the above circumstances, there is no reason why the petitioner shall suffer the ignominy of
incarceration. This Court is therefore, inclined to allow the prayer of the petitioner. It is directed
that in the event of arrest the petitioner shall be released on bail by the arresting officer on such
terms and conditions as he may deem fit and proper including the condition that he shall appear
before the IIC of Kalimela Police Station on every Sunday at 10.00 am till submission of
charge-sheet and further, he shall appear before the Court in seisin of the matter personally 7 (2021)
4 SCC 1 on each date of posting of the case without seeking representation.
25. The petitioner in ABLAPL No. 13980 of 2023, is apprehending arrest in connection with
Kalimela P.S. Case No. 212 of 2023 under Section 20 (b)(ii)(c)/25(1)(a)/27(a) and 29 of NDPS Act.
He is in custody since 30.08.2023 in connection with Kalimela P.S. Case No. 216 dated 30.08.2023.
It is alleged that when the SI of Kalimela police station was performing patrolling duty in the night
of 27.08.2023 with his staff, they noticed a person standing with several plastic bags on the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 15
Afr vs State Of Odisha & Anr. .... Opposite ... on 10 April, 2024
roadside. On seeing the police the person started running away towards the jungle but he was
nabbed by the police staff. He was found with a gun (SMBL) in his hand which was taken away from
him. On interrogation he admitted that he was guarding the bags in which Ganja were kept and
further disclosed that the Ganja had been procured by him from the petitioner. A total quantity of
1050 kgs of Ganja was found inside the bags and seized.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that there is absolutely no proof of the petitioner's
presence at the spot at the relevant time or of possessing the contraband. Even as per the
prosecution case, the involvement of the petitioner is sought to be proved through the confession of
the co-accused, which is not admissible.
26. Learned State Counsel opposes the prayer for bail by submitting that the petitioner being a
regular trader in contraband is involved in the occurrence in question. Moreover huge quantity of
contraband was seized for which the bar under Section 37 would come into play. In these
circumstances, even the confessional statement of the co- accused cannot be ignored.
27. This Court finds from a reading of the FIR that there is absolutely no mention of the petitioner
having been present at the spot. It is also the prosecution case that the contraband was seized from
the exclusive and conscious possession of the co-accused Gopal Pal and nothing was seized from the
petitioner. There is no other evidence, save and except the confessional statement of co-accused
Gopal to show that he had procured the Ganja from the petitioner. In the case of Tofan Singh versus
State of Tamil Nadu (supra) the Supreme Court held that in case of a person implicated on the
statement of a co-accused the bar under Section 37 would not apply. It is needless to mention that
the confession of a co-accused is not admissible evidence. Thus, this Court finds that prima facie,
there is no admissible evidence to show the complicity of the petitioner. The ratio laid down in the
case of Tofan Singh (supra) would squarely apply to the facts of the present case.
28. In the above circumstances, there is no reason why the petitioner shall suffer the ignominy of
incarceration. This Court is therefore, inclined to allow the prayer of the petitioner. It is directed
that in the event of arrest the petitioner shall be released on bail by the arresting officer on such
terms and conditions as he may deem fit and proper including the condition that he shall appear
before the IIC of Kalimela Police Station on every Sunday at 10.00 am till submission of
charge-sheet and further, he shall appear before the Court in seisin of the matter personally on each
date of posting of the case without seeking representation.
29. In the result, all the three anticipatory bail applications are disposed of in terms of the directions
issued herein before.
.................................
Sashikanta Mishra, Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack, The 10th April, 2024/ Deepak
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116032646/ 16
