Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp.
Parties on 28 March, 2024
Author: B.R.Sarangi
Bench: B.R.Sarangi
ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
W.P(C) NO. 34843 OF 2023
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and
227 of the Constitution of India.
---------------
AFR M/s. Laxsan Associates,
Bhubaneswar ..... Petitioner
-Versus-
State of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties
For petitioner : M/s. P.C. Nayak, S.K. Sahu &
I. Tripathy, Advocates
For opp. parties : Mr. P.P. Mohanty, Addl. Government Advocate [O.P.No.1] Mr. Pravakar Behera,
Standing Counsel, Transport Department [O.Ps. No. 2-4] P R E S E N T:
THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI AND THE HONOURABLE MR
JUSTICE G. SATAPATHY Date of hearing : 21.03.2024 :: Date of judgment :
28.03.2024 DR. B.R. SARANGI,J. M/s Laxsan Associates, a partnership firm, has
filed this writ petition through its Managing // 2 // Partner seeking to quash the
Annexure-1 dated 06.10.2023, by which it has been communicated that its financial
bid has not been considered as its performance relating to deployment of manpower
in RTO offices earlier was not satisfactory and it has not deposited statutory dues in
respect of manpower supplied.
2. The factual matrix of the case, in brief, is that opposite party no.3-Transport Commissioner,
Odisha State Transport Authority invited public tender vide RFP Reference No.LTR
No.LXVI-9/23-10547/TC dated 18.07.2023 for "Selection of IT Service provider for executing
driving license & registration certificate related services, etc. for office of the Transport
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 1
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
Commissioner, Odisha and its sub-ordinate offices for a period of one year". The mode of
submission of proposals was physical. The last date of submission of proposals was 10.08.2023 and
opening of technical proposals was 11.08.2023. It was mentioned that date and time of opening of
the price proposals will be communicated later to the technically qualified bidders at e-mail ID // 3
// provided by them. As regards method of selection, it was mentioned as "Least Cost Method (L1
selection). 2.1. The petitioner, having satisfied all the criteria as per RFP, participated in the tender
process and the technical evaluation committee selected the bid of the petitioner. In the financial
bid, the petitioner was L1 bidder, but, opposite party no.4, vide letter dated 06.10.2023 under
Annexure-1, communicated that its financial bid was not considered as its performance relating to
deployment of manpower in RTO offices earlier was not satisfactory and it has not deposited
statutory dues in respect of manpower supplied. 2.2. Opposite party no.4, vide letter dated
17.01.2023, intimated all the service provider agencies that a meeting will be held on 20.01.2023 at
Bhubaneswar stating that the Chief Minister will take a review meeting on the performance of all the
manpower service provider agencies providing manpower and requested to attend the meeting. In
the said meeting, 18 service provider agencies, including the petitioner, took // 4 // part. But it was
intimated that the performance of the petitioner was not satisfactory. It is submitted that if the
petitioner's performance was not satisfactory relating to the deployment of manpower in RTO
Offices earlier, then, while calling the tender on 18.07.2023, this clause should have been included
so that in pre-bid meeting the petitioner could have clarified the same. Apart from the same,
pursuant to letter dated 06.10.2023, the petitioner clarified that the reason given, that it has not
cleared the statutory dues, is not correct and it has cleared all statutory dues in respect of the
deployment made in the office and in support of the same it has filed a clearance certificate from the
Provident Fund Authority. Therefore, disqualification of the financial bid submitted by the
petitioner, as communicated vide letter dated 06.10.2023, cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
Hence, this writ petition.
3. Mr. P.C. Nayak, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner contended that the petitioner, having
satisfied the requirement of the RFP issued under Annexure-2, participated in the tender process
and // 5 // qualified in the technical evaluation. Thereafter, in the financial bid though it was L1
bidder, its financial bid was not accepted on the flimsy ground that its past performance relating to
deployment of manpower in RTO offices was not satisfactory and it has not deposited statutory dues
in respect of manpower supplied. It is further contended that while participating in the tender in pre
bid meeting if the said question was raised, the petitioner could have clarified the position with
regard to past performance relating to deployment of manpower in RTO offices. It is further
contended that so far as clearance of statutory dues is concerned, the petitioner has cleared all the
EPF and allied dues vide Annexure-5. When there are no statutory dues to be paid by the petitioner,
the authority has misconstrued in issuing letter dated 06.10.2023 and rejecting the financial bid of
the petitioner. It is further contended that since the letter dated 06.10.2023 under Annexure-1 has
been issued without specifying with regard to violation of any condition of the tender, the same
cannot be sustained in the eye of law. Thereby, the decision making process of // 6 // the authority
being arbitrary, unreasonable and contrary to the provisions of law, this Court can exercise power of
judicial review to prevent arbitrariness and unreasonableness in the decision of the authority
concerned. To substantiate his contentions, he has relied upon the judgments in Mohabir Auto
Stores v. Indian Oil Corporation, AIR 1990 SC 1031 : (1990) 3 SCC 752; Reliance Energy Ltd. and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 2
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
Anr. v. Maharashtra State Road Development Corpn. Ltd. & Ors,, (2007) 8 SCC 1; Adani Gas
Limited v. Petroleum and Natural Gas Regulatory Board & Ors., (2020) 4 SCC 529; M/s. D.K.
Engineering & Construction v. State of Odisha & Anr., 2016(II) ILR-CUT-515; M/s. Famous Security
Services v. State of Odisha, AIR 2021 (Odisha) 57 and Mihan India Ltd. v. GMR Airports Ltd., AIR
2022 SC 2745.
4. Mr. P.P. Mohanty, learned Addl. Government Advocate appearing for the State-opposite party
no.1 contended that since the matter relates to opposite parties no.2 to 4 and in order to justify their
action they // 7 // have filed their counter affidavit, opposite party no.1 has not got any effective role
to play.
5. Mr. Pravakar Behera, learned Standing Counsel appearing for opposite parties no.2 to 4
vehemently contended that pursuant to the RFP issued by opposite party no.3 under Annexure-2,
the bidders submitted their bids and the tender committee made evaluation. After evaluation of
qualifying criteria and opening of the financial bid, the tender committee in its meeting held on
07.09.2023, taking into consideration the past unsatisfactory performance of the petitioner as
reported by the RTOs, took decision not to consider the proposal/bid of the petitioner. It is further
contended that as per clause-6.10, though the petitioner was found qualified in technical bid and in
the financial bid it stood first lowest, but, as its performance with regard to execution of the contract
in respect of providing manpower services was not satisfactory, pursuant to letter dated 01.02.2023
issued by the RTO, Gajapati and the letter dated 09.03.2023 issued by RTO, Nuapada, its bid was
not accepted. Besides, from the appraisal // 8 // proposal sent to the Government earlier, vide letter
dated 03.02.2023, it was ascertained that the past performance of the petitioner was poor.
Accordingly, the tender committee decided not to consider the bid of the petitioner. It is further
contended that since the petitioner had not paid statutory dues, its bid was also not accepted. Even
if the petitioner had quoted lowest price that ipso facto would not give a right that its bid would be
accepted. In the above premises, non- acceptance of the bid submitted by the petitioner cannot be
termed as arbitrary exercise of power so as to cause interference of this Court in exercise of power
under judicial review. Thereby, he seeks for dismissal of the writ petition. To substantiate his
contentions he has relied upon the decisions rendered in Raunaq International Ltd. v. IVR
Construction Ltd., (1999) 1 SCC 492; Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa, (2007) 14 SCC 517; Afcons
Infrastructure Ltd. v. Nagpur Metro Rail Corporation Ltd., (2016) 16 SCC 818 and Bharat Cooking
Coal Limited v. AMR Dev Prabha, (2020) 16 SCC 759.
// 9 //
6. This Court heard Mr. P.C. Nayak, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner; Mr. P.P. Mohanty,
learned Addl. Government Advocate appearing for the State-opposite party no.1; and Mr. Pravakar
Behera, learned Standing Counsel appearing for opposite parties no.2 to 4 in hybrid mode.
Pleadings have been exchanged between the parties and with the consent of learned counsel for the
parties, the writ petition is being disposed of at the stage of admission.
7. On careful perusal of the records, this Court finds that opposite party no.3 invited tender for
"Selection of IT Service provider for executing driving license & registration certificate related
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 3
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
services, etc. for office of the Transport Commissioner, Odisha and its sub-ordinate offices for a
period of one year". The relevant provisions of the RFP read thus:-
"6. Instruction To Bidders xxx xxx xxx 6.1 Preparation of Proposal Proposals shall
include "Technical Proposal"
and "Financial Proposal"
The content of proposal should be as below:
I. Cover Page:
// 10 // (cid:128) Super scribed with "Selection of IT service provider for executing Driving
License & Registration Certificate Related Services, etc. for office of the Transport
Commissioner, Odisha and its sub-ordinate offices for a period of one year." and
bidders name and address.
(cid:128) It shall be included in both the envelops of "Part 1: Technical Proposal" and " Part
2" :Financial Proposal".
II. Technical Proposal Develop:
(cid:128) Super scribed with "Technical Proposal", RPF Name & Number along with bidder's
name and Due date & time of submission.
(cid:128) DD for Tender fee ( Mandatory) (cid:128) Bid Security Declaration.
(cid:128) EMD (Mandatory) (cid:128) Self- Declaration (cid:128) Technical supporting document (cid:128)
Compliances to the Qualification Criteria (cid:128) Service Specification datasheet (cid:128) Any
other document required as per this RFP.
It is to be noted that the Technical Proposal Envelope shall contain all the documents
related to eligibility criteria, terms, and conditions of tender document etc. i.e.
complete tender documents except Price Bide part. The successful bidder needs to
provide the bid documents with proper binding and index. The page number should
be mentioned clearly against the documents. Failing of these may lead to
disqualification.
III. Financial Proposal Envelope:
(cid:128) The bidders needs to submit the Financial Proposal (Price Bid) as // 11 // per the
given format in Annexure-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 4
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
(cid:128) It is to be oted that the Financial Proposal Envelope shall contain only Prices and
no conditions i.e. deviations/ assumptions / stipulations/ clarifications /comments/
any other request whatsoever. Conditional offers shall be rejected.
6.2. Qualification Criteria Office of the Transport Commissioner, Odisha shall carry
out the technical evaluation for selection of eligible bidder. The bidder should meet
the following qualification criteria.
Sl. Basic Qualification Criteria Documents to be Submitted No. Requirement
1. Legal Entry The bidder should be: A (cid:128) Certification of incorporation/ company registered under
the Partnership firm and Articles of Indian Companies Act, Association in case of limited 1956/2013
or company.
LLP firm under LLP provisions (cid:128) Certificate of Registration for
2008, or GST.
Partnership Firm Should be
registered with GST, or
Proprietorship Firm Should be
registered with GST
2. Annual The bidder must have an (cid:128) Audited Financial Statements
Turnover average annual turnover in for last 3 financial years of
India of at least Rs.7.5 crores bidder.
during the last three (cid:128) Certificate from the Statutory
completed financial years ( FY Auditor/ Chartered
2019-20, FY 2020-21, FY Accountant clearly specifying
2021-22) the average annual turnover
of the bidder for the specified
years.
3. Experience of The bidder should have (cid:128) Copy of relevant Work
bidder experience of providing IT Order and
support services on man-hour (cid:128) Completion Certificate
basis for minimum 2 projects from Authority
to any Central/ State (cid:128) Ongoing Similar Projects
Government Department or with performance
Central /State Public Sector Certificate from Authority
Undertakings (PSUs) or any and the project should be
other Government (Central/ operational for more than
State/ PSU/ ULBs/ Smart two years.
Cites SPV) in India in last
Five (5) years on the due date
of proposal submission.
// 12 //
4. Non- Self-declaration by the bidder Self-declaration by the bidder
Blacklisted confirming that they have not signed by the authorized
Undertaking been blacklisted by any signatory
Central/State Government
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 5
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
Department or Central/State
Public Sector Undertakings
(PSUs) or any other
Government (Central/
State/PSU/ ULBs/ Smart
Cites
SPV) Organization in India as
on proposal due date.
5. Power of Power of Attorney in favour of On the bidder letter head
Attorney person who has signed the
Tender documents.
6. Tender Fee Tender Fees as specified in In shape of DD drawn in favour of
Bid Data sheet Transport
Commissioner, Odisha,
Cuttack from any rationalized
bank.
7. E.M.D. Fee E.M.D. Fees as specified in In shape of DD drawn in favour of
Bid Data sheet Transport
Commissioner, Odisha,
Cuttack from any rationalized
Bank.
8. Mandatory (cid:128) Valid PAN Number Self attested Certificate Copy
Requirement (cid:128) Income Tax Return
9. ISO ISO 9001-2022 Self attested valid Certificate Copy
Certification
10. Presence in
The Bidder must have a Self attested valid Certificate copy Odisha registered project office/office of
Office registration in Odisha in last 5 years Complete tender document with each page signed and
stamped by bidder.
The bidder must submit all certified and authenticated documentary proof for meeting the
qualification criteria and technical qualified bidders shall be considered for opening of their price
proposal. Technically qualified bidders have no right to claim for award of the work. Office of the
Transport Commissioner, Odisha reserves the right to cancel or award the work at any point of time.
xxx xxx xxx 6.7 Disqualification Even if the bidder(s) meets the guidelines / terms and conditions as
set forth in this RFP document, Office of the Transport Commissioner, Odisha at its discretion, may
disqualify any bidder(s) if:
// 13 // (cid:128) The bidder has been blacklisted by Office of the Transport Commissioner ,
Odisha or GoI or any State Government or Central Government or any Government
agency / Department in India as on Proposal Submission Due Date; or (cid:128) The bidder
has made misleading or false representation in the forms, statements and
attachments submitted.
(cid:128) Any attempt by a bidder to obtain confidential information, enter into unlawful
agreements with competitors or influence the committee or the Contracting
Authority during the process of examining, clarifying, evaluating and comparing
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 6
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
Tender shall make the Tender submitted by those Vendors liable for
rejection/disqualification.
xxx xxx xxx 6.10 Acceptance / Rejection of Tender (cid:128) Office of the Transport
Commissioner, Odisha does not bind itself to accept the lowest proposal.
(cid:128) Office of the Transport Commissioner, Odisha also reserves the right to accept or reject any
proposal in part or full without assigning any reason whatsoever.
(cid:128) Office of the Transport Commissioner, Odisha reserves absolute right to reject any or all the bids
at any time solely based on the past unsatisfactory performance by the bidder(s) the
opinion/decision of Office of the Transport Commissioner, Odisha regarding the same shall be final
and conclusive.
xxx xxx xxx
7. Selection Criteria 7.1 Evaluation Process // 14 // The proposals submitted by the bidders will be
evaluated on parameters as described in this RFP document. The bidder must get at least 60% of the
maximum score i.e. out of total @100 marks, in the evaluation process in order to qualify for
opening of the commercial/financial evaluation.
7.2 Evaluation Criteria
Sl. Maximum Supporting Marking
Criteria Parameter
No Mark Document Criteria
A. Company Competency
Minimum five years
of experience of the
bidder in providing
services for any (cid:128) 5 Years: 3
Work Order/
Central/State Marks
Authority
Government (cid:128) More than 5
Certificate/Agreem
Department or years and
ent
Central/State Public less
Company Copies/
A1 Sector Undertakings 5 than 8 years:
Competency Completion
Certificate clearly
Government Marks
indicating the
(Central/ State/ (cid:128) More than 8
scope of
PSU/ ULBs/ Smart years: 5
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 7
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
work and year.
Cites SPV) Marks
Organization in
India as on proposal
due date.
Valid Certification
A2 Certificate ISO 9001:2011-2023 5 5 Marks
Copy
B. Financial Competency
Bidder shall
submit:
(cid:128) Audited
statement
for last 3 financial
years.
Average Annual (cid:128) Certificate
Turnover of the from the
Average
Bidder during last Statutory auditor /
B1 Annual
three Financial Independent
Turnover
Years-2019-20, Chartered
2020-21, 2021-22 Accountant with
seal and signature
clearly specifying
the average
annual turnover
for
the specified years
C. Domain Experience Compliance Sr. Maximum Supporting Marking Criteria Parameter No Mark
Document Criteria Relevant The bidder must Work (cid:128) 2 C1 experience have executed 40
Order/Completion Similar in similar nature of Certificate from Projects = 25 // 15 // similar project
for any Authority. Marks assignments Central/State Government Department or Central/State
Public (cid:128) For Sector Undertakings each (PSUs) or any other additional Government Consolidated
project 5 (Central/ State/ Yearly marks PSU/ ULBs/ Smart billing invoices as will be Cites SPV) per
awarded Organization in Annexure 8 subject to India as on proposal maximum of marks AND
Yearly billing of 2 projects must not be less than 1 Cr together.
(cid:128) 1
Work
Project = 6
Order/Completion
Marks
Certificate from
Authority.
(cid:128) For
The Bidder must each
Relevant
have experience of additional
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 8
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
experience
C2 working with Odisha 10 project 2
in
Government as on mark
Odisha
Proposal due date will be
Consolidated
awarded
Yearly
subject to
billing invoices as
maximum of
per
Annexure 8
marks.
Important Note:
1- The Bidder needs to submit checklist with indexing, failing of which may lead to disqualification.
2- The Bidder must submit all required document with page number and the checklist. 7.3 Financial
Bid Evaluation The Bidders quoting the lowest financial quote (L1) shall be the Preferred Bidder.
For avoidance of doubt, it is clarified that in case L1 bidder fails to provide required services within
defined time lined, the authority reserves right to invite L2 bidder to provide required services in
terms of this RFP."
// 16 //
8. Pursuant to the aforesaid tender call notice, all total six bidders participated in the tender
process, out of which five bidders, including the petitioner, were qualified for having scored more
than 60% marks in terms of the RFP and became eligible for opening of financial bid. Accordingly,
their financial bids were opened and they were found to have quoted their prices to the following
effect:-
Cost of Man-hour to be Name of the Bidder charged by the Bidder (In Rupees) M/s.
Compuet Lab.
1 Rs. 97.00 Bhubaneswar M/s Laxsan Associates 2 Rs. 77.059 Bhubaneswar M/s R.R.
Enterprises, 3 Rs.75.09 Bhubaneswar M/s Care Security & 4 Allied Service, Rs.77.45
Bhubaneswar Rs.16,028.29 M/s. Swarnadevi Agency, 5 (mentioning per month
Cuttack per person)
9. After evaluation of qualifying criteria and opening of financial bids, the tender committee in its
meeting held on 07.09.2023 taking into consideration the past unsatisfactory performance of the
petitioner, as reported vide letter dated 01.02.2023 issued by the RTO, // 17 // Gajapati and letter
dated 09.03.2023 issued by RTO, Nuapada, took decision not to consider the proposal/bid of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 9
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
petitioner. Besides, from the appraisal proposal sent to the Government earlier vide letter dated
03.02.2023 it was ascertained that the past performance of the petitioner was poor. Accordingly, the
tender committee decided not to consider the bid of the petitioner. The petitioner, being engaged as
service provider in seven RTO offices earlier, they reported regarding payment of lowest wages and
statutory dues. So far as statutory dues are concerned, reliance has placed by the petitioner on
Annexure-5, wherein observation and also remarks have been given to the following effect:-
"OBSERVATION Establishment could not produce document for the inspection in
the stipulated time and requested for time for production of documents. On
verification of records produced by the Establishment before the undersigned, it is
observed that the Establishment has deposited EPF and allied dues up to the month
of June 2023.
REMARK // 18 // 1-The employer is advised to facilitae the filing of e-nomination by
all its employees at the earliest.
2-It is also advised to deposit the EPF and allied dues within the stipulated time to
avoid payment of penalty and interest u/s 14B & 7Q of the Act."
10. On bare reading of the communication made by the EPF Organization to the petitioner, it is
made clear that the petitioner was advised to facilitate the finding of e-nomination by all the
employees and also advised to deposit EPF and allied dues to be paid under Section-14B and 7Q of
the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952. Such instructions were
issued, as the petitioner had not deposited the statutory dues and was lacking in its responsibility to
comply with the statutory requirements. As a consequence thereof, communication was made to the
petitioner vide Annexure-1 dated 06.10.2023 assigning reason as to why its bid was not accepted,
even though it was L1 bidder in the process of bidding, keeping in view clause-6.10 of the RFP.
11. It may be noted that in exercise of power of judicial review in respect of contracts entered into on
// 19 // behalf of the State or instrumentality of the State, such as Corporation, the Court prima
facie concerns whether there has been any infirmity in the decision making process. In that case, the
Court can examine whether the decision making process was reasonable, rationale not arbitrary and
not violative of Article-14 of the Constitution of India.
12. In Erussion Equipment and Chemicals Ltd. v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1975 SC 266, the Apex
Court held as follows:
"When the Government is trading with the public, 'the democratic form of
Government demands equality and absence of arbitrariness and discrimination in
such transactions'. The activities of the Government have a public element and,
therefore, there should be fairness and equality. The State need not enter into any
contract with anyone, but if it does so, it must do so fairly without discrimination and
without unfair procedure."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 10
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
13. In Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. I.A. Authority of India, AIR 1979 SC 1628, the Apex Court held as
follows :
"It is true that the Government may enter into a contract with any person but in so
doing the State or its instrumentalities cannot act arbitrarily. The tenders were to be
adjudged on their own intrinsic merits in // 20 // accordance with the terms and
conditions of the tender notice."
14. In Food Corporation of India v. Kamdhenu Cattle Feed Industries, AIR 1993 SC 1601, the Apex
Court held as follows:
"In contractual sphere as in all other State actions, the State and all its
instrumentalities have to conform to Article 14 of the Constitution of which
non-arbitrariness is a significant facet. There is no unfettered discretion in public
law: A public authority possesses powers only to use them for public good. This
imposes the duty to act fairly and to adopt a procedure which is 'fairplay in action'."
15. In Sterling Computers Ltd. v. M & N Publications Ltd. (1993) 1 SCC 445, the apex Court observed
as under:-
"18. While exercising the power of judicial review, in respect of contracts entered into
on behalf of the State, the court is concerned primarily as to whether there has been
any infirmity in the 'decision-making process'. ... the courts can certainly examine
whether 'decision-making process' was reasonable, rational, not arbitrary and
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution."
16. In Tata Cellular v. Union of India, (1994) 6 SCC 651 : AIR 1996 SC 11, the apex Court, referring to
the limitations relating to the scope of judicial review of // 21 // administrative decisions and
exercise of powers in awarding contracts, held to the following effect:-
"(1) The modern trend points to judicial restraint in administrative action.
(2) The court does not sit as a court of appeal but merely reviews the manner in
which the decision was made.
(3) The court does not have the expertise to correct the administrative action. If a
review of the administrative decision is permitted it will be substituting its own
decision, without the necessary expertise which itself may be fallible.
(4) The terms of the invitation to tender cannot be open to judicial scrutiny because
the invitation to tender is in the realm of contract. ... More often than not, such
decisions are made qualitatively by experts.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 11
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
(5) The Government must have freedom of contract. In other words, a fair play in the
joints is a necessary concomitant for an administrative body functioning in an
administrative sphere or quasi-administrative sphere. However, the decision must
not only be tested by the application of Wednesbury principle of reasonableness
(including its other facts pointed out above) but must be free from arbitrariness not
affected by bias or actuated by mala fides.
(6) Quashing decisions may impose heavy administrative burden on the
administration and lead to increased and unbudgeted expenditure."
The apex Court also noted that there are inherent limitations in the exercise of power of judicial
review in contractual matter. As such, it was observed that the // 22 // duty to act fairly will vary in
extent, depending upon the nature of cases, to which the said principle is sought to be applied. It
was further held that the State has the right to refuse the lowest or any other tender, provided it tries
to get the best person or the best quotation, and the power to choose is not exercised for any
collateral purpose or in infringement of Article 14.
17. In Air India Ltd. v. Cochin International Airport Ltd. (2000) 2 SCC 617, the apex Court, while
summarizing the scope of interference as enunciated in several earlier decisions, held as follows:-
"7. ... The award of a contract, whether it is by a private party or by a public body or
the State, is essentially a commercial transaction. In arriving at a commercial
decision considerations which are paramount are commercial considerations. The
State can choose its own method to arrive at a decision. It can fix its own terms of
invitation to tender and that is not open to judicial scrutiny. It can enter into
negotiations before finally deciding to accept one of the offers made to it. Price need
not always be the sole criterion for awarding a contract. It is free to grant any
relaxation, for bona fide reasons, if the tender conditions permit such a relaxation. It
may not accept the offer even though it happens to be the highest or the lowest. But
the State, its corporations, instrumentalities and agencies are bound to adhere to the
norms, standards and procedures laid down by them and cannot depart from them
arbitrarily. Though that decision is not amenable to judicial review, the court can
examine the decision-making process and // 23 // interfere if it is found vitiated by
mala fides, unreasonableness and arbitrariness. The State, its corporations,
instrumentalities and agencies have the public duty to be fair to all concerned. Even
when some defect is found in the decision-making process the court must exercise its
discretionary power under Article 226 with great caution and should exercise it only
in furtherance of public interest and not merely on the making out of a legal point.
The court should always keep the larger public interest in mind in order to decide
whether its intervention is called for or not. Only when it comes to a conclusion that
overwhelming public interest requires interference, the court should intervene."
18. In Master Marine Service (P) Ltd. v. Metcafe & Hodgkinson (P) Ltd, (2005) 6 SCC 138, the apex
Court held that the principles of judicial review would apply to the exercise of contractual powers by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 12
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
Government bodies in order to prevent arbitrariness or favourtism. However, there are inherent
limitations in exercise of that power of judicial review.
19. The scope of judicial review has also been taken into consideration elaborately in Jagdish
Mandal v. State of Odisha, (2007) 14 SCC 517. In paragraph-22 of the said judgment, the apex Court
held as follows:-
"..............Therefore, a court before interfering in tender or contractual matters in
exercise of power of judicial review, should pose to itself the following questions:
// 24 //
(i) Whether the process adopted or decision made by the authority is mala fide or
intended to favour someone;
OR Whether the process adopted or decision made is so arbitrary and irrational that the court can
say: "the decision is such that no responsible authority acting reasonably and in accordance with
relevant law could have reached";
(ii) Whether public interest is affected. If the answers are in the negative, there should be no
interference under Article 226. Cases involving blacklisting or imposition of penal consequences on
a tenderer/contractor or distribution of State largesse (allotment of sites/shops, grant of licences,
dealerships and franchises) stand on a different footing as they may require a higher degree of
fairness in action."
Similar view has also been reiterated in Michigan Rubber (India) Limited v. State of Karnatak,
(2012) 8 SCC 216 and Maa Binda Express Carrier v. North East Frontier Railway, (2014) 3 SCC
760.
20. In Afcons Infrastructure Limited v. Nagpur Metro Rail Corporation Limited, (2016) 16 SCC 818,
the apex Court held that the constitutional courts are concerned with the decision making process. A
decision if challenged (the decision having been arrived at through a valid process), the
constitutional Courts can interfere if the decision is perverse. However, the // 25 // constitutional
Courts are expected to exercise restraint in interfering with the administrative decision and ought
not substitute its view for that of the administrative authority.
21. In Vidarbha Irrigation Development Corporation v. M/s Anoj Kumar Agarwalla), (2020) 17 SCC
577, the apex Court, in paragraph-16 of the judgment, held as under:-
"16. It is clear even on a reading of this judgment that the words used in the tender
document cannot be ignored or treated as redundant or superfluous they must be
given meaning and their necessary significance. Given the fact that in the present
case, an essential tender condition which had to be strictly complied with was not so
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 13
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
complied with, the appellant would have no power to condone lack of such strict
compliance. Any such condonation, as has been done in the present case, would
amount to perversity in the understanding or appreciation of the terms of the tender
conditions, which must be interfered with by a constitutional court."
22. In Bharat Cooking Coal Limited (supra), the apex Court in paragraph-34 of the said judgment
held that "it is thus imperative that in addition to arbitrariness, illegality or discrimination under
Article // 26 // 14 or encroachment of freedom under Article 19(1)(g), public interest too is
demonstrated before remedy is sought. Although the threshold for the latter need not be high, but it
is nevertheless essential to prevent bypassing of civil courts and use of constitution avenues for
enforcement of contractual obligations."
23. In Reliance Energy Ltd. (supra), the apex Court in paragraph-39 of the said judgment held as
follows:
"39. In Reliance airport Developers (P) Ltd. v. Airports Authority of India the
Division bench of this Court has held that in matters of judicial review the basic test
is to see whether there is any infirmity in the decision-making process and not in the
decision itself. This means that the decision- maker must understand correctly the
law that regulates his decision-making power and he must give effect to it otherwise it
may result in illegality. The principle of "judicial review" cannot be denied even in
contractual matters or matters in which the Government exercises its contractual
powers, but judicial review is intended to prevent arbitrariness and it must be
exercised in larger public interest. Expression of different views and opinions in
exercise of contractual powers may be there, however, such difference of opinion
must be based on specified norms."
24. In Mihan India Ltd. (supra), the apex Court in paragraphs-43 and 47 of the said judgment held
as follows:
// 27 // "43. Bare perusal of the above stated case-law in light of the facts of the
instant case makes it clear that merely having the power of rejection of bids does not
entitle authorities to exercise the said power arbitrarily. While discussing the
applicability o f Clauses 2.16.1, 3.3.1 and 3.3.5, it is made clear that in pre-bid
procedure prior to acceptance, the bidding process may be annulled otherwise after
issuance of LoA, the annulment cannot be done.
47. Analyzing the facts of this case in the light of the judgments in Dinesh engineering
(supra) and Shishir Reality (supra), after issuing the LoA in terms of Clause 3.3.5 of
RFP and declaring GAL as concessionaire as per Clause 3.3.6, issuing letter of
annulment of bidding process on the basis of the meeting of PMIC on 14.10.2019,
which directed for re-tendering of the bid, is completely an arbitrary exercise of
power, contrary to the provisions of RFP and violative of Article 14 of the
Constitution of India."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 14
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
25. In Adani Gas Limited (supra), the apex Court in paragraph-56.11 of the said judgment held as
follows:
"50.11. This Court is justified in reviewing the process adopted by the Board in
evaluating the bids for the ninth round of CGD bidding. It is well settled that judicial
review cannot be denied even in contractual matters to prevent arbitrariness."
26. In view of the above cited law laid down by the apex Court, so far as the power of the Court to
interfere with the conditions of tender in exercise of judicial review is concerned, there is no iota of
doubt that when there is arbitrariness and unreasonableness in the matter of decision making
process by the tendering // 28 // authority, the Court can interfere. But, here is a case where in
adherence to the tender conditions, the tendering authority has exercised its power, more
particularly, clause-6.10 which gives power to the tendering authority to reject any or all the bids at
any time solely based on the past unsatisfactory performance by the bidders. On the basis of the
materials available, the tender committee came to a definite conclusion that past performance of the
petitioner was unsatisfactory and, therefore, even if it quoted lowest price, the same cannot be
accepted.
27. In Raunaq International Ltd. (supra), the apex Court in paragraph-16 of the said judgment held
as follows:-
"16. It is also necessary to remember that price may not always be the sole criterion
for awarding a contract. Often when an evaluation committee of experts is appointed
to evaluate offers, the expert committee's special knowledge plays a decisive role in
deciding which is the best offer. Price offered is only one of the criteria. The past
record of the tenderers, the quality of the goods or services which are offered,
assessing such quality on the basis of the past performance of the tenderer, its market
reputation and so on, all play an important role in deciding to whom the contract
should be awarded. At times, a higher price for a much better quality of work // 29 //
can be legitimately paid in order to secure proper performance of the contract and
good quality or work - which is as much in public interest as a low price. The court
should not substitute its own decision for the decision of an expert evaluation
committee."
28. In Jagdish Mandal (supra), the apex Court in paragraph-24 of the said judgment held as follows:
"24. ...... The committee did not send show- cause notice to the fifth respondent
before rejecting the TD passbook and consequently the tender, as Clause 3.5.18 of the
Code makes it clear that acceptance of any tender is entirely at the discretion of the
accepting authority and no tenderer can require the authority to show cause for
rejection of the tender."
29. Therefore, the bid submitted by the petitioner has been rejected on the ground of
non-satisfactory performance in the past relying upon two documents, which have been issued by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 15
Afr M/S. Laxsan Associates vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 28 March, 2024
the RTO, Gajapati and RTO, Nuapada and also due to non-compliance of the requirement by
depositing statutory dues.
30. So far as the case of Mihan India Ltd. (supra) is concerned, on which learned counsel for the
petitioner has placed reliance, the same is distinguishable from the facts and circumstances of this
case, as in the said case direction was given for // 30 // retendering in arbitrary exercise of power
contrary to the provisions of the RFP, which violated Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, the said ratio cannot have any application to the present case.
31. In view of such position, this Court is of the considered view that rejection of the bid of the
petitioner, even though lowest one, is well justified in view of clause-6.10 of the RFP. Therefore,
there is no error in the decision making process in rejecting the bid of the petitioner so as to warrant
interference of this Court in exercise of the power under judicial review.
32. In the result, therefore, the writ petition merits no consideration and the same is hereby
dismissed. There shall be no order as to costs.
(DR. B.R. SARANGI) JUDGE G. SATAPATHY, J. I agree.
Digitally Signed (G. SATAPATHY) Designation: A.R-cum-Sr. Secretary JUDGE Reason:
Authentication Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 28-Mar-2024
16:21:42 The 28 March, 2024, Alok th
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/100058095/ 16
