Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party
on 11 March, 2025
Author: Sashikanta Mishra
Bench: Sashikanta Mishra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
I.A. No. 132 of 2024 &
I.A. No. 133 of 2024
(Arising out of ELEPT No. 5 of 2024)
(Applications under Sub-Section(1) of Section 83 of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 read with Rule 94-A of the
Conduct of Election Rules, 1961 and Order-VII Rule 11(d) of the
CPC, and under Order-VI Rule-16 of the CPC respectively).
---------------
AFR Aswini Kumar Patra ...... Petitioner
(Respondent)
- Versus -
Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party
(Election Petitioner)
Advocate(s) appeared in this case:-
__________________________________________________________________
For Petitioner : Mr. Bidyadhar Mishra, Sr. Advocate
(Respondent) with M/s. T.K. Biswa, (Mrs.) R.P. Panda,
P. Bharadwaj & B.S. Panigrahi, Advocates
For Opp. Parties : Mr. Manas Mohapatra, Sr. Advocate,
(Election Petitioner) with M/s. A.P. Bose, S.K. Mohapatra,
S. Swain, S.K. Routray, D. Sahoo, D.K.
Sethy & S. Satpathy, Advocates
_____________________________________________________________
CORAM:
JUSTICE SASHIKANTA MISHRA
ORDER
th 11 March, 2025 SASHIKANTA MISHRA, J. Both these applications have been filed by the sole
respondent of the above election petition. I.A. No. 132 of 2024 has been filed for dismissal of the
election petition at the threshold for non-compliance of the provision under Section 83(1) of
Representation of the People Act, 1951 (in short, the 'Act') read with Rule 94-A of the Conduct of
Election Rules (in short, the 'Rules') and Order-VII Rule 11(d) of CPC. I.A. No. 133 of 2024 has been
filed for striking out the pleadings of the election petition as per the provisions under Order-VI Rule
-16 of CPC. Both the applications essentially involve the same facts and issues and were therefore,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 1
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
heard together and are being disposed of by this common order.
2. The election petition has been filed by the election petitioner (a) to declare the election of
respondent, Aswini Kumar Patra as void and (b) to direct re-election/ fresh poll in respect of 35
Jaleswar Assembly Constituency to the Odisha Legislative Assembly. The election of the respondent
has been questioned basically on two grounds, (i) the respondent appointed one Manas Jena as his
election agent and counting agent, who is disqualified to act as such as per law and, (ii) the
respondent through his election and counting agent has influenced the result of the election by
taking advantage of his position as Chairman of Panchayat Samiti, for which the result of the
election was materially affected.
3. Pursuant to notice, the respondent entered appearance and filed his written statement.
Additionally, he filed the present applications on grounds that would be highlighted hereinafter. The
election petitioner has filed detailed objections to the said applications.
4. In I.A. No. 132 of 2024 it is stated that though the election petitioner has made allegations of
corrupt practice, has not filed the required affidavit in Form-25 along with the election petition,
which is in violation of the provision under Section 83(1) of the Act read with Rule 94-A of the
Rules. It is also stated that the election petitioner has failed to disclose/plead the material facts and
material particulars of commission of such corrupt practice, which is in violation of Section 83(1)(a)
and (b) of the Act. It is also stated that the challan showing deposit of Rs.2,000/- towards security
for cost of the petition as per Section 117 of the Act is defective and being an incurable defect, the
election petition is liable to be rejected.
I.A. No. 133 of 2024 has been filed by stating that the pleadings under Paragraphs-9(A) to (F) are
unnecessary, scandalous, frivolous and vexatious and tend to prejudice and embarrass and delay the
fair trial of the case. As such, they are liable to be struck out. In this context it is stated that the said
paragraphs of the election petition contain allegations with regard to disqualification of Manas Jena
as the election/counting agent of the respondent but without referring to the specific provision of
law or the latest instruction of the Election Commission of India in this regard. The other allegations
made under paragraph-9 of the election petition constitute corrupt practices but are vague and do
not make out a cause of action.
5. Heard Mr. Bidyadhar Mishra, learned Senior Counsel with Mr. T.K. Biswal, learned counsel for
the petitioner- respondent and Mr. Manas Mohapatra, learned Senior Counsel with Mr. A.P. Bose,
learned counsel appearing for the opposite party- election petitioner.
6. As has already been stated hereinbefore, the election petition is based on two allegations; (i)
Manas Jena, the election and counting agent of respondent was disqualified to act as such under the
provisions mentioned in paragraph - 9(C) and 9(E) (ii) the respondent through Manas Jena
influenced the result of the election by adopting unfair means and undue influence as highlighted in
paragraphs 9(D) and 9(F) of the Election Petition. On the first issue noted above, Mr. Mishra would
argue that admittedly, Manas Jena was appointed as the election agent and counting agent of the
respondent. There is no dispute that said Manas Jena is also the Chairman of Jaleswar Panchayat
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 2
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
Samiti. The election petitioner has referred to Sections 40 and 41 of the Act and Rule 12(1) of the
Rules to contend that Manas Jena was not qualified to act as election agent of the respondent.
Chapter-VI of the Handbook for Candidates- 2023 issued by the Election Commission of India has
also been relied upon by the election petitioner. Mr. Mishra argues that neither Section 40 nor
Section 41 debars a person like Manas Jena to act as election agent or counting agent. In fact, he was
duly appointed as per Section 40 as election agent and as per Section 47 as counting agent. The
election petitioner has referred to Clause-6.1.2 of the Handbook for Candidate- 2023 but has not
referred to the latest instructions issued by the Election Commission of India. Mr. Mishra therefore,
argues that the averments made in the election petition relating to the so called disqualification of
Manas Jena have no legs to stand and as the same do not disclose a valid cause of action, the
election petition is to be dismissed as a whole.
7. In reply, learned Senior Counsel Mr. Mohapatra would argue that Section 41 of the Act provides
for disqualification for being an election agent. The Election Commission of India issued Handbook
for Candidate-2023 of which Clause-6.1.2 specifically mentions that Chairperson of Panchayat
Samiti is disqualified from acting as election agent. The respondent, though mentioned the name of
Manas Jena in Form No.18 relating to appointment of counting agent, deliberately did not mention
the words 'Chairman of Panchayat Samiti' against his name as the same would have resulted in
rejection of the Form. Being a sitting chairman of the Panchayat Samiti, Manas Jena is disqualified
for which the petitioner has filed the election petition questioning the election of the respondent on
the grounds set out under Section 100(1)(d)(iv) of the Act.
8. Having heard learned counsel for the parties, this Court deems it proper to refer to the relevant
statutory provisions at the outset. Section 100(1)(d)(iv) of the Act reads as follows:
―100. Grounds for declaring election to be void.--(1) Subject to the provisions of
sub-section (2) if the High court is of opinion--
xx xx xx
(d) that the result of the election, in so far as it concerns a returned candidate, has
been materially affected--
xx xx xx
(iv) by any non-compliance with the provisions of the Constitution or of this Act or of
any rules or orders made under this Act, the High Court shall declare the election of
the returned candidate to be void.(cid:129) Sections 40 and 41 being also relevant are quoted
hereinbelow:
"40. Election agents.--A candidate at an election may appoint in the prescribed
manner any one person other than himself to be his election agent and when any
such appointment is made, notice of the appointment shall be given in the prescribed
manner to the returning officer.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 3
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
41. Disqualification for being an election agent.--Any person who is for the time being
disqualified under the Constitution or under this Act for being a member of either
House of Parliament or the House or either House of the Legislature of a State or for
voting at elections, shall, so long as the disqualification subsists, also be disqualified
for being an election agent at any election.(cid:129) Rule-12 of the Conduct of Election Rules,
1961 reads as follows;
"12. Appointment of election agent.--(1) Any appointment of an election agent under
section 40 shall be made in Form 8 and the notice of such appointment shall be given
by forwarding the same in duplicate to the returning officer who shall return one
copy thereof to the election agent after affixing thereon his seal and signature in
token of his approval of the appointment.
(2) The revocation of the appointment of an election agent under sub-section (1) of
section 42 shall be made in Form 9.(cid:129)
9. According to the election petitioner, Manas Jena is disqualified as he is the sitting chairperson of
Jaleswar Panchayat Samiti. Be it noted that it has not been disputed that Manas Jena was in fact the
serving chairman of Jaleswar Panchayat Samiti at the relevant time. Mr. Mohapatra, learned Senior
Counsel has referred to the Handbook for Candidate- 2023 issued by the Election Commission of
India. Chapter-VI deals with appointment of election agents. Clause-6.1.1 states as follows:
―6.1.1. A candidate may appoint any person to be his/her election agent. Note that
under the law, it is not necessary or incumbent on a candidate to appoint an election
agent at the time of filing of his nomination paper. Such appointment may, if the
candidate so desires, be made at any time after the nomination as a candidate or not
at all. Every such appointment has to be made by a formal communication by the
candidate in Form 8 (Under Rule 12 of Conduct of Election Rules, 1961) (Annexure -
7) in duplicate, which has to be submitted to Returning Officer. The Returning
Officer will retain one copy thereof and return the second copy to the
candidate/election agent after affixing thereon his seal and signature in token of his
approval of the appointment.(cid:129) Clause-6.1.2 reads as follows;
"6.1.2 Important points to note -
(cid:130) Any person who currently stands disqualified under the Constitution or under the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, for being a member of either House of
Parliament or either House of the Legislature of a State or for voting at elections is
disqualified for being an election agent so long as the disqualification subsists.
(cid:130) No person with security cover can be allowed to surrender the security cover to
enable him to become an election agent.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 4
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
(cid:130) No sitting Minister either of Union Government or of a State Government, sitting
Member of Parliament, sitting Member of Legislative Assembly/Legislative Council,
Chief/Head/ Chairperson of Urban Local Bodies, viz., Mayor of a Corporation or
Chairperson of Municipality/Zila Parishad/Panchayat Union,
Chairperson/Vice-Chairperson of District level/Block level/ Mandal Parishad,
Panchayat samiti etc., shall be allowed to act as Election agent, Polling Agent, or
Counting Agent of any candidate during an election. (Latest instruction to be
referred). (cid:130) Chairpersons and members of Central PSUs/State PSUs, Govt.
Bodies/Corporation, Cooperatives. (cid:130) Persons receiving any honorarium or aid from
Government or Persons working on part time in any Govt. / Govt. Aided Institutions
shall not act as Election agent.
(cid:130) Para Medical/Healthcare staff working in Govt./Govt. Aided institutions, Fair Price
Shop dealers, Anganwadi Employees.(cid:129) (cid:130) No person in the service of the Government
can act as an Election agent. This is an offence and Under Section 134-A of the R.P.
Act 1951, such appointees are punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to 3 (three) months, or with fine, or with both.(cid:129)
10. Thus, on a plain reading it would be evident that a person serving as Chairperson of the
Panchayat Samiti is disqualified to act as election agent. No other statutory provision is cited in this
regard. On the contrary, the respondent has argued that Handbook for Candidate-2023 does not
have any force of law. There is nothing in the Constitution of India, the Representation of People Act
or in the Handbook for Returning Officer-2023 issued by the Election Commission of India to
suggest that a Chairman of Panchayat Samiti is disqualified to act as election agent. In the
Handbook for Returning Officer, Clause-5.26 deals with appointment of election agents and there is
nothing therein to hold that Chairman of Panchayat Samiti is disqualified. Clause-5.26.4 only
provides that Ministers of the Union or States and MP, MLA, MLCs. and any other person provided
with security cover by the State shall not be appointed as election agents (and also as polling and
counting agents).
11. Mr. Mishra further argues that only the Handbook for Returning Officer-2023 has sanction of
law and not the Handbook for Candidate-2023 and therefore, not legally binding. Additionally, Mr.
Mishra has argued that even otherwise, Manas Jena was appointed as election agent/counting agent
in his individual capacity and not as Chairman of the Panchayat Samiti.
12. From the above discussion, this Court finds that whether Manas Jena was appointed in his
personal capacity or the same was in his capacity as the Chairman of Panchayat Samiti and if so,
whether he was disqualified to act as such, are matters to be decided during trial on the basis of
evidence laid and legal provisions examined. If it is to be held that Manas Jena was disqualified, the
same would obviously have an impact on the candidature of the respondent. Therefore, it cannot be
said that the election petition in so far as the point under consideration is concerned, does not raise
a valid cause of action so as to be rejected at the threshold and in such light the pleadings made
under Paragrah-9(C) and 9(E) refer to a valid cause of action. The contentions raised by the
respondent in this regard are not acceptable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 5
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
13. It is next stated that though the election petitioner has alleged commission of corrupt practices
by the respondent, the material facts thereof have not been pleaded and the pleadings have not been
supported by affidavit in Form-25. Particular reference has been made in this context to the
pleadings under paragraphs 9(D) and 9(F). In this context, Mr. Mishra, learned Senior Counsel for
the respondent would argue that if the pleadings under the above paragraphs are to be read, it
would be clear that the same relate to the allegations of corrupt practice committed by the
respondent. Mr. Mishra submits that the election petitioner is duty bound to plead material facts
and full particulars of such corrupt practice that he alleges including as full statement as possible of
the names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt practices and the date and place of
commission of each such corrupt practice. But if the pleadings under the aforementioned
paragraphs are read as a whole, it would be apparent that the full material facts and particulars have
not been pleaded at all. Besides, the election petition is not accompanied by the affidavit in
Form-25.
14. Per contra, learned Senior Counsel Mr. Mohapatra would argue that the election petitioner has
not alleged any corrupt practice whatsoever. His entire case is based on Section 100(1)(d)(iv). Since
no corrupt practice has been alleged, the requirement of specific pleading and filing of affidavit in
Form No.-25 does not arise.
15. Having heard learned counsel on the point it would useful to first reproduce the concerned
paragraphs of the election petition for better appreciation.
―9(D). That as per the provisions contained in Section 47 of the Representation of the People Act,
1951 and the Rule 52(1) of the Conduct of Election Rules 1961 the Respondent has appointed Manas
Jena as one of the Counting Agent for counting of votes of 35-Jaleswar Legislative Assembly held on
04.05.2024. In the prescribed Form 18 the name of Manas Jena has been mentioned as counting
agent.
In exercise of the power conferred under Article 324 of the Constitution of India an several
judgments passed by the Hon'ble High Courts and Hon'ble Supreme Court of India the Election
Commission of India has issued the guidelines and circulars and the same has got the effect of law.
As per the circulars the Chairman of the Panchayat Samiti will not be allowed to act as Election
Agent/Polling Agent or Counting Agent Chapter -14 of the Hand Book of candidate 2023 issued by
the Election Commission of India elaborately stated about counting of votes. Clause 14.9 elaborately
deals with qualification of counting agents. The relevant provisions are contained in clauses 14.9.2
of the Chapter 14 and the same are quoted here under:
Chapter -14 of the Hand Book of candidate 2023 issued by the Election Commission
of India elaborately stated about counting of votes. Clause 14.9 elaborately deals with
qualification of counting agents. The relevant provisions are contained in clauses
14.9.2 of the Chapter 14 and the same are quoted here under:
14.9.2. However, sitting Minister either of the Union Government or of the State
Government, Member of Parliament or State Legislature, Mayor of a corporation or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 6
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
Chairperson of Municipality / Zila Parishad/Panchayat Union, etc, Chairpersont and
Members of Central PSUs/State PSUs, Govt Bodies/Corporation, Persons receiving
any honorarium from Government or Persons working on part time in any Govt/Gost
Aided Institutions and Para Medical/Healthcare staff working in Govt Govt Aided
institutions, Fair Price Shop dealers. Anganwadi Employees shall not be appointed as
a counting agents.
During the time of counting the Returning Officer (Additional Sub-Collector of Balasore) and the
staff of Jaleswar Block were engaged for counting of votes. The Respondent through his election
agent who is also a counting agent influenced the persons who were engaged for counting of votes.
The Respondent intentionally, deliberately and consciously appointed Manas Jena the Chairman of
Jaleswar Panchayat Samiti as his counting agent in order to influence his position, power and
authority over the counting staff for the furtherance of the prospect of the Respondent election. The
certified copy of Form 18 is annexed herewith as Annexure-3.
The object of the law and to ensure free and fair election is to keep the public servant aloof from
politics and also protect them from being used by those with influence or in position or authority
and power and to prevent the machinery of the Govt. from being used to influence of a particular
candidate and success in election. Therefore the result of the election, in so far as it concerns the
Respondent in so far as it relates to 35-Jaleswar Assembly Constituency has been materially affect
and aside.
It would be crystal clear that the Respondent and the Returning Officer are hand in glove to ensure
Respondent's success in the election and they have made a mockery of statutory provisions of law,
instead of strictly observing them.
9(F) That the Respondent with a pre-conceived notion appointed the Chairman of Jaleswar
Panchayat Samiti (Jaleswar Block) as his election agent. The Chairman of the Block is a public
servant holding a high position in the Block and by utilizing his position, power and authority was
canvasing the voters of 35-Jaleswar Assembly Constituency to vote in favour of the Respondent who
is the returned candidate. That apart said Manas Jena was also a counting agent. The staff of
Jaleswar Block were engaged for counting of votes. Since Manas Jena the Chairman of the Block was
the counting agent he has influenced the staff of the Block to show favour to the Respondent. It's
another instance, which has vitiated the counting process and election result in which the
Respondent is declared to have been elected. Both in electronic media and print media it was
declared that the election petitioner has won the election but after some time it has been declared
that the Respondent has won the election, such declaration is absolutely wrong as no notice was
given to the election petitioner and Manas Jena Chairman of Jaleswar Block though prohibited in
law to act as election agent and counting agent of the Respondent in the general election 2024 in
respect of 35-Jaleswar Assembly Constituency has appointed as election agent and counting agent
and influenced the voters and counting staff in furtherance of the prospects of the returned
candidate. The Respondent has adopted the unfair means of undue influence and procuring and
obtaining assistance from the Chairman of the Block for furtherance of his prospect. Hence the
election of 35-Jaleswar Assembly Constituency be declared as void and the same is liable to be set
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 7
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
aside.(cid:129) [Emphasis added]
16. Whether these allegations would amount to corrupt practice or not can be determined with
reference to Section 123 of the Act, which defines 'corrupt practice'. From the tone and tenor of the
pleadings quoted above, it is apparent that according to the Election petitioner, the respondent
through his election agent resorted to unfair practices and undue influence to further his prospects
in the election. The relevant provision, that is, sub-Section(2) of Section 123 is quoted hereinbelow:
―123. Corrupt practices.--
xx xx xx (2) Undue influence, that is to say, any direct or indirect interference or
attempt to interfere on the part of the candidate or his agent, or of any other person
with the consent of the candidate or his election agent, with the free exercise of any
electoral right:
Provided that-- (a) without prejudice to the generality of the provisions of this clause
any such person as is referred to therein who--
(i) threatens any candidate or any elector, or any person in whom a candidate or an
elector is interested, with injury of any kind including social ostracism and
ex-communication or expulsion from any caste or community; or
(ii) induces or attempts to induce a candidate or an elector to believe that he, or any
person in whom he is interested, will become or will be rendered an object of divine
displeasure or spiritual censure,shall be deemed to interfere with the free exercise of
the electoral right of such candidate or elector within the meaning of this clause;
(b) a declaration of public policy, or a promise of public action, or the mere exercise
of a legal right without intent to interfere with an electoral right, shall not be deemed
to be interference within the meaning of this clause.
xx xx xx(cid:129) If the allegations made in the paragraphs in question are considered as a
whole they would certainly be treated as undue influence within the meaning of
Sub-Section (2) of Section 123 of the Act. The election petitioner has made allegations
but stopped short of designating them as corrupt practice. It is immaterial if the
election petitioner specifically designates his allegations as corrupt practices or not,
for it is for the Court to test the same on the touch-stone of statutory provisions
quoted above. Having done so, this Court is left with no doubt that the pleadings
under paragraphs 9 (D) and 9(F) are nothing but allegations of corrupt practice.
Having held so, it is to be seen whether the pleadings satisfy the requirements of
Section 83(1) of the Act. For reference, Section 83 is quoted hereinbelow:
"83. Contents of petition.--(1) An election petition-- (a) shall contain a concise
statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies; (b) shall set forth full
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 8
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
particulars of any corrupt practice that the petitioner alleges, including as full a
statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such
corrupt practice and the date and place of the commission of each such practice; and
(c) shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid down in the Code
of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908) for the verification of pleadings: 6 [Provided that
where the petitioner alleges any corrupt practice, the petition shall also be
accompanied by an affidavit in the prescribed form in support of the allegation of
such corrupt practice and the particulars thereof.] (2) Any schedule or annexure to
the petition shall also be signed by the petitioner and verified in the same manner as
the petition.(cid:129) It is undisputed that the required affidavit in Form-
25 has not been filed. This has been held to be an incurable defect. Therefore, the
statutory provision is clearly violated.
17. Even accepting for the sake of argument that the pleadings in paragraphs 9(D)
and 9(F) cannot be treated as allegations of corrupt practices then also the same need
to be considered to ascertain as to whether the strict requirement of pleadings in
election cases is satisfied. In this regard law is well settled that all the material facts
have to be specifically pleaded and that omission to state even a single material fact
would be fatal to the election petitioner. The Supreme Court in the case of
Harishankar Jain v. Sonia Gandhi1 held as follows:
"Section 83(1)(a) of RPA, 1951 mandates that an election petition shall contain a
concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies. By a series of
decisions of this Court, it is well settled that the material facts required to be stated
are those facts which can be considered as materials supporting the allegations made.
In other words, they must be such facts as would afford a basis for the allegations
made in the petition and would constitute the cause of action as understood in the
Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. The expression "cause of action" has been
compendiously defined to mean every fact which it would be necessary for the
plaintiff to prove, if traversed, in order to support his right to the judgment of court.
Omission of a single material fact leads to an incomplete cause of action and the
statement of claim becomes bad. The function of the party is to present as full a
picture of the cause of action with such further information in detail as to make the
opposite party understand the case he will have to meet. (See Samant N. Balkrishna
ν. George Fernandez 18, Jitendra Bahadur Singh v. Krishna Behari¹9.) Merely
quoting the words of the section like chanting of a mantra does not amount to stating
material facts. Material facts would include positive statement of facts as also positive
averment of a negative fact, if necessary. In V.S. Achuthanandan v. P.J. Francis this
Court has held, on a conspectus of a series of decisions of this Court, that material
facts are such preliminary facts which must be proved at the trial by a party to
establish existence of a cause of action. Failure to plead "material facts" is fatal to the
election petition and no amendment of the pleadings is permissible to introduce such
material facts after the time-limit prescribed for filing the election petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 9
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
(2001) 8 SCC 233 It is the duty of the Court to examine the petition irrespective of
any written statement or denial and reject the petition if it does not disclose the cause
of action. To enable a court to reject a plaint on the ground that it does not disclose a
cause of action, it should look at the plaint and nothing else. Courts have always
frowned upon vaque pleadings which leave a wide scope to adduce any evidence. No
amount of evidence can cure basic defect in the pleadings."
18. If we look at paragraph-9(D) quoted earlier, the same strikes as vague as it does not state as to
what assistance was obtained by the respondent from his election agent for furtherance of the
prospects of the election. There can be no presumption raised in this regard. It is only stated that
because the election agent was the Chairman, the respondent procured his assistance. Further, it is
alleged that the respondent influenced the persons who were engaged for counting of votes and the
respondent intentionally appointed Manas Jena as his counting agent to influence his position,
power and authority over the counting staff. How such influence was exerted, who were the persons
engaged for counting of votes, how many persons were engaged for counting of votes, what was the
manner of influence allegedly exerted by Manas Jena on them are woefully lacking. Again, it is
alleged that the respondent and returning officer were hand in glove to ensure respondent's success
in the election. This is again a vague pleading, inasmuch as what was the commission or omission by
the returning officer to help the respondent that led the election petitioner to make such an
allegation has not been stated.
19. Coming to paragraph-9(F), it is stated that the Chairman of the Panchayat Samiti by utilizing his
position, power and authority was canvassing the voters to vote in favour of the respondent but what
was the manner of such canvassing, how many persons were canvassed etc. have not been
specifically pleaded. It is also stated that Manas Jena being the Chairman of the Panchayat Samiti
influenced the staff of the Block to show favour to the respondent. Who were such staff, how many
such staff were deputed to duty, what were their names, who among them were influenced and in
what manner have not been pleaded at all. Again it has been generally alleged that Manas Jena
influenced the voters and counting staff without stating anything else. It is further stated that the
respondent adopted unfair means of undue influence by procuring and obtaining assistance of the
Chairman of the Block for furtherance of his prospects but what constituted such unfair means has
not been spelt out at all.
20. The petitioner has raised another ground - that the verification appended to the election petition
is not in consonance with Order-VI Rule-15 of CPC read with Section 83(1)(c) of the RP Act. In this
regard, Mr. B. Mishra, learned Senior Counsel would argue that the statutory requirement requires
the affidavit to be placed after verification because the affidavit is in respect of the facts verified. In
the instant case, the affidavit is placed before the verification, which is not in consonance with law.
In reply, Mr. Mohapatra, learned Senior Counsel would submit that the requirement being to
furnish both affidavit and verification and the same having been complied with it is immaterial as to
which is to be placed at what place.
21. Order-VI Rule-15 of CPC reads as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 10
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
―15. Verification of pleadings.--(1) Save as otherwise provided by any law for the time
being in force, every pleading shall be verified at the foot by the party or by one of the
parties pleading or by some other person proved to the satisfaction of the Court to be
acquainted with the facts of the case. (2) The person verifying shall specify, by
reference to the numbered paragraphs of the pleading, what he verifies of his own
knowledge and what he verifies upon information received and believed to be true.
(3) The verification shall be signed by the person making it and shall state the date on
which and the place at which it was signed.
(4) The person verifying the pleading shall also furnish an affidavit in support of his
pleadings.(cid:129) Thus, the statutory requirement is that both verification and affidavit
must accompany the pleadings. Sub-
Rule-4 of Rule-15 simply states that the persons verifying the pleading shall also furnish an affidavit
in support of his pleadings. Reference to the election petition shows that the election petitioner has
furnished the required affidavit as well as verification. Since the requirement of the statute as
referred above has been complied with, this Court is of the considered view that the placement of the
affidavit and verification in the election petition is immaterial. The objection raised in this regard is
therefore, unacceptable.
22. From a conspectus reading of the pleadings under paragraphs 9(D) and 9(F), this Court, firstly,
holds that the same being allegations of corrupt practices do not satisfy the requirement of stating
the material facts. The Supreme Court in the case of Senthibalaji V. v. A.P. Geetha & Ors.2, observed
as follows:
13. Section 123 of the RP Act of 1951 defines corrupt practices. In paragraphs 6 and 7,
even bare particulars of any of the corrupt practices covered by Section 123 have not
been pleaded. What is the nature of corrupt practice is also not described except for
making a bald allegation that in the representations mentioned in paragraph 6, the
first respondent has set out electoral misconduct, corrupt practice, and bribery on the
part of the appellant.
Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Civil Appeals @ SLP (C) Nos.7219-7220 of 2018 Section 83 mandates
that an election petition must contain a concise statement of material facts. When the allegation is of
corrupt practice, the basic facts constituting corrupt practice must be pleaded in order to make
compliance with Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 83. In this case, such concise facts are not at
all pleaded. Basic facts cannot be pleaded only by stating that the same find place in the documents
relied upon. The first respondent has merely stated that the contents of representations may be read
as a part of the petition. This does not satisfy the requirement of incorporating a concise statement
of material facts. Moreover, when the allegation is of corrupt practice, the proceedings virtually
become quasi-criminal. Therefore, the elected candidate must get adequate notice of what is alleged
against him. That is why material facts concerning the ground of corrupt practice must be pleaded.
The outcome of such a petition is very serious. It can oust a popularly elected representative of the
people. Therefore, non- compliance with the requirement of stating material facts must result in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 11
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
rejection of the petition at the threshold.
14. At this stage, we may make useful reference to a well- known decision of this Court of a Bench of
Civil Appeal no.-3895-3896 of 2023, DOJ-19/05/2023, Citation-2023 INSC 571 three Hon'ble
Judges in the case of V.S. Achuthanandan4 which is in fact relied upon by the first respondent.
Paragraph 15 of the said decision reads thus:
Civil Appeals @ SLP (C) Nos.7219-7220 of 2018 ―15. It would thus appear that the
election petition was rejected mainly on the ground that it did not disclose the cause
of action as according to the learned trial Judge the allegations regarding corrupt
practice were vague and did not disclose ―material facts and full particulars(cid:129) of the
corrupt practice alleged. It is evident that the learned trial Judge did not distinguish
between the ―material facts(cid:129) and the ―material particulars(cid:129) of allegations regarding
corrupt practices as defined under Section 123 of the Act. The law on the point is well
settled which appears to have not been taken note of or appreciated by the learned
trial Judge. After referring to various pronouncements of this Court including cases
in Balwan Singh v. Lakshmi Narain [AIR 1960 SC 770 : (1960) 3 SCR 91], Samant N.
Balkrishna v. George Fernandez [(1969) 3 SCC 238] , Virendra Kumar Saklecha v.
Jagjiwan [(1972) 1 SCC 826], Udhav Singh v. Madhav Rao Scindia [(1977) 1 SCC 511], F.A. Sapa v.
Singora [(1991) 3 SCC 375] and Gajanan Krishnaji Bapat v. Dattaji Raghobaji Meghe [(1995) 5 SCC
347] and a host of other authorities, this Court in L.R. Shivaramagowda v. T.M. Chandrashekar
[(1999) 1 SCC 666 : (1998) 6 Scale 361] held that while failure to plead ―material facts(cid:129) is fatal to the
election petition and no amendment of the pleading is permissible to introduce such material facts
after the time-limit prescribed for filing the election petition, the absence of ―material particulars(cid:129)
can be cured at a later stage by an Civil Appeals @ SLP (C) Nos.7219-7220 of 2018 appropriate
amendment. An election petition was not liable to be dismissed in limine merely because full
particulars of corrupt practice alleged were not set out. It is, therefore, evident that material facts
are such primary facts which must be proved at the trial by a party to establish existence of a cause
of action. Whether in an election petition a particular fact is a material fact or not, and as such,
required to be pleaded is a question which depends on the nature of the charge levelled, the ground
relied upon, and in the light of the special circumstances of the case. In Udhav Singh case [(1977) 1
SCC 511] the Court held: (SCC p. 523, paras 42-43) ―In short, all those facts which are essential to
clothe the petitioner with a complete cause of action, are ‗material facts' which must be pleaded,
and failure to plead even a single material fact amounts to disobedience of the mandate of Section
83(1)(a). ‗Particulars', on the other hand, are ‗the details of the case set up by the party'.
‗Material particulars' within the contemplation of clause (b) of Section 83(1) would therefore mean
all the details which are necessary to amplify, refine and embellish the material facts already
pleaded in the petition in compliance with the requirements of clause (a). ‗Particulars' serve the
purpose of finishing touches to the basic contours of a picture already Civil Appeals @ SLP (C)
Nos.7219-7220 of 2018 drawn, to make it full, more detailed and more informative.(cid:129) (emphasis
added)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 12
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
15. The consensus of judicial opinion is that the failure to plead material facts concerning alleged
corrupt practice is fatal to the election petition. The material facts are the primary facts which must
be proved on trial by a party to establish the existence of a cause of action. In the present case,
taking the averments made in the petition as it is, not a single material fact is pleaded making out an
allegation of corrupt practice covered by Section 123 of the RP Act of 1951. All that the first
respondent has pleaded is that he made representations to the Returning Officer and other
authorities complaining about the corrupt practice on the part of the appellant. What is the nature
of the corrupt practice is not mentioned even in brief. Therefore, material facts, which according to
the first respondent constitute corrupt practice were not pleaded in the Election Petition.
xx xx xx
17. This Court held that Section 83 makes it obligatory for the election petitioner to give requisite
facts, details, and particulars of each corrupt practice with exactitude. In this case, requisite facts are
completely missing. The allegations are very vague Civil Appeals @ SLP (C) Nos.7219-7220 of 2018
and general in nature and, therefore, there is no cause of action to proceed on the ground of corrupt
practice. Therefore, in our view, the averments made in paragraphs 6 and 7 do not constitute a cause
of action available to proceed on the ground of corrupt practices contemplated by Section 123.
Paragraph 8 contains the details of the result of the election. Paragraphs 2 to 4 and 8 are formal in
nature and not at all relevant.
18. In paragraph 9, again there are vague and general allegations that the appellant and 6th
respondent committed electoral misconduct and corrupt practice. Even this paragraph is bereft of
material facts. Paragraph 9 (a) has been added which contains only one sentence that acceptance of
nomination of the appellant and 6th respondent is illegal. Not a single material fact is pleaded in
support of the plea that the acceptance of the nomination paper is improper.(cid:129) In an earlier case, the
three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of C.P. John vs. Babu M. Palissery and Others3
held as follows:
―19. To put it differently, when the election petition is taken up for consideration, the
Court which deals with such an election petition, should be in a position to know in
exactitude as to what is the corrupt practice alleged as against the parties without
giving any room for doubt as to the nature of such allegation, the parties involved, the
date, time and the place, etc. so that the party against whom such allegation is made
is in a position to explain or defend any such allegation without giving scope for
(2014) 10 SCC 547 any speculation. In that context, both Sections 83(1)(a) and (1)(b)
and the proviso play a very key role since the election petitioner cannot simply raise
an allegation of corrupt practice and get away with it, inasmuch as the affidavit to be
filed in respect of corrupt practice should specifically support the facts pleaded, as
well as, the material particulars furnished. Rule 94-A of the Rules in turn stipulates
that the affidavit should be in the prescribed Form 25 and should be sworn before the
Magistrate of the First Class or a notary or the Commissioner of Oaths and makes it
mandatory for the election petitioner to comply with the said requirement statutorily.
The format of the affidavit as prescribed in Form 25 elaborates as to the requirement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 13
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
of specifically mentioning the paragraphs where the statement of facts are contained
and also the other paragraphs where material particulars relating to such corrupt
practices are alleged. It also mentions as to which of those statements of facts and
material particulars are based on the personal knowledge of the election petitioner
and such of those statements and particulars that are made based on the information
gained by the election petitioner.(cid:129) [Emphasis added] Secondly, even if the pleadings
are held to be not constituting corrupt practice then also, the same are vague and
non-specific, and hence, are to be treated as frivolous and not constituting a valid
cause of action. This Court is therefore, of the view that the pleadings in
paragraphs-9(D) and 9(F) need to be struck out.
23. It is stated that the challan appended to the election petition has not been made in the manner
as prescribed under Chapter-XXII, Rule-1 of the Rules of the High Court of Orissa, 1948 read with
Section 117 of the Act. In this context, Mr. Mishra would argue that though a sum of Rs.2,000/- was
deposited by the election petitioner, yet the same was through his lawyer and secondly, the challan
does not contain the signature of the Deputy Registrar of this Court as required. In reply, Mr.
Mohapatra would submit that the Challan contains the seal of the Deputy Registrar and signature of
the cashier, which implies that the amount was duly paid. Non-availability of the signature of the
Deputy Registrar can be treated as an official mistake not attributable to the election petitioner.
24. Section 117 of the Act provides that the petitioner shall deposit in the High Court a sum of
Rs.2,000/- as security for the costs of the petition 'in accordance with the Rules of the High Court of
Orissa, 1948'. Rule-1 under Chapter-XXII reads as follows:
―Chapter -XXII Rule-1-Deposit and Repayment of Money (1)When money is required
to be paid or deposited in the office of the Court, it shall be accompanied by triplicate
challans which shall be delivered to the Accountant of the Court. If the challans are in
order, the Accountant shall sign and return the three challans to the person making
the payment or deposit for presentation with the money to the Cashier of the Court.
The Cashier shall thereupon receive the money, sign each challan and send the
challans to the Accountant. The Accountant shall then enter the amount in his
register of receipts, issue one copy of the challan to the person making the payment
or deposit as a receipt for the money, send the second copy to the office to be filled
with the record concerned and keep the third copy serially in a guard file. When the
amount exceeds Rs.500, the copy of the challan intended as a receipt for the money
shall be signed by the Deputy Register before it is issued. The Cashier shall remit the
money, he has received to the Treasury with the Treasury Pass Book after verification
by the Deputy Registrar, or in his absence by the Officer-in-Charge, on the next day
on which the Treasury is open following the day of payment.(cid:129)
25. It is thus, provided that ordinarily, the Accountant is to accept the deposit but when the amount
exceeds Rs.500/- the copy of the challan intended as a receipt shall be signed by the Deputy
Registrar. Reference to the challan appended to the election petition shows that the Cashier has
signed accepting the deposit. The seal of the Deputy Registrar has been endorsed but there is no
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 14
Afr Aswini Kumar Patra vs Brajamohan Pradhan ....... Opp. Party on 11 March, 2025
signature of the Deputy Registrar. Since the requirement of the Statute is payment of money, which
has already been done largely in compliance of the Rules of the High Court of Orissa, mere
non-signing of the challan by the Deputy Registrar cannot nullify the same. At best it can be treated
as an act of inadvertence or mistake by the Deputy Registrar, for which the election petitioner
cannot obviously be blamed. The objection raised in this regard is therefore, not acceptable.
26. Thus, from a conspectus of the analysis of facts, law, contentions raised and the discussion
made, this Court is of the view that I.A. No. 132 of 2024 filed with the prayer to reject the election
petition bears no merit. However, I.A. No. 133 of 2024, for the reasons indicated, deserves to be
allowed in the manner narrated earlier.
27. For the foregoing reasons therefore, I.A. No. 132 of 2024 being devoid of merit is rejected. I.A.
No. 133 of 2024 is allowed in part by striking out the pleadings under Paragraphs 9(D) and 9(F) of
the election petition.
.................................
Sashikanta Mishra, Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 11th March, 2025/ A.K. Rana, P.A. Designation: Personal Assistant Location: HIGH COURT OF
ORISSA, CUTTACK Date: 11-Mar-2025 19:28:28
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/173624787/ 15
