Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri
Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
...
FAO no.13/2024
Reserved on: 19.02.2025
Pronounced on: 11.03.2025
1. Airports Authority of India through its Chairman, Rajiv Gandhi Bhawan
Safdarjung Airport, New Delhi-110001
2. Executive Engineer (Commercial) Airports Authority of India Rajiv
Gandhi Bhawan Safdarjung Airport, New Delhi-110001
3. Airport Director, Airports Authority of India, Srinagar International
Airport, Srinagar
4. Senior Manager (Commercial), Airports Authority of India, Srinagar
International Airport, Srinagar
.......Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr Mr Rajiv Shakdher, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Digvijay Rai, Advocate,
Mr. Faizan A Ganie, Advocate; Mr. Vikas Malik, Advocate;
Mr Mushtaq Ahmad Dar, Advocate
Versus
M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Private Limited through its Authorised Signatory
Akash Kumar Raj age 35 years having its Registered office at L-332
Mahipalpur Extension New Delhi 110037
......Respondent(s)
Through: Mr Danish Majid, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. Setting-aside of Order dated 8th April 2024 passed by Additional District Judge (Fast Track)
Budgam ("Trial Court" hereinafter) in a civil suit titled M/s Saptagari Restaurant Private Limited v.
Airport Authority of India and others, allowing ad interim injunction application of respondent
(plaintiff before the Trial Court), making threshold interim order dated 21st December 2023
absolute and keeping Order no.CL-11047/3/2020-COMMERCIAL/238 dated 20th December Page 1
2023 in abeyance till disposal of main suit. Setting-aside of Order dated 21st December 2023 passed
by Trial Court is also being prayed for on the grounds made mention of in instant appeal.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 1
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
2. I have heard learned counsel for parties and considered the matter.
3. A civil suit has been filed by M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Private Limited
- respondent herein, against Airport Authority and its functionaries - appellant herein before Trial
Court. In its suit it is stated by plaintiff/ respondent that it is a registered company carrying on
business of managing restaurants and other related services for past 23 years, having its registered
office at L-332, Mahipalpur Extension, New Delhi and has been running various food and beverages
outlets, restaurants, massage chair facility etc. in the airports all over the country for last two
decades. Plaintiff has also stated in his plaint that it is aggrieved of Order
no.CL-11047/3/2020-COMMERCIAL/238 dated 20th December 2023, issued by defendant no.2
(appellant no.2 herein), debarring plaintiff from participating in any future tenders floated by
Airport Authority of India (AAI) for three years.
3.1. According to plaintiff/respondent, it participated in a tender process initiated by defendant no.1
(appellant no.1 herein) in Chennai and Amritsar, but defendant no.1 sought to debar plaintiff to
participate in tender process at Chennai and Amritsar, ostensibly on the ground that an employee of
plaintiff, namely, Karan Singh, Proprietor of M/s Syona Spa, had availed benefits, like ESI PF,
etcetera and also an airport- employee-pass was issued to said Karan Singh by Bureau of Civil
Aviation Security in the name of M/s Saptagiri Restaurants Private Limited. It was alleged that
aforesaid Karan Singh had availed a loan Page 2 from plaintiff and hence there was a conflict of
interest as per the RFP provisions contained in the notice inviting e-tenders and as a corollary
whereof in terms of letter dated 30th November 2022 an explanation was called from plaintiff
alleging therein that complaints were received against plaintiff and one M/s Syona Spa regarding
participation in tender.
3.2. It is also the case of plaintiff/respondent before the Trial Court that plaintiff immediately
tendered a reply dated 5th December 2022, contending that allegations were baseless and that upon
taking into consideration reply filed by plaintiff and after being satisfied that allegations levelled in
the complaint were baseless, defendant-AAI proceeded to award tender to plaintiff insofar as tender
floated in respect of Amritsar was concerned. In the interregnum, defendant-AAI initiated
proceedings against plaintiff insofar as tender pertaining to Chennai Airport is concerned and issued
a show cause notice dated 5 th June 2023 asking plaintiff to show cause as to why action should not
be taken against plaintiff on the ground of conflict of interest and material misrepresentation.
3.3. It is further case of plaintiff before Trial Court that similar allegations were levelled against
plaintiff in show cause notice as were levelled against it in Amritsar. Upon receipt of show cause
notice dated 5th June 2023, plaintiff tendered its reply dated 14th June 2023 in which allegations
were strongly refuted and controverted. 3.4. Plaintiff has also averred in his plaint that an illegal
order of debarring it in participating in any tenders floated by defendant-AAI at Chennai Airport
was issued. Aggrieved whereof, plaintiff filed Writ Petition Page 3 bearing no.23466 of 2023 before
the High Court of Madras, assailing the action of defendant-AAI debarring plaintiff. Upon
consideration of matter, the Madras High Court passed order dated 9th August 2023, directing
defendant not to do anything in pursuance of the proceedings dated 26th July 2023 initiated by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 2
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
them and affect commercial activities of plaintiff in any way and stayed the order dated 26 th July
2023, in terms whereof, plaintiff was debarred qua Chennai Airport. 3.5. Subsequently, defendant
no.1 issued a show cause notice to plaintiff seeking reply with regard to issue of conflict of interest
and plaintiff responded to show cause notice, but defendant no.1 issued order dated 8th August
2023, debarring plaintiff from participating in any tender floated by defendant no.1 at Amritsar
Airport for three years, ostensibly, on the ground of conflict of interest and material
misrepresentation. Aggrieved, plaintiff filed Civil Writ Petition no.17635 of 2023 before the High
Court of Punjab and Haryana at Chandigarh. Plaintiff withdrew that petition with liberty to
approach Dispute Redressal Committee (DRC). Plaintiff, accordingly, approached DRC.
3.6. It is also stated by plaintiff in his plaint that it upon acquaintance of the fact that defendants
have also started to act prejudicial to its rights, debarring plaintiff to participate in Tender
no.AAI/SXR/ COMML/ FnB /400/2023 titled "Short Term License to operate Food and Beverages
outlets (SHA F/F and Arrival at Srinagar International Airport, Srinagar", it approached court of 1st
Additional District Judge, Budgam, with a Suit for Declaration, Perpetual and Mandatory
Injunction, for declaring defendants' action, debarring plaintiff from Page 4 participating in tender
floated by defendant no.1 in Srinagar in terms of aforesaid tender notice, as illegal and arbitrary.
The said Court vide ad interim order dated 22nd August 2023, directed defendants to allow plaintiff
to participate in aforesaid tender and not to finalize the tender without further orders of the court.
Application for vacation of ad interim order was filed by defendants. The said Court issued order
dated 8th September 2023, directing defendant no.3 to open bids including that of plaintiff and
proceed in terms of relevant provisions of law taking into consideration rules applicable and
conclude process. Against that order, appeal preferred by defendants was dismissed by a Bench of
this Court vide order dated 13th October 2023. 3.7. According to plaintiff, in the interregnum
another show cause notice dated 8th June 2023 was issued by defendants, which was replied by him
on 16th June 2023. However, defendants issued order dated 20th December 2023, imposing
prohibition on plaintiff for three years, precluding plaintiff's participation in any forthcoming
tenders including the ones in Srinagar, floated by AAI. Plaintiff in his plaint, sought quashing of
order dated 20th December 2023, with a direction to defendants to restrain from debarring plaintiff
from participating in any future tenders floated by AAI. Plaintiff also sought respondents to be
directed to allow plaintiff to participate in all future tenders floated by AAI.
3.8. Trial Court vide its order dated 21st December 2023 kept in abeyance defendant no.2's order
dated 20th December 2023.
4. Appellants/defendants submitted their written statement and objections.
Page 5 4.1. In their written statement, it is averred by appellants that AAI is a statutory body
constituted by an Act of Parliament viz. Airports Authority of India Act, 1994 and is enshrined with
the responsibility of creating, upgrading, maintaining and managing civil aviation infrastructure in
the country.
4.2. It is also stated by appellants in their written statement that the suit filed by respondent is liable
to be dismissed as Trial Court lacks territorial jurisdiction on account of the fact that show cause
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 3
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
notices were issued to plaintiff/respondent at its registered office at New Delhi. He replied to show
cause notices from the same address and order of debarment was also served at its registered office
at New Delhi. Besides, plaintiff/respondent has no office at Srinagar as he is operating his business
from Delhi which is also reflected in the title of the case and has been debarred from participation in
tenders at AAI Airports by way of debarment order falling outside the territorial jurisdiction of the
Trial Court and cannot be allowed to institute the suit in absence of any specific cause of action
against appellants at Srinagar. 4.3. Further submission of appellants in their written statement is
that respondent while taking recourse of earlier orders passed by Trial Court in a pending suit which
was upheld by the High Court on the pretext that debarment orders issued at Chennai Airport
stands already stayed and same cannot be treated as debarment before the Trial Court, then one
fails to understand as to why respondent has not challenged order dated 20th December 2023
before Madras High Court, where earlier writ petition is already pending either by way of fresh writ
petition or initiating contempt proceedings against appellants and in spite of doing Page 6 so why
and under what circumstances plaintiff has chosen to file the suit against debarment order before
Trial Court that too without having any cause of action or knowing the fact that Trial Court is not
vested with territorial jurisdiction.
4.4. It is also stated by appellants that debarment order has been passed in accordance with law
after examining the issue properly while giving full opportunity of being heard to respondent.
Respondent was debarred by authorities at Chennai and Amritsar and was not allowed to participate
in tendering process floated by appellants at Srinagar International Airport. Respondent has been
found to have connection with M/s Syona Spa and M/s Mahesh Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., having strong
understanding between Shri Bikram Singh and Shri Karan Singh, which indicated that there is
complete collusive bidding/bid rigging practices by both entities in AAI tenders. 4.5. It is also
averred by appellants that contentions raised by respondent with respect to non-involvement of Shri
Karan Singh in presence of his termination prior to issuance of debarment order will not principally
be made basis for non-issuance of order as conflict of interest was found very much in all tenders,
description of which is given in debarment order. All the procedures and norms have been followed.
4.6. The Trial Court has passed order dated 8 th August 2024, which is impugned in this memo of
appeal.
5. It is the case of appellants that Appellant -Airports Authority of India is a Statutory Body
constituted by the Act of Parliament, viz. The Airports Authority of India Act, 1994.
Page 7 5.1. It is also stated by appellants/defendants that respondent/plaintiff has been debarred by
appellants from participating in future tenders/RFPs/ RFQs/NITs to be floated by AAI for a period
of three years from the date of issuance of order dated 20th December 2023. What is mentioned in
said order is worthwhile to be reproduced hereunder:
1. On perusal of the details of the participation of M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Pvt. Ltd
(SRPL) in following e-tenders (NIETs) of AAI viz. (i) 2022_AAI_124765_1 at Raipur
Airport (ii) 2022_AAI_127866_1 at Amritsar Airport (iii) 2022_AAI_127867_1 at
Amritsar Airport (iv) 2022_AAI_131566_1 at Chennai Airport (v)
2022_AAI_131571_1 at Chennai Airport (vi) 2022_AAI_122611_1 at Ranchi Airport
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 4
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
and (vii) 2022_AAI_128964_1 at Pune Airports, the bidding pattern indicated in the
show-cause notice, examination of replies submitted to the show cause Notice and
personal hearing held on 30.11.2023 in the O/o Member (HR) thereof, the following
has emerged:
a. During the personal hearing on 21.11.2023, M/s Syona Spa, represented by Shri
Karan Singh, proprietor of M/s Syona Spa mentioned that he has worked with M/s
Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. for 18 to 19 years, and he does not know anyone
in M/s SRPL. He also mentioned that after debarment of M/s Syona Spa by AAI, he is
involved in Agriculture and Animal Husbandry activities at his native place around
Gurgaon, Haryana.
b. From the contents of the letter of M/s Syona Spa dated 12.04.2023 addressed to
the Airport Director, Chennai, it is perceived that Shri Karan Singh, the proprietor of
M/s Syona Spa has indicated that he was also in the services of M/s SRPL from 2015
till July/August 2022 but for reasons best known to M/s SRPL, his services were
dispensed with by M/s SRPL in August, 2022. It is also indicated in the letter that he
was granted a personal loan by M/s SRPL. This letter also indicates that his services
are being continued in M/s Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. while he is still
continuing as sole proprietor of M/s Syona Spa. c. Further, it is observed from the
records, that based on the request from M/s Saptagiri Restaurants Pvt. Ltd., Shri
Karan Singh was issued Airport Entry Pass No.BOM20202044702 valid from
25.02.2020 to 16.08.2021 for entry into All Airports and All Terminals. It was also
seen from the records that a letter dated
06.05.2016 was issued by Shri Bikram Singh, Director of M/s SRPL in which it was mentioned that
M/s Syona Spa is a unit of M/s SRPL. d. In view of the foregoing, it is deduced beyond any
reasonable doubt that Shri Karan Singh was also working for M/s SRPL and that M/s Syona Spa is a
unit of M/s SRPL.
e. During the personal hearing on 30.11.2023, M/s Saptagiri Restaurants Pvt. Ltd (M/s SRPL)
represented by Shri Bikram Singh intimated that he has multiple businesses in the name of M/s
SRPL, M/s Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Pvt. Ltd., M/s Lovelin Enterprises, M/s Roma Henay
Security Services and M/s Roma Enterprises. He added that his elder son Shri Satvik Gothwal and
Shri Mohinder Singh (maternal uncle of Shri Bikram Singh) are Directors of M/s Mahesh Sunny
Enterprises Pvt. Ltd and he along with his younger son Shri Dhruv Gothwal are Directors of M/s
SRPL which his currently working at 16 AAI Airports as Master Concessionaires and Standalone
outlets. Further, when he was asked about the Page 8 employment of Shri Karan Singh, he
mentioned that Shri Karan Singh was on the pay roll of M/s Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Pvt. Ltd but
his services are also utilized in M/s SRPL. He also added that he had given a personal loan to Shri
Karan Singh of M/s Syona Spa and till date he has not received back the loan and Shri Karan Singh
has defaulted on the loan.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 5
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
f. Shri Bikram Singh, Director, M/s SRPL in his letter dated 25.02.2023 (vide para 2) addressed to
the Airport Director, Chennai has mentioned that Shri Karan Singh was working as Sr. Manager
with his Company. The letter was signed by Shri Bikram Singh on the letter head of M/s SRPL.
Further, vide para 2 of the same letter Shri Bikram Singh has mentioned that a personal loan was
extended to Shri Karan Singh in 2016 and that the same is still unpaid. g. It was also seen that in the
letter dated 06.05.2016 which was issued by Shri Bikram Singh, Director of M/s SRPL it was
mentioned that M/s Syona Spa is a unit of M/s SRPL. This letter was issued on the letter head of
M/s SRPL and addressed to 'To whom it may concern'. Further, it could be seen that the registered
address of Syona Spa (as per letter head as seen vide letter dated 19.06.2023) is L 73 / L 322, 1st
Floor, Saptagiri Hotel, Mahipalpur Extension, NH-8, New Delhi - 110 037 and the registered
address of M/s SRPL (as per letter head as seen vide letter dated 16.06.2023) is L-322, Mahipalpur
Extension, New Delhi - 110 037 which indicates a strong connect between both the Agencies.
h. From the above, it can be seen that there is a strong connection between M/s SRPL, M/s Syona
Spa and M/s Mahesh sunny Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. and thereby strong understanding between Shri
Bikram Singh and Shri Karan Singh, as prudence says:
******* i. As can be seen from table above that, while above tenders were called by
AAI from July, 2022 to October, 2022, M/s Syona Spa was submitting their bids
without any proper documents on the last day of bid extended period; despite being a
regular participant in AAI tenders and well aware of the requirements in the tender
process. j. When M/s Syona Spa was asked about the reason for such unsuccessful
participation, the Agency replied that it could not mobilize sufficient funds due to the
non-cooperation of his Financiers in time. This argument is very difficult to accept as
the tender process was spread across four months and seen tenders involved.
2. In view of the forgoing, it can be comprehended that there is a long history of
association between M/s Syona Spa and M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Pvt. Ltd that puts
both the entities in position to have access/influence over each other. Therefore, said
indicated pattern above leads to Collusive bidding/bid rigging practices by both
entities in the above AAI tenders.
3. Therefore, it is to inform that, M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Pvt. Ltd. has violated
Clause 9 (a) (vi) of General Information and Guidelines of e- Tender document / NIT.
4. Thus, as per clause 9(b) of the General Information and Guidelines of e-Tender
document / NIT, M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Pvt. Ltd, with registered address L 322,
Mahipalpur Extension, New Delhi - 110037, is hereby debarred from Participating in
future tenders/RFPs/RFQs/NITs floated by AAI along-with forfeiture of EMD and
performance security in the said tenders, for a period of (03) (Three) years from the
date of issuance of this letter.
5. This is issued without prejudice to any other rights or remedies that may be
available to Airports Authority of India as per NIET / Tender document or any other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 6
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
law for the time being in force.
Page 9
6. Competent Authority of AAI has decided to restrain the agency "M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Pt. Ltd.
L 322, Mahipalpur Extension, New Delhi
- 110037" from participating in any future tenders for any work in AAI in any name and style for
three (03) years from the date of issuance of this letter.
7. It is further notified that the above decision of AAI applied to all allied firms / partners /
subsidiaries / JV (if any) of M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Pt. Ltd......
5.2. It is contention of appellants that issuance of debarment order had been felt only when
appellants found that respondent had indulged in collusive bidding for tenders invited at Amritsar,
Rajpur, Ranchi, Chennai and Pune Airports inasmuch as respondent falls under Clause 9(a)(vi) of
General Information and Guidelines of E-tender by taking recourse of Clause 9(b) thereof. It has
also been found by appellants that there existed a long history of association between respondent
and M/s Sayona Spa which puts both entities in a position to have access/influence over each other,
leading to collusive bidding/bid rigging practice in tenders invited by AAI.
5.3. According to appellants, the suit filed by respondent before the Trial Court is not maintainable
against a Statutory action taken/initiated by a Statutory body and on a challenge under writ
jurisdiction is available, more particularly when there is presence of an Alternate Dispute
Mechanism Clause in the form of Mediation and Arbitration under the Manual of Contract 2019, the
civil suit could not be entertained. 5.4. Appellants' next contention is that respondent cannot avail
multiple/ parallel remedies qua the same subject-matter before the Madras High Court, Dispute
Resolution Committee (DRC) at Amritsar, and Declaration Suit before Trial Court and that statutory
proceeding cannot be challenged in a suit as remedy under Statute is to be availed. When a consent
was given by respondent before the High Court of Page 10 Punjab and Haryana to appear before
DRC qua its all grievances on the subject-matter, any other proceedings before different forums
became infructuous and ought to be have withdrawn or dismissed.
6. Earlier, AAI through its Airport Director, Chennai Airport, issued Debarment Order dated 26th
July 2023, against respondent debarring it for a period of three years. This Order of Debarment,
challenged by respondent in a writ petition, was stayed by the Madras High Court, vide order dated
9th August 2023.
6.1. Respondent had also preferred a writ petition before Punjab and Haryana High Court against
order dated 8 th August 2023. There it was on consensus that respondent withdrew its writ petition
so as to approach DRC at Amritsar Airport for redressal of its grievances.
If that being the position, respondent has opted a choice to approach a particular forum for
redressal of its grievances and as a consequence of which all other proceedings become infructuous.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 7
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
7. It is AAI's Main Office at Delhi, i.e., Corporate Headquarters, which by virtue of order dated 20th
December 2023, has debarred respondent from participating in any future tenders with respect of
any works in AAI, in any name and style for a period of 03 years from 20th December 2023.
7.1. Against Debarment Order dated 20th December 2023, respondent preferred to approach the
Trial Court with a civil suit. The Trial Court vide its order dated 21st December 2023, stayed
Debarment Order. 7.2. Against Trial Court ad interim order dated 21st December 2023, appellants
had preferred an appeal, being FAO no.38/2023. A Bench of this Court, however, without
expressing any opinion on merits of the Page 11 case, directed them to file objections to interim
application with a further direction to Trial Court to consider application/objections/ written
statement, if any, to be filed by appellants and decide the application/objections and pass
appropriate orders in the interim application after hearing both the parties.
7.3. The Trial Court by impugned order has made its ad interim order dated 21st December 2023
absolute. The result thereof is that Debarment Order dated 20th December 2023 has been kept in
abeyance by the Trial Court till final disposal of main suit.
8. Learned counsel for appellants would contend that suit filed by respondent before Trial Court is
not maintainable against statutory action taken by statutory body inasmuch as challenge thereto can
be thrown under writ jurisdiction. He has placed reliance on Ghulam Abbas and other v. State of
U.P. and others (1982) 1 SCC 71, in which it was observed that a suit cannot be filed against orders
which are passed by statutory authorities under different Statutes and that if orders of statutory
authorities passed under respective Statutes have to be challenged, then these can be only
challenged under Article 227 and/or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and not by way of
a civil suit.
8.1. He further contends that in presence of an Alternate Dispute Mechanism Clause in form of
Mediation and Arbitration under the Manual of Contract 2019, civil suit could not have been
entertained by Trial Court. In addition to that, existence of a provision of appeal specifically
mentioned qua subject matter, i.e., order of debarment under Manual of Contract 2019, civil suit
could not have been Page 12 entertained. Respondent could not avail multiple parallel remedies on
same subject matter before Madras High Court, DRC at Amritsar and Declaration suit before Trial
Court. Once consent was given by respondent before the Punjab and Haryana High Court to appear
before DRC, all other proceedings initiated by appellant before other fora become infructuous and
ought to have been withdrawn or dismissed. 8.2. It is being also averred that the Trial Court has
erred to appreciate that debarment of respondent was done in exercise of procedure laid down in
Clause 8.12.4 of Commercial Manual 2019 (Manual of Contract), which provide for "steps to be
taken for debarring an agency". And that Trial Court also erred to appreciate that in paragraph 26,
respondent mentioned that procedure under Manual of Contract 2019 was followed by appellants
before debarring respondent-agency. Trial Court also did not consider the fact that Manual of
Contract is a self-contained manual, which prescribed procedure of dispute mechanism. 8.3. It is
being vehemently stated that Trial Court has not appreciated the fact that respondent has
approached it with unclean hands owing to the fact that on an Identical Debarment Letter, issued in
Chennai and Amritsar, respondent had approached the High Courts under Article 226 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 8
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
Constitution, by stating therein that no appeal or revision lies against action of respondents and
therefore respondent was left with no other alternative remedy except to invoke writ jurisdiction,
whereas in the present case, he has approached the Civil Court. 8.4. It is being stoutly argued that
respondents, by taking three separate recourses at the same time for identical and combining
orders, has attempted to pollute stream of justice and it is a well settled principle Page 13 of law in
Dalip Singh v. UP and others that litigants who attempt to pollute the stream of justice are not
entitled to any relief, interim or final. Pursuing of parallel remedies in respect of same
subject-matter has been deprecated by the Supreme Court in Jai Singh v. Union of India (1977) 1
SCC 1 : AIR 1977 SC 898.
8.5. Another resolute assertion made by learned counsel for appellants is that Trial Court has not
appreciated the fact that it lacks pecuniary, territorial and subject-matter jurisdiction because of the
fact that cause of action to file suit before it emanated from Debarment Order passed by AAI, Head
Office at Delhi and respondent had no immediate consequence herein at Srinagar. Reference in this
regard is being made to Section 20 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, which prescribed suits to be
instituted where defendants reside or cause of action arises. 8.6. According to learned counsel, Trial
Court has not considered the fact that Section 33 of the Airports Authority of India Act, 1994, bars
any suit, prosecution or other legal proceedings against AAI. Besides, Manual of Contract 2019
provides arbitration mechanism and in such situation, respondent could have availed remedy under
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996. That apart, Trial Court has failed to appreciate that even
otherwise the scheme of Specific Relief Act has not been designed to prohibit public
officer/authorities from performing its functions under the Statutes.
8.7. Learned counsel has also stated that there is a conflict of interest inasmuch as there is modus of
respondent - M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Private Limited and M/s Syona Spa that when any one of the
regional airports across the country invites bids for tender, respondent-SRPL Page 14 first submits
its bid and where there is only a single participant in the bid, the last date for submission is
extended, as a pattern, it is observed that on the last date of the extended bid submission, M/s
Syona Spa submits its bid with incomplete documents and as a consequence of which there is no
further extension and respondent-SRPL is declared as a successful bidder. Reference in this regard
has been made by them to the Table given in Debarment Order dated 20th December 2023, which
has already been reproduced herein above.
8.8. He would say that respondent and M/s Syona Spa, in a similar case, in which Debarment
Letters/Orders dated 26th July 2023 and 4th August 2023, issued by AAI with respect to Chennai
Airport, filed writ petitions, viz. WP Nos. 23446 & 26896 of 2023 titled as M/s Saptagiri Restaurant
and M/s Syona Spa v. the Chairman Airport Authority of India and another, before the High Court
of Judicature at Madras, which were dismissed vide judgement dated 30th September 2024. 8.9.
Learned counsel for petitioners has invited attention of this Court to a writ petition, viz. CWP
No.11390 of 2024 (O&M) titled as M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Private Limited v. Airports Authority of
India and others, [2024:PHHC:171044-DB], in which respondent herein had thrown to challenge
orders dated 8th August 2023, by which respondent was debarred from participating in future
tenders/RFPs floated by Airports Authority of India for a period of three years and licence awarded
to it for Wellness Centre/ Spa and Massage Chair Facility was terminated. Besides, order dated 2nd
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 9
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
May 2024, passed by DRC was also assailed by respondent. The Division Bench of Punjab and
Haryana High Court has dismissed the said writ petition.
Page 15
9. Per contra, it is stated by counsel for respondent that impugned order does not call for any
interference as it has been passed by Trial Court after considering rival contentions of both the
parties. He would also aver that instant appeal is not maintainable as it challenges two distinct
orders of the Trial Court. Appellants are stated to have raised certain grounds for the first time in
the appeal, which they did not plead in their written statement before the Trial Court, which is
impermissible under law as parties are required to present all their grounds and defences at the
earliest stage of the proceedings and failure to do so precludes appellants from introducing new
grounds at appellate stage. According to him, Debarment Order does not derive its authority from
Airports Authority of India Act, 1994, rather it is an administrative order issued by appellant no.2,
which infringes upon legal and legitimate rights of respondent. The provisions of Manual of
Contract 2019 cannot override the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure and Specific Relief Act.
In addition to this, provision in Manul of Contract, 2019, regarding appeal against debarment is
directory in nature.
9.1. It is being also stated that respondent is entitled to seek redress before either Civil Court or
before this Court and that allegation about parallel proceedings is baseless as it was malicious
actions of appellants which necessitated respondent to take recourse to different forums across
Madras, Amritsar and Srinagar. Respondent's approach to various courts was in response to
separate orders issued by appellants, blacklisting respondent.
9.2. He also avers that Trial Court while passing order dated 8 th April 2024 was satisfied that three
cardinal principles for granting interim relief Page 16 were in favour of respondent. Respondent
demonstrated a strong prima facie case indicating that action taken by appellant no.2 was legally
untenable and that balance of convenience clearly favoured respondent as blacklisting and
debarment would cause significant and irreparable harm to its business and reputation. Respondent
has established that it would suffer irreparable harm if interim relief was not granted as debarment
order would prevent respondent from participating in future tenders.
10.It is well settled principle of law that interim relief can always be granted in aid of and as
ancillary to the main relief available to a party on final determination of his rights in a suit or any
other proceeding. Therefore, a court undoubtedly possesses the power to grant interim relief during
the pendency of the suit. Temporary injunctions are thus injunctions issued during the pendency of
proceedings. Order XXXIX Rule 1 CPC provides that where in any suit it is proved by affidavit or
otherwise:
a) that any property in dispute in a suit is in danger of being wasted, damaged or
alienated by any party to the suit, or wrongfully sold in execution of a decree, or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 10
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
b) that the defendant threatens, or intends, to remove or dispose of his property with
a view to defrauding his creditors, the Court may by order grant a temporary
injunction to restrain such act, or make such other order for the purpose of staying
and preventing the wasting, damaging, alienation, sale, removal or disposition of the
property or dispossession of the plaintiff, or otherwise causing injury to the plaintiff
in relation to any property in dispute in the suit as the Court thinks fit, until the
disposal of the suit or until further orders.
Page 17
c) That the defendant threatens to dispossess the plaintiff or otherwise causes injury to the plaintiff
in relation to any property in dispute in the suit:
Provided that the Court before granting any injunction shall invariably call upon the
applicant to satisfy it by an affidavit or otherwise that not suit of similar nature is
pending in or has already been decided by any court of competent jurisdiction.
10.1. In order to grant an order of injunction, the party who seeks for grant of such
injunction has to prove that he has made out a prima facie case to go for trial, the
balance of convenience is also in his favour and he will suffer irreparable loss and
injury if injunction is not granted. But it is equally well-settled that when a party fails
to prove prima facie case to go for trial, question of considering the balance of
convenience or irreparable loss and injury to the party concerned would not be
material at all, that is to say, if that party fails to prove prima facie case to go for trial,
it is not open to the court to grant injunction in his favour even if he has made out a
case of balance of convenience being in his favour and would suffer irreparable loss
and injury if no injunction is granted.
10.2. The Supreme Court in Dalpat Kumar v. Prahlad Singh, AIR 1993 SC 276,
emphasized the three essential conditions for the grant of a temporary injunction: a
prima facie case, balance of convenience, and irreparable injury. The court held that
these conditions must be satisfied conjunctively.
10.3. In Morgan Stanley v. Kartic Das, (1994) 4 SCC 225, the Supreme Court
indicated the factors which should weigh with the court in grant of ex parte
injunction:
(i) whether irreparable or serious mischief will ensue to the plaintiff, Page 18
(ii) whether the refusal of ex parte injunction would involve greater injustice than the
grant of it would involve.
(iii) the Court will also consider the time at which the plaintiff first had notice of the
act complained so that the making of improper order against a party in his absence is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 11
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
prevented.
(iv) that the Court will consider whether the plaintiff had acquiesced for sometime
and in such circumstances it will not grant ex parte injunction.
(v) the Court would expect a party applying for ex parte injunction to show utmost
good faith in making the application.
(vi) even if granted, the ex parte injunction would be for a limited period of time.
(vii) general principles like prima facie case, balance of convenience and irreparable
loss would also be considered by the Court. The purpose of Rule 3, Order XXXIX is to
enable the opposite party to show cause against issuance of such injunction and if
injunction issued without notice, to enable the opposite party to file objections
thereto and by this to prevent the petitioner to retain undue advantage of the
situation and abuse of the process of law.
10.4. In Gujarat Bottling Co. Ltd. v. Coca Cola Co., AIR 1995 SC 2372 , the Supreme Court
recapitulated that the object of granting an interim injunction is to protect plaintiff against injury by
violation of his right for which he could not be adequately compensated in damages. The court also
stressed the importance of maintaining the status quo until the final disposal of the case.
10.5. The Supreme Court in Seema Arshad Zaheer v. Municipal Corporation of Greater Mumbai,
(2006) 5 SCC 282, has discussed the principles governing the grant of temporary injunctions and
highlighted that the Page 19 power to grant injunction is a discretionary power and must be
exercised judiciously.
10.6. In the case of Zenit Mataplast P. Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra, (2009) 10 SCC 388, temporary
injunction was sought against State of Maharashtra to restrain them from taking coercive action.
The Supreme Court of India held that temporary injunctions should not be granted if there is an
adequate alternative remedy available to the plaintiff. The court reinforced that all three
prerequisites - prima facie case, irreparable injury, and balance of convenience - must be satisfied.
10.7. In M. Gurudas v. Rasaranjan, AIR 2006 SC 3275 , the Supreme Court reiterated the principles
for granting temporary injunctions and emphasized the importance of maintaining the status quo.
The court also clarified that the grant of a temporary injunction is a discretionary power that must
be exercised judiciously.
10.8. The Supreme Court in the case of Best Sellers Retail (India) Pvt. Ltd.
v. Aditya Birla Nuvo Ltd., (2012) 6 SCC 792 , discussed the principles of balance of convenience and
irreparable harm in depth. The Supreme Court held that a temporary injunction should not be
granted merely because a prima facie case is established. The plaintiff must also demonstrate that
the balance of convenience is in their favour and that they would suffer irreparable harm if the
injunction is not granted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 12
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
11.One more important aspect of the matter is worthwhile to be deliberated upon here. In addition
to the present case, plaintiff/ respondent has filed as many as five Civil Suits.
12.In its First Suit filed by respondent on 22nd August 2023, it sought Declaration and Injunction
before the Trial Court (Additional District Page 20 Judge, Budgam) for processing the tender and
considering the bid submitted by respondent. In that case plaintiff's agency had been disqualified in
technical bid of short-term tender due to debarment by Chennai and Amritsar Airports for a period
of three years. In the said suit, the Trial Court passed an order dated 22nd August 2023, directing
not to finalise tender without orders of the Trial Court. On 8 th September 2023, Trial Court
directed to process the tender and also to consider the bid submitted by respondent.
12.1. Second suit was filed by respondent/plaintiff on 29th August 2023, before the Trial Court for
Declaration, seeking protection from vacation from F&B Sites located at City Side of Terminal
Building at Srinagar Airport. In this suit, Trial Court vide order dated 29 th August 2023, stayed the
vacation order, which was issued on expiry of contract for SHA/Arrival.
12.2. Third suit was filed on 4th September 2023 before the Trial Court by plaintiff/respondent. In
the said suit as well, vacation notice was issued on expiry of contract for cityside. In the said suit,
respondent sought protection from vacation from sites at SHA & Arrival of the Terminal Building at
Srinagar Airport. In this case as well, the Trial Court vide its order dated 4th September 2023 stayed
vacation order subject to enhanced licence fee.
12.3. Fourth suit was filed by respondent on 8th September 2023, again before the Trial Court
seeking participation and consideration of bids for Short Term Tender for F&B Outlets in SHA and
Arrival of the Terminal Building at Srinagar Airport. The Trial Court again vide its Order dated 8th
September 2023 directed to open bids including that of respondent Page 21 12.4. Fifth suit was also
filed by respondent on 9th December 2023, before the Trial Court in which he sought declaration
and perpetual injunction, in which appellant was directed to allow respondent to continue to occupy
space allotted to it in terms of award letter dated 17 th October 2022.
12.5. Sixth suit was filed by respondent before the Trial Court, in which Trial Court vide Order dated
24th February 2024 kept in abeyance communication dated 5th January 2024 and schedule C of
E-Tender dated 28th October 2023 at serial no.1&2.
13.As noticed above, two writ petitions had been filed by respondent: one before Madras High
Court; and another before Punjab & Haryana High Court. In both petitions as well, subject-matter of
dispute is same and similar as is in the case in hand. Thus, it would be apt to reproduce certain
portions of the judgements hereinafter as they squarely also cover the instant case:
13.1. Excerpts of Judgement dated 30th September 2024, passed by Madras High
Court are as under:
"54. This Court gave its careful consideration to the submissions advanced by the
learned senior counsel appearing on either side and perused the materials available
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 13
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
on record as also the decisions relied on by the parties in support of their respective
contentions.
......
57. Two allegations have been levelled by the respondents against the petitioner, viz.,
one pertaining to conflict of interest and the other pertaining to material
misrepresentation, which has led to the issuance of the impugned orders.
........
61. It transpires that between 2015 and August, 2022, Karan Singh, the Proprietor of
Syona Spa was employed with SRPL and during the said period of time, the said
Karan Singh had received financial aid/loan from SRPL. The said fact is neither
disputed by SRPL nor by Karan Singh, the proprietor of Syona Spa. It is the case of
SRPL that there was no subsisting loan to be repaid by Karan Singh when the bid was
submitted as, as early as during March, 2022, the loan stood repaid, whereas the bid
was submitted much later in point of time.
........
Page 22
63.... In the case on hand, there existed a relationship of employer- employee
between SRPL and Karan Singh, the Proprietor of Syona Spa, which is admitted by
the parties, which was between 2015 and August, 2022. Further, the said Karan Singh
himself has admitted, in his writ petition, to have been working with Mahesh Sunny
Enterprises prior to 2014. It is the specific case of the respondent that one of the
Director of SRPL is a shareholder with Mahesh Sunny Enterprises, which is not
disputed by SRPL, but it is only submitted that the shareholding was less than 10%.
However, the nexus of the Director of SRPL with Mahesh Sunny Enterprises as a
shareholder clearly attracts clause 10 (vi) which clearly shows that there is a common
third party, who is linked between SRPL and Karan Singh. In fact, the said individual
cannot be brought within the ambit of third party, but stands on a more
advantageous position, which will have a bearing on the tender process, as the said
individual is in a controlling position. Therefore, clause 10 (vi) would also stand
squarely attracted.
64. When clauses 10 (iv) and 10 (vi) is squarely attracted and the same having not
disclosed in the bid submitted either by SRPL or by Syona Spa, the allegation of
conflict of interest, alleged by the respondents cannot be said to be bereft of any
material and, therefore, the respondents were within their right to call for
explanation by issuing show cause notice and act on the same.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 14
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
........
67. There could be no quarrel with the said fact that anterior in point of time to the
submission of the bid, a bidder would not be aware of the persons, who would
partake in the bid process and, therefore, non-mentioning of the names of persons,
who were associated with the bidder may not arise. However, the present case stands
on a totally different footing as projected by the respondents while dealing with the
explanation submitted to the show cause notice issued by them.
68. There is no quarrel with the fact that SRPL had employed Karan Singh on its rolls
as its employee between 2015 and August, 2022. It is the claim of SRPL that the bid
was submitted six months after the ouster of Karan Singh from the rolls of SRPL.
However, it is the stand of Syona Spa that its Proprietor Karan Singh was operating
Syona Spa even prior to his joining SRPL, as even when he was an employee under
Mahesh Sunny Enterprises, the said Karan Singh had stated that he was running
Syona Spa. It should not be lost sight of that the shareholder of Mahesh Sunny
Enterprises is a Director in SRPL.
69. In the aforesaid backdrop, this Court has to consider the case holistically to see
whether the allegations are made out. One of the Director of SRPL was a shareholder
in Mahesh Sunny Enterprises during the point of time when Karan Singh of Syona
Spa was working under Mahesh Sunny Enterprises. The said Karan Singh, even
during the said point of time, was running Syona Spa, which is admitted by the said
Karan Singh in the affidavit. Even thereafter on his relieving from Mahesh Sunny
Enterprises, the said Karan Singh was operating Syona Spa. Therefore, SRPL cannot
feign ignorance about the avocation of Karan Singh apart from his employment, as
one of its Director is a shareholder in Mahesh Sunny Enterprises. Thereafter, from
2015 to August, 2022, the said Karan Singh was employed in SRPL even during
which time, it is admitted, that the said Karan Singh was running Syona Spa. ....
......
71. To find out the veracity of the said allegation, this Court ventured to look into the
materials placed before it, which reveals the following: -
i) The address of SRPL is L-322, Mahipalpur Extension, New Delhi 110 037, while
that of Syona Spa is L-73/L322, 1st Floor, Mahipalpur Extension, HI-8, New Delhi
110 037, which is in the very same area.
ii) Karan Singh, the Proprietor of Syona Spa was the erstwhile employee of SRPL,
who ceased to be an employee since August, 2022.
Page 23
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 15
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
iii) However, the said Karan Singh, the Proprietor of Syona Spa was running the said Syona Spa
even while he was employed in Mahesh Sunny Enterprises and also continued to operate it even
after his employment with SRPL.
iv) The said Karan Singh had taken loan from SRPL, while he was an employee with SRPL, which
was alleged to have been repaid by him before he left the services of SRPL.
v) One of the Director of SRPL was also a shareholder in Mahesh Sunny Enterprises.
.......
74. Though it is the claim of SRPL that the stand of the respondents that there is material
discrepancy in the date on which the loan was settled between Karan Singh and SRPL the said
discrepancy would not be of any consequence as by the time during which explanation was initially
offered and the explanation which was given to the show cause notice Karan Singh had paid the loan
and, therefore, the discrepancy is there, however, the said stand is immaterial considering clause 10
(iv), which clearly spells out that even any previous loan or existing loan given to any bidder or
affiliate by another bidder would constitute conflict of interest and in that backdrop, the receipt of
loan by Karan Singh even anterior in point of time to the bid, not being spelt out in the bid, would
definitely attract clause 9(a) (iv) and invoking the same, if the respondents had rejected the bid of
both the petitioners, the same cannot be found fault with.
75. Further, it is to be pointed out that when the tender inviting authority had properly appreciated
the terms of the tender and the guidelines and had come to the clear finding that there exists conflict
of interest between SRPL and Syona Spa, which stands fortified by the materials available on record,
the mere fact that on the day when the bid was submitted there was no relationship between SRPL
and Syona Spa and, therefore, SRPL would not be aware of the persons, who had submitted the bid
and had not given the necessary details in the bid cannot be a ground to interfere with the order
passed by the 2nd respondent, when it is the specific case of the 2nd respondent that not only there
is infraction of clauses 9 (a)(i) and (v) and 10
(iv) and (vi), but there exists a modus between SRPL and Syone Spa through Karan Singh in the
bidding process, leading to rigging the bid and the modus having been carried out in other tenders
relating to other Airports, the stand of SRPL that it would not be aware of the persons, who have
submitted their bids pales into insignificance.
76. Further, it is also to be pointed out that it is the specific case of the respondents that for passing
the impugned order of debarment and cancellation of tender, that there exists a modus operandi
between SRPL and Syona Spa and that SRPL and Syona Spa, in a cartel formation, had worked hand
in glove with its clandestine operation by duping the respondents and had secured may bids, which
stand of the respondents cannot also be totally negated as the discussion made above reveals a
sinister operation having been carried on by SRPL and Syona Spa and further the complaint not
being an anonymous complaint, but is a complaint, which has been written by an individual, who is
closely associated with the higher echelons in the management of SRPL, which has even been
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 16
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
admitted by SRPL, the stand of SRPL that the said debarment is wholly arbitrary, capricious,
perverse and illegal does not merit acceptance.
79. Insofar as the stand of Syona Spa that it cannot be termed to be a bidder as their bid was not
even accepted and, therefore, their debarment would not arise, is wholly misconceived. The floating
of e-Tender is an invitation to submit a bid by an entity, and Syona Spa having submitted its bid,
would fall within the ambit of bidder even in the literal sense of the word. Merely because certain
conditions prescribed therein had not been fulfilled would not be a ground to hold that Syona Spa is
not a bidder. The prescription of additional conditions is only for the purpose of accepting the bid
and mere non-acceptance of the bid for other reasons would not deem the person, who Page 24 had
submitted the bid to be not a bidder. Giving any such restricted meaning, as canvassed by the
petitioner, would be wholly impermissible and against the literal meaning of the term "bidder" and
mere non-fulfilment of the terms of the notice inviting e-Tender cannot take the bid submitted by
Syona Spa outside the realm of bid and the person, who had submitted the bid from the realm of
bidder, which would be an erroneous interpretation of the term 'bidder'.
80. Further, as pointed out by the learned senior counsel for the respondents, the term "bidder: is
not defined in the notice inviting tender. Therefore, referencing the term from Blacks' Law
Dictionary 4th Edition, where "bidder" is defined as "one who makes a bid", Syona having submitted
its bid, though it has come to be rejected for non-submission of certain documents and monetary
materials, would have to be construed as a bidder and, therefore, Syona would have to be treated as
a bidder for all purposes. Therefore, the contention of Syona Spa that it is not a bidder in the
absence of payment of license fee is misconceived and the same deserves to be dismissed.
81. Though decisions have been placed before this Court on behalf of the petitioners to substantiate
their contentions, the said decisions would not be applicable to the facts of the present case, as they
stand on a totally different footing and the same cannot be pressed into service for adjudicating the
present issued.
82. For the reasons aforesaid, this Court does not find any infirmity with the orders passed by the
2nd respondent and there being no merits in the present writ petitions, the same are dismissed...."
13.2. Relevant portions of judgement dated 19th December 2024 is reproduced as under: -
"37. It was held by the DRC that the debarment and annulment orders passed by the
Airport Director, Amritsar had been passed after taking approval from the competent
authority and, therefore, the same would be considered as orders passed by the
Airports Authority of India. The submissions as regards the share holding in M/s
Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Private Limited was also noticed;
"Considering the above facts, the Committee (DRC) is of the view that the debarment
and annulment order passed by the Airport Director, Amritsar Airport has been
passed after taking approval from the competent authority and thus the orders dated
08.06.2023 would be considered as orders passed Airports Authority of India,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 17
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
therefore, the judgments quoted by M/s SRPL are different. The other submission
made by M/s SRPL is that its share- holding in M/s Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Pvt.
Ltd. was less than the cut off as per the tender document. M/s SRPL has placed
certain documents on the file along-with its written submissions. The tender was
issued on 05.09.2022 and the last date for submission was 03.10.2022. It has been
observed that such documents regarding change in shareholding pattern, gift deeds
were not submitted by the party at the time of show cause notice isued by AAI,
Amritsar on 05.06.2023."
38. As regards the issue of Karan Singh being an employee of the petitioner and M/s Mahesh Sunny
Enterprises Private Limited as also the involvement of M/s Syona Spa, respondent No.3 held as
under:-
"OBSERVATIONS OF DRC:
1) The above submissions of Sh. Karan Singh read with his earlier submission made
on 12.04.2023 shows that he was an employee of M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Pvt. Ltd.
as well as M/s Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. and his services were dispensed
with M/s Page 25 SRPL in August, 2022 and was continuing with M/s Mahesh Sunny
Pvt. Ltd. but later on, the submissions were revised/changed by Sh.
Karan Singh in his letter dated 16.06.2023 stating that when he resumed his office recently, came to
know that his services have also been discontinued by M/s Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Pvt. Ltd.
prior to August, 2022.
2) The above, submissions shows that Sh. Karan Singh was misleading AAI by changing his
submissions from time to time.
3) If the bid is visible in CPP e-tenders government portal, this means the bidder has submitted both
technical and financial bids as mere submission of technical bid only will not close the bid process.
This means the party M/s Syona Spa has completed the entire bid process on CPP portal only then
the bid is visible to bid manager after technical opening.
4) Funds equivalent to six months license fees along with 01 month advance license fees are only
required if the party comes as H1 i.e. after award of license. The party has shown same intention for
above 07 tenders (02 of instant tenders of Amritsar airport). Moreover, there is an option to
withdraw the bid in CPP portal and as per tender conditions also which has not been exercised by
M/s Syona Spa depicting malafide/corrupt intentions of the party in the tender processes. The
beneficiary of such conduct of M/s Syona Spa is M/s SRPL.
5) The fact that the services of Sh. Karan Singh were discontinued by M/s SRPL and M/s Mahesh
Sunny Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. but M/s Syona Spa participated in all the tenders wherein M/s SRPL
was also one of the bidder during the period Mid July to October end (2022) infers that both the
bidders were having access to each other information and reply to show causes are just an after
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 18
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
thoughts.
39. As regards the share holding of Bikram Singh, etc. and the conflict of interest issue, it was held
as under:-
"OBSERVATIONS OF DRC:
1) No documentary evidence on shareholding of Sh. Bikram Singh in M/s Mahesh
Sunny Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. was submitted on the date of reply of show cause was
provided.
As per documents submitted by the party in the DRC process, it can be seen that there has been
major change in the distribution of shares in M/s Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Pvt. Ltd. in respect of
shares of Sh. Bikram Singh. It is the responsibility of party /Director Sh. Bikram Singh to have
presented the documents related to Gift deed at the time of show- cause notice. Mere submission of
statement that "it is a matter of record" cannot be taken into consideration as per records submitted
at later stage the party had a major change in shareholding pattern in the months of May to July
2022.
2) Considering the fact that a mistake was done by official of M/s Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Pvt.
Ltd. in depositing EPF and ESI of Sh. Karan Singh for near about 10 months i.e. from the month of
termination of services prior to August 2022 till the month of June 2023 cannot be considered a
mere mistake but a pre-conceived after- thought to come out of the grounds of conflict of interest.
.....
4) Also, only after submitting of tender fees, EMD, documents of technical bid and financial bid
BOQ (rate quote), the bid gets completed and the system accepts the bids and then the further
process is carried out.
5) DRC has also observed that M/s Syona Spa has opted for similar process in tenders for Raipur
and Pune wherein M/s SRPL was also one of the bidder. As the information regarding bidders
become visible on CPP portal instantly after opening of technical bids by bid managers, the reason
that M/s SRPL has not highlighted to AAI the Page 26 malafide intentions of M/s Syona Spa to
affect the bidding process can be considered as the fact that both the bidders were working closely in
the bid processes having the access of each other's information in respect to the bid submission.
The DRC has also observed that the address of all the three firms in question is same i.e. L-322
MAHIPALPUR EXTENS, NEW DELHI 110037. It has also come to light that the address of M/s
Syona SPA (L-73/L-322, Mahipalpur Extension, New Delhi) and M/s Saptagiri Restaurant Pvt. Ltd.
(L-322, Mahipalpur Extension, New Delhi) are in the same premises. In this regard, the reference
has been taken into the account from the letter dated 06.05.2016 issued by M/s SRPL confirming
the address L-73 and L-322, Ist Floor, Hotel Saptagiri, Mahipalpur Extn. National Highway No.08,
New Delhi-110034 (unit of Satpagiri Restaurant Pvt. Ltd.)."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 19
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
40. Finally it was concluded by respondent No.3-DRC as under:-
"Thus in the light of facts discussed above, it can be reasonably inferred that M/s
SRPL (one bidder) has relationship with M/s Syona Spa (Sh. Karan Singh- Prop.)
(another bidder) directly or indirectly or through M/s Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Pvt.
Ltd. (a common third party) that puts either or both of tghem in a position to have
access to each other's information, or to influence the bid of either or each other
which means conflict of interest as per tender conditions.
DRC is of the view that the documents submitted by the party were created after
participation in the tender and were presented before this forum for the purpose of
misleading and to obtain a favourable order.
Thus, DRC comes to the conclusion that the orders dated 08.08.2023 passed by
Airport Director, Amritsar Airport by which M/s SRPL was debarred and license was
annulled, would remain valid."
41. It is, therefore, clear that respondent No.3 examined the matter from all angles after giving due
opportunity of hearing to all stake holders and thereafter passed the order under challenge."
(emphasis supplied) 13.3. Perusal of aforesaid judgement speaks volumes and, therefore, need not
be reiterated or elaborated here because this Court at this moment deals with ad interim injunction
given by the Trial Court.
14.As has been said by the Supreme Court in S.G.Jaisinghani v. Union of India and others, AIR 1967
SC 1427; and Haji T.M.Hassan Rawther v. Keral Financial Corporation, AIR 1988 SC 157, that every
action of the State or its instrumentalities should not only be fair, legitimate and aboveboard but
should be without any affection or aversion. It should neither be suggestive of discrimination nor
even apparently give an impression of bias, favouritism and nepotism. The decision should be made
by the application of known principle and rules and in general Page 27 such decision should be
predictable and the citizen should know where he is, but if a decision is taken without any principle
or without any rule, it is unpredictable and such a decision is antithesis to the decision taken in
accordance with the rule of law 14.1. In essence and core, the action/order of the State or State
instrumentality would stand vitiated if it lacks bona fide as it would only be a case of colourable
exercise of power. The Rule of Law is the foundation of a democratic society.
14.2. The Supreme Court in the case of I.R. Coelho (dead) by LRs v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2007
SC 861, held as under:-
"The State is to deny no one equality before the law ........ Economic growth and social
equity are the two pillars of our Constitution which are linked to the right of an
individual (right to equal opportunity), rather than in the abstract.......Equality, rule
of law, judicial review and separation of powers form parts of the basic structure of
the Constitution. Each of these concepts are intimately connected. There can be no
rule of law, if there is no equality before the law. These would be meaningless if the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 20
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
violation was not subject to the judicial review."
14.3. In Zenit Mataplast P. Ltd. (supra) it has been observed by the Supreme Court that when a
person approaches the court complaining against the Statutory Authority alleging arbitrariness, bias
or favouritism, the court, being custodian of law, must examine the averments made in the
application to form a tentative opinion as to whether there is any substance in those allegations.
Such a course is also required to be followed while deciding the application for interim relief. It was
also held by the Supreme Court that interim injunction should be granted by the Court after
considering all the pros and cons of the case in a given set of facts involved therein on the risk and
responsibility of the party or, in case he loses the case, he cannot take any advantage of the same.
Page 28 14.4. In the case of Fertiliser Corporation Kamgar Union (Regd.0 Sindri and others v.
Union of India and others (1981) 1 SCC 568 , the Supreme Court observed that if the Government
acted fairly, though faltered in wisdom, the court should not interfere. The Supreme Court observed:
"A pragmatic approach to social justice compels us to interpret constitutional
provisions, .... with a view to see that effective policing of the corridors of power is
carried out by the court until other ombudsman arrangement..............
emerges............ The court cannot usurp or abdicate, and the parameters of judicial
review must be clearly defined and never exceeded. If the Directorate of a
Government company has acted fairly, even if it has faltered in its wisdom, the court
cannot, as a super auditor, take the Board of Directors to task. This function is
limited to testing whether the administrative action has been fair and free from the
taint of unreasonableness and has substantially complied with norms of procedure
set for it by rules of public administration."
14.5. Dealing with the interim orders, the Supreme Court observed in Assistant Collector of Central
Excise, Chandan Nagar, West Bengal v. Dunlop India Ltd and others (1985) 2 SCR 190, that an
interim order should not be granted without considering balance of convenience, the public interest
involved and the financial impact of an interim order. 14.6. Similarly, in Ramniklal N. Bhutto and
Anr: v. State of Maharashtra and Ors., [1997] 1 SCC 134, the Supreme Court said that while granting
a stay the court should arrive at a proper balancing of competing interests and grant a stay only
when there is an overwhelming public interest in granting it, as against the public detriment which
may be caused by granting a stay. Therefore, in granting an injunction or stay order against the
award of a contract by the Government or a Government agency, the court has to satisfy itself that
the public interest in holding up the project far out-weighs the public interest in carrying it out
within a reasonable time. The court must also take into account the cost Page 29 involved in staying
the project and whether the public would stand to benefit by incurring such cost.
14.7. In Colgate Palmolive (India) Ltd v. Hindustan Level Ltd. AIR 1999 SC 3105, The Supreme
Court observed that the other considerations which ought to weigh with the Court hearing the
application or petition for the grant of injunctions are as below :
(i) Extent of damages being an adequate remedy;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 21
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
(ii) Protect the plaintiff's interest for violation of his rights though however having
regard to the injury that may be suffered by the defendants by reason therefor ;
(iii) The court while dealing with the matter ought not to ignore the factum of
strength of one party's case being stronger than the others;
(iv) No fixed rules or notions ought to be had in the matter of grant of injunction but
on the facts and circumstances of each case- the relief being kept flexible;
(v) The issue is to be looked from the point of view as to whether on refusal of the
injunction the plaintiff would suffer irreparable loss and injury keeping in view the
strength of the parties' case;
(vi) Balance of convenience or inconvenience ought to be considered as an important
requirement even if there is a serious question or prima facie case in support of the
grant;
(vii) Whether the grant or refusal of injunction will adversely affect the interest of
general public which can or cannot be compensated otherwise."
14.8. The case of Raunaq International Ltd. v. I.V.R. Contraction Ltd. and others (1999) 1 SCC 492,
deals with various aspects of the matter which relate to the instant case as well, including courts to
adopt restrain in granting interim orders, where public interest is involved. It was said that even
when the State or a public body enters into a commercial transaction, considerations which would
prevail in its decision to award the contract to a given party would be the same. However, because
the State or a public body or an agency of the State enters into such a contract, there could be, in a
given case, an element of public law or public interest involved even in such a commercial
transaction. The Supreme Court proceeded to say that what are the elements of public interest that
public money would be expended for the purposes of the Page 30 contract; that the goods or services
which are being commissioned could be for a public purpose, such as, construction of roads, public
buildings, power plants or other public utilities; that the public would be directly interested in the
timely fulfilment of the contract so that the services become available to the public expeditiously;
that the public would also be interested in the quality of the work undertaken or goods supplied by
the tenderer; that the poor quality of work or goods can lead to tremendous public hardship and
substantial financial outlay either in correcting mistakes or in rectifying defects or even at times in
redoing the entire work, thus involving larger outlays or public money and delaying the availability
of services, facilities or goods. Hence before entertaining a petition and passing any interim orders
in such petitions, the court must carefully weigh conflicting public interests. Only when it comes to a
conclusion that there is an overwhelming public interest in entertaining the petition, the court
should intervene. The same considerations must weigh with the court when interim orders are
passed in such petitions. The party at whose instance interim orders are obtained has to be made
accountable for the consequences of interim order as interim order could delay the project, jettison
finely worked financial arrangements and escalate costs. Hence applicant asking for interim orders,
in appropriate cases should be asked to provide security for any increase in cost as a result of such
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 22
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
delay, or any damages suffered by the opposite party in consequence of an interim order. Otherwise,
public detriment may outweigh public benefit in granting such interim orders. Stay order or
injunction order, if issued, must be moulded to provide for restitution. The Supreme Court went to
say that Page 31 it was unfortunate that despite repeated observations made by it in a number of
cases, such petitions are being readily entertained by the court without weighing the consequences.
Therefore, when such a stay order is obtained at the instance of a private party or even at the
instance of a body litigating in public interest, any interim order which stops the project from
proceeding further, must provide for reimbursement of costs to public in case ultimately litigation
started by such an individual or body fails. The public must be compensated both for the delay in
implementation of the project and the cost escalation resulting from such delay. Unless an adequate
provision is made for this in the interim order, the interim order may prove counterproductive.
15.Now adverting to case in hand. Appellants first issued show cause notice on 21st February 2023
upon respondent asking that one, Mr Karan Singh, proprietor of Syona Spa was an employee of
respondent- firm and also availed all benefits as an employee, like ESI, PF etc and also an Airport
Entry Pass was issued, which amounted to conflict of interest as per RFP provisions in tender for
Licence to operate Wellness Centre/Spa and Massage Chair facility at Chennai Airport by the
Airport Director, Chennai Airport.
15.1. Another show cause notice dated 5th June was issued by Airport Director, Chennai Airport, to
respondent asserting conflict of interest by stating that respondent-firm, which is owned by Mr.
Bikram Singh, who is also a shareholder of M/s Mahesh Sunny Enterprises Private Limited and
reiterated the contents of show cause notice dated 21 st February 2023.
Page 32 15.2. Show cause notice was also issued by Airport Director, Amritsar Airports on 5th June
2023, upon respondent contending conflict of interest and that respondent-firm was owned by Mr.
Bikram Singh, who was also shareholder of M/s Mahesh sunny Enterprises Private Limited. 15.3.
Show cause notice dated 8th June 2023 was also issued by ED (Comm) averring therein collusive
bidding/bid rigging by respondent-firm with reference to tender issued at Amritsar, Raipur, Ranchi
and Chennai Airports.
15.4. It was on 26th July 2023 that Airport Director, Chennai, debarred respondent-firm for having
conflict of interest with another bidder, i.e., Syona Spa, as the conduct of respondent-firm was
violative of clause 9(a)(ii) and 9(a)Iv) and Clause (b).
15.5. On 3rd August 2023, AAI issued NIET for short-term licence to operate food and beverages
outlets (SHA) F/F and arrival at Srinagar International Airport, Srinagar.
15.6. On 8th August 2023, Airport Director, Amritsar Airport, debarred respondent-firm for having
conflict of interest with another bidder, i.e., Syona Spna, as the conduct of respondent-firm was
violative of Clause 9(a) 9(b) and 9(c) of NIT for licence for Wellness Centre and Spa and Massage
Chair Facility inside Domestic SHA, Amritsar, Airport. As a consequence of which, respondent
preferred a number of writ petitions. 15.7. On 11th August 2023, AAI informed respondent that its
bid with respect to NIET dated 3rd August 2023 had been rejected due to debarment action taken
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 23
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
against it at Chennai and Amritsar Airports. Respondent challenged debarment order dated 8th
August 2023 before Punjab and Haryana High Court which was, however, withdrawn by it seeking
Page 33 liberty to approach DRC under clause 29 of General Terms and Conditions.
15.8. A civil suit that has been filed by respondent before the Trial court, an order was granted
therein holding respondent eligible for participation in tendering process and also directing AAI to
open the bids with respect to short-term licence to operate food and beverages outlets (SHA) F/F
and Arrival at Srinagar International Airport. By virtue of order dated 8th September 2023, the Trial
Court allowed interim application of respondent and dismissed the application filed by AAI under
Order 39 Rule 4 CPC. An appeal, being FAO no.24/2023 preferred by AAI was dismissed vide
judgement dated 13 th October 2023, against which SLP (C) no.3376/2024 was filed before the
Supreme Court. Since respondent did not participate in the subsequent tenders issued by AAI, as
such, the said SLP was withdrawn and the question of law was specifically kept open by the Supreme
Court. 15.9. In another suit, being no.24/2023, by virtue of an ad interim order dated 1st November
2023, AAI was restrained from evicting respondent from the allotted premises and allowing
respondent to operate F&B outlets at the airport.
15.10. In one more suit, bearing no.08/2023, vide order dated 1st November 2023, an interim order
was granted and vacation of premises ordered by AAI vide communication dated 25th August was
stayed. 15.11. In another suit, bearing no.09/2023, the Trial Court vide order dated 9 th December
2023, directed appellant-AAI to allow respondent to continue to occupy the space allotted to it in
terms of award letter dated 17th August 2022.
Page 34 15.12. ED (Comm) CHQ, New Delhi, issued a debarment order dated 20 th December 2023,
after taking notice of association between respondent and M/s Syona Spa. Respondent challenged
debarment order before Trial Court. Ad interim order dated 21st December 2023 was granted in
favour of respondent, keeping in abeyance debarment order. 15.13. On 27th January 2024, DRC
upheld debarment order dated 8 th August 2023, issued by Airport Director, Amritsar Airport.
15.14. On 8th April 2024, Trial Court has issued order impugned. 15.15. Respondent challenged DRC
Order dated 27th January 2024 before Punjab and Haryana High Court in WP(C) no.3041/2024,
which was disposed of directing DRC to pass a reasoned order. 15.16. DRC on 2nd May 2024 vide its
Final Order upheld debarment order. 15.17. Against impugned order of Trial Court, the instant
appeal was disposed of by this Court on 22nd July 2024. However, review thereof was sought, which
was allowed by this Court vide order dated 11th October 2024 and appeal was restored to its original
number. 15.18. LPA no.316/2024 was directed by respondent against revival order dated 11th
October 2024, which, however, was disposed of vide order dated 23rd December 2024, with an
observation by the Division Bench of this Court that it did not find any reason to show any
indulgence. 15.19. Against Debarment Orders, passed by Airports of Chennai and Amritsar as also
against Dispute Resolution Committee's (DRC) order, writ petitions preferred by respondents have
been dismissed by the High Court of Punjab & Haryana, and High Court of Madras.
16.As has been made it clear herein above, that the object of ad interim injunction is to protect
plaintiff against injury by violation of his right Page 35 for which he could not be adequately
compensated in damages if the case were resolved in his favour at the trial. The need for such
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 24
Airports Authority Of India Through Its ... vs M/S Saptagiri Restaurant Private ... on 11 March, 2025
protection has, however, to be weighed against the corresponding need of defendant to be protected
against injury resulting from his having been prevented from exercising his own legal rights for
which he could not be adequately compensated. The court must weigh one need against another and
determine where the balance of convenience lies. Gujarat Bottling Co. Ltd. v. Coca Cola Co (1995) 5
SCC 545.
17.In the context of above settled position, impugned orders of Trial Court warrant interference and
are liable to be set-aside. Accordingly, both the impugned orders are set-aside.
18. Disposed of.
19. Copy be sent down.
(Vinod Chatterji Koul) Judge Srinagar 11.03.2025 Ajaz Ahmad, Secretary Whether approved for
reporting? Yes/No. Page 36
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/35151379/ 25
