Ajay Sharma Alias Ajju Pandit vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Ajay Sharma Alias Ajju Pandit vs State Of U.P. on 2 January,
2025
Author: Shekhar Kumar Yadav
Bench: Shekhar Kumar Yadav
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:64
Court No. - 35
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 38490 of 2024
Applicant :- Ajay Sharma Alias Ajju Pandit
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Sunil Kumar
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Rajendra Kumar Yadav
Hon'ble Shekhar Kumar Yadav,J.
1. Counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the State today in the Court, the same is taken on
record.
2. Heard Sri Sunil Kumar, learned counsel for the applicant, Sri Rajendra Kumar Yadav, learned
counsel for the informant and learned AGA for the State as well as perused the record.
3. By means of this application, the applicant is seeking enlargement on bail in Case Crime No.184
of 2024, under Sections 302, 341, 34, 120-B IPC, Police Station- Ecotech-3, District- Gautambudh
Nagar.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37714165/ 1
Ajay Sharma Alias Ajju Pandit vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
4. As per prosecution story, it is alleged that the informant lodged the impugned FIR on 14.5.2024
against the applicant and two other accused-applicant alleging therein that on 1.5.2024 at about
10:15 pm, his nephew/deceased went for filling of CNG Gas at pump situated near Balika Inter
College, where some persons in a vehicle number UP 16 DT 2855 are said to have assaulted him and
said that he is Ajay alias Pandit, and further said that "You don't know me yet, I will put your mind
in order, just get some gas poured, I will tell you." Saying this he called two more person at the
Pump, one of them came out of the pump on a scooty and one on a Bullet motor cycle. It is further
alleged one Abhishek then called the informant and told him to come quickly as three people were
beating Aman Bhai. It is further alleged that at the time of incident, the informant was also nearby
and he drove the car fastly and went to the pump and saw that Aman was lying unconscious. It is
further alleged that the informant and others took him to Saini Hospital where he was given an
injection and thereafter he was referred to Yatharth Hospital, where the doctor declared him dead
during treatment.
5. Learned counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant is innocent and has been falsely
implicated in the present case on false and fabricated facts. He submits that the applicant has not
committed any offence as alleged in the impugned FIR. There is no evidence against the accused
even in the footage of CCTV cameras installed at the CNG pump. He submits that no statement was
given regarding the presence of accused on the spot by any of the witnesses. There are
contradictions in the statements of the witnesses produced by the police. He further submits that
the applicant did not have any role whatsoever in the alleged murder of the victim and did not at any
point of time share the common intention with the main accused to murder the victim. He further
submits that only one injury, out of the three injuries, to deceased was said to be fatal, but no role of
present applicant has been shown and he has been charge sheeted because of the common intention,
but what was the common intention to murder has not been disclosed. He submits that co-accused,
Rishabh Bhati, who has already been granted bail by this Court vide order dated 23.8.2024 in
Criminal Misc. Bail Application No.31008 of 2024. Several other submissions in order to
demonstrate the falsity of the allegations made against the applicant have also been placed forth
before the Court. The circumstances which, according to the counsel, led to the false implication of
the accused have also been touched upon at length. It has been assured on behalf of the applicant
that he is ready to cooperate with the process of law and shall faithfully make himself available
before the court whenever required. He submitted that the applicant is languishing in jail since
14.5.2024 having no previous criminal history.
6. On the other hand, learned counsel for the informant as well as learned AGA have opposed the
application for bail but could not dispute the submission raised by learned counsel for the applicant.
7. Upon hearing learned counsel for the parties, perusal of record and considering the complicity of
accused, severity of punishment as well as totality of facts and circumstances, at this stage without
commenting on the merits of the case, I find it a fit case for bail.
8. Let the applicant- Ajay Sharma Alias Ajju Pandit, who is involved in aforementioned case crime
be released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions. Further, before issuing the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37714165/ 2
Ajay Sharma Alias Ajju Pandit vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
release order, the sureties be verified.
(i) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any
adjournment on the date fixed for evidence when the witnesses are present in Court.
In case of default of this condition, it shall be open for the Trial Court to treat it as
abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders in accordance with law.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present before the Trial Court on each date fixed,
either personally or through his counsel. In case of his absence, without sufficient
cause, the Trial Court may proceed against him under Section 229-A IPC.
(iii) In case, the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during trial and in order to
secure his presence proclamation under Section 82 Cr.P.C., may be issued and if
applicant fails to appear before the Court on the date fixed in such proclamation,
then, the Trial Court shall initiate proceedings against him, in accordance with law,
under Section 174-A IPC.
(iv) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance
with law.
(v) The Trial Court may make all possible efforts/endeavour and try to conclude the
trial within a period of one year after the release of the applicant.
9. In case of breach of of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
10. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
11. With the aforesaid observations/ directions, the application is allowed.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 // Krishna*
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/37714165/ 3
