Ajay Vishwakarma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 July, 2019
Ajay Vishwakarma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 July,
2019
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH : JABALPUR
SINGLE BENCH : HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE V.P.S.CHAUHAN
Cr.R.No.984/2019
Ajay Vishwakarma and another
Vs.
State of M.P.
Shri Sushil Kumar Sharma, learned counsel for the
applicants.
Shri J.S. Parihar, PL for respondent -State.
O R D E R
(09 /07/2019) The applicant has filed this revision under Section 397 read with Section 401 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 being aggrieved by the order dated 5.2.2019, passed in Sessions
Trial No. 09/2019, by Sessions Judge, Panna, whereby charge under Section 304/34 of IPC has been
framed against both the applicants.
2. The facts given rise to this petition in short are that Sant Kumar Yadav died by electrocution. A
Crime No. 423/18 registered at Police Station, Ajaigarh, district Panna under Section 304/34 of IPC
against both the applicants on the report of Ashok Kumar Dwivedi and after investigation, the
charge sheet came to be filed and ultimately committed to the trial court for trial. The Sessions
Court after completing all formalities vide order dated 5.2.2019 framed the charge against both the
applicants punishable under Section 304/34 of IPC.
3. The case of the prosecution against both the applicants in short is that the deceased Sant Kumar
Yadav was working with the applicant, Ratiram Yadav who engaged him for repairing of DP
installed in the field of Babu Singh Thakur and permit for doing the work was issued, meaning
thereby that at the time given in the permit, the electric current would not be supplied in the electric
line and in the given time, one has to repair the fault of D.P. Ratiram instructed Sant Kumar Yadav
to climb up the pole and repair the D.P. On the instructions of Ratiram, Sant Kumar Yadav climbed
up the pole. At that time, there was a permit to cut of electric. He joined the dumper and he
suddenly felt that electric current is running in the electric wire. Ratiram told that no electric
current would run in the electric wire, we have permit and if you have any doubt, you can check by
touching the wire by hand. Sant Kumar Yadav was assured that there is no electric current. He
touched the electric line and got electrocuted. Retiram felt that after receiving the permit, Ajay
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32644120/ 1
Ajay Vishwakarma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 July, 2019
Vishwakarma started the electric line knowing that a man is working on the electric line may get
electrocuted. Sant Kumar was electrocuted and ultimately he died while shifting to the hospital.
4. Learned counsel for the applicants submits that the deceased was neither an employee of the
M.P.E.B. nor he was a licence holder for doing the work. He climbed on the pole on his own volition.
No ingredients of any offence is found against both the applicants. The applicants have falsely been
implicated in this case.
5. Learned Penal Lawyer submits that there is sufficient evidence available on record about the
action of Ratiram as well as of Ajay Vishwakarma, Sant Kumar was working on the pole to repair the
D.P. on the instructions of the applicants. Ajay Vishwakarma knew that if he would connect the
current, Sant Kumr Yadav may get electrocuted and may die. Inspite of that, he intentionally got
connected supply of the electric current in the line and another applicant, Ratiram intentionally
instructed Sant Kumar that he had got permit of disconnection of current in the electric line and you
can touch the electric wire, there is no current. When Sant Kumar Yadav touched the electric wire
and he got electrocuted and ultimately died. There is sufficient evidence against both the applicants.
Learned trial court has not committed any error in framing the charge.
6. Having heard, learned counsel for the parties, perused the case diary of Crime No. 423/18 of P.S.
Ajaygarh.
7. No doubt, Ajay Vishwakarma and Ratiram Yadav both are employee of the M.P.E.B. Ratiram was
engaged for repairing the electrical line and he engaged Sant Kumar Yadav for doing that work.
There was a permit for repairing the work, meaning thereby that at that time no current would be
running in the electric wire. The electric current would be disconnected during that period. During
the disconnected period, Ratiram Yadav instructed Sant Kumar Yadav to repair the D.P. and while
he was repairing the D.P., suddenly, the applicant no. 1, Ajay Vishwakarma without collecting any
information that work in the electric line was going on or over, he connected the current in the
electric wire and Ratiram Yadav, the applicant no. 2, instructed Sant Kumar Yadav to touch the
electrical wire. Sant Kumar touched, the electric wire and he got electrocuted and died. There is
sufficient material available on record.
8. The trial court after hearing both the parties found that there are sufficient ground for proceeding
further against the both the accused and thus, the trial court did not discharge both the applicants
from the charge under Section 227 of CrP.C. and proceeded to frame charge under Section 228 of
Cr.P.C. Section 228 of Cr.P.C. reads as under :-
228. Framing of charge.- (1) If, after such consideration and hearing as aforesaid, the
Judge is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has
committed an offence which-
(a) is not exclusively triable by the Court of Session, he may, frame a charge against
the accused and, by order, transfer the case for trial to the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
(or any other Judicial Magistrate of the first class and direct the accused to appear
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32644120/ 2
Ajay Vishwakarma vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 July, 2019
before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, or as the case may be, the Judicial Magistrate of
the first class, on such date as he deems fit, and thereupon such Magistrate) shall try
the offence in accordance with the procedure for the trial of warrant- cases instituted
on a police report;
(b) is exclusively triable by the Court, he shall frame in writing a charge against the
accused. (2) Where the Judge frames any charge under clause (b) of sub- section (1),
the charge shall be read and explained to the accused and the accused shall be asked
whether he pleads guilty of the offence charged or claimed to be tried.
9. Language implies in Section 228 of Cr.P.C is that if any court on the basis of documents and the
evidence collected during investigation finds that there is ground for presuming that the accused has
committed some offence, then it shall frame charge in writing against the accused, meaning thereby
that if any court finds sufficient evidence on record for presuming any ground against the accused in
regard to the committing of any offence, the court can proceed to frame the charge against the
accused. At this stage, the court has not to consider whether there is sufficient evidence for
conviction against the accused. The trial court categorically discussed the case law in this regard and
proceeded to frame a charge instead to discharge the accused from the charge under Section 227 of
Cr.P.C.
10. On the basis of foregoing discussion, this court does not find any illegally, perversity or
irregularity in the impugned order dated 5.2.2019 passed in S.T. No. 09/2019. This revision
deserves to be and hereby dismissed.
(Vishnu Pratap Singh Chauhan) Judge bks
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32644120/ 3
