Ajay Kumar Yadav vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
Ajay Kumar Yadav vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
Author: Sanjay Kumar Singh
Bench: Sanjay Kumar Singh
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:68962
Court No. - 78
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION U/S 482 BNSS No. - 2845 of 2025
Applicant :- Ajay Kumar Yadav
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Chandra Prakash Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Sanjay Kumar Singh,J.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned Additional Government Advocate representing the
State of U.P. and perused the record.
This Criminal Misc. Anticipatory Bail Application under Section 482 of B.N.S.S. has been moved by
the applicant after submission of charge-sheet and rejection of his anticipatory bail application vide
order dated 07.03.2025 passed by learned Additional Session Judge/Special Judge (Prevention of
Corruption Act), Court No. 4, Gorakhpur, seeking Anticipatory Bail in Case Crime No. 7 of 2023,
under Sections 7, 13(1)B, 13(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act and Section 120-B of I.P.C., police
station Anti Corruption, district Gorakhpur, during the pendency of the trial.
As per prosecution case, the complainant gave a complaint dated 11.11.2023 in the office of Anti
Corruption Organization, Gorakhpur making allegations inter alia that he has installed a water plant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/182140383/ 1
Ajay Kumar Yadav vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
at his house. Last year, display of the electricity meter, installed by the electricity department in his
water plant, got damaged. After giving information twice, Sub Divisional Officer (in short 'SDO')
came to check his meter on 23.08.2022 and went after checking. On 25.09.2022, his meter was
checked and replaced by the electricity department and he has been paying electricity bills regularly.
When in November, 2023, meter reader came to take the meter reading, he told that your account
has been put on hold by the SDO and directed him to go and meet SDO. When he met SDO at the
Electricity Sub Station, Suraj Kund, Gorakhpur, then he told him that the feeding of the new meter
installed at the water plant has not been done in the department, due to which the bill is pending
from the time the new meter was installed, till now. When he told the SDO that the meter has been
installed by the electricity department and he has been paying the entire bill on time since the
installation of the meter and before that, then SDO directed him to go and meet Sandeep Babu, he
will explain everything to him. After this, when he went to meet Sandeep Babu, then he demanded
bribe of Rs. 25,000/- for feeding of new meter.
Taking cognizance of the said complaint, a preliminary inquiry was conducted for prima facie
satisfaction to proceed further in the matter. On being satisfied with the opinion given in the inquiry
report, a trap team was constituted to catch the person concerned red handed while accepting bribe.
The currency notes, already numbered, coated with an invisible powder and after completing
pre-trap formalities, etc., the trap team along with independent witnesses and complainant
proceeded to the designated place to execute the trap proceeding. It is the case of the prosecution
that the moment the accused Sandeep accepted the bribe of Rs. 25,000/-, the trap team nabbed him
red handed. His hands were then dipped in sodium carbonate solution, the colour of solution
changes to pink, which prima facie proved that he has taken the currency notes in question. On
preliminary interrogation, Sandeep disclosed that he has accepted the bribe at the instance of S.D.O.
(applicant-Ajay Kumar Yadav). Sandeep has also disclosed that he has to feed the bill of the
complainant in the system but the applicant was authorized to make an amendment in bill and to
grant approval. Thereafter, Mr. Ram Bahadur Pal (Inspector / In-Charge Trap Team) got a first
information report lodged in the matter on 18.11.2023.
Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that the applicant has been falsely implicated in
this case. There is no evidence on record to show any demand of bribe by the applicant from the
complainant, he has no knowledge about the bribe demanded by co-accused Sandeep with regard to
repairing of meter and correction of meter reading. Allegations levelled against the applicant are
false and based on concocted facts. Investigating officer has not conducted fair investigation. No
offence is made out against the applicant.
Per contra, learned Additional Government Advocate representing the State of U.P. opposed the
prayer for granting anticipatory bail to the applicant by contending that the investigating officer,
after due investigation, submitted charge sheet dated 06.02.2025 in this case on the basis of cogent
material against the applicant, therefore, as on date cognizable offence is made out against the
applicant and it can not be presumed that he has been falsely implicated. Lastly it is submitted that
in the light of judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of P. Chidambaram Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement, AIR 2019 SC 4198, refusal of anticipatory bail in an appropriate case does not amount
to denial of rights conferred upon applicant under article 21 of the Constitution of India. Since there
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/182140383/ 2
Ajay Kumar Yadav vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
is no exceptional ground to exercise the discretionary jurisdiction under Section 482 B.N.S.S. in
favour of the applicant. Hence the instant anticipatory bail application is liable to be rejected.
Having heard the learned counsel for the parties, I find that as per the prosecution case, co-accused
Sandeep (clerk) was caught red handed while accepting bribe at the behest of present applicant Ajay
Kumar Yadav (S.D.O.). The charge sheet has been filed after required sanction by the authority
concerned and on the charge sheet, the concerned Court took cognizance. As on date, I do not find
any credible material on record to give any finding that applicant has been falsely implicated.
The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Sumitha Pradeep vs. Arun Kumar C.K. and another, 2022
LiveLaw (SC) 870 has held that while considering anticipatory bail, the nature of offence should be
looked into along with the severity of the punishment. It is also held that even if custodial
interrogation is not required or necessitated, by itself, cannot be a ground to grant anticipatory bail.
Here it would also be apposite to mention the observations made by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the
case of Devinder Kumar Bansal Vs. State of Punjab, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 488, wherein the Apex
Court has laid down the criteria for considering anticipatory bail in the matters relating to the
offences under the Prevention of Corruption Act, which are as under:-
"21. The parameters for grant of anticipatory bail in a serious offence like corruption
are required to be satisfied. Anticipatory bail can be granted only in exceptional
circumstances where the Court is prima facie of the view that the applicant has been
falsely enroped in the crime or the allegations are politically motivated or are
frivolous. So far as the case at hand is concerned, it cannot be said that any
exceptional circumstances have been made out by the petitioner accused for grant of
anticipatory bail and there is no frivolity in the prosecution.
22. In the aforesaid context, we may refer to a pronouncement in Central Bureau of
Investigation v. V. Vijay Sai Reddy, (2013) 7 SCC 452: (2013) 7 Scale 15, wherein this
Court expressed thus:
"28. While granting bail, the court has to keep in mind the nature of accusation, the
nature of evidence in support thereof, the severity of the punishment which
conviction will entail, the character of the accused, circumstances which are peculiar
to the accused, reasonable possibility of securing the presence of the accused at the
trial, reasonable apprehension of the witnesses being tampered with, the larger
interests of the public/State and other similar considerations. It has also to be kept in
mind that for the purpose of granting bail, the Legislature has used the words
"reasonable grounds for believing" instead of "the evidence" which means the Court
dealing with the grant of bail can only satisfy it as to whether there is a genuine case
against the accused and that the prosecution will be able to produce prima facie
evidence in support of the charge. It is not expected, at this stage, to have the
evidence establishing the guilt of the accused beyond reasonable doubt."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/182140383/ 3
Ajay Kumar Yadav vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
(Emphasis supplied)
23. The presumption of innocence, by itself, cannot be the sole consideration for grant of
anticipatory bail. The presumption of innocence is one of the considerations, which the court should
keep in mind while considering the plea for anticipatory bail. The salutary rule is to balance the
cause of the accused and the cause of public justice. Over solicitous homage to the accused's liberty
can, sometimes, defeat the cause of public justice.
24. If liberty is to be denied to an accused to ensure corruption free society, then the courts should
not hesitate in denying such liberty. Where overwhelming considerations in the nature aforesaid
require denial of anticipatory bail, it has to be denied. It is altogether a different thing to say that
once the investigation is over and charge-sheet is filed, the court may consider to grant regular bail
to a public servant-accused of indulging in corruption."
Object of Section 482 of B.N.S.S. 2023, is that a person should not be unnecessarily harassed or
humiliated in order to satisfy personal vendetta or grudge of complainant or any other person
operating the things directly or from behind the curtains. It is well settled that discretionary power
conferred by the legislature on this Court cannot be put in a straitjacket formula, but such
discretionary power either grant or refusal of anticipatory bail has to be exercised carefully in
appropriate cases with circumspection on the basis of the available material after evaluating the
facts of the particular case and considering other relevant factors (nature and gravity of accusation,
role attributed to accused, conduct of accused, criminal antecedents, possibility of the applicant to
flee from Justice, apprehension of tampering of the witnesses or threat to the complainant, impact
of grant of anticipatory bail in investigation or society, etc.) with meticulous precision maintaining
balance between the conflicting interest, namely, sanctity of individual liberty and interest of
society.
In the light of above, looking to the facts and circumstances of this case, submissions of learned
counsel for the parties as mentioned above, gravity and nature of accusation, this Court is of the
view that after submission of charge-sheet against the applicant and material evidence on record as
noted above, no case for exercising its discretionary power for granting anticipatory bail till
conclusion of trial, is made out in favour of applicant.
In view of the above, the prayer of the applicant for grant of anticipatory bail till conclusion of trial is
hereby refused.
Accordingly, this anticipatory bail application is rejected.
It is clarified that anything said in this order at this stage is limited for the purpose of determination
of this anticipatory bail application and will in no way be construed as an expression on the merits of
the case. The trial court concerned shall be absolutely free to arrive at its independent conclusions
according to law on the basis of materials / evidences on record.
Order Date :- 1.5.2025 Kashifa
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/182140383/ 4
