Akhilesh Kumar Jain vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 July, 2019
Akhilesh Kumar Jain vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 July,
2019
1
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
R.P. No. 620/2019
Akhilesh Kumar Jain Vs. State of M.P. and others
Gwalior, Dated:-03/07/2019
Shri Sunil Jain, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Shri Pratip Visoriya, learned Government Advocate for the
respondents/State.
Vide this petition, petitioner/Officer-in-Charge of Writ Petition No. 8540/2015, seeks review of
order dated 23/01/2019.
There is a delay of 65 days in filing the review petition, condonation whereof is being sought vide
I.A. No. 1803/2019.
Taking into consideration the stand taken in paragraph No.2 of the application, which prevented the
petitioner from filing the petition within the period of limitation, sufficient cause is made out.
Consequently, delay condoned.
I.A. No. 1803/2019 stands disposed of.
The Writ Petition, which was a Public Interest Litigation, was filed making complaint against
respondents No.5 to 8 (in Writ Petition) of having grabbed and encroached upon the land granted
on "Muafi" to the temple - Mandir Shri Ramjanki situated at Chhaparwala Pul, Lashkar, Gwalior,
with a direction to respondents No.1 to 4 (in Writ Petition) to ensure that the temple in question is
not closed down or demolished and the Government property is not grabbed/ captured by
respondents No.5 to 8 (in Writ Petition). Further direction was sought that a Priest be appointed in
the temple and a THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Akhilesh Kumar Jain Vs. State of
M.P. and others further detailed enquiry in the entire matter be directed to be conducted.
Petitioner, who was an Officer-in-Charge of the case representing respondents No.1 to 4 (in Writ
Petition) filed return on 24/06/2016 on affidavit wherein in paragraph 8, following contentions
were made:-
"Content of ground paras of this petition are mere repetition of earlier facts, does not
call for any further reply. It is pertinent to mention here that as stated in above paras,
aforesaid, the temple in question is not owned by the State Government, whereas the
same is belongs to Respondent No.5 to 7. However, detailed reply of all these grounds
have already been narrated in the aforementioned paras of this return, hence needs
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58509629/ 1
Akhilesh Kumar Jain vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 July, 2019
no reply again."
In reply to paragraph 1, following contentions were made:-
"In this regard it is respectfully submitted that the aforesaid temple in question is not
a government temple, same is owned by Respondent No.5 to 7. The contention of the
petitioner that 'Nemnuk' has also been given to the aforesaid temple, but the same
fact is not correct hence denied. The 'Nemnuk' is not being provided to the temple in
question."
Later on, the said return filed by the State was sought to be withdrawn by moving an application on
the ground that wrong averments were adverted to in the return. Leave was also sought to file fresh
return. The prayer was allowed. Respondents No.1 to 4 - State of Madhya Pradesh and its
functionaries, were permitted to withdraw the return with a liberty to file fresh return.
Consequently, THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Akhilesh Kumar Jain Vs. State of M.P.
and others fresh return was filed stating therein that Collector Gwalior after holding an enquiry
found that temple in question belongs to Muafi Aukaf Department, State of Madhya Pradesh and the
land in question was granted to said temple. It was also found that, in respect of land in question, a
suit was pending between the tenants and one Sita Devi in the Court of First Civil Judge, Class-II,
Gwalior, forming subject matter of Case No. RCSA 00072/2016.
In these fact situation, the said Writ Petition came to be decided on 23/01/2019 in the following
terms:-
"10. In the above backdrop, after hearing learned counsel for the parties, this court
deems it appropriate to dispose of this PIL in the following terms :-
(i) As State Government has already filed a Civil Suit for cancellation of registered
sale deed, which has been executed in relation to a government land (Muafi Temple
land), it will make all the endeavours to take the suit to its logical end and protect the
government land from being usurped by the land Mafia.
(ii) Since the lis between the parties is to be decided by the Civil Court, therefore, for
the present, no effective writ can be issued in the present writ petition as regards the
land of the temple.
(iii) Lokayukt Establishment shall expedite the inquiry and shall take it to logical
conclusion, if possible within six months from the date of communication of this
order.
(iv) State Government will be free to take action against all the delinquent officers
including Akhilesh Kumar Jain, who was posted as SDO (Revenue) Lashkar, Gwalior
on 21.6.2016 at the time of swearing in of the affidavit in support of the reply
declaring the government land to be a private land and misleading the court by filing
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58509629/ 2
Akhilesh Kumar Jain vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 July, 2019
incorrect and inappropriate reply.
(v) For this purpose a copy of this order and the replies which have been filed by the
State one under the THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Akhilesh Kumar
Jain Vs. State of M.P. and others signatures of Shri Akhilesh Kumar Jain and another
under the signature of Shri Vinod Kumar, be supplied to the Chief Secretary of the
State so also the Principal Secretary of General Administration Department for
necessary action.
(vi) Necessary action be completed within a period of six months from the date of
receipt of copy of this order.
(vii) Chief Secretary of the State shall be obliged to furnish copy of action taken
report in the matter before Registry of this court immediately on expiry of six months
or on or before 1st August 2019."
Petitioner vide present petition seeks review of said order. It is stated that on his appointment as
Officer-in-Charge by Collector, Gwalior to file reply, he issued direction to Officer-in-Charge of
record vide letter dated 11/02/2016 to get the information with regard to file of settlement (Nasti)
Samvat 1997 along with copy of present khasra along with the report furnished by Tahsildar on
16/02/2016. It is urged that Naib Tahsildar, Lashkar Gwalior submitted his report vide
communication dated 16/02/2016, mentioning therein that the temple is situated over survey No.
733 and one temple Shri Ramji and Mahadev Ji Panchayat Jinsi Nala Lashkar is a Muafi temple. It
was reported that temple Shri Ram Mandir situated at Phalka Bazar Lashkar is not having detail of
Pujari/ Namnuk in Aukaf Department. It was also written that No Objection Certificate is issued by
Nazul Office and as per No Objection Certificate of Nazul, Shri Ram Mandir does not belong to
Aukaf Department.
It is urged that on the basis of information received, petitioner THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH Akhilesh Kumar Jain Vs. State of M.P. and others drafted and filed the return stating
therein that the temple in question is not owned by the State Government, as adverted to him by the
Department.
It is contended that later on, the petitioner came to know through the rejoinder filed by respondents
No.11 & 12 (petitioners in Writ Petition) that the temple of Ramjanki is situated at Jaripatka and not
in Phalka Bazar Lashkar. It is urged that since the petitioner was new to Gwalior, he was not aware
of difference of the fact as regard to location of temple in question. Accordingly, got the return
drafted and presented in the Court.
It is urged that there was no malafide intention of the petitioner to have give a wrong statement in
the return which was later on withdrawn.
On these factual submissions, the petitioner seeks review/ modification of the order to the extent
that it record findings against the petitioner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58509629/ 3
Akhilesh Kumar Jain vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 July, 2019
After hearing learned counsel for the petitioner at length and giving thoughtful consideration to the
submissions made and after perusal of entire record, we are not convinced with the contentions put
forth on behalf of the petitioner that the information given in the return filed on 24/06/2016 was
not deliberate and was bonafide and the mistake occurred because he was new to Gwalior. The
petitioner THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Akhilesh Kumar Jain Vs. State of M.P. and
others was the Officer-in-Charge and was in control of entire revenue record. Besides being in
control of revenue record, was also custodian of Government property which he was supposed to
protect in larger public interest. It was not expected of the Senior Officer like the petitioner to have
casually deal with the matter as the present one. Therefore, the liberty granted to the State
Government that they are free to take action against the petitioner, cannot said to be error apparent
on the face of record, as would warrant any indulgence.
Consequently, review petition fails and is dismissed. All interlocutory applications stand disposed
of.
(Sanjay Yadav) (Vivek Agarwal)
Judge Judge
Shubhankar*
SHUBHANKAR
MISHRA
2019.07.08
14:37:05 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58509629/ 4
