Akhilesh Patel vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
Akhilesh Patel vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February,
2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:15460
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 43945 of 2024
Applicant :- Akhilesh Patel
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Sanjay Kumar Pal
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Mohd. Faizal, holding brief of Sri Sanjay Kumar Pal, learned counsel for the applicant
and Ms. Baby Naaz, learned counsel appearing for the High Court Legal Services Committee as well
as Sri Ashwani Kumar Tripathi, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the record.
3. Supplementary affidavit filed by the learned counsel for the applicant today is taken on record.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18623396/ 1
Akhilesh Patel vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
4. As informed by learned AGA, notice to the informant has been served on 21.10.2024 but none is
present on behalf of the informant even in the revised call.
5. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 268 of 2024, under Sections 137(2), 87, 64, 351(3) of
B.N.S. and Section 3/4 of the POCSO Act, Police Station Sen Paschim Para, District Kanpur Nagar,
during the pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
6. The applicant is stated to have enticed away the daughter of the informant on 08.08.2024.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT :
7. The applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case and he has nothing to do with the
said offence.
8. No time of offence is mentioned in the FIR.
9. The FIR is delayed by about 17 days and there is no explanation of the said delay caused.
10. The victim is a consenting party as is but evident from her statement recorded u/s 183 B.N.S.S.
whereby she has stated that she had gone with the applicant to several places including Surat, Gujrat
and she has not raised any alarm whatsoever during the said sojourn.
11. The victim by her looks seems to be major, although, as per school certificate of class-VIIIth, her
date of birth is stated to be 30.11.2006 as such, her age has come up to be 17 years, 8 months and 9
days.
12. The said certificate is not admissible in the light of Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act.
13. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
14. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since
02.09.2024. The applicant is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail,
he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE :
15. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18623396/ 2
Akhilesh Patel vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
CONCLUSION:
16. In light of the judgement of the Supreme Court passed in Niranjan Singh and another vs
Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and others AIR 1980 SC 785, this Court has avoided detailed
examination of the evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the case as no party
should have the impression that his case has been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is
needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive exploration of the merits in the order itself.
17. In the case of P. Yuvaprakash vs State Rep. by Inspector of Police, AIR 2023 SC 3525, the
Supreme Court has observed that in the absence of records relating to the birth of the victim, no
other documents except the Matriculation or equivalent certificate from the concerned examination
board or certificate by a corporation, municipal authority or a Panchayat can be relied upon to
ascertain the age of the victim.
18. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
19. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
20. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate
of Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
21. Learned AGA could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would warrant denial of
bail to the applicant.
22. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at
the trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned AGA.
23. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
24. Let the applicant-Akhilesh Patel involved in aforementioned case crime number be released on
bail on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18623396/ 3
Akhilesh Patel vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
court concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C./351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
25. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
26. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025 Sumit S (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18623396/ 4
