Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on 27.02.2023
Pronounced on 15.03.2023
CRMC No. 281/2016
c/w
CRMC No. 437/2016
OWP No. 1083/2015
Alok Betab .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Alok Betab and others
Alok Betab
Through: Mr. Sunil Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Q
Mr. Vishal Mahajan, Advocate
vs
State of J&K and others ..... Respondent(s)
State of J&K and others
State of J&K and others
Through: Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy.AG
Mr. Gagan Basotra, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Rishabh Sharma, Advocate
Ms. Navdeep Kour, Advocate
Ms. Surinder Kour, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Sunil Kumar, Advocate
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. By this common judgment, the afore-titled three petitions are proposed to be disposed of.
2. Vide petition bearing CRMC No. 281/2016, petitioner-Alok Betab has challenged FIR No.
158/2016 for offences under Sections 509 and 506 RPC registered with Police Station, Domana.
Vide petition under Section 561-A of J&K Cr.P.C bearing CRMC No. 437/2016, petitioners-Alok
Betab and others have challenged FIR No. 251/2016 for offences under Sections 509, 354-B, 500
and 506 RPC read with Sections 67 and 67-A of the Information Technology Act, whereas vide OWP
No. 1083/2015, petitioner-Alok Betab has challenged order No. SCW/08/2015/65 dated 24.06.2015
issued by the Secretary, J&K State Commission for women.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 1
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
3. As already noted, the petitioner has thrown challenge to FIR No. 158/2016 for offences under
Sections 509 and 506 RPC registered with Police Station, Domana. Before coming to the
contentions raised in this petition, it would be apt to notice the contents of the impugned FIR that
was lodged by respondent No.2 on 28.05.2016 with Police Station, Domana. The same are
reproduced as under:
"That the complainant is working as PRT Teacher in DAV Jammu for the last about
eleven years but the day the present Principal Alok Betab took the charge of School as
Principal in year 2012, my life has become hell right from the day one. He started
torturing me by using abusive language and also by calling me in his office time and
again without any rhyme and reason, I requested him not to harass me but he did not
stop his attitude and he used to call her on Mobile during the late hours, which I
statted in the previous matter as well as stated verbally in my this complaint on
09.09.2014. When he was called at the Police Station, he apologized for his conduct
before my father and uncle, in presence of SHO of the Police Station and he also
tendered written apology me to withdraw my complaint his assurance that he will not
repeat the act again but to my surprise on the very next day, he tortured me in front
of everybody by saying that my complaint had not done anything wrong to him and
the clear act I force at you to withdraw the same forcibly. That he again started
harassing her so I brought the matter to DAV higher authorities at Delhi for
necessary action. When he came to know about the same he told me that he has very
high approach with the higher authorities, so nobody can harm me. However, DAV
authorities called me Delhi one time for enquiry and I requested them to shift the
Principal for impartial probe and enquiry in view of guidelines framed by Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Vishaka Case but Principal was right in saying so that he has
approached with DAV authorities that's why D.A.V authorities without transferring
him, dismissed my complaint without proper enquiry. In view of this unfair enquiry
complainant approached National Women Commission Delhi wherein I have stated
all the facts in detail. NWC Delhi after thorough verification directed the J&K Women
Commission Jammu to take action in the matter in the month of January 2015 and
accordingly I approached Women Commission Jammu with the application and
directed for enquiry. Women Commission has called Alok Betab and heard him and a
report was sought from SHO P/S Domana and accordingly after giving opportunity to
both the sides, the Commission Prima-facie found substance in my allegations and
accordingly vide this office No.SCW/08/2015/15 dated 24.06.2015 directed
Chairman DAV Management Committee Delhi to transfer him for thorough enquiry
in view of Vishaka's case, but he got stay from the High Court by mismanagement of
facts. The High Court issued Dasti notice for my service but I was present in school,
he did not serve me and next day got exparte stay and now when there was stay in the
matter and when I informed DAV about it, he started harassing me again very much
from the day he came to know about the same. He is using his teachers to harass me
indirectly and on 9th of May 2016, he sent few teachers along with Mr. Bhushan. He
told me to take the case back from Women Commission as he has been told by the
Principal that he has to do the job at all cost. He told me to come to the office but I
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 2
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
straightway refused to do so. Again, next day, he came and forced me to do the same.
I again refused, again he came back and repeated the same. I again denied. Next day
Mr. Alok Betab has sent me a notice wherein there was no mention about the office of
Principal at the top through Sunita Jamwal and accordingly replied the notice
16.5.2016 and I have mentioned all the details again. On 16.5.2016, Sunita Jamwal
noted me unofficial letter for pressurizing me to oblige the Principal as it seem so. I
again replied, he on receiving, forced me to take my letter back. Besides this on
17.5.2016 Meenu Betab (Principal's wife) threatened me during lunch time to take my
case back otherwise she told me to inflect my husband in a false case. So sighting
back data when he was on leave in the year 2014, I told her that is total lie and it is all
afterthought to force me to take my case back. She told that nobody would transfer
me and my husband. On 25.05.2016 when there was non-teaching day there were no
children in the class, only teachers were called in the School. Mr. Alok Betab came to
me to take my case back from Women Commission and I will accommodate you for
that, falling which he would spoil her career being the head of the School. He further
told me that he likes me and my company, due to which I feel disgraced and ashamed
with his cheap behaviour. When I objected to him strongly, he told me that he will
spoil me and my husband's career through his wife Meenu Betab. It is pertinent to
mention here that in the same School, his wife, his sister-in-law and other relatives
are working and he is using their full influence and support."
4. It has been averred in the petition that prior to lodging of the FIR, respondent No. 3/complainant
had filed a complaint against the petitioner before SHO, Police Station, Domana on 07.09.2014 in
which she had levelled allegations of sexual harassment at work place against the petitioner. It is
averred that the said complaint was withdrawn by the complainant in terms of her letter dated
09.09.2014. Thereafter, the complainant is alleged to have addressed a similar complaint to the
DAV College Managing Committee which was received on 15.09.2014. Upon receipt of this
complaint, the Managing Committee constituted a Complaints Committee and the said Committee,
after conducting thorough investigation into the matter, rendered its report dated 01.12.2014
thereby giving clean chit to the petitioner and admonishing the complainant in terms of memo
dated 19.12.2014.
5. It is further alleged that another complaint dated 24.03.2015 came to be lodged by the
respondent-complainant with the State Commission for Women making similar allegations and an
order came to be passed by the Secretary of the Commission on 24.06.2015, whereby a
recommendation was made to the effect that petitioner-Alok Betab, who was working as Principal,
MHAC, Nagbani be shifted from his present place of posting so as to allow fair investigation into the
compliant of the respondent/complainant. The said order has been challenged by the petitioner vide
OWP No. 1083/2015. Vide order dated 20.08.2015 passed by this Court, the impugned
recommendation of the Commission has been stayed.
6. Another complaint came to be lodged by the complainant against petitioner-Alok Betab, the
Principal of MHAC, Nagbani School and other staff members on 10.08.2016, and it culminated in
registration of FIR No.251/2016 of P/S Domana. The same is subject matter of challenge in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 3
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
petition bearing CRMC No.437/2016. The FIR reads as under
complainant:
"1. That the applicant complainant is working as PRT teacher in Nagbani School
Jammu.
2. That the applicant complainant is aggrieved of the fact that she is the worst
sufferer of sexual harassment and exploitation for which she was already filed FIR
against accused Alok Betab Principal Nagbani Jammu which was registered on
29-5-2016 bearing FIR No. 158/2016 wherein no SIT has been framed and matter is
under investigation and challan is likely to be produced after the investigation.
3. That the accused the Principal along with his wife Meenu Betab, Sister-in-law
Simmi Padha teachers Poonam Mahagan , Sunita Sharma, Anju Gupta, Shashi Bedi,
Sukral Sharma, Deepti and other teachers whose list is enclosed with the complaint
has convened a press conference on 30/5/2016 in order to teach a lesson after
registration of FIR No. 158/16 wherein name of the complainant has been disclosed
and published in print media as well as in electronic media and also name has been
flashed in the internet on that day. All these persons have tarnished the image and
dignity of complainant by using derogatory remarks and also accused principal by
using other teachers on his behalf who have passed many messages in the internet by
giving great injury and insult to the modesty of applicant utter violation of the
guidelines framed by the hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case of Vishakha wherein
name of victim cannot be disclosed in such matters of sexual harassment and
exploitation by doing so accused principal has tarnished the image and dignity of
applicant in the public and general life and he has also tried to insult the applicant in
the eye of student, husband and other family members which amounts to a grave
serious offence and it also amounts to be pressure tactics of the accused principal to
pressurize for taking the previous FIR back.
4. That the complainant after coming to know about the same has brought all the
internet messages and paper cutting to the knowledge of SHO P/S, Domana through
Whatsapp and now again applicant is being complaint against all the accused who
have participated in the press conference along with photocopy of their names and
signature that till date no FIR has been registered. Though the sufficient material on
the basis of whatsapp messages and newspaper reporting are there which cannot be
denied or overruled even in this matter no witness is required because sufficient
material in the shape of whatsapp messages and print media reporting is already
there and enclosed even worthy Chief Minister of J/K state has also directed in
general to take immediate steps in such matters of sexual harassment and
exploitation which has been reported in the Daily Excelsior and Tribune on 18/7/16.
Even otherwise in such matter action shall be taken henceforth to send strong
messages to others so that nobody dare to take such steps again.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 4
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
5. That accused principal is responsible for all this happening along with his wife
because they are the sole beneficiaries in the matter and is the mastermind of all this
happenings. He has also used his sister-in-law, her son Agam Padha, Anju Gupta and
other teachers and relatives for passing the remarks against the complainant in
internet by giving incarnation insult and defamation to the modesty integrity and
public life of complainant. There is every likelihood of breach of peace because
complainant is belonging to a minority community and such kind of hostile criminal
defamatory unwanted attitude to the accused the principal and the teacher involved
in the matter highly objectionable for which action under the law is required to be
taken without any delay because accused principal is daily intimidating the applicant
and he has installed CCTV cameras to harass and also there is an interference in the
peaceful life of the applicant during the school hours. It also amounts to confinement
because with the fear of CCTV cameras nobody speak to the complainant and is
confined to the classroom. He is very cunning fellow because he has not used his
mobile and laptop in order to save his skin but has used his teachers kith and kin to
spoil and tarnish my image in the public and accused principal very gladly submitted
his laptop and mobile to police for check upon if SIT/Police entertained it then it will
be great blunder and mockery of system because as a common man sense accused
can use his own equipment for the said purpose rather Police/SIT showed inquire the
mobiles of Anju Gupta, Agam Padha , Simmi Padha , Meenu Betab , Poonam
Mahajan, Sunita Sharma, Sukral Sharma and also photographs of the newspapers are
the real and the original proofs enclosed here with along with internet material .
6. That the accused Principal who is sitting at the chair of Principal and is on bail in
the previous FIR is no more revengeful and he is using all bearings and is having
blessings of his blue eyed bosses at the DAV Head Quarter, New Delhi for which I
have already submitted complaint in the matter which is already pending with SHO
P/S Domana/SIT by virtue of which the accused deliberately carried DAV Committee
under his blue eyed Director J. P Shoor and four others over and above the SIT and
subjudice matter in the High Court in order to hamper the investigation and also to
know the version of the witnesses deposed in FIR 158/16 which is a great offense also
and SIT should also take note of it and put proper section in the matter to deal with
the situation he has used the teachers under his command to tarnish my image in the
general public, student, relatives and my family. Even said principal is making
anonymous communications to defame my name with male teachers(JE) which is a
serious offense as it will have a serious impact on my married life which cannot be
compensated in any manner and in case if any action is not taken in the matter than
complainant will have no option rather than to put an end to his life and children for
which all the above the said persons and the others will be responsible who are trying
to hush upto the matter .
7. That the complainant is filing the instant complaint which is required to be
registered henceforth and thorough investigation in the matter is also to be done
under the provision of section 66 and 67-A of IT Act , 500 RPC(Defamation),
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 5
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
504RPC(Intentional insult), 506RPC(Criminal intimidation), 507 RPC(Annoyance
communication), 509 RPC(Insult to modesty) and all the concerned persons are
required to be dealt under the law and even these persons are openly making tainting
remarks to the applicant that what Police and SIT has done in the matter though SIT
is framed at the instance of complaint for just and fair probe and anybody who tries
at the instance of complainant for just functioning of Police/SIT will also be
responsible for interference into the functioning of the Police and administration of
justice. Keeping in view of above facts, it is submitted that SHO P/S Damana and SIT
be directed to register the FIR in the above relevant provisions and also other
provisions regarding confinement and hampering the investigation be also taken into
account and guilty be bring to the task so that they be punished under the law so that
nobody will dare again to repeat such things in future with other women like me
because the job of the teacher is pious one and if the Principal whose the Rakshak
becomes Bakshak than who will send the student school and will give wrong signals
in the general public and also crime against the women at a work place shall be dealt
with from lands."
7. The common grounds, which have been urged by the petitioner/petitioners in all the aforesaid
three petitions, are that the complainant has, by making repeated complaints against the Principal
of the School, Alok Betab tried to settle a personal score with him by misusing the process of law. It
is contended that the fact that respondent/complainant has time and again levelled similar
allegations in all her complaints before various fora repeatedly goes on to show that the complainant
is using the process of law for oblique purposes as a weapon of harassment against petitioner-Alok
Betab. It has been contended that a bare perusal of the impugned FIRs would suggest that no
offence is made out against the petitioner/petitioners.
8. Regarding challenge to the recommendation of the State Women Commission, the main ground
urged by the petitioner is that the recommendation was made by the Secretary of the Commission,
who had no jurisdiction to do so as the Commission at the relevant time was without a Chairman.
9. The respondents including the respondent/complainant have in their pleadings submitted that
this Court in exercise of its power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. cannot scuttle a genuine prosecution
when the Investigating Agency during the course of investigation has assembled material to prima
facie show that offences against the petitioner/petitioners are made out. It has been submitted that
respondent/complainant has been subjected to sexual harassment by the petitioner/petitioners
repeatedly which has compelled her to make repeated complaints against them. Therefore, it cannot
be a ground for quashing the proceedings.
10. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record including the Case Diaries
relating to the impugned FIRs.
11. So far as the scope of power of the High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C is concerned, it is by now
settled by the various judicial precedents of the Supreme Court and of this Court that the power
under section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash the criminal proceedings has to be exercised sparingly only in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 6
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
deserving cases. The illustrations of such deserving cases have been laid down by the Supreme Court
in the case of State of Haryana v Choudhary Bhajan Lal and others, 1992 Supp-1 SCC 335. These
illustrations are reproduced as under:
"(a) where the allegations made in the First Information Report or the complaint,
even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima
facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused;
(b) where the allegations in the First Information Report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the F.I.R. do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code;
(c) where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or 'complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused;
(d) where the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the
Code;
(e) where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently
improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion
that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused;
(f) where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code
or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the
institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific
provision in the Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the
grievance of the aggrieved party;
(g) where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where
the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge. [305D-H;
306A-E]."
12. In light of foregoing principles, let us now analyze the facts of the instant cases so as to
determine whether or not the case of the petitioners falls in any of the afore-noted illustrations.
13. The facts that emanate from the record and which are not in dispute are that
respondent/complainant was working as primary teacher with MHAC, Nagbani, School Jammu and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 7
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
petitioner-Alok Betab was working as a Principal in the said school. The respondent/complainant
applied for ex- India leave with effect from 10.07.2014 to 25.08.2014. Instead of joining duty on
25.08.2014, she joined the school on 26.08.2014. The case of the complainant for approval of leave
from 10.07.2014 to 25.08.2014 was submitted to the competent authority by the Principal, however,
certain objections were raised by the competent authority and the complainant was asked to submit
a fresh affidavit in accordance with the proforma prescribed by the management. The same was
conveyed to the complainant by the petitioner-Alok Betab.
14. It seems that the above events became the genesis of strained relations between the complainant
and the Principal (petitioner). The complainant as is clear from the complaints lodged by her from
time to time, perceived it as an act of harassment perpetrated upon her by the Principal. The first
complaint was lodged by the complainant against the Principal before the SHO Police Station,
Domana on 07.09.2014. The same was withdrawn by her on the basis of a compromise arrived at
between her and the Principal. The compromise was arrived at on 09.09.2014.
15. Another complaint of sexual harassment was addressed by the complainant to the management
of the school on 05.09.2014 that was received by the management on 15.09.2014. It appears that a
Complaints Committee was constituted by the management in terms of provisions contained in the
Sexual Harassment of Women at Work Place (Prevention, Prohibition and Redressal) Act, 2013
(hereinafter to be referred to as the POSH Act). The Committee comprised four members which
included Mr. J. Kackria, Director, Mrs. Sushma Arya, Principal DAV Yamuna Nagar, Mrs. Chitra
Nakra, Principal DAV Public School, Vikaspuri, New Delhi and Mrs. Indu Chaswal from NGO. An
enquiry was conducted by the aforesaid Committee regarding the allegations of sexual harassment
made by the complainant against the petitioner/Principal. The Committee, after thorough enquiry
into the allegations made by the respondent/complainant, concluded that there is no case of sexual
harassment. It was also observed by the Committee that the complainant should desist from
resorting to taking advantage of being a female and she should obey the lawful orders of the
management. A perusal of the report of the Committee clearly shows that genesis of the strained
relations between the petitioner and the complainant is the insistence of the Principal upon
submission of affidavit by the complainant as per the proforma prescribed by the management,
which he had done under the directions of the management.
16. After the aforesaid report was rendered by the Complaints Committee, the complainant moved
State Commission for Women with a complaint dated 26.03.2015 containing the same allegations of
sexual harassment against the petitioner. On the basis of this complaint, a recommendation was
made by the Secretary of the Commission that the petitioner-Alok Betab should be transferred from
the present place of posting so as to allow fair investigation. This was done by the Secretary vide his
order dated 24.06.2015 and the same has been stayed by this Court in terms of order dated
20.08.2015.
17. The complainant did not stop here and instead of challenging the report of the Complaints
Committee, she lodged the impugned FIR bearing No. 158/2016 on 28.05.2016. Besides, repeating
the allegations already made by her in her previous complaint, the complainant further alleged that
on 09.05.2016, the petitioner/Principal tried to force her to withdraw her complaint before the State
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 8
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
Women's Commission and the same was conveyed to her through some teachers. She went on to
allege that on 17.05.2016, wife of the petitioner threatened her and asked her to withdraw her case.
It was further alleged that on 25.05.2016 when there was a non- teaching day, petitioner-Alok Betab
called her out of the class and asked her to withdraw the case, failing which he would spoil her
career. At the same time, it was alleged by the complainant that the petitioner told her that he likes
her and her company, due to which she felt disgraced and ashamed. This FIR came to be challenged
by the petitioner before this Court and vide order dated 07.06.2016, a direction was issued that the
final report in the impugned FIR shall not be produced.
18. The aforesaid sequence of events did not stop here. The complainant lodged another FIR against
the petitioner-Alok Betab and other teachers of the school on 10.08.2016, contents whereof, have
been reproduced hereinabove. The crux of these allegations is that at the instance of petitioner-Alok
Betab, some other teachers of the school held a press conference wherein they supported the version
of petitioner-Alok Betab and made derogatory remarks against the complainant. It has been alleged
that the accused in the said FIR have, in violation of the guidelines of the Supreme Court in
Vishakha's case, nominated the complainant who is victim of sexual harassment thereby tarnishing
her image and dignity. It has also been alleged that the accused have uploaded comments on social
media which are derogatory to the dignity of the complainant.
19. From the foregoing sequence of events, it is clear that the respondent/complainant has, in order
to settle a service dispute with the management of the school, gone on to lodge repeated complaints
against her Principal. It appears that petitioner-Alok Betab, in his capacity as Principal of the school,
conveyed the observation of the management to the complainant, who instead of fulfilling the
requisite, retaliated by lodging repeated complainants and FIRs including the impugned FIRs. By
doing so, it appears that the complainant has tried to have her own way and attempted to pressurize
her superior officers and the management so that no action for overstaying the leave is taken against
her.
20. The allegations of sexual harassment have been thoroughly investigated by an independent body
constituted by the management. The Committee included three ladies, out of whom, one was an
independent person from an NGO and two others hold the positions of Principal. The fourth
member was Director of the Managing Committee. Thus, it is not a case where the allegations of
sexual harassment made by the complainant against the petitioner-Alok Betab were enquired into
by a Committee whose members were working under the subordination of the perpetrator of the
alleged acts of harassment but it is a case where, having regard to the stature of the members of the
Committee, it was impossible for petitioner-Alok Betab to exert any influence upon them. The report
clearly shows that the Committee has gone into every aspect of the matter and they have given a fair
hearing to the complainant to present her version whereafter they have come to the conclusion that
no case of sexual harassment is made out against petitioner-Alok Betab and that the complainant
needs to follow the rules and regulations of the Managing Committee.
21. Instead of abiding by the orders of the management, the complainant went on to make another
complaint against the petitioner before the State Women Commission as also before the Police. The
allegations in the impugned FIR bearing No. 158/2016 relating to sexual harassment that are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 9
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
alleged to have taken place on 25.05.2016 appear to be highly improbable given the background of
hostile relations between petitioner-Alok Betab and the complainant. The complainant as per her
own case alleges that on 26.05.2016, petitioner-Alok Betab asked her to withdraw her complaint and
threatened to spoil her career and in the same breath, she alleges that the petitioner told her that he
likes her as well as her company. It is impossible that a person who has highly strained relations
with a woman would express his liking for the said woman knowing fully well that such conduct
would invite more complaints/FIRs against him. It seems that the respondent/complainant has
added these allegations to her previous allegations, because her earlier allegations of sexual
harassment against the petitioner were found baseless by the Complaints Committee. Thus, these
allegations are inherently improbable.
22. That takes us to the second impugned FIR i.e. FIR No. 251/2016. As already noted, in the said
FIR, the complainant is aggrieved of the action of the petitioners/accused in organizing a press
conference in support of Principal-Alok Betab. The FIR has been registered for offences under
section 509, 354-B, 500, 506 RPC and 67 and 67-A IT Act. In the FIR, there are no allegations
against the accused that they have extended any threat to the complainant with a view to compel her
to do or not to do a particular act nor there is any allegation that accused have made any gesture or
word so as to insult the modesty of the complainant. The only allegation in the impugned FIR is that
the accused have nominated the complainant in violation of the guidelines laid down in Vishakha's
case as a result of which, her image has been tarnished in the general public. It is further alleged that
the accused have uploaded comments relating to the complainant on social media.
23. So far as offences under Sections 67 and 67-A of the IT Act are concerned, the ingredients of
these offences are not attracted in the instant case. Even if it is assumed that the accused uploaded
the alleged comments on social media, the same are neither lascivious nor do the same appeal to the
prurient interest and the same do not even tend to deprave and corrupt persons, who are likely to
read these comments. These comments do not contain any sexually explicit act or conduct. The
comments and the press notes only express support to the version of the Principal and condemn the
action of the complainant in lodging baseless allegations against the Principal. So this is a case
where none of the cognizable offences i.e. offences under section 509 RPC, 67 and 67-A of the IT Act
are made out even from a bare perusal of the FIR bearing No. 251/2016.
24. A perusal of the comments alleged to have been uploaded by the accused on social media and the
press notes, which have been collected during the investigation of the impugned FIR, shows that the
accused have supported the stand of their Principal and termed the allegations made by the
complainant as baseless. Even if it is assumed that by making these comments, the accused have
lowered the image of the complainant in the eyes of general public still then being a non-cognizable
offence, the Police had no jurisdiction to enter upon investigation in this regard. Even otherwise as
per section 199 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, a person can be prosecuted for an offence
punishable under Chapter XXI of RPC, under which offence of defamation falls, only upon a
complaint made by some person aggrieved by the offence. Therefore, the Police had no business to
enter upon the investigation of offence under section 500 RPC. The offence being non cognizable
and the Police being not the aggrieved person, the investigation into the said offence could not have
been undertaken by the police.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 10
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
25. The Police went ahead with the registration of the FIR on the basis of the allegations made by
the complainant which at best make out a cognizable offence against the petitioners. The same could
not have been done by the Police without the order of the Magistrate as is clear from the provisions
contained in Section 155 of the CrPC. In fact, a perusal of the record would reveal that the
complainant had initially filed a complaint before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu and the
same was forwarded by the Chief Judicial Magistrate to Superintendent of Police, Rural, Jammu
with a direction to send status report by or before 12.08.2016. Instead of sending report to the
Magistrate, the Police went ahead with the registration of the FIR without there being an order of
the Magistrate, despite the allegations being non-cognizable in nature.
26. That takes us to order dated 24.06.2015 passed by the Secretary, State Women's Commission,
whereby a recommendation has been made to the management of the school in which petitioner was
working as a Principal to transfer him from the existing place of posting in order to ensure fair
enquiry into the allegations of sexual harassment made against him. The same appears to have been
passed by the Secretary without there being Commission in place at the relevant date. The petitioner
has placed on record documents which show that the State Women Commission was headless from
10.03.2015 to 24.06.2015, and this is not in dispute. However, the impugned recommendation has
been made by the Secretary of the Commission on 24.06.2015.
27. In its reply, the State Women Commission's has contended that the said order has been passed
by the Secretary in exercise of powers under section 9 of the State Commission for Women Act,
1999, which reads as under:
"9. Procedure to be regulated by the Commission. --(1) The Commission or a
committee thereof shall meet as and when necessary and shall meet at such time and
place as the Chairperson may think fit.
(2) The Commission shall regulate its own procedure and the procedure of the
committees thereof.
(3) All orders and decisions of the Commission shall be authenticated by the
Member-Secretary or any other officer of the Commission duly authorized by the
Member-Secretary in this behalf."
28. A perusal of the aforesaid provision reveals that the Member Secretary of the Commission has
only power to authenticate orders or decisions of the Commission, meaning thereby that the
decision has to be taken by the Commission. The Commission has been defined under section 2(a)
of the Act, according to which, it means the State Commission for Women constituted under section
3. As per section 3 of the Act, the Commission consists of Chairperson and two part time members
to be nominated by the Government and one Secretary of the rank of Additional Secretary to the
Government.
29. The impugned recommendation has been passed by the Secretary of the State Women
Commission and not by the Commission. It is correct that as per section 7, vacancies would not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 11
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
invalidate proceedings of the Commission but in the instant case, it is not even claimed by the State
Commission in its reply that the complaint of the respondent/complainant was considered by the
Commission. The only stand taken by the State Commission is that the Secretary of the Commission
has power to issue orders in terms of section 9 of the Act. As already noted, the said power is only to
authenticate the decision or orders of the Commission and not to pass an order or decision. The
impugned recommendation made by the Secretary of the Commission is therefore, without any
jurisdiction.
30. Even otherwise, after coming into the effect of the Jammu and Kashmir Reorganization Act,
2019, the State Women for Commission Act stands repealed. Thus, the proceedings before the State
Women's Commission, on the basis of the complaint, lodged by the respondent/complainant, have
been rendered redundant.
31. From the foregoing analysis of the facts emanating in all the three cases, it is revealed that the
complainant has, by launching repeated complaints before the Police and other fora tried to settle
her personal score with the Principal(petitioner-Alok Betab) with whom, she holds a grudge that he
is unnecessarily and repeatedly asking her to comply with certain requirements in connection with
grant of leave.
32. The Supreme Court has, in the case of Robert John D' Souza and others v Stephen Gomes and
another, SLP Criminal No. 330 of 2015, decided on 21.07.2015 observed that court must ensure that
criminal prosecution is not used as an instrument of harassment for seeking private vendetta or with
an ulterior motive to pressurize the accused. In M/s Medchi Chemicals and Pharma Private Ltd. v
M/s Biological E Limited, 2000(3) SCC 269, the Supreme Court has observed that frustrated
litigants ought not to be indulged to give vent to their vindictiveness through a legal process and
such an investigation ought not to be allowed to be continued since the same is opposed to the
concept of justice, which is paramount. Again, in Mohan Goswani and anr. vs State of Uttaranchal,
and others, (2007) 12 SCC 1, the Supreme Court has laid down that court proceedings are not to be
permitted to degenerate into a weapon of harassment or persecution.
33. In the instant, case as already noted, the complainant has repeatedly lodged complaints and
proceedings before different fora against the petitioner- Alok Betab. She has not stopped here. She
has even implicated his wife and other relatives and well-wishers by filing second FIR, in which
besides making allegations against the accused, she has given guidelines to the Investigating Agency
as to in what manner the investigation is to be conducted. She has threatened the Investigating
Agency of the said FIR that in case no action is taken in the matter, then she will have no option but
to put an end to the life of some male teacher with whom the accused are alleged to have linked her
and also to end the life of his children, for which accused would be responsible. She has further
threatened the Investigating Agency that anybody who tries to interfere into the functioning of the
Police and administration of justice would be responsible for interference and hampering the
investigation and that they should be taken to the task.
34. The complainant has problem with the installation of CCTV in the school premises as according
to her, this stops her from speaking to anyone and forces her to remain confined to classroom. She
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 12
Alok Betab vs State Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
cries foul about the conduct of Principal Alok Betab not using a mobile cell phone. These allegations
contained in the impugned FIR clearly show that even a lawful and bonafide action of the principal
is being perceived as an act of harassment by the complainant. The conduct of the complainant in
making sweeping allegations not only against the petitioner but also against his family and
supporters, clearly smacks of personal vendetta of the complainant against the petitioner-Principal.
A perusal of the report of the Complaints Committee reveals that the complainant had not even
spared Late Capt. Dewan Singh, Chairman LMC against whom she had made allegations of bias.
Thus, it appears that the complainant by lodging these repeated complaints and FIRs is trying to
threaten the management of the school so that she can have her own way in the matter of her service
career.
35. With above backdrop of the facts, it appears to be a clear cut case of brazen attempt on the part
of the complainant to persecute the petitioner-Alok Betab, his family members and the management
of the school. In fact the management of DAV College Management Committee has filed an
application for intervention in OWP No. 1083/2015 in which they have contended that the
complainant is habitual in making allegations for ulterior considerations and she cannot be allowed
to malign the reputation of the institution by involving its head into false and frivolous case of
sexual harassment. It has been submitted in the said application that if the management concedes to
the pressure tactics of the people like the complainant there would be total indiscipline in the
educational institution, which would not be good for the said institution.
36. Thus, the manner in which the complainant has invoked allegations relating to sexual
harassment against the Principal of the school in order to circumvent the procedure laid down by
the management for grant of leave to its employees, casts a serious doubt about the veracity of the
allegations made by the complainant. Therefore, it has become imperative to this Court to prevent
the abuse of process of law. The allegations made in the impugned FIRs are absurd and inherently
improbable. Besides this, the criminal prosecution initiated by the complainant against the
petitioner(petitioners) is manifestly actuated with mala fides with an ulterior motive for wrecking
vengeance against the accused persons due to private and personal grudge. Thus, this is a fit case
where this Court should exercise its power under section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash the impugned FIRs as
also the impugned order passed by the State Women's Commission.
37. For the foregoing reasons, all the afore-titled petitions are allowed and impugned FIRs bearing
No. 158/2016 and No. 251/2016, both registered with Police Station, Domana as well as proceedings
emanating therefrom are quashed. Impugned order No.SCW/08/2015/65 dated 24.06.2015 passed
by the Secretary of the State Women Commission is also quashed.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 15.03.2023 Rakesh Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196770577/ 13
