Alok Kumar And 10 Others vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
Alok Kumar And 10 Others vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28
February, 2025
Author: Ashwani Kumar Mishra
Bench: Ashwani Kumar Mishra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:28768-DB
Court No. - 29
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 16891 of 2021
Petitioner :- Alok Kumar And 10 Others
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 2 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Dinesh Kumar Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Uday Pratap Singh
Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar Mishra,J.
Hon'ble Donadi Ramesh,J.
Petitioners are State Government employees who have been allotted houses within the premises of
respondent no.4 University by the State officials. They have approached this Court challenging a
notice issued by the District Magistrate dated 07.07.2021 whereby they have been called upon to
vacate the residential premises allotted to them as the premises are required to be handed over to
fourth-respondent University. The notice of District Magistrate is issued pursuant to a direction
issued by the Chancellor of the University on 01.07.2021.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9542183/ 1
Alok Kumar And 10 Others vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
The perusal of records would indicate that the premises in which the houses in question situate were
initially part of Uttar Pradesh Pandit Deendayal Upadhyaya Pashu Chikitsha, Vigyan
Vishwavidyalaya Evam Go-Anushandhan Sansthan,) a Vetenary College, Mathura (hereinafter
referred to as "the Vetenary College") which was owned and controlled by the State Government.
The Vetenary College, Mathura was transferred to Chandra Shekhar Azad, University of Agriculture
and Technology, Kanpur (hereinafter referred to as "the Agricultural University") in 1975. The
houses which were apparently constructed out of State funds but were located within the premises
of the Vetenary College. Subsequently the fourth-respondent University got established in 2001
which took over the erstwhile Vetenary College from Agricultural University. The property hitherto
owned by the the Agricultural University came to be transferred to respondent no.4 University. The
authorities of State, however, continued to treat some of the houses constructed within the Vetenary
College campus to be owned by the State and consequently State employees were allotted houses in
the Vetenary College campus to the extent of 50 percent while remaining 50 percent were allotted by
the University to its own employees. This arrangement was continuing for some time. An issue arose
as to whether the houses constructed within the premises of the Vetenary College were transferred
in its entirety to the Agricultural University or not? A Court order dated 15.07.1975 has been
referred to according to which the entire property of the Vetenary College, Mathura, was transferred
to the Agricultural University. Proceedings from time to time have been undertaken objecting to
allotment of houses to State employees but uncertainty appears to have continued with regard to
ownership of part of the houses constructed out of State Government funds which were kept in the
pool of houses meant for State Government employees. It is now that the Chancellor of
fourth-respondent University has issued a direction to the State to hand over the remaining houses
also situated within the premises of the fourth-respondent University to the University which lead to
issuance of notices to the petitioners, who have filed the present writ petition.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance upon a Government Order dated 27.10.1994
which records that only such houses were transferred to the Agricultural University which were
constructed by the Vetenary College and that the houses constructed by the State Government out of
its own funds were neither transferred to the Agricultural University vide Government Order dated
15.07.1975 nor the ownership of State over such houses has ceased to exist. This Government Order
forms the basis of the petitioners claim for challenging the impugned notice.
A counter affidavit has been filed by the District Magistrate, Mathura placing facts in this regard.
According to the District Magistrate, Mathura houses allotted to petitioner were from the pooled
houses available with the District Administration and that notices have now been issued under the
orders of the State Government.
Respondent no.4- University has filed a counter affidavit denying the allegations made in the writ
petition. According to University the State Government not only owned the Vetenary College but
also the houses that were constructed within its premises. It is submitted that once the Vetenary
College, Mathura was transferred to the Agricultural University the entire premises of the Vetenary
College along with houses existing in its campus were transferred to the Agricultural University. It is
submitted that some of the State officials who were earlier in occupation were issued notices under
the U.P. Public Premises (Eviction of Unauthorized Occupants Act, 1972). These proceedings were
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9542183/ 2
Alok Kumar And 10 Others vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
challenged before this Court in Writ Petition No.7546 of 1981. This Court dismissed the writ petition
after observing that the entire property which initially belonged to Vetenary College, Mathura has
been transferred to the Agricultural University. The judgment of this Court dated 17.07.1991 is relied
upon which is reproduced hereinafter:-
"Alongwith the counter affidavit of Ramesh Chandra Bhatt a Government Order
dated 15.07.1975 has been filed as Annexure-1 of which reference is G.O.
NO.XII-E-37-4(15)/72-722. From this Government Order it is clear that the entire
property which initially belonged to U.P. Vetenary Sciences and Animal Husbandry
College, Mathura have been transferred to Chandra Shekhar Azad, University of
Agriculture and Technology, Kanpur. This fact has not been denied it is clear from
this order dated 15.07.1975 that after creation of the University on 01.03.1975 all the
University on 01.03.1975 all the movable and immovable properties of U.P. Vetenary
Sciences and Animal Husbandry were transferred to the University. Once the
property was transferred to the University they seized to remain government
property. In this circumstances the finding recorded by the District Judge, Mathura
that the petitioner had failed to establish that the property is public premises does
not suffer from any legal infirmity.
In this view of the matter there is no merit in the petition. It is accordingly dismissed.
Parties shall bear their own costs."
The respondents have also relied upon a communication issued by the Chief Secretary of the State
dated 02.01.2012 clearly stating that none of the houses in the Vetenary Hospital, Mathura be
allotted to any one. Attention of the Court has also been invited to a communication issued by the
Department of Animal Husbandry dated 06.09.2003 wherein also a specific direction has been
issued to hand over the possession of the houses situated within the premises of the Agricultural
University to the concerned University.
In reply learned counsel for the petitioner reiterates his contention according to which the houses
since have been constructed by the State and forms part of the pooled house for the District
concerned, the valid occupants cannot be evicted from the premises in the manner as is sought to be
done.
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material available on record.
The undisputed facts that emerge from the materials placed before us is that the premises where the
houses situate initially belonged to the Vetenary College. Vetenary College was a State College in
1975, the Vetenary College came to be transferred to the Agricultural University. Once the premises
of the Vetenary College were transferred to the Agricultural University the houses constructed
thereupon were also transferred to the Agricultural University. This is particularly so as this Court
way back in 1991 has already examined the Government Order dated 15.07.1975 to held that
ownership of entire premises including the houses situated in it were transferred to the Agricultural
University. We otherwise see no reason as to how the houses situated within the premises of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9542183/ 3
Alok Kumar And 10 Others vs State Of U.P. And 2 Others on 28 February, 2025
Agricultural University could be retained by the State Government only because State Government
contributed funds for the constructions of the houses. The Vetenary College was otherwise owned by
the State and not only the houses claimed by the petitioners but all other houses must have been
constructed from the funds of the State. The construction of houses from the State funds, therefore,
would not constitute any valid basis for such houses to be claimed by the State. The position in this
regard has been clarified in the subsequent Government Order of the year 2003 issued by the
Department of Animal Husbandry. We also find no reason for the State employees to be residing
within the premises of the respondent no.4- University which has its premises separately earmarked
and validly delivered to the fourth-respondent University. Petitioners, therefore, cannot resist
transfer of possession of the houses which situates within the premises of the fourth-respondent
University. Challenge laid to the impugned notice, therefore, must fail. It will otherwise make no
sense to allow the petitioners who are not the employees of the University to reside within the
premises of the University.
However, as the petitioners are employees of the State Government we deem it appropriate to
provide that in the event petitioners approach the District Magistrate, Mathura, he shall accord
consideration to their claim for allotment of official accommodation elsewhere. Such arrangement
would be made within a period of three months. The District Magistrate, Mathura shall ensure that
upon expiry of three months entire houses in possession of District Administration situated in the
premises of fourth-respondent University are hand over/ transferred to the fourth-respondent
University, in accordance with law.
Order Date :- 28.2.2025 A Gautam
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/9542183/ 4
