Amit vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Amit vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Author: Siddharth
Bench: Siddharth
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44882
Court No. - 47
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 16170 of 2024
Applicant :- Amit
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Mashaluddin Shah,Pankaj Kumar Tripathi,Rajendra Kumar Srivastava
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Siddharth,J.
Supplementary affidavit filed today is taken on record.
Heard Sri Pankaj Kumar Tripathi and Sri Rajendra Kumar Srivastava, learned counsel for the
applicant and learned AGA for the State.
The instant bail application has been filed on behalf of the applicant, Amit, with a prayer to release
him on bail in Case Crime No. 30 of 2024, under Sections 2/3 U.P. Gangsters and Anti Social
Activities(Prevention) Act, 1986, Police Station- Nagla Khangar, District- Firozabad, during
pendency of trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191445815/ 1
Amit vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
According to the gang chart the applicant is said to have been involved in two criminal cases
wherein he is on bail.Apart from above case applicant has criminal history of nine more case
wherein he is also on bail. The applicant alleges false implication in the present case due to police
rivalry. He is languishing in jail since 27.03.2024.
Per contra learned A.G.A. has opposed the bail prayer of the applicant by contending that the
applicant is a member of gang and habitual of committing crime. In case the applicant is released on
bail he will again indulge in similar anti-social activities and will misuse the bail by extending threat
and intimidation to the prosecution witnesses.
Having considered the material on record, larger mandate of the Article 21 of the Constitution of
India and the dictum of Apex Court in the case of Dataram Singh Vs. State of U.P. and another,
reported in (2018) 3 SCC 22 and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, let the
applicant involved in the aforesaid crime be released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond and
two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned with the following
conditions that :-
(i). The applicant shall not tamper with the evidence or threaten the witnesses.
(ii) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any
adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence when the witnesses are present in Court.
In case of default of this condition, it shall be open for the Trial Court to treat it as
abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders in accordance with law.
(iii) The applicant shall remain present before the Trial Court on each date fixed,
either personally or as directed by the Court. In case of his absence, without sufficient
cause, the Trial Court may proceed against him under Section 229-A of the Indian
Penal Code.
(iv) In case the applicant misuse the liberty of bail during trial and in order to secure
his presence, proclamation under Section 82 Cr.P.C. is issued and the applicants fail
to appear before the Court on the date fixed in such proclamation then the Trial
Court shall initiate proceedings against him in accordance with law under Section
174-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(v) The applicant shall remain present in person before the Trial Court on the dates
fixed for (i) opening of the case, (ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance
with law.
In case of breach of any of the above conditions, the complainant is free to move an application for
cancellation of bail before this court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191445815/ 2
Amit vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 SS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191445815/ 3
