Ananta Wellness India vs The Commissioner Of Police on 9 December, 2021
Ananta Wellness India vs The Commissioner Of Police on 9
December, 2021
Author: R. Suresh Kumar
Bench: R.Suresh Kumar
W.P.No.26222 of 2021
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 09.12.2021
CORAM :
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE R.SURESH KUMAR
Writ Petition No.26222 of 2021
and W.M.P.No.27677 of 2021
Ananta Wellness India
Rep.by its Partner, Ms.Dr.Shruti Nair
No.58/112, Gopathi Narayanaswami Road
Thirumoorthy Nagar, Sathyamurthy Nagar
T.Nagar, Chennai-600 017. …. Petitioner
-Vs-
1 The Commissioner of Police
Chennai City Police Commissionerate No. 132
Commissioner Office Building EVK Sampath
Road Vepery Chennai - 7.
2 The Commissioner
Greater Chennai Corporation Rippon Building
Chennai - 3.
3 The Revenue Officer
Revenue Department / License Section
Greater Chennai Corporation Rippon Building
Chennai - 3.
4 The Joint Commissioner Health
Greater Chennai Corporation Rippon Building
Chennai - 3.
5 The Assistant Commissioner of Police
Anti Vice Squad Chennai City Police Commissionerate
No. 132, Commissioner Office Building EVK Sampath
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15068781/ 1
Ananta Wellness India vs The Commissioner Of Police on 9 December, 2021
Road Vepery Chennai - 7.
1 / 18
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) W.P.No.26222 of 2021
6 The Inspector of Police
J5 Sastri Nagar Police Station 1st Avenue
Service Road Custom Colony Besant Nagar
Chennai – 90. …. Respondents
Prayer : Writ Petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India praying for the
issuance of a Writ of Mandamus directing the Second Third and Fourth Respondent to
consider the petitioners application dated 2.8.2021 and consequently direct the
second third and fourth respondents to issue / renew trade license for the petitioners
shop Ananta Thai Spa situated at MIG Flats M 2 / 2 New No. 13 / 2 Old No. 26 4th
main road Adjacent Cafe Coffee Day Besant Nagar Chennai – 90 without insisting
NOC from the First Respondent within the time limit fixed by this Honourable Court.
For Petitioner : Mr.Vijayan Subramanian
For Respondents : Mrs.V.Yamuna Devi,
Special Government Pleader – for RR 1,5 & 6
Ms.P.T.Ramadevi,
Standing Counsel – for RR 2, 3 and 4
ORDER
The prayer sought for herein is for a Writ of Mandamus directing the second third and fourth
Respondent to consider the petitioner's application dated 2.8.2021 and consequently direct the
second, third and fourth respondents to issue / renew trade license for the petitioners shop Ananta
Thai Spa situated at MIG Flats M 2/2 New No. 13 / 2 Old No. 26 4th main road, Adjacent Cafe
Coffee Day, Besant Nagar Chennai – 90 without insisting NOC from the First Respondent within the
time limit fixed by this Court.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
2. The petitioner, after getting license from the respondent Corporation to run a haircutting Saloon
with AC, has been running the same along with the Spa called Ananta Thai Spa.
3. The said license since has expired, it had to be renewed. Therefore, the petitioner made an
application on 02.08.2021 to renew the license. The said application, having been received by the
respondent Corporation is kept pending, and it is under process so far.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15068781/ 2
Ananta Wellness India vs The Commissioner Of Police on 9 December, 2021
4. In the meanwhile, it is the grievance of the petitioner that, the police officials under the first
respondent often visited the petitioner's Saloon / Spa and made unnecessary harassment and in one
such incident, the police officials have taken the staff of the petitioner's Saloon / Spa to the Office of
the Deputy Commissioner of Police and after some time, they have been let out. This kind of
harassment being met by the petitioner very often at the hands of the police officials is also one of
the grievances expressed by the petitioner.
5. It is also the grievance of the petitioner that, prior to 2019, running of a Spa was not specifically
brought under the purview of licensing area of the respondent Corporation under the provisions of
the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
6. Therefore, sometime in the year 2014, when this kind of police harassments were met by various
persons, who run the Spas including the petitioner, they have approached this Court by filing writ
petitions and those writ petitions were heard, the following order was passed by the learned Judge
of this Court on 11.09.2014.
“ 67. In the light of the above, all the writ petitions are disposed of to the following effect.
(i) The respondents shall not, as a matter of routine and without any basis, conduct
any raids and interfere with the business carried on by the petitioners.
(ii) In specific cases where the police have reasonable grounds to believe that an
offence punishable under the Immoral Traffic (Prevention) Act has been or is being
committed, it is open to the police to take action, after scrupulously following all the
steps indicated in Section 15 of the said Act. The steps to be followed are narrated by
me in paragraph 28 above; and
(iii) Based upon the laws enacted in various States of the United States of America
and Singapore, which I have dealt with in paragraphs 39 to 54, the respondents may
take appropriate steps for bringing in either a new legislation or a subordinate
legislation in terms of the provisions of the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act
or the Chennai City Police Act, so that public order, decency and morality, which can
form the basis for a regulatory law under Article 19(2) of The Constitution, are taken
care of. The Government shall file a report on or before 31.03.2015, before this
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Court, about the decision taken. No costs.
Consequently, all pending MPs are closed.”
7. Though such an order was passed sometime in the year 2014, the respondents have not come
forward immediately either to bring a legislation as suggested by this Court or make any
amendment in the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919 or any subordinate legislation in
this regard.
8. Thereafter only on 27.02.2019, the Government has issued a notification, including Beauty
Parlours, Spas and Massage Parlours in Schedule-VI for trade license under Section 373 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15068781/ 3
Ananta Wellness India vs The Commissioner Of Police on 9 December, 2021
Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919. Therefore from 27.02.2019 only, by virtue of the said
subordinate legislation ie., notification issued in this regard by the State Government, a provision
was made under Schedule- VI of the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919, wherein certain
amendments were made, which reads thus.
“ The Government in its Gazette Notification No.252, dated 16.07.2018, has amended the
Schedule-VI of the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, as follows:-
In Schedule VI to the 1919 Act, for the entry “Keeping a shaving or hair dressing
Saloon”, the following entries shall be substituted, namely:-
“Hair Cutting Saloon & Beauty Parlour, without partition or room. Beauty Parlour,
Spa or Massage Parlour, with partition or room or Sauna or bathing facilities.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Provided that no licence shall be granted unless the
applicant produces no objection certificate from the Health Department of the
Corporation and from such police officer as may be specified by the Commissioner.”
9. By virtue of this notification, the word 'Beauty Parlour' 'Spa' or 'Massage Parlour' also had been
included as one of the item to be licensed by the respondent Corporation.
10. Only in that circumstances, the application filed by the petitioner for renewal of the earlier
license, of course for running a haircutting Saloon dated 02.08.2021 has to be processed by the
respondent Corporation.
11. It is in this context, the learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that, under Section 365
of the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919, detailed procedure has been made regarding
licenses, registrations and permissions, wherein sub-section (10) of Section 365 is heavily relied
upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner, which reads thus, “ (10) the acceptance by the
corporation of the prepayment of the fee 8[referred to in clause (a) or the sum referred or in clause
(b) of sub- section (2]for a licence or permission or for registration shall not entitle the person
making such prepayment to the licence or remission or to registration, as the case may be, 1[but
only to refund of an amount not exceeding one half of the fee or sum aforesaid as may be decided by
the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis council] in case of refusal of the licence or permission or of
registration ; but an applicant for the renewal of a licence or permission or registration shall until
communication of orders on his application be entitled to act as if the licence or permission or
registration had been renewed; and, save as other wise specially provided in this act, if orders on an
application for a licence or permission or for registration are not 2[received by the applicant within
sixty days after the receipt of the application] by the commissioner, the application shall be deemed
to have been allowed for the year or for such less period as is mentioned in the application and
subject to the law, rules by- laws, regulations and all conditions ordinarily imposed.”
12. By relying upon this sub-section, the learned counsel for the petitioner would contend that, once
an application is made for renewal, until that renewal application is decided, the licensee can
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15068781/ 4
Ananta Wellness India vs The Commissioner Of Police on 9 December, 2021
continue to run the business under the license which is sought to be renewed and also, within 60
days if the application for renewal of license is not disposed of by the respondent Corporation, it
shall be deemed that, the application for renewal has been accepted by the respondent Corporation
and accordingly, under the benefit of deeming clause, the licensee can continue to run the business
as if that the license had been renewed.
13. Be relying upon these provisions, the learned counsel for the petitioner would contend that,
therefore the renewal application dated 02.08.2021 made by the petitioner shall be treated as the
requisite application not only for haircutting Saloon https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis with AC but
also the Spa, because, at the time of the earlier license, there was only the haircutting Saloon which
had to be licensed, however, and as without even license Spa can be run, that was also run, and by
virtue of the 2019 notification, since Spa has been brought under the licensing area, now the
application made by the petitioner dated 02.08.2021 shall be treated as an application for grant of
renewal of the haircutting Saloon with AC and also license for the Spa, which also was being run
continuously by the petitioner, of course even prior to the 2019 notification.
14. In this context, it is the further contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner that, since
under the proviso to the afore stated clause mentioned in the notification referred to above, no
license shall be granted unless the applicant produces NOC from the Health Department as well as
from the Police Officer concerned to be specified by the Commissioner, the petitioner had already
approached the first respondent Police Commissioner to get a NOC and the said NOC so far seems
to have not been granted and therefore, awaiting the NOC as a mandatory one since the respondent
corporation had delayed the process of the application for renewal made by the petitioner dated
02.08.2021 by invoking the deeming clause under sub- section (1) of Section 365, the petitioner
would be entitled to run the Saloon as well as the Spa without any hindrance. Therefore, that right of
the petitioner should be protected by this Court, he contended.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
15. Per contra, Mrs.V.Yamuna Devi, learned Special Government Pleader appearing for Respondents
1, 5 and 6 would submit that, pursuant to the application made by the petitioner, that was referred
to the first respondent to convey the NOC or otherwise for the petitioner's haircutting Saloon and
Spa. Accordingly, the first respondent has directed the Additional Commissioner of Police, Law &
Order and DC- IS to send their specific remarks to issue NOC from Police point of view by verifying
the character and antecedents of the applicant in connection with the issuance of traders license for
Spa Centre.
16. Pursuant to which, the Inspector of Police, J5 Sastri Nagar Police Station, having visited the
haircutting Saloon as well as Spa centre of the petitioner, has conveyed his decision refusing to give
NOC by his communication dated 06.12.2021 which reads thus, “ ,jd; kDjhuh; jpUkjp/ gPdh gpujPg;
Fkhh; vd;gth;
J?5 rh!;jphp efh; fhty; epiya vy;iyf;Fl;gl;l MIG Flat M 2/2- 13/2-26, 4tJ bkapd; nuhL bgrd;l; efh;
vd;w Kfthpapy; bray;gl;L tUk; Anantha Thai Spa vd;w epWtdj;jpw;F Spa chpkj;ij g[Jg;gpf;f NOC
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15068781/ 5
Ananta Wellness India vs The Commissioner Of Police on 9 December, 2021
nfl;L kD bra;Js;sjd; nghpy; nkw;go Kfthpf;F brd;W ghh;itapl;ljpy; m';F kDjhuhpd; fzth;
jpU/gpujPg;Fkhh; vd;gth; bgahpy; brd;id bgUefu https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis khefuhl;rpapy;
Hair Cutting Saloon with A/c vd;w bjhHpYf;F kl;Lk; mDkjp bgw;W tpl;L Anantha Thai Spa vd;w
epWtd bgah; itj;Jf;bfhz;L Spa bjhHpy; bra;J tUtJ bjhpatUfpwJ/ vdnt Spa bjhHpy; bra;a chpa
mDkjpia khefuhl;rpapy; ,Jtiu kDjhuh; bgwhky; cs;sjhy; bgrd;l; efhpy; cs;s Anantha Thai Spa vd;w
epWtdj;jpy; Spa bray;gl mDkjp tH';f rpghhpR kWj;J gzpe;J rkh;g;gpf;fpd;nwd;/
xk;-?////////6-12-2021 fhty; Ma;thsh;.
n$?5 rh!;jphp efh; fhty; epiyak;.
milahW fhty; khtl;lk;. brd;id ? 90/"
17. Relying upon this communication, the learned Special Government Pleader would contend that,
since the Spa Centres also have to obtain license, without which no Spa Centre can be run by virtue
of the 2019 notification, and when an enquiry was conducted by visiting the haircutting Saloon / Spa
Centre of the petitioner, it was found that, the petitioner was running the Spa Centre in the name of
Ananta Thai Spa without getting a license and by having license only for their haircutting Saloon
with AC. Therefore, on that ground the police have refused to grant NOC.
18. On the other hand, Ms.P.T.Ramadevi, learned Standing Counsel appearing for the Corporation,
on instructions would submit that, if at all any application has been made for renewal of the earlier
license, that only relates to haircutting Saloon https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and not relates to
Spa Centre. Insofar as the application for Spa Centre is concerned, though no separate application
had been made, as it is a new area to be licensed by virtue of inclusion of Spa Centres, Beauty
Parlours and Massage Centres in Schedule- VI of the Chennai City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919,
separate application should have been made by the petitioner to the respondent Corporation for
getting license to the Spa Centre, without which, merely making an application on 02.08.2021 to
renew the license, which was admittedly given only to run the haircutting Saloon, the petitioner
cannot expect that, by virtue of the deeming provision, the license has been renewed for Spa Centre
also and accordingly she can run the Spa business also.
19. The learned Standing Counsel further submits that, if at all the petitioner wants to get the license
for running the Spa Centre, which she has already been running or continue to run, she should make
a fresh application, based on which that application would be processed as per the procedure
contemplated under the notification of 2019 as well as various provisions of the 1919 Act. Unless and
until such an application is made, the petitioner, by using the deeming provision available under
sub-section(10) of Section 365, cannot run the business of Spa Centre as claimed by her, she
contended.
20. I have considered the rival submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for both sides
and have perused the materials placed on record. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15068781/ 6
Ananta Wellness India vs The Commissioner Of Police on 9 December, 2021
21. It is an admitted case that, the original license was obtained by the petitioner to run the
haircutting Saloon with AC. However, along with the haircutting Saloon, it is also an admitted fact
that she was running a Spa. Before 2019, since there was no provision to obtain license to run the
Spa, the petitioner was running the Spa without the license and there could be no impediment for
permitting the petitioner to run the Spa Centre till 2019 ie., till 27.02.2019.
22. The moment the notification was issued in 2019, wherein it was provided that, Spa Centres also
have to obtain license, the petitioner should have made an application immediately to get a license
for running the Spa Centre. However, without such license being obtained by the petitioner, since
she is running the Spa Centre, that is now noticed by the police authorities and the same is the only
reason for the police authorities to refuse the NOC.
23. In this context, even though there is a deeming provision available under Section 365(10), under
which, after 60 days period of an application for renewal is not considered and granted or disposed
of, a license holder can continue to run the show, whether the deeming provision would also apply to
the Spa Centres, is the question raised by the learned Standing Counsel.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
24. In this context, the earlier license since was given only for Saloon, this Court feels that, the
deeming provision would apply only for that business, under which the petitioner can continue to
run the Saloon without getting an express renewal order to be passed in this regard by the
respondent Corporation by invoking the deeming provision under Section 365(10).
25. However, insofar as the Spa Centre is concerned, the petitioner has to make a fresh application
and if such application is made, it is open to the respondent Corporation to process the same and
pass orders.
26. In this context, it is to be taken note of the fact that, once such an application is made, normally
the respondent Corporation would insist upon getting the NOC from the Health Department as well
as the Police Department, in view of the proviso attached with the said provision referred to above.
27. However, in this case, such a process has already been completed, where the police officer
concerned, having visited the Spa Centre or Saloon of the petitioner, has expressed his inability to
grant the NOC or refused to grant NOC on the only and sole reason that, the petitioner was running
the Spa Centre without license.
28. Here there is a slight confusion that, since the Spa was started prior to the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis year 2019 without a license, as no license was required to be
obtained prior to 2019, the petitioner continues to run the Spa even till today.
29. Even though strictly speaking the petitioner should have made an application after the 2019
notification, she has failed to do so. But, at least now if the petitioner wants to continue the Spa
Centre, she has to make a fresh application under the 2019 Rules, where the present refusal order
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15068781/ 7
Ananta Wellness India vs The Commissioner Of Police on 9 December, 2021
made by the police department to grant NOC citing the reason as stated above, may not stand in the
way to independently process such application by the respondent Corporation, unmindful of the
provision mentioned in the 2019 notification because of the peculiar facts referred to above.
However, in such case, the NOC from the Health Department necessarily has to be obtained by the
petitioner.
30. In that view of the matter, this Court is inclined to dispose of this writ petition with the following
order.
● That the petitioner shall be free to continue to run the haircutting Saloon with AC for which
license has already been given, even though it got lapsed, the renewal application made by the
petitioner dated 02.08.2021 since has not been disposed of within the 60 days period, by
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis invoking the deeming clause under Section 365(1) of the Chennai
City Municipal Corporation Act, 1919, the petitioner can continue to run the Saloon without any
demur.
● Insofar as the running of the Spa Centre by the petitioner is concerned, the petitioner shall make a
fresh application immediately for getting a license under the provisions of the 2019 notification,
where, if any such application is made by the petitioner, the respondent Corporation shall
immediately process the same and pass orders on merits and in accordance with law.
● While processing the said application, the respondent Corporation need not insist on any NOC
from the Police Department in view of the peculiar facts discussed herein above. However, the
petitioner shall get the NOC from the Health Department and produce the same to the respondent
Corporation.
● If the petitioner makes an application as indicated above for getting the license to the Spa, the
respondent Corporation https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis shall process the same and pass orders
thereon, on merits as has been discussed herein above, within a period of six weeks from the date of
receipt of the said application. ● Till such time, the petitioner shall not run the Spa Centre.
Once the license is granted by the respondent Corporation, the petitioner would be free to run the
Spa Centre as per the license conditions.
31. With the above observations and directions, this writ petition is disposed of. No costs.
Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is closed.
09.12.2021 Index : Yes Internet : Yes KST https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis To 1 The Commissioner
of Police Commissioner Office Building EVK Sampath Road Vepery Chennai - 7.
2 The Commissioner Greater Chennai Corporation Rippon Building Chennai - 3.
3 The Revenue Officer Revenue Department / License Section Greater Chennai Corporation Rippon
Building Chennai - 3.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15068781/ 8
Ananta Wellness India vs The Commissioner Of Police on 9 December, 2021
4 The Joint Commissioner Health Greater Chennai Corporation Rippon Building Chennai - 3.
5 The Assistant Commissioner of Police Anti Vice Squad Chennai City Police Commissionerate No.
132, Commissioner Office Building EVK Sampath Road Vepery Chennai - 7.
6 The Inspector of Police J5 Sastri Nagar Police Station, 1st Avenue Service Road, Custom Colony,
Besant Nagar Chennai – 90.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis R. SURESH KUMAR, J.
KST 09.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15068781/ 9
