Aneesh Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home ... on 31 January, 2025
Aneesh Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home ... on 31
January, 2025
Author: Sangeeta Chandra
Bench: Sangeeta Chandra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:6787-DB
Court No. - 9
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. WRIT PETITION No. - 868 of 2025
Petitioner :- Aneesh Kumar
Respondent :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Deptt. Lko. And 3 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Mahesh Kumar
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Hon'ble Mrs. Sangeeta Chandra,J.
Hon'ble Shree Prakash Singh,J.
1. Heard learned counsel for the petitioner and learned A.G.A. appearing on behalf of the State.
2. This petition has been filed with the following main prayer:-
"(I) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of Mandamus thereby commanding
and directing the concerned opposite parties to protect the life and liberty of the
petitioner from the opposite party no.-4 (i.e. police authorities), who are giving
regular threat to petitioner without having any rhyme and reason, and without
having complaint against the petitioner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/158301257/ 1
Aneesh Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home ... on 31 January, 2025
(II) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of Mandamus thereby commanding
and directing the concerned opposite parties to consider and decide the
representation of petitioner moved on 03-01-2025 (Annexure No.-1 of the writ
petition) within stipulated period Fixed by this Hon'ble High Court."
3. Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner belongs to a poor family and
he is a simple person, but the Police personnel of Police Station Satrikh, Barabanki, are
unnecessarily threatening and harassing the petitioner continuously. Hence this petition has been
filed.
4. Learned A.G.A. has produced before this Court instructions sent by Jitendra Rai, Sub Inspector,
P.S. Satrikh, Barabanki, wherein it has been stated that the petitioner is not being harassed. It is a
case of a family dispute between a brother-in-law and his sister-in-law. On 03.01.2025, the
petitioner had given an application to the Superintendent of Police Barabanki and also to the
District Magistrate Barabanki. In pursuance of comments sought, an enquiry was held by the Police
Station concerned. The petitioner and his bhabhi (Mamta w/o Late Bhailal) are at loggerheads and
the allegation regarding breaking up of locks of the house of Mamta widow of Bhailal was received
through an application from the alleged victim on which an enquiry was held.
5. Learned A.G.A. has additionally stated that he has received telephonic instructions that
proceedings under Sections 126 and 135 of B.N.S.S. (corresponding Sections 107/116 of the Cr.P.C.)
have been taken and Challani report has been prepared.
6. Instructions are kept on record.
7. The writ petition is disposed of.
Order Date :- 31.1.2025 Rahul
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/158301257/ 2
