Anil Kumar Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 5 September, 2019
Anil Kumar Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 5
September, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 MP 1928
Author: Rajendra Kumar Srivastava
Bench: Rajendra Kumar Srivastava
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
PRINCIPAL SEAT AT JABALPUR
Hon'ble Shri Justice Rajendra Kumar Srivastava
M.Cr.C. No. 24098/2018
Anil Kumar Jatav
Vs
State of M.P.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shri Aditya Adhikari Senior counsel with Shri Kishore Roy,
learned counsel for the petitioner.
Shri Samarth Awashty, learned G.A. for the respondent/State.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ORDER
(05.09.2019) Petitioner has filed this petition under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. for quashing the FIR
in Crime No. 354/2014 dated 26.09.2014 registered at Police Station Maanpur, District Umariya for
the offence under Section 420/34 of IPC. Since the charge sheet for the offence under Sections 420,
409, 511 read with Section 34 of IPC has also been filed, therefore, he prays to quash the same too.
He also seeks quashment of Session Trial No. 7/2017 pending before 2 nd Additional Sessions
Judge, Umariya, District Umariya. It is also necessary to mention that on 11.05.2018 the learned 2
nd Additional Sessions Judge has framed the charges under Section 420 and 409/511 of IPC against
the present petitioner.
2. Case of prosecution in brief is that CEO Janpad Panchayat Maanpur has filed a written complaint
to Incharge Police Station Maanpur District Umariya stating that under the scheme of MANREGA,
present petitioner along with co-accused person who were functioning as Sarpanch, Secretary,
Assistant Engineer have sanctioned the work of Med Bandhan in the field of Bhurelal Gond and Raja
Gond, but in physical the work was not done. The completion certificate of said work has been
issued and bill has also been submitted for withdrawing of payment, therefore, it is alleged against
the petitioner/accused and co-accused persons that they have cheated the State and tried to misuse
of appropriate fund of Government. On the basis of same, case was registered against the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/148869991/ 1
Anil Kumar Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 5 September, 2019
petitioner/accused and other co-accused. During the investigation, statements of witnesses have
been recorded. After the completion of investigation, charge sheet has als been filed before the trial
Court. Thereafter, learned trial judge also framed the charge against the petitioner/accused under
Sections 420 and 409/511 of IPC.
3. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that petitioner/accused physically did spot verification
and issued completion certificate as per the site shown by the Sarpanch and Secretary. After
issuance of completion certificate, the petitioner/accused came to knowledge that the Sarpanch and
Secretary intentionally in fraudulent manner showing an another execution of Medh Bandhan work
and obtained the false completion certificate from the petitioner. On 30.01.2012, the petitioner
immediately informed by written a letter to the CEO Zila Panchayat and requested to stop the labour
payment as claimed by the Sarpanch and Secretary. Petitioner has also informed the Assistant
Engineer Mr. S.N. Verma, with regard to fraud, played by the Sarpanch and Secretary. Thereafter,
on 16.05.2013, the Assistant Engineer S.N. Verma immediately wrote a letter to the CEO of Janpad
Panchayat, Maanpur, not to release the labour payment of forged Medh Bandhan work as shown by
Secretary and Sarpanch. On the complaint, the CEO, Zila Panchayat has constituted a District Level
Committee vide order No. 1084/JP/2013 on 24.05.2014 and inquiry was conducted. Thereafter,
memorandum of inquiry was produced before Zila Panchayat and according to it no proceeding was
initiated against the petitioner. Further, CEO himself constituted a team on 28.06.2014 with a
malafide intention and conducted an inquiry without perusing the documents submitted by the
District Level Committee in their inquiry memorandum. Thereafter CEO, Janpad Panchayat,
Maanpur written a letter to lodge the FIR against the petitioner/accused and co-accused. The work
of Medh Bandhan was executed by the Work Agency of Gram Panchayat. The Mate Arun Patel
executed the layout of another field and the Assistant Engineer has assessed the valuation to issue
completion certificate. In departmental enquiry, no charge has been found proved and the co-
accused Assistant Engineer S.N. Verma has been discharged from the charges by the Enquiry
Officer. So it is evident prima facie no offence is made out against the petitioner/accused because
the then Sarpanch and Secretary has shown another Medh Bandhan work. Further, on the basis of
spot verification conducted by Mate Arun Patel has performed valuation of work and issued
completion certificate. As soon as petitioner received the information that Sarpanch and Secretary
has played fraud to withdraw the amount of labour payment, the petitioner immediately informed
the Zila Panchyat CEO and the payment has not been released in favour of Secretary and Sarpanch.
Thus, the act of petitioner is showing his bona fide and he himself was betrayed by the Sarpanch and
Secretary.
4. Apart from that, petitioner/accused was doing the work in near about 15 Gram Panchayat and
under it approx 50 villages come, then it is practically difficult for petitioner to verify the work
deeply. On the contrary, due to awareness of the petitioner/accused, the then Sarpanch and
Secretary could not withdraw the Government fund. So Prima facie no case under Sections 409, 420
read with Section 511/34 of IPC is made out against the petitioner. The complainant Sidhi Gopal
Verma, CEO has not been obtained any permission from the Higher Authorities for conducting an
inquiry. So this proceeding is misused of procedure of law. Therefore, he prays for setting aside all
the proceeding.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/148869991/ 2
Anil Kumar Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 5 September, 2019
5. Learned counsel for the respondent/State submits that there is prima facie material available on
the record which shows that petitioner/accused cheated and tried to misuse of appropriate fund. It
is not disputed, the work of Medh Bandhan was sanctioned in the field of Bhurelal Gond and Raja
Gond, but no work of Medh Bandhan was initiated and completed in the field of them even then
petitioner/accused has given the certificate of completion of work and also submitted bill for final
payment, so this is not a fit case, where inherent jurisdiction may be invoked. Therefore, he prays
for dismissal of this petition.
6. Heard both the parties and perused the record.
7. On perusal of case, it appears that the allegation against the present petitioner is that being a Sub
Engineer under the "MANREGA Scheme", he has verified work of "Med Bandhan" said to perform
in the field of Bhurelal and Raja Gond without actually doing the same. With intention to cause the
financial loss to state and also to misappropriate of Government funds, he has made valuation of
work and has issued completion certificate for work which was not done actually. Prima Facie, the
court found that the petitioner has committed the offence under Sections 420 and 409/511 of IPC
8. Before embarking on the facts of the case, it would be necessary to read first the relevant
provisions of IPC, charges under Sections 420, 409/511 of IPC has been framed against the
petitioner, same are quoted as under:-
"420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property.--Whoever cheats and
thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any
person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or
anything which is signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a
valuable security, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a
term which may extend to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine.
409. Criminal breach of trust by public servant, or by banker, merchant or
agent.--Whoever, being in any manner entrusted with property, or with any
dominion over property in his capacity of a public servant or in the way of his
business as a banker, merchant, factor, broker, attorney or agent, commits criminal
breach of trust in respect of that property, shall be punished with [imprisonment for
life], or with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to ten
years, and shall also be liable to fine.
511. Punishment for attempting to commit offences punishable with imprisonment
for life or other imprisonment.--Whoever attempts to commit an offence punishable
by this Code with [imprisonment for life] or imprisonment, or to cause such an
offence to be committed, and in such attempt does any act towards the commission of
the offence, shall, where no express provision is made by this Code for the
punishment of such attempt, be punished with [imprisonment of any description
provided for the offence, for a term which may extend to one-half of the
imprisonment for life or, as the case may be, one-half of the longest term of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/148869991/ 3
Anil Kumar Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 5 September, 2019
imprisonment provided for that offence], or with such fine as is provided for the
offence, or with both."
9. Further, under IPC, the definition of cheating provides in Section 415, which is also reproduced as
under:-
"415. Cheating.--Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly
induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent
that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so
deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so
deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to
that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat".
10. In order to apply the Section 415 of IPC in this case, following ingredients has to prove:-
i. Fraudulent or dishonest inducement.
ii. Dishonest inducement pursuance to delivery of any property.
11. On reading of Section 420 of IPC, it appears that it deals with offence of cheating and dishonestly
inducing delivery of property, its essential ingredients are:-
"(i) cheating;
(ii) dishonest inducement to deliver property or to make, alter or destroy any
valuable security or anything which is sealed or signed or is capable of being
converted into a valuable security, and
(iii) mens rea of the accused at the time of making the inducement."
12. Before applying the Section 409 of IPC, consideration of Section 405 of IPC is necessary. Bare
reading of Section 405 IPC shows that the accused is either entrusted with a property or acquires
dominion over the property and misappropriates the same dishonestly or converts the same for its
own use or dishonestly uses or disposes of that property. In criminal breach of trust, the person
comes into possession of a property honestly but he develops dishonest intention subsequent to his
acquiring dominion over the property by way of entrustment or otherwise. To constitute the offence
of criminal breach of trust following ingredients must be fulfilled:-
(i) There has to be some property.
(ii) The said property must be entrusted to someone with or without any contract.
(iii) The dominion of the property was shifted from complainant to the accused.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/148869991/ 4
Anil Kumar Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 5 September, 2019
(iv) The accused person refuses to return/restore the said property to the rightful
owner when demanded.
(v) The accused having misappropriated/converted to its own use/disposed the
property refuses to restore the property to the complainant/lawful owner.
13. When offence of criminal breach of trust committed by any public servant or by banker merchant
or agent then they shall be punished under Section 409 of IPC.
14. Section 511 of IPC provides the punishment for attempting to commit offence punishable by the
IPC for which express provision for its attempt is not made by this Code.
15. Now this Court shall examined the facts of the present case in view of the provisions as
mentioned above:-
16. During the investigation, the statements of Bhurelal and Raja Gond have been recorded.
Bhurelal Gond clarified in his police statement that he has no knowledge about the work of "Medh
Bandhan" in the field of him and his brother Raja. Thereafter, it came to his knowledge when Gram
Panchayat prepared a proposal for work of Medh Bandhan in the field of him but no work was done
actually. Moreover, final payment was sanctioned then he made complaint of the same to the higher
authorities. Therefore, prima facie material is available on the record that work of Medh Banchan
was sanctioned in the field of Bhurelal Gond and Raja Gond but work was neither initiated nor
completed. Petitioner/accused submitted a report of completion of work and sanctioned final
payment in this regard. Thus it appears that there is prima facie case is made out against the
petitioner/accused as being a public servant he verified and sanctioned amount for that work which
is neither started nor completed. Since the payment has not been made to anyone and same was
stopped by the authority, section 511 of IPC would attract in the case and prima facie no error found
to frame the charges under Section 409/511 of IPC. So far as offence under Section 420 of IPC is
concerned it appears that when the dishonestly inducement is done with regard to any person to
deliver any property from him, offence under Section 420 of IPC would prima facie attract in the
case. Though, in the case payment has not been done but act of inducement is found with regard to
present petitioner.
17. Learned counsel for the petitioner/accused took ground that he issued completion certificate as
per the site shown by the Sarpanch and Secretary and as soon as it came to his knowledge that
execution of work was not done in the field of Bhurelal Gond and Raja Gond, he wrote a letter to
CEO Janpad Panchayat to stop the labour payment and thereafter, labour payment has not been
done. A departmental inqury was also conducted and it is found by the inquriy committee that
petitioner/accused did not do any work with malafide intention. These submissions of
petitioner/accused may be considered at appropriate stage of trial.
18. In the case of Rajiv Thapar Vs. Madan Lal Kapoor reported in (2013) 3 SCC 330, the Hon'ble
Apex Court has given the guidelines in step by step procedure to determine the veracity of a prayer
for quashment of proceedings under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. The Hon'ble Apex Court has held as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/148869991/ 5
Anil Kumar Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 5 September, 2019
under:-
"30. Based on the factors canvassed in the foregoing paragraphs, we would delineate
the following steps to determine the veracity of a prayer for quashing, raised by an
accused by invoking the power vested in the High Court under Section 482 of the
Cr.P.C.:-
30.1 Step one:- whether the material relied upon by the accused is sound, reasonable,
and indubitable, i.e., the material is of sterling and impeccable quality?
30.2 Step two:- whether the material relied upon by the accused, would rule out the
assertions contained in the charges levelled against the accused, i.e., the material is
sufficient to reject and overrule the factual assertions contained in the complaint, i.e.,
the material is such, as would persuade a reasonable person to dismiss and condemn
the factual basis of the accusations as false.
30.3 Step three:- whether the material relied upon by the accused, has not been
refuted by the prosecution/complainant; and/or the material is such, that it cannot
be justifiably refuted by the prosecution/complainant?
30.4 Step four:- whether proceeding with the trial would result in an abuse of process
of the court, and would not serve the ends of justice?
30.5 If the answer to all the steps is in the affirmative, judicial conscience of the High
Court should persuade it to quash such criminal proceedings, in exercise of power
vested in it under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. Such exercise of power, besides doing
justice to the accused, would save precious court time, which would otherwise be
wasted in holding such a trial (as well as, proceedings arising therefrom) specially
when, it is clear that the same would not conclude in the conviction of the accused.:
19. In the case of Hemant Pandey Vs. State of M.P. reported in 2018(1) MPWN 45, Coordinate
Bench of this High Court has held as under:-
"8.At the stage of framing of charge, the contents of the F.I.R and the statement of
the witnesses ought to be seen. It is to be seen that prima facie case is made out. In
the case of C.B.I Vs. K.M. Sharan, (2008) 4 SCC 471wherein the Apex Court has held
that the High Court in its jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C is not called upon to
embark upon the inquiry whether the allegations in the F.I.R and the charge sheet are
reliable or not and thereupon to render definite finding about truthfulness or veracity
of the allegations. These are the matters which can be examined only by the Court
concerned after the entire material is produced before it on a thorough investigation
and evidence is led.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/148869991/ 6
Anil Kumar Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 5 September, 2019
9. It would not be proper for the High Court to analyze the case of the complainant in
the light of all probabilities in order to determine whether a conviction would be
sustainable and on such premises arrive at a conclusion that the proceeding ought to
be quashed"
20. Therefore, in view of the forgoing discussion this Court found that there is prima facie sufficient
material available on the record which shows that the petitioner/accused issued a completion
certificate of said work and sanctioned of final amount which was not done, he made inducement to
State by his act to get the amount sanctioned for the work, even it had not begin. Thus, this is not a
proper case to invoke inherent jurisdiction of this Court.
21. Accordingly this petition is dismissed.
(Rajendra Kumar Srivastava) Judge L.R. Date: 2019.09.07 13:00:38 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/148869991/ 7
