Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 15 March,
2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on 10.03.2023
Pronounced on:15.03.2023
WP(Crl) No. 66/2022
Anil Sharma .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Q
Through: Mr. Sunny Mahajan, Advocate
Vs
Union Territory of J&K and others ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Sumeet Bhatia, GA
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The petitioner-Anil Sharma S/o Mool Raj, R/o Zib, Udhampur (hereinafter to be referred as the
detenue) has challenged order No. PITNDPS 20 of 2022 dated 24.09.2022 passed by the Divisional
Commissioner, Jammu (hereinafter to be referred as the Detaining Authority), whereby he has been
taken into preventive custody in terms of Section 3 of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotics
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 (hereinafter to be referred as the PITNDPS Act).
2. It has been contended by the petitioner that the impugned order of detention has been passed in
an arbitrary and mala fide manner without application of mind. It has been further submitted that
the impugned order of detention is verbatim copy of the dossier prepared by respondent No. 3 and
as such, respondent No.2-Detaining Authority has failed to record its subjective satisfaction before
passing the impugned order of detention. It has been further submitted that the order of detention,
copies of the dossier and other related documents were not provided to the petitioner within the
stipulated time and the same were neither read over nor explained to him in the language he
understands. According to the petitioner, due to non-furnishing of the relevant material, he was
unable to make an effective representative against the order of detention. It has been submitted that
the incidents relied upon by the Detaining Authority for passing the impugned order of detention
are not of such a serious nature as would pose threat to the public orders or public health and as
such, the impugned order of detention smacks of non-application of mind. It has also been
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39144309/ 1
Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
submitted that the petitioner has not been communicated about his right to make a representation
against the impugned order of detention. It is further contended that there were no compelling
reasons for the detaining authority to pass the impugned order of detention against the petitioner.
3. The petition has been contested by the respondents by filing counter affidavit. In their counter
affidavit, the respondents have submitted that the petitioner is a habitual drug peddler who is
involved in a number of cases in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances which pose a serious
threat to the health and welfare of the people of District Udhampur as well as other adjoining areas.
It has been stated that the Detaining Authority has thoroughly examined the material and thereafter
derived its subjective satisfaction on the basis of which the impugned order of detention has been
passed. It has been further submitted that the two FIRs and two Daily Diary reports lodged against
the petitioner clearly show that he has no respect for ordinary law and in order to curb his repeated
involvement in illicit drug trafficking, it was necessary to detain him under PITNDPS Act.
4. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case as well as the
detention record produced by the respondents.
5. The primary ground that has been projected by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
for assailing the impugned order of detention is that the incidents, on the basis of which, the
petitioner has been put under preventive detention are stale in nature, inasmuch as, the same relate
to 30.07.2020 and 26.03.2021. It is contended that on the basis of these stale incidents, which have
no proximate link to the passing of the impugned order of detention, the petitioner could not have
been kept in preventive detention. In this regard, learned counsel has relied upon the judgment of
this Court in Shabir Ahmed Malik vs Union Territory of J&K and others, 2022(2) JKJ HC 182 and
the judgment of the Supreme Court in Samaaruna v State of Telangana and another, (2018)12 SCC
150.
6. If we have a look at the grounds of detention, it bears reference to two FIRs, one bearing No.
114/2020 and another bearing No. 111/2021. Both these FIRs relate to offences under the NDPS Act
and subject matter of these FIRs are incidents dated 30.07.2020 and 26.03.2021. It seems that
reference to these FIRs has been made by the Detaining Authority to show the past conduct of the
petitioner. In the grounds of detention there is also a reference to two Daily Diary reports bearing
Nos. 12 and 10 of 13.09.2022 and 15.09.2022 respectively. As per these reports, suspicious
movements of the petitioner with regard to the sale and purchase of illicit drugs in the District,
Udhampur have been recorded. These two incidents have proximate and immediate link with the
passing of the impugned order of detention which is dated 24.09.2022. Therefore, the contention of
learned counsel for the petitioner that the impugned order of detention has been passed on the basis
of stale incidents, is not borne out from the record.
7. It has been next contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that the detenue/petitioner
had made representation against the impugned order of detention but the same has not been
considered by the Detaining Authority as has been admitted by the Detaining Authority in its
counter affidavit. Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that without considering the
representation of the petitioner/detenue, the impugned order of detention could not have been
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39144309/ 2
Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
confirmed by the Government and that it was incumbent upon the respondents to place the said
representation before the Advisory Board.
8. So far as the receipt of representation made by the petitioner is concerned, the same has not been
disputed by the respondents. It is also not in dispute that the Advisory Board has considered the
case of the petitioner in the absence of his representation. It is an admitted position that at the time
when the order of detention was confirmed by the Government, the representation had not been
considered. The record, however, shows that the representation dated 13.10.2022 was made by the
petitioner from Central Jail, Jammu and the same was addressed to the Secretary to the
Government, Home Department with a copy to the Divisional Commissioner Jammu. Record
further shows that it has been sent through registered post to the aforesaid two authorities on
15.10.2022. The case of the petitioner was considered by the Advisory Board on 17.10.2022 and
obviously the representation had not reached the Board at the relevant time and his case was
considered in the absence of his representation. The record further shows that the Government
confirmed the order of detention on 21.10.2022. It is also revealed from the record that vide
communication dated 11.11.2022, the Home Department sought comments from the Criminal
Investigation Department and vide communication dated 22.12.2022 recommendation was made by
the said Department to the Home Department. Accordingly, vide communication dated 12.01.2023,
the representation of the detenue was rejected by the Government and the same was conveyed to the
concerned.
9. From the foregoing sequence of events, it is cleared that the representation of the petitioner was
not received by the Government when the matter was placed before the Advisory Board and it has
not been received when the order of detention was confirmed by the Government. It is only after the
confirmation of the detention order that the representation of the detenue was received by the
Government, whereafter comments were sought from the Criminal Investigation Department and
pursuant thereto, the representation was rejected by the Government on 12.01.2023. The counter
affidavit was filed by the Detaining Authority on 01.12.2022 and by that time, the representation
had not been considered.
10. It was open to the Government to confirm the detention order before considering the
representation of the detenue. In the instant case, the representation has been received by the
Government post confirmation and before confirmation the order of detention and at the time of
consideration of the matter by the Advisory Board, there was no representation of the petitioner
before the Government. The post confirmation consideration of the representation is neither illegal
nor unconstitutional. I am supported in my afore-stated view by the judgment of K. M. Abdullah
Kunhi and B. L. Abdul Khader vs Union of India (1991)1 SCC 476.
11. The only requirement of law is that the representation of the detenue has to be considered with
reasonable dispatch. In the instant case, as already noted, immediately upon the receipt of the
representation, the Home Department sought comments from the Criminal Investigation
Department and upon receipt of the same, the representation was considered and rejected by the
Government. Therefore, there has been no undue and unexplained delay in consideration of the
representation of the petitioner. Merely because the same was considered after post confirmation of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39144309/ 3
Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 15 March, 2023
the detention order, obviously because the representation was received by the Government after the
confirmation of the detention order, does not make the detention of petitioner unconstitutional.
12. It has been next contended by learned counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner has not been
provided the grounds of detention in the language he understands and as such, he has been unable
to make an effective representation against the impugned order of detention. It has been further
submitted that whole of the material has not been supplied to the petitioner.
13. If we have a look at the detention record, the petitioner has been provided all the material
comprising detention order, notice of detention, grounds of detention and dossier of detention with
other material on 26.09.2022. In this regard, the petitioner has executed a receipt. The dossier of
detention includes 43 leaves comprising the copy of the challans relating to two FIRs as also copies
of Daily Diary reports, mention whereof is made in the grounds of detention. Thus, whole of the
material relied upon by the Detaining Authority has been furnished to the petitioner. The Executing
Officer has clearly indicated in the receipt that he has explained contents of the documents to the
petitioner in Hindi language which he fully understands. He has further indicated in the report that
the petitioner was informed about his right to make an effective representation to the Government
as well as to the Detaining Authority. There is an affidavit of Sub Inspector-Yogeshwar Manhotra,
the Executing Officer on the record, wherein he has declared that he has briefed the petitioner about
the grounds of detention in the language he understands and that he has handed over all the
documents to the petitioner. An undertaking in this regard has also been executed by the Executing
Officer. In the face of this overwhelming record, the contention of the petitioner that he has not been
provided whole of the material relied upon by the Detaining Authority and that he could not
understand the grounds of detention, is without any substance.
14. Viewed in the above context, I do not find any ground to interfere with the impugned order of
detention. The writ petition lacks merit and dismissed as such.
15. Detention record be returned to the learned counsel for the respondents.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 15.03.2023 Rakesh Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39144309/ 4
