Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 16 August, 2023
Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 16
August, 2023
Bench: Tashi Rabstan, Mohan Lal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR
AT JAMMU
LPA No.55/2023
Reserved on: 01.08.2023
Pronounced on:16.08.2023.
Anil Sharma
...Petitioner(s)
Through:- Mr. Sunny Mahajan, Advocate.
Versus
Union Territory of J&K and Others
...Respondent(s)
Through:- Mr. Dewakar Sharma, Dy.AG.
Coram:- HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE TASHI RABSTAN, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Tashi Rabstan, J:-
1. This Letters Patent Appeal is directed against the judgment dated 15.03.2023
passed by the learned Single Judge, whereby the appellant's Writ Petition being
WP(Crl) No.66/2022 titled 'Anil Sharma v. Union Territory of J&K and others'
seeking quashment of detention order No. PITNDPS 20 of 2022 dated 24.09.2022,
issued by Respondent No.2-the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu (hereinafter to be
referred to as the Detaining Authority), was dismissed.
2. Learned counsel for the appellant/writ petitioner has assailed the judgment impugned dated
15.03.2023, passed by the learned Single Judge, inter alia, on the following grounds:
" a. That the bare perusal of the judgment impugned makes it amply clear that the
same has been passed by the learned Single Judge by not appreciating the fact that it
was an admitted fact that the Appellant herein was never provided all the relevant
material forming part of the dossier, that too, in the language which the Appellant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57947489/ 1
Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 16 August, 2023
understood as per the mandate of law.
b. That the learned Single Judge failed to take note of the fact that bare perusal of the
order of detention impugned makes it amply clear that the same has been issued by
Respondent No.2 in an extremely casual and mechanical manner, and without proper
application of mind to the peculiar facts and circumstances of the present case.
c. That the order of detention as also the copies of dossier and other relevant
documents were never provided to the Appellant within the stipulated period as
prescribed under Section 3(3) of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988.
d. That the reasons enshrined in the order of detention is contrary to the views as
repeatedly expressed by hon'ble the Supreme Court that even if a person is granted
bail wrongly, there are well- known remedies in the ordinary law to take care of the
situation. That State can always prefer appeal against the bail order granted and/or
apply for the cancellation of bail. Merely on the ground that an accused in detention
as an under-trial prisoner was released on bail, an order of detention under any
preventive detention law should not ordinarily be passed. Thus, in view of law laid
down by Hon'ble Apex Court, the above stated detention order dated 24.09.2022 is
patently illegal, thus, the Judgment impugned as also the order of detention, as such,
is required to be set aside."
3. The appellant/writ petitioner has challenged detention order No. PITNDPS No.20 of 2022 dated
24.09.2022 foisted upon him by respondent No.2-the Divisional Commissioner, Jammu before the
writ Court by filing petition bearing WP(Crl.) No.66/2022 being the same in breach of the
provisions of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India read with provisions of PITNDPS and also the
same is alleged to have been passed arbitrarily and in a mala fide manner without application of
mind, as the detaining authority has not provided the grounds of detention, copies of dossier and
other related documents in the language which the detenue understands and, as such, he has been
prevented in making an effective representation against the impugned order of detention within
time.
4. Learned counsel for the appellant/writ petitioner submitted that the detaining authority has not
mentioned a word in the detention order with regard to the satisfaction drawn by it as to how it has
come to the conclusion of passing the detention order. Furthermore, it is stated that the
appellant/writ petitioner has not committed any offence nor is he involved in the commission of any
offence under the NDPS Act, which pose a serious threat to the health and welfare of the people, but
the respondents without the application of mind and without considering the material on record had
issued and passed the impugned detention order which is illegal, unjustified, unwarranted under
law and as such the same is liable to be quashed. It is also the submission of learned counsel for the
detenue that the order of detention and the connected documents annexed with the petition clearly
show violation of right of the detenue guaranteed in terms of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of
India and the provisions of PIT NDPS Act. It is lastly submitted by the learned counsel for the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57947489/ 2
Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 16 August, 2023
appellant/writ petitioner though it was admitted in Para-5 of the Counter affidavit filed by
respondent no.2 that the representation filed by the appellant was pending consideration with the
Home Department, yet the Home Department had confirmed the order of detention without going
through the representation.
5. On the other hand, learned Dy. AG, Mr. Dewakar Sharma, appearing for the State, has stated that
the detenue was ordered to be detained under the provisions of Prevention of Illicit Traffic in
Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988 and had he been let free there would have
been every likelihood of his re-indulging in criminal activities. It is also being stated that the
appellant/writ petitioner is involved in numerous criminal activities/drug peddler/habitual
smuggler engaged in the sale and purchase of illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, which poses a serious threat to the lives of young generation of the country and even to
the economy of the UT. It is further submitted that the repeated and continuous involvement of the
detenue, in the illicit trafficking of drugs and psychotropic substances and his disrespectful attitude
towards the substantive law, it has become inevitable to detain him preventively.
6. Learned counsel for the detenue, while being heard, making reference to the grounds of
detention, would argue that on a cursory look on the same it is manifest that same are vague,
besides replica of the dossier. It is also submitted that the Detaining Authority, on the basis of
dossier submitted by Senior Superintendent of Police, Udhampur, without application of mind and
without evaluating the allegations made against the detenue in the said dossier, though copy
provided to the detenue but the same is in English language, therefore, he was not made to
understand of his preventive detention, the detaining authority proceeded to pass impugned
detention order, whereby the detenue has been detained and ordered to be lodged at Central Jail,
Kot Bhalwal, Jammu. It is also submitted that the Detaining Authority has not mentioned in the
detention order that the detenue has right to make representation against the order of detention and
the time frame for making such representation and has supplied the copies of the documents/FIRs
and material relied upon by the Detaining Authority which are in English language thus the detenue
was prevented in making effective and meaningful representation against the detention order to the
government, within a reasonable dispatch, as such, the detention order is liable to be quashed.
7. Learned counsel for the respondents, ex adverso, submits that the record reveals that there is no
vagueness in the grounds of detention. All the procedural safeguards prescribed under Act and the
rights guaranteed to the detenue under the Constitution have strictly been followed in the instant
case. The detenue has been furnished all the material, as was required, and was also made aware in
Hindi of her right to make representation to the detaining authority as well as government, against
her detention. It is lastly submitted by the learned Dy. AG that the learned Writ Court has passed a
detailed and reasoned judgment which does not call for any interference from this court and the
appeal filed by the appellant against the impugned judgment is without any merit and substance,
and be dismissed as being devoid of any merit.
8. Heard learned counsel for both the sides at length, perused the impugned judgment and
considered the detention record (photo-copy) attached with the appeal.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57947489/ 3
Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 16 August, 2023
9. The right of personal liberty is most precious right guaranteed under the Constitution. It has been
held to be transcendental, inalienable and available to a person. A person is not to be deprived of
his/her personal liberty except in accordance with procedures established under law and the
procedure as laid down in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India (1978 AIR SC 597), is to be just and fair.
The personal liberty may be curtailed, where a person faces a criminal charge or has been convicted
of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment. Where a person is facing trial on a criminal charge
and is temporarily deprived of his/her personal liberty because of the criminal charge framed
against him/her, has an opportunity to defend himself/herself and to be acquitted of the charges in
case the prosecution fails to bring home his/her guilt. Where such a person is convicted of the
offence, he/she still has the satisfaction of having been given adequate opportunity to contest the
charge and also adduce evidence in his/her defence.
10. Nevertheless, framers of the Constitution have, by incorporating Article 22 (5) in the
Constitution, left room for detention of a person without a formal charge and trial and without such
person having been held guilty of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment by a competent court.
The object is to save the society from activities that are likely to deprive a large number of people of
their right to life and personal liberty. In such a case it would be dangerous for the people at large, to
wait and watch as, by the time ordinary law is set into motion, the person having dangerous designs,
would execute his/her plans, exposing the general public to risk and cause colossal damage to life
and property. It is, therefore, necessary to take preventive measures and prevent the person bent
upon perpetrating mischief from translating his/her ideas into action. Article 22(5) Constitution of
India therefore leaves scope for enactment of preventive detention law.
11. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment rendered in the case of "Hardhan Saha v. State of W.B"
[(1975) 3 SCC 198], has succinctly pointed out difference between preventive and punitive detention
in the following words:
"The essential concept of preventive detention is that the detention of a person is not
to punish him for something he has done but to prevent him from doing it. The, basis
of detention is the satisfaction of the executive of a reasonable probability of the
likelihood of the detenu acting in a manner similar to his past acts and preventing
him by detention from doing the same. A criminal conviction on the other hand is for
an act already done which can only be possible by a trial and legal evidence. There is
no parallel between prosecution in a Court of law and a detention order under the
Act. One is a punitive action and the other is a preventive act. In one, case a person is
punished to prove his guilt and the standard is proof beyond reasonable doubt
whereas in preventive detention a man is prevented from doing something which it is
necessary for reasons mentioned in section 3 of the Act to prevent."
12. The conceptual framework of preventive detention has been reiterated in "Khudiram Das v. State
of W.B", [(1975) 2 SCR 832], as under:
"The power of detention is clearly a preventive measure. It does not partake in any
manner of the nature of punishment. It is taken by way of precaution to prevent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57947489/ 4
Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 16 August, 2023
mischief to the community. Since every preventive measure is based on the principle
that a person should be prevented from doing something which, if left free and
unfettered, it is reasonably probable he would do, it must necessarily proceed in all
cases, to some extent, on suspicion or anticipation as distinct from proof."
13. In "Naresh Kumar Goyal v. Union of India", [(2005) 8 SCC 276], the Court observed:
"It is trite law that an order of detention is not a curative or reformative or punitive
action, but a preventive action, avowed object of which being to prevent the
anti-social and subversive elements from imperiling the welfare of the country or the
security of the nation or from disturbing the public tranquility or from indulging in
smuggling activities or from engaging in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances etc. Preventive detention is devised to afford protection to
society. The authorities on the subject have consistently taken the view that
preventive detention is devised to afford protection to society. The object is not to
punish a man for having done something but to intercept before he does it, and to
prevent him from doing so."
14. The detention record, reveals that the detenue was involved in following cases registered at
Police Station, Rehambal and Police Station Udhampur vide:-
(i) FIR No. 114/2020 U/S 8/21/22 NDPS Act.
(ii) FIR No. 111/2021 U/S 8/21/22/27(a)/29 NDPS Act.
(iii) Daily Diary Report No.12 dated 13.09.2022, P/S Rehambal
(iv) Daily Diary Report No.10 dated 15.09.2022, P/S Rehambal. Involvement of the detenue in the
aforementioned cases appears to have heavily weighed with the detaining authority while passing
detention order. Even in aforementioned two FIRs of Police Stations, Udhampur & Rehambal, the
charge sheet are presented before the competent court of law and the cases are pending
adjudication. Detention record would further show that detenue was arrested in pursuance of these
two FIRs and two Daily Diary Reports entered at P/S Rehambal. Detention record further reveals
that the impugned detention order stands confirmed vide government Order No. Home/PB-V/2687
of 2022 dated 21.10.2022.
15. Perusal of Annexure-II (copy of Execution Report) attached with the Counter Affidavit filed on
behalf of respondent no.2 would show that detenue at the time of execution of detention warrant
was provided copy of the notice of detention, detention order (02 leaves), contents of Detention
Warrant & grounds of detention order (02 leaves), Dossier of detention (43 leaves). Further perusal
of the Execution Report reveals that the Executing Officer had read over the notice of the detention,
contents of Detention Warrant and grounds of detention in English and explained these documents
to the detenue in Hindi the language which he fully understands and to this extent, the detenue has
also put his signatures on the receipt of the grounds and other relevant documents. The detenue, as
execution report reveals, was also informed as regards his right of making representation against the
detention order if he so desired, both to detaining authority and Government.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57947489/ 5
Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 16 August, 2023
16. The grounds of detention are definite, proximate and free from any ambiguity. The detenue has
been informed with sufficient clarity what actually weighed with the detaining authority while
passing detention order. The detaining authority has narrated facts and figures that made it to
exercise its powers under Section 3 of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substance Act, 1988, and record subjective satisfaction that detenue was required to be
placed under preventive detention in order to prevent him from committing any of the acts within
the meaning of illicit traffic. The detaining authority has informed detenue that he is an accused in
four cases, involving illegal trafficking of narcotic substances, which poses serious and great threat
to the society particularly/especially young generation. So viewed, the detenue is not to be heard
saying that any of his Constitutional and Statutory rights have been violated while detention order
in question was slapped on him and thereafter executed.
17. The instant case relates to illicit trafficking of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. The
drug problem is a serious threat to public health, economy and growth of humanity. Our global
community is facing serious consequences of drug abuse and it undermines the socio- economic and
political stability and sustainable development. Besides, it also distorts the health and fabric of the
society and it is considered to be the originator for petty offences as well as heinous crimes like
smuggling of arms & ammunition and money laundering. The involvement of various terrorist
groups and syndicates in drug trafficking leads to threat to the national security and sovereignty of
States by the way of Narco-terrorism. The drug trafficking and abuse has continued its significant
toll on valuable human lives and productive years of many persons around the globe. With the
growth and development of world economy, drug traffickers are also seamlessly trafficking various
type of drugs from one corner to other ensuring the availability of the contrabands for vulnerable
segment of the society who fall into the trap of drug peddlers and traffickers. Due to India's close
proximity with major opium growing areas of the region, India is facing serious menace of drug
trafficking and as a spill- over effect, drug abuse especially among the youth is a matter of concern
for us.
18. In view of the foregoing discussion, it is clearly disclosed that it is not the number of acts that are
to be determined for detention of an individual but it is impact of the act which is material and
determinative. In the instant case the act of detenue relates to drug trafficking, which has posed
serious threat, apart from health and welfare of the people, to youth, most particularly unemployed
youth, to indulge in such acts, ramifications thereof would be irreversible and unimaginable.
Appellant/writ petitioner has not been able to convincingly point out violation of any statutory or
constitutional provisions.
19. So far as the contention of the learned counsel for the appellant/writ petitioner that the non
consideration of the representation filed by the petitioner before the competent authority while
confirming the detention order is concerned, the said contention has been satisfactorily addressed
by the learned Single Judge and needs not be dealt with any further.
20. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and discussion made hereinabove; the
appeal is found to be devoid of any merit and substance and is dismissed accordingly. The judgment
passed by the learned Single Judge, being a reasoned and detailed judgment, does not call for any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57947489/ 6
Anil Sharma vs Union Territory Of J&K And Others on 16 August, 2023
interference by this court and the same is accordingly upheld and so is the preventive detention
order of the detenue.
21. The appeal is dismissed.
22. Detention record be returned to the learned counsel for the respondents.
23. No order as to costs.
(Mohan Lal) (Tashi Rabstan)
Judge Judge
Jammu
16.08.2023
Raj Kumar
Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No.
Whether the order is reportable? Yes/No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57947489/ 7
