Ankit Sharma @ Anku vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 August, 2019
Ankit Sharma @ Anku vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9
August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 MP 1759
1 M.Cr.C.No.24924 of 2019
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
PRINCIPAL SEAT AT JABALPUR
Single Bench : Hon'ble Shri Rajeev Kumar Dubey, J.
Misc. Criminal Case No.24924/2019
Ankit Sharma @ Anku
vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shri Anil Khare, Senior Advocate with Shri Arpan Shrivastava,
counsel for the applicant.
Shri M.K. Singh, Panel Lawyer for the respondent/State.
Shri Adamya Bajpai, counsel for the objector.
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ORDER
Reserved on : 07/08/2019 Delivered on : 09/08/2019 Case dairy perused and argument heard.
This is First application of the applicant Ankit Sharma @ Anku filed under section 439 Cr.P.C. for
grant of bail. Applicant was arrested on 02.02.2019 in connection with Crime No.285/2018
registered at Police Station Cyber and High Technique Office, Bhopal for the offence punishable
under Sections 419, 420, 467, 468, 120-B of IPC and Section 66 (d) of IT Act.
As per the prosecution case, on 16.10.2018 complainant Danish Khan lodged a written complaint at
P.S. Cyber and High Technique Office averring that he was told by his college friend applicant Ankit
Sharma @ Anku that he was a permanent employee at Honda Car Company Delhi and there the
company makes an offer to its permanent employees to put a Honda City cab on hire in the company
and company paid 60000/- per month as rent for that cab. Applicant Ankit Sharma asked him to
put a cab in the Honda company and took a total of Rs.3800000 from him between the year 2016 to
2018. and in between he also returned some money to him stating that he was earning profit due to
which his friend Mubsir Khan invested Rs.32,30,100 and Ankit Nigam invested Rs.20,70,000/- on
the same assurance. Applicant's father Uttam Sharma, maternal uncle Anil Sharma and his son
Visesh Sharma also assured the complainant that applicant was a permanent employee of Honda
Company and he was posted as Assistant Engineer in the company. Sometime later, when they
enquired from the Honda Company, they came to know that applicant Ankit Sharma did not engage
cab with Honda Company. On that, they demanded their money back from applicant Ankit Sharma
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68762970/ 1
Ankit Sharma @ Anku vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 August, 2019
@ Anku, who then showed complainant one website called hondasielcarslimited.com, logged in that
by ID and password and showed agreement, salary slip, ID, purchase invoice, registration card and
other cards due to which complainant Danish Khan, Mubsir Khan and Ankit Nigam paid money to
the applicant by transferring money in his account by cheque and RTS in Kotak Bank and applicant
took Rs.1 crore from the complainant Danish Khan and Mubsir Khan and Ankit Nigam, thereafter
he denied to give that money back. Thus, he cheated the complainant Danish Khan, Mubsir Khan
and Ankit Nigam. On that police registered Crime No.285/2018 for the offence punishable under
Sections 419, 420, 467, 468, 120-B of IPC and Section 66 (d) of IT Act and investigated the matter
and arrested the applicant on 02.02.2019.
Learned counsel for the applicant submits that applicant is innocent and has falsely been implicated
in the offence. There is no evidence on record to show that the applicant prepared any fake
documents. He further submitted that police seized as many as four agreements executed by the
applicant and complainant Danish but in these agreements it is not mentioned that complainant
gave money to applicant for purchasing a cab or for engaging the cab with Honda Company. So the
fact that applicant took money from complainant on the pretext of buying Honda cab becomes false.
Although, it is alleged that applicant had mailed some documents to complainant but the said
documents were allegedly sent by the relatives of the applicant, so it cannot be said that applicant
sent any forged documents to complainant. It is further alleged that the applicant showed forged
documents to complainant by logging on website but police during investigation collected certificate
from Google in which it is not mentioned that applicant logged that website on the said date. This
report procured by the prosecution from Google too was not collected by the police according to
Section 166 of IT Act so that document has no value. It is also clear from the evidence collected by
the police during investigation that applicant also transferred some amount in the bank account of
complainant Danish as profit which clearly shows that applicant contacted with complainant Danish
for business and complainant gave money to applicant on the basis of agreement for business. There
is no direct evidence on record to show that applicant executed agreement with bad intention. So,
only on that basis that applicant could not repay the money to the complainant Danish Khan,
Mubsir Khan and Ankit Nigam, offence under Section 420 of IPC is not made out against the
applicant. The applicant is in custody since 02.02.2019 and the conclusion of trial is likely to take
long time, hence prayed for release of the applicant on bail. In this regard, learned counsel also
placed reliance on Apex Court judgments passed in Satishchandra Ratanlal Shah v. State of Gujarat
and another reported in 2019 SCC Online SC 196, Anand Kumar Mohatta v. State (Govt. of NCT of
Delhi) reported in 2018 SCC Online SC 2447 and Hridaya Ranjan Prasad Verma & Ors. v. State of
Bihar & Another reported in (2000) 4 SCC 168.
Learned counsel for the State as well as learned counsel for the objector opposed the prayer and
submitted that applicant on the basis of forged documents took money from the complainant and
Mubsir Khan and Ankit Nigam and cheated them and embezzled their amount of around Rs. 1 crore.
So, he should not be released on bail.
The facts of the cases relied by the learned counsel for the applicant in Hridaya Ranjan Prasad
Verma v. State of Bihar and another (supra), Anand Kumar Mohatta v State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi)
(supra) and Satish Chandra Ratanlal Shah v State of Gujarat and another (supra) do not match with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68762970/ 2
Ankit Sharma @ Anku vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 9 August, 2019
the instant case. In these cases, the Hon'ble Apex Court only held that "mere breach of contract
cannot give rise to criminal prosecution for cheating unless fraudulent or dishonest intention is
shown right at the beginning of the transaction, that is the time when the offence is said to have
been committed." while in this case, although in the agreement executed by the applicant with
complainant Danish Khan, it is not mentioned that applicant took money from Danish Khan for
buying car and engage it in the Honda company as cab but in these agreements it is mentioned that
applicant took money from complainant Danish Khan to run transportation business while it is not
the case of the applicant that he run any taxi service and suffered loss due to which he could not
repay the money to complainant Danish Khan, Mubsir Khan and Ankit Nigam. So, these judgments
do not assist the applicant.
It is alleged that applicant took money from the complainant Danish Khan, Mubsir Khan and Ankit
Nigam on the pretext of investment in buying Honda cab and engage it with the Honda company but
applicant never run any taxi business. It is not the case of the applicant that applicant run any taxi
service and suffered loss due to which he could not repay the money to complainant Danish Khan,
Mubsir Khan and Ankit Nigam so only on the basis that applicant returned some amount after
agreement showing the profit earned from business to complainant Danish Khan, it cannot be said
that from the beginning there was no intention of the applicant to cheat complainant Danish Khan,
Mubsir Khan and Ankit Nigam. In the statements of complainant Danish Khan, Mubsir Khan and
Ankit Nigam recorded by the police during investigation, it is mentioned that applicant took money
from them on the assurance of investment in buying Honda cab and engage it with the Honda
company while applicant never run any taxi business which prima-facie shows that the applicant
committed fraud with the complainant Danish Khan, Mubsir Khan and Ankit Nigam. So, looking to
the facts and circumstances of the case and the involvement of applicant in the crime and enormity
of fraud, this Court is not inclined to grant bail to the applicant.
Accordingly, the bail application is hereby rejected.
(Rajeev Kumar Dubey) Judge
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68762970/ 3
