Ankit Tyagi vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home ... on 3 March, 2025
Ankit Tyagi vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home ... on 3
March, 2025
Author: Alok Mathur
Bench: Alok Mathur
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:12430
Court No. - 6
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 2435 of 2025
Petitioner :- Ankit Tyagi
Respondent :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Deptt. U.P. Lko. And 5 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Deo Prakash Srivastava
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Alok Mathur,J.
1. Heard Sri Deo Prakash Srivastava, learned counsel for the petitioner as well as learned Standing
Counsel for the respondents. With the consent of learned counsel for the parties, present writ
petition is heard and decided at admission stage itself.
2. It has been submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that petitioner has applied for
compassionate appointment on the ground of death of his father on 30.07.2022 due to heart attack.
It is stated that father of petitioner, late Tejpal Singh Tyagi was working on the post of Sub Inspector
in Civil Police. The respondents in order to ascertain physical fitness of the petitioner for appointing
him on compassionate ground, fixed date for physical test on 07.11.2023, but the petitioner could
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/112563432/ 1
Ankit Tyagi vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home ... on 3 March, 2025
not participate because he was suffering from partial tear of anterior cruciate ligament of right leg
and on account of the fact that he was suffering from partial tear of anterior cruciate ligament of
right leg and the fact that he had also intimated this fact to the respondents, on 13.12.2023, another
date was fixed for the petitioner to participate in physical test. It is stated that on the said date again
petitioner could not appear as he was still suffering from partial tear of anterior cruciate ligament of
right leg and moved an application requesting the respondents to fix another date for physical test.
On the third occasion also ie. on 03.10.2024, the petitioner could not participate as he suffered from
partial tear of anterior cruciate ligament of right leg.
3. It has been submitted by learned counsel for the petitioner that subsequent to 03.10.2024, no
further date has been fixed and in the meanwhile petitioner received a letter dated 16.11.2024,
issued by the respondents stating that petitioner has not appeared on the dates fixed for physical
efficiency test so he is ineligible for the post of Sub Inspector and he may apply for the other lower
post, accordingly present writ petition has been filed and prayer has been made for direction to the
respondents to permit the petitioner to participate in physical test.
4. Learned Standing Counsel on the other hand has opposed the writ petition and submitted that
three opportunities have already been granted to the petitioner and accordingly it cannot be said
that respondents have acted in arbitrary manner by not giving due opportunity to the petitioner to
participate in the physical test for appointment on the department.
5. Considering rival submissions, it is noticed that in similar circumstances, this Court had
interfered where it has been found that due to genuine physical ailment person seeking appointment
on compassionate ground could not appear in the physical test. This Court in Writ Petition No.
35983 (S/S) of 2019 - Kaushal Sharma Vs. State of U.P. and Others (alongwith one connected case),
2020 (38) LCD 1059, has observed as under :-
"This Court in Service Single No.15721 of 2016, Vineet Kumar Mishra Vs. State of
U.P. and others, vide order dated 26.4.2017, has considered the medical ailment of
that petitioner and perused the documents relating to the medical advice and found
that the said petitioner was not capable to appear in the physical efficiency test,
therefore, it has been directed to the respondents to fix a fresh date for physical
examination for that petitioner afresh for compassionate appointment.
Following the direction of this Court in Vineet Kumar Mishra (supra), this Court in
Service Single No.7758 of 2019, Dharmendra Fugat Vs. U.P. Police Recruitment &
Promotion Board and others, has issued the similar direction vide order dated
15.3.2019, which reads as under:-
"The present Writ Petition has been filed seeking a direction to the opposite parties to
conduct physical efficiency test afresh for the post of Sub-Inspector of Police under
the U.P. Recruitment of Dependants of Government Servants Dying in Harness
Rules, 1974 on account of the fact that the petitioner was suffering from illness on the
date when the physical efficiency test was scheduled.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/112563432/ 2
Ankit Tyagi vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home ... on 3 March, 2025
Similar controversy had already been adjudicated by this Court by means of
judgment and order dated 26.04.2017 passed in Writ Petition No.15721 (S/S) of
2016, which is reproduced hereinafter :
"Heard learned counsel for the parties.
No counter affidavit has been filed yet but the instructions have been received by the
learned standing counsel. A copy of the said instructions has been placed before the
Court, the same be placed on record. The instructions merely reiterates the reasons
already given in the impugned order, therefore, there is no need to call for any
counter affidavit.
The instructions received by the learned standing counsel do not disclose any
justifiable cause for not acceding to the request of the petitioner for fixing a date for
physical test as on the date already fixed, the petitioner was not well and was
suffering from Jaundice and had been advised three weeks rest which is evident from
the documents at page no. 30-31 of the paper book, therefore, in these circumstances
the contention that on the Website it had been specifically mentioned that no second
chance would be given to the candidate is of no avail as if a person is suffering from
Jaundice obviously he could not participate in physical races etc. and specially as the
consideration being for compassionate appointment, a compassionate view ought to
have been taken into the matter, as such, the impugned order containing the
aforesaid reason is hereby quashed. The respondents shall fix a fresh date for a
physical examination for the petitioner afresh for compassionate appointment. Let
this be done within three weeks and thereafter within next three weeks the physical
examination shall be held. Consequences shall fallow as per law.
The writ petition is disposed of in the aforesaid terms."
Since grievance of the petitioner in the present petition is similar to one which has already been
adjudicated hereinabove, the benefit of the aforesaid order dated 26.4.2017 shall also be made
available to the petitioner in the same terms.
The Writ Petition is disposed of finally subject to the observations made herein above."
The State Government has filed Special Appeal Defective No.346 of 2019 assailing the order dated
15.3.2019 and the said special appeal was dismissed by this Court vide order dated 26.8.2019, which
reads as under:-
"Heard Sri Q. H. Rizvi, learned Standing Counsel for the appellants and Sri
Gyanendra Kumar Pandey, learned Counsel for the respondent.
This Special Appeal has been filed against an order dated 15.3.2019 passed in Writ
Petition No. 7758 (SS) of 2019, Dharmendra Fugat v. U. P. Police Recruitment &
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/112563432/ 3
Ankit Tyagi vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home ... on 3 March, 2025
Promotion Board through Chairman & Others whereby the learned Writ Court
relying on the decision of the order dated 26.4.2017 passed in Writ Petition No. 15721
(SS) of 2016 disposed of the writ petition with a direction that the benefit of the
aforesaid order dated 26.4.2017 shall also be available to the respondent.
Brief facts of the present case are that in pursuance of the advertisement issued for
recruitment in U. P. Police Department for the posts of Constables, Constables P.A.C.
and Fireman, the respondent applied on 25..2013 and thereafter, he appeared in the
preliminary written examination held on 15.12.2013. He was selected and a letter has
been issued for scrutiny of records and medical examination. As he was not well and
was suffering from high fever and was confined to bed from 25.8.2018 to 10.9.2018,
therefore, he could not appear before the authority concerned.
Learned Counsel for the appellants has submitted that in the case relied upon by the
learned Single Judge, the petitioner applied for the post of Sub-Inspector under the
U. P. Recruitment of Dependents of the government Servants Dying-in-Harness
Rules, 1974 and in the aforesaid case, the petitioner was suffering from jaundice and
has been advised to three weeks rest and therefore, he could not mark his presence
before the authority concerned to participate in the physical test. Thus his
submission is that the aforesaid judgment will not applicable to the present case.
On due consideration of the aforesaid so also the order dated 26.4.2017 passed in
Writ Petition No.15721 (SS) of 2016, we are of the view that the case of the present
petitioner is squarely covered by the aforesaid judgment as the petitioner was unwell
from 25.8.2018 to 10.9.2018 and therefore, the learned Writ Could has rightly
disposed of the writ petition relying upon the aforesaid order. No case is made out to
interfere with the aforesaid order passed by the learned Single Judge.
The Special Appeal lacks merit and is accordingly dismissed.""
6. In the present case, the petitioner was given opportunity to appear before the respondents but
due to one reason or the other he could not appear and accordingly written instructions were
received by learned Standing counsel wherein it has been state that numerous opportunities were
given to the petitioner and subsequently looking into the fact that the petitioner was not appearing
in the selection the opportunity has been closed and even written examination for appointment
under compassionate appointment has been completed on 12.12.2024 as all the vacancies have been
filled-up.
7. However, from perusal of judgment and order of the coordinate Bench of this Court in the case of
Kaushal Sharma Vs. State of U.P. and Others (supra), this Court finds that facts of the present case
are similar to the facts of the case as narrated in the judgment of the coordinate Bench.
8. Accordingly, the petitioner in the present case is also entitled to be granted relief as granted in the
order dated 26.04.2017 in the case of Vineet Kumar Mishra v. State of U.P. and Others (supra) and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/112563432/ 4
Ankit Tyagi vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home ... on 3 March, 2025
Dharmendra Fugat v. U.P. Police Recruitment & Promotion Board and Others (supra).
9. Accordingly, considering the fact that recruitment process for appointment under Dying in
Harness Rules is already over, opportunity is given to the petitioner to move a suitable application,
whenever next round of recruitment process takes place where the petitioner would be entitled to
appear before the respondents on the date fixed for the recruitment and no further time shall be
given to him and if he does not appear, the opportunity shall be closed.
10. It is made clear that no further opportunity shall be given to the petitioner to participate in the
physical test.
11. With above directions the writ petition stands disposed of.
(Alok Mathur, J.) Order Date :- 3.3.2025 RKM.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/112563432/ 5
