Anoop vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
Anoop vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:28524
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 44133 of 2024
Applicant :- Anoop
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Ashish Kumar,P.K. Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Devendra Kumar Mishra,G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri P.K. Singh, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Devendra Kumar Mishra, learned
counsel for the informant as well as Sri Shyam Dhar Maurya, learned A.G.A. for the State and
perused the record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 324 of 2024, under Sections 64, 65(2), 75(2), 115(2),
351(3) of BNS and Section 5m/6 of POCSO Act, Police Station Phase-II, District Gautam Budh
Nagar, during the pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
4. The applicant is stated to have outraged the modesty of the daughter of the informant on
15.07.2024.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51862681/ 1
Anoop vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT :
5. The applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case and he has nothing to do with the
said offence.
6. The FIR is delayed by about two days and there is no explanation of the said delay caused.
7. There is no time of offence mentioned in the FIR.
8. The allegations are of outraging the modesty in the FIR but subsequently in the statement of the
victim recorded under section 183 BNSS, the allegations have been escalated to that of rape.
9. It is also mentioned in the said statement that the victim bled at the time of offence.
10. The said fact does not find any corroboration of the medical examination report.
11. No injury was observed by the doctor conducting her medical examination and she has refused
her internal examination as such, the presumption shall rise that it is a case of false implication.
12. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
13. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since
26.07.2024. The applicant is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail,
he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF INFORMANT :
13. The bail application has been opposed on the ground that the victim was a girl of
tender age i.e. nine years only and the applicant has committed the said offence.
CONCLUSION:
14. In light of the judgement of the Supreme Court passed in Niranjan Singh and another vs
Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and others AIR 1980 SC 785, this Court has avoided detailed
examination of the evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the case as no party
should have the impression that his case has been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is
needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive exploration of the merits in the order itself.
15. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51862681/ 2
Anoop vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
16. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
17. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
18. Learned AGA could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would warrant denial of
bail to the applicant.
19. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned AGA.
20. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
21. Let the applicant- Anoop involved in aforementioned case crime number be released on bail on
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court
concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C./351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
22. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
23. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51862681/ 3
Anoop vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
witnesses.
Order Date :- 28.2.2025/Sumit S (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51862681/ 4
