Anshu Shukla vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 3 March, 2025
Anshu Shukla vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 3
March, 2025
Author: Rajesh Singh Chauhan
Bench: Rajesh Singh Chauhan
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:12757
Court No. - 11
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 1490 of 2025
Applicant :- Anshu Shukla
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. Home Lko.
Counsel for Applicant :- Rama Kant Jayswal,Kapil Dev Mishra
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Ajeet Kumar Singh
Hon'ble Rajesh Singh Chauhan,J.
1. Heard Sri Rama Kant Jayswal, learned counsel for the applicant, Sri Arun Kumar Verma, learned
A.G.A. for the State and Sri Ajeet Kumar Singh, learned counsel for the complainant who has filed
counter affidavit, same is taken on record.
2. Learned counsel for the applicant has filed two supplementary affidavits, same are taken on
record.
3. It has been contended by the learned counsel for the applicant that the applicant is in jail since
8.1.2025 in Case Crime No. 278 of 2016 u/s 147, 302 IPC, P.S. Kotwali City, District Hardoi. It has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94703121/ 1
Anshu Shukla vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 3 March, 2025
been submitted that the applicant has been falsely implicated in this case as he has not committed
any offence as alleged.
4. Attention has been drawn towards the impugned F.I.R. which was lodged on 25.5.2016 for the
alleged incident dated 19.5.2016 without explaining the reason of delay properly. Learned counsel
has stated that after lodging of the aforesaid F.I.R. the investigation started and nothing
incriminating has been found against the applicant, therefore, the final report was filed. However,
on such final report the competent authority has directed for further investigation transferring the
investigation to another agency i.e. Crime Branch. The matter was investigated by the crime branch
and crime branch found that the earlier final report was rightly filed.
5. On the aforesaid report and earlier final report the protest was filed by the informant and on such
protest application the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Hardoi passed order dated 18.12.2020 (Annexure
no. 2 to the supplementary affidavit) allowing the protest application summoning the present
applicant and other co-accused persons. Against the order dated 18.12.2020 the criminal revision
was filed wherein no interim order was granted but the present applicant could not be arrested. The
summoning order, bailable order and non-bailable order has been issued against the present
applicant, pursuant thereto he was taken into judicial custody on 8.1.2025 and since then the
applicant is in jail.
6. Learned counsel has stated that in the F.I.R. the main allegation has been levelled against the
accused Rahul Singh and as per the statement of the witnesses the main accused Rahul Singh had
come to the place of deceased to call him. As per statement of the supplementary statement (Majeed
Bayan) of Brijesh Kumar Singh, father of the victim (since deceased), the main accused Rahul Singh
is the main accused who had come to call his son Amit Singh and no other accused persons were
with the main accused Rahul Singh.
7. As per the prosecution story the main accused Rahul Singh was having motive against the
deceased as he was having suspicion that the deceased was having illicit relation with his wife. The
cause of death is coma due to ante-mortem injury. As per investigation report the deceased jumped
into the swimming pool and received head injury and that head injury was fatal. There is no
allegation that the present applicant has beaten the victim but as a matter of fact, prima -facie, the
incident in question was an accident and this fact may be ascertained during the course of trial.
However, so far as the present applicant is concerned he has been falsely implicated. In paras no. 2
to 5 of the supplementary affidavit the learned counsel for the applicant has explained the criminal
history enclosing therewith the bail orders.
8. The learned counsel for the applicant has given an undertaking on behalf of applicant that the
applicant shall not misuse the liberty of bail and shall cooperate with the trial proceedings and shall
abide by all terms and conditions of bail, if granted.
9. Learned A.G.A. opposed the prayer for bail but could not dispute the aforesaid facts as argued by
the learned counsel for the applicant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94703121/ 2
Anshu Shukla vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 3 March, 2025
10. Without entering into the merits of the case and considering the arguments of learned counsel
for the parties, contents and allegations of the F.I.R., the fact that the F.I.R. was lodged on 25.5.2016
for the alleged incident dated 19.5.2016 without explaining the reason of delay properly, in the
investigation started and nothing incriminating has been found against the applicant, therefore, the
final report was filed, on such final report the competent authority has directed for further
investigation transferring the investigation to another agency i.e. Crime Branch, the matter was
investigated by the crime branch and crime branch found that the earlier final report was rightly
filed, in the F.I.R. the main allegation has been levelled against the accused Rahul Singh and as per
the statement of the witnesses the main accused Rahul Singh had come to the place of deceased to
call him, as per statement of the supplementary statement (Majeed Bayan) of Brijesh Kumar Singh,
father of the victim (since deceased), the main accused Rahul Singh is the main accused who came
to call his son Amit Singh and no other accused persons were with the main accused Rahul Singh, as
per the prosecution story the main accused Rahul Singh was having motive against the deceased as
he was having suspicion that the deceased was having illicit relation with his wife, cause of death is
coma due to ante-mortem injury, as per investigation report the deceased jumped into the
swimming pool and received head injury and that head injury was fatal, there is no allegation that
the present applicant has beaten the victim, in paras no. 2 to 5 of the supplementary affidavit the
criminal history of the applicant has been explained enclosing therewith the bail orders and the
undertaking given on behalf of the applicant that he shall not misuse the liberty of bail and shall
cooperate in the trial proceedings, the applicant is entitled to be released on bail in this case.
11. Bail application is allowed.
12. Let the applicant Anshu Shukla, involved in aforesaid case crime be released on bail on his
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court
concerned with the following conditions which are being imposed in the interest of justice:-
(i) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any
adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence when the witnesses are present in court.
In case of default of this condition, it shall be open for the trial court to treat it as
abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders in accordance with law.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present before the trial court on each date fixed, either
personally or through his counsel. In case of his absence, without sufficient cause, the
trial court may proceed against him under Section 229-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(iii) In case, the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during trial and in order to
secure his presence proclamation under Section 82 Cr.P.C.may be issued and if the
applicant fails to appear before the court on the date fixed in such proclamation,
then, the trial court shall initiate proceedings against him, in accordance with law,
under Section 174-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(iv) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the trial court on the dates
fixed for (i) opening of the case, (ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94703121/ 3
Anshu Shukla vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 3 March, 2025
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the trial court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the trial court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance
with law.
(v) The applicant shall not leave the country without permission of the Court
concerned.
13. It is made clear that the role of the present applicant is different from the role of co-accused
Rahul Singh, therefore, Rahul Singh may not seek parity with the present applicant.
.
(Rajesh Singh Chauhan, J.) Order Date :- 3.3.2025/Om
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94703121/ 4
