Anshul Garg And Others vs State Of Punjab And Others on 15 September, 2023
Anshul Garg And Others vs State Of Punjab And Others on 15
September, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP(Crl) No. 52/2023 c/w
CRM(M) 768/2023
d
Anshul Garg and others
Aashna Gupta and others
..... petitioner (s)
Through :- Mr. Sakal Bhushan Advocate
Mr. Bhavesh Bhushan Advocate
Mr. Rahul Sharma Advocate.
Mr. Ayushman Kotwal Advocate.
V/s
State of Punjab and others .....Respondent(s)
UT of Jammu and Kashmir and ors
Through :- Mr. P.D.Singh Dy.AG
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT (ORAL)
1 By this common order, above titled two petitions are proposed to be disposed of.
2 In WP(Crl) No.52/2023, the petitioners have challenged FIR No.39/2023 for offences under
Sections 406/498-A, 313, 120-B of IPC registered with Police Station, Women Patiala, Punjab. The
impugned FIR has been lodged against the petitioners on the complaint of respondent No.4 herein,
who happens to be petitioner No.1 in CRM(M) No.768/2023. In CRM(M) No.768/2023, the
petitioners have challenged FIR No.148/2023 for offences under Sections 465,469,471,506,120-B
RPC registered with Police Station, Gandhi Nagar, Jammu, which has been lodged at the instance of
one Om Parkash Garg, father of petitioner No.1 of WP(Crl) No. 52/2023. 3 FIR No.39/2023 has
been lodged by one Aashna Gupta, wife of petitioner No.1 of WP(Crl) No. 52/2023 on the ground
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155000561/ 1
Anshul Garg And Others vs State Of Punjab And Others on 15 September, 2023
that she was harassed and maltreated by petitioner No.1 in WP(Crl) No. 52/2023, namely Anshul
Garg and his family members. FIR No. 148/2023 appears to be a counterblast of FIR No. 39/2023.
4 During the pendency of these two petitions, the parties have entered into a compromise and have
placed on record original compromise deed.
5 As per the compromise deed, which has been executed on 20.08.2023, the parties have settled
their disputes amicably as they want to live peacefully without involving themselves in further
litigation. It is further stated in the compromise deed that the executants do not want to pursue the
impugned FIRs. The compromise deed has been executed by complainants and accused in both the
FIRs. The parties have also made statements before the Registrar Judicial through their respective
counsels wherein they have admitted the contents of the deed of compromise as well as its
execution. 6 It is pertinent to mention here that regarding entertainment of WP(Crl) No. 52/2023,
this Court vide order dated 24.05.2023 has already observed that this Court had the jurisdiction to
entertain the writ petition, though the impugned FIR was lodged at Women Police Station, Patiala,
Punjab.
7 I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
8 So far as the facts alleged in both the petitions, particularly those pertaining to the compromise
arrived at between the parties are concerned, the same are not disputed. However, some of the
offences are non-compoundable in nature. In the backdrop of this position, the question arises as to
whether this Court has power to quash the proceedings, particularly when some of the offences
alleged to have been committed by the petitioners of both the petitions are non-compoundable in
nature.
9 The Supreme Court in the case of Gian Singh. v. State of Punjab & another, reported in (2012) 10
SCC 303, while considering this aspect, has observed as under:
"57. The position that emerges from the above discussion can be summarised thus:
the power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to
a criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code.
Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases
power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised
where the offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
and circumstances of each case and no category can be prescribed. However, c/w
CRM(M) No.614/2021 before exercise of such power, the High Court must have due
regard to the nature and gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental
depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even
though the victim or victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such
offences are not private in nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155000561/ 2
Anshul Garg And Others vs State Of Punjab And Others on 15 September, 2023
compromise between the victim and offender in relation to the offences under special
statutes like Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
servants while working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for quashing
criminal proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having
overwhelmingly and pre- dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the
purposes of quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial, financial,
mercantile, civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of
matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically
private or personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In
this category of cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view,
because of the compromise between the offender and victim, the possibility of
conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put accused
to great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by
not quashing the criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise
with the victim. In other words, the High Court must consider whether it would be
unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal proceeding
or continuation of the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of
law despite settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and
whether to secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an
end and if the answer to the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall
be well within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding.."
10 Similarly, the Supreme Court in the case titled Narinder Singh & Ors. Vs. State of Punjab & anr,
reported in (2014) 6 SCC 466, has laid down guidelines for quashing of criminal proceedings. The
guidelines are reproduced as under:
"31. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay down the following
principles by which the High Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
the settlement between c/w CRM(M) No.614/2021 the parties and exercising its
power under Section 482 of the Code while accepting the settlement and quashing
the proceedings or refusing to accept the settlement with direction to continue with
the criminal proceedings:
(I) Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be distinguished from the
power which lies in the Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has inherent power
to quash the criminal proceedings even in those cases which are not compoundable,
where the parties have settled the matter between themselves. However, this power is
to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
(II) When the parties have reached the settlement and on that basis petition for
quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases would be
to secure:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155000561/ 3
Anshul Garg And Others vs State Of Punjab And Others on 15 September, 2023
(i) ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
While exercising the power the High Court is to form an opinion on either of the aforesaid two
objectives. (III) Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions which involve heinous and
serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
private in nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for offences alleged to have been
committed under special statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by
Public Servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender. (IV) On the other, those criminal cases having
overwhelmingly and pre-dominantly civil character, particularly those arising out of commercial
transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship or family disputes should be quashed when
the parties have resolved their entire disputes among themselves. (V) While exercising its powers,
the High Court is to examine as to whether the possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and
continuation of criminal cases would put the accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme
injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the criminal cases.
(VI) Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the category of heinous and serious offences and
therefore is to be generally treated as crime against the society and not against the individual alone.
However, the High Court c/w CRM(M) No.614/2021 would not rest its decision merely because
there is a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this provision. It
would be open to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there
for the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if proved, would lead to
proving the charge under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to
go by the nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of
the body, nature of weapons used etc. Medical report in respect of injuries suffered by the victim can
generally be the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis, the High Court can examine
as to whether there is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances of conviction are remote and
bleak. In the former case it can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the criminal proceedings
whereas in the later case it would be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea compounding
the offence based on complete settlement between the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be
swayed by the fact that the settlement between the parties is going to result in harmony between
them which may improve their future relationship. (VII) While deciding whether to exercise its
power under Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play a crucial role. Those cases
where the settlement is arrived at immediately after the alleged commission of offence and the
matter is still under investigation, the High Court may be liberal in accepting the settlement to
quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is because of the reason that at this stage the
investigation is still on and even the charge sheet has not been filed. Likewise, those cases where the
charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is still at infancy stage, the High
Court can show benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but after prima facie assessment of
the circumstances/material mentioned above. On the other hand, where the prosecution evidence is
almost complete or after the conclusion of the evidence the matter is at the stage of argument,
normally the High Court should refrain from exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code, as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155000561/ 4
Anshul Garg And Others vs State Of Punjab And Others on 15 September, 2023
in such cases the trial court would be in a position to decide the case finally on merits and to come a
conclusion as to whether the offence under Section 307 IPC is committed or not. Similarly, in those
cases where the conviction is already recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the appellate
stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the parties would not be a c/w CRM(M)
No.614/2021 ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has already been
convicted by the trial court. Here charge is proved under Section 307 IPC and conviction is already
recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question of sparing a convict found guilty of
such a crime."
11 From a perusal of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court, it is clear that in the cases or
disputes which have predominantly civil flavour and where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature arising out of matrimonial relationship or family disputes and the parties have
resolved their entire dispute, the High Court will be within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal
proceedings if it is known that because of the compromise arrived at between the parties, there is
remote possibility of securing conviction of the accused. In fact, in such cases, the Supreme Court
has clearly observed that it would amount to extreme injustice if despite settlement having been
arrived at by the parties, the criminal proceedings are allowed to continue. 12 Adverting to the facts
of the instant case, it is clear that the parties to the dispute, i.e., complainants of both the impugned
FIRs, have entered into a compromise whereby they have decided not to pursue the prosecution
against accused in the impugned FIRs. Therefore, once the rival groups have arrived at a settlement
as regards the basis of the dispute which is actually an outcome of matrimonial relationship,
allowing the prosecutions to continue merely because some of the offences alleged against the
accused are non-compoundable in nature would amount to great injustice to both the parties. In
fact, it will amount to frittering away the fruits of compromise that has been arrived at between the
parties, who want to live peacefully. The continuance of criminal proceedings against the petitioners
of the two petitions, in these circumstances, will be nothing, but an abuse of process of law. 13
Taking conspectus of the aforesaid discussion, both the petitions are allowed. Accordingly, FIR
No.39/2023 for offences under Sections 406/498-A, 313, 120-B of IPC registered with Police
Station, Women Patiala, Punjab and the FIR No.148/2023 for offences under Sections
465,469,471,506,120-B RPC registered with Police Station, Gandhi Nagar, Jammu,as also the
proceedings emanating therefrom, are quashed.
Let copies of this judgment be conveyed to the concerned Police Stations for information and
compliance.
(Sanjay Dhar) Judge JAMMU.
15.09.2023
Rakesh Whether the order is speaking : Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155000561/ 5
