Anubhav Mishra Alias Golu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
Anubhav Mishra Alias Golu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28
February, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:28200
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 43757 of 2024
Applicant :- Anubhav Mishra Alias Golu
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Satya Prakash Mishra
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Avinash Kumar Sharma,G.A.,Yash Pratap Singh
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Harish Chandra Mishra holding brief of Sri Satya Prakash Mishra, learned counsel for
the applicant and Sri Mohd. Junaid Khan holding brief of Sri Yash Pratap Singh, learned counsel for
the informant as well as Sri Jay Kishan Chaurasiya, learned State Law Officer and also perused the
material available on record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 182 of 2022, under Sections 363, 366, 376, 323, 504, 506
of I.P.C. and Sections 5/6 of POCSO Act, Police Station - Manda, District - Prayagraj, during the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39018443/ 1
Anubhav Mishra Alias Golu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
4. The applicant is stated to be the colleague of the victim and had enticed her away on 28.06.2022
at about 01:00 am.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT:
5. The applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case due to ulterior motive. He has
nothing to do with the said offence as alleged in the FIR.
6. The FIR is delayed by about two days and there is no explanation of the said delay caused.
7. The timing of the victim leaving her house indicates consent.
8. The consent of the victim can be drawn from the fact that she had gone with the applicant all the
way to Pune Maharashtra and has not raised any alarm during the said sojourn. The victim had
stayed there for about 11 months although it is true that she got impregnated but the said pregnancy
has been terminated at the behest of the informant.
9. The victim by her physical appearance seems to be major as per ossification test report, her age
comes out to be 17 years.
10. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
11. The applicant is languishing in jail since 07.10.2024, having no criminal history to his credit,
deserves to be released on bail. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the
liberty of bail and shall cooperate with trial.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF INFORMANT/ STATE BY STATE LAW OFFICER:
12. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed and also the fact that the applicant has no criminal history.
CONCLUSION:
13. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
14. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39018443/ 2
Anubhav Mishra Alias Golu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been reiterated by the Supreme Court
in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
15. Reiterating the aforesaid view, the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate
of Enforcement, 2024 INSC 595, has again emphasized that the very well-settled principle of law
that bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
16. Learned State Law Officer could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would
warrant denial of bail to the applicant.
17. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned State Law Officer.
18. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, pending trial and considering the complicity of accused, severity
of punishment, at this stage, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the Court is
of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is allowed.
19. Let the applicant- Anubhav Mishra @ Golu , who is involved in aforementioned case crime be
released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions. Further, before issuing the
release order, the sureties be verified.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance
with law.
20. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
21. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 28.2.2025 Priya (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39018443/ 3
