Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ...
on 30 May, 2025
Author: Rohit Ranjan Agarwal
Bench: Rohit Ranjan Agarwal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
Neutral Citation No.-2025:AHC:93158
Reserved on : 21.5.2025
Delivered on : 30.5.2025
Court No. - 9
Case :- CIVIL REVISION No. - 63 of 2025
Revisionist :- Anupam Pathak
Opposite Party :- Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt And 8 Other
Counsel for Revisionist :- Kartikeya Saran,Shikhar Awasthi
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Shreya Gupta,Shahnawaz Akhtar
Hon'ble Rohit Ranjan Agarwal,J.
1. This revision under Section 115 of the Code of Civil Procedure (hereinafter referred as the 'CPC')
has been filed assailing the order 28.2.2025 passed by the District Judge, Budaun rejecting the
application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC filed in Election Petition No. 1 of 2023 by the returned
candidate.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 1
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
2. Facts, leading to filing of the present revision, are that revisionist alongwith other candidates
contested the election for the post of Chiarman of Nagar Panchayat Mudiya Dhureki. The elections
were held on 11.5.2023 and the counting of the votes was held on 13.5.2023. Revisionist having
received 1495 votes was declared as winning candidate. Respondent no. 1 Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh
Chandra Bhatt filed an Election Petition No. 1 of 2023 questioning the election of the revisionist.
The election petition was contested and written statement was filed. Thereafter, the issues were also
framed. On 30.1.2025 the revisionist filed an application under Order VII Rule 11 read with Section
151 CPC for rejection of the plaint. The election tribunal by the order impugned had rejected the said
application filed under Order VII Rule 11 CPC. Hence, present revision.
3. Sri Kartikeya Saran, learned counsel appearing for the revisionist, submitted that the power to
question a municipal election under The U.P. Municipalities Act, 1916 (hereinafter referred as the
'Act of 1916') is provided under Section 19 by presentation of an election petition. Sub-section 2 (b)
of Section 19 of the Act of 1916 specifically bars the institution of an election petition on the ground
that any non-compliance with the act or rules, or of any mistake in the form required thereby, unless
such irregularity has materially affected the result of the election.
4. According to him, election petition should have disclosed the material facts and particulars for
consideration and in the instant case a vague allegation of 250 voters being included in the voter list
has been made which cannot be the ground for declaring the result of a returned candidate as void.
He then contended that the application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC has been summarily rejected
without deciding the points raised therein. Reliance has been placed upon the decisions of Azhar
Hissain Vs. Rajiv Gandhi, 1986 SCC 315, Ram Lakhan Yadav Vs. Usha Rani & 8 Others, Writ-C No.
43917 of 2015, Neutral Citation No. 2015:AHC:186058, Poonam Vs. Election Tribunal & Ors.
MANU/UP/2496/2016, Shyamdeo Pd. Singh Vs. Nawal Kihsore Yadav, AIR 2000 SC 3000, Ashok
Kumar Vs. Md. Hasnain & 9 Ors. 2019:AHC:162001, Karim Uddin Barbhuiya Vs. Aminul Haque
Laskar & Ors. Civil Appeal No. 6282 of 2023 and Kunwar Nipendra Bahadur Singh Vs. Jai Ram
Verma & others, 1977 SCC OnLine SC 222.
5. Ms. Shreya Gupta, learned counsel appearing for the election petitioner/respondent no. 1
submitted that as the election petition is progressing and is at the stage of final arguments,
application moved under Order VII Rule 11 CPC was not maintainable. She further contended that
the material facts have been disclosed in the election petition and the election tribunal has rightly
rejected the application filed under Order VII Rule 11 CPC. Reliance has been placed upon the
decision of Apex Court rendered in case of M/S Bhagya Estate Ventures Pvt. Ltd. Vs. Narne Estates
Pvt. Ltd. & Another, Civil Appeal No. 4570 of 2023, decided on 11.9.2024. The relevant paragraph
nos. 12 to 14 are extracted hereasunder;
"12. The above position holds good as we are not of the opinion that issuance of
summons shall foreclose the right of the defendant to seek rejection of plaint; but the
focal issue for consideration is that till when and for how long can this right of the
defendant survive?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 2
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
13. It is amply clear that the purpose behind such a provision is to ensure that the
plaints or petitions which are defective, for any of the reasons enumerated, shall not
be allowed to proceed further and shall be put to an end before they progress to an
advanced stage. When such is the purpose, we fail to understand as to how an
application for rejection of a plaint can be entertained at a stage where written
submission has already been filed, evidence has been led and the trial has
substantially reached the stage of final arguments, as in the present case. This would
rather go completely against the objective of the provision and would effectively not
serve the purpose which it intended to.
14. Moreover, when the proceedings have reached such an advanced stage of trial and
the Court has gone through the merits of the case, it is fair to presume that the Court
has already applied its mind to the substantive submissions and cannot make a prima
facie conclusion about a plaint being improper at the outset or not. Also, it is a settled
position of law that when the court is considering an application under Order VII
Rule 11, it must only peruse and consider the averments in the plaint to check
whether the plaint is defective for any of the reasons provided under the rule or is a
proper plaint. Since the plaint is the only material to be considered while deciding an
application seeking rejection of plaint, then in a case where plaint has been
registered, written submission has been filed, evidence has been recorded, and the
parties are ready for final arguments, it is only natural that some form of bias or
opinion regarding the merits of the case would crop up in the mind of the court. In
such a scenario, looking at the plaint in isolation and deciding the rejection
application based solely on prima facie reading of the plaint would not be possible. At
this point, the trial has rather fructified to a stage where the dismissal of a suit on
merits is a more appropriate course of action instead of rejecting a plaint at the outset
which should have been done at a preliminary stage."
6. I have heard respective counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
7. Before adverting to decide the issue in hand a cursory glance of some of the provisions of the Act
of 1916 is relevant for better appreciation of the case. Electoral rolls to be maintained for the election
to the municipality has been provided under Section 12-A, 12-B, 12-C, 12-D and 12-E. Section 12-F
provides for the correction of electoral rolls. Section 12-G provides for the revision of electoral rolls.
Section 13-K bars the jurisdiction of civil court to entertain or adjudicate upon any question whether
any person is or is not entitled to be registered in an electoral roll of an ward or to question the
legality of any action taken by or under the authority of State Election Commission in respect of
preparation and publication of electoral roll. Further, the legality of any action taken or decision
given by the Returning Officer or by any officer appointed under the act in connection with an
election also cannot be questioned.
8. Section 19 of the Act of 1916 provides for the power to question municipal election by petition,
which is extracted hereasunder;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 3
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
"19. Power to question municipal election by petition. - (1) The election of any person
as a member of a [Municipality] may be questioned by an election petition on the
ground, -
(a) that such person committed during or in respect of the election proceedings a
corrupt practice as defined in Section 28;
(b) that such person was declared to be elected by reason of the improper rejection or
admission of one or more votes, or any other reason was not duly elected by a
majority of lawful votes;
[(c) that such person was not qualified to be nominated as a candidate for election or that the
nomination paper of the petitioner was improperly rejected.] (2) The election of any person as a
member of a [Municipality] shall not be questioned, -
(a) on the ground that the name of any person qualified to vote has been omitted from, or the name
of any person not qualified to vote has been inserted in the electoral roll or rolls;
[(b)] on the ground of any non-compliance with this Act or any rule, or of any mistake in the forms
required thereby, or of any error, irregularity or informality on the part of the officer or officers
charged with carrying out this Act or any rules, unless such non-compliance, mistake, error,
irregularity or informality has materially affected the result of the election."
9. From the reading of the above provision, it is clear that the election of any person as a member of
a municipality may be questioned through an election petition on the grounds enumerated under
clause (a) (b) and (c) of Sub-section (1). Sub-section (2) clearly bars the election petition on the
ground that the name of any person qualified to vote has been omitted from, or the name of any
person not qualified to vote has been inserted in the electoral roll or rolls. Similarly, clause (b) of
Sub-section (2) further bars an election petition on the ground of any non-compliance of any
provision of the Act or any rule, or any mistake in the forms required thereby, unless such
irregularity has materially affected the result of the election petition, meaning thereby that through
an election petition the election petitioner cannot challenge an election that a person who was
qualified to vote has been omitted from the voter list or the name of any person who was not
qualified has been added therein.
10. Similarly, the said provision also restricts the filing of election petition on the ground of any
non-compliance of any provision of the act or rules or any mistake in the forms required to be filed
by any candidate therein. It is only when there is irregularity which has been committed has
materially affected the result of the election that an election petition could be maintainable.
11. Further, Section 20 of the Act of 1916 prescribes the forms and presentation of election petition,
which is extracted hereasunder;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 4
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
"20. Form and presentation of election petitions. - (1) An election petition shall be
presented within 30 days after the day of which the result of the election sought to be
questioned is announced by the Returning Officer, and shall specify the ground or
grounds on which the election of the respondent is questioned and shall contain a
concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies and set for the
full particulars of any corrupt practices that the petitioner alleges, including as full a
statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such
corrupt practices and the dates and place of the commission of each such practice.
(2) The petition shall be signed by the petitioner and verified in the manner laid
down in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (V of 1908), for the verification of
pleadings.
(3) The petition may be presented by any candidate in whose favour votes have been
recorded and who claims in the petition to be declared elected in the room of the
person whose election is questioned or by ten or more electors of the municipality or
by a person who claims that his nomination paper was improperly rejected.
(4) The person whose election is questioned and, where the petitioner claims that any
other candidate should be declared elected in the room of such person, every
unsuccessful candidate who is not a petitioner in the petition shall be made a
respondent to the petition.] [(5) The petition shall be presented to the District Judge
exercising jurisdiction in the area in which the municipality, to which the election
petition relates, is situate:
Provided that the petition shall not be entertained by the District Judge, unless it is
accompanied by a treasury challan showing that the prescribed security has been
deposited]."
12. From the perusal of the said provision, it is clear that election petition which questions the result
announced by a Returning Officer shall specify the ground or grounds on which the election is
questioned and shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner relies
and set for the full particulars of any corrupt practices that the petitioner alleges, including as full a
statement as possible of the names of the parties alleged to have committed such corrupt practices.
13. Thus, from the conjoint reading of Sections 19 and 20 of the Act of 1916, it culls out that the
election of any person as a member of municipality may be questioned through an election petition
on the grounds enumerated therein, and the election petition has to disclose the concise statement
of material facts on which election petitioner relies and also to set for the full particulars.
14. Thus, for the maintainability of an election petition "material facts" and "particulars" have to be
disclosed. In the matter relating to the elections held under The U.P. Panchayat Raj Act, 1947, Full
Bench of this Court in case of Ram Adhar Singh Vs. The District Judge, Ghazipur & Ors. 1985 AWC
246 had the occasion to consider what are the material facts to be disclosed in an election petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 5
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
The Full Bench in paragraph no. 18 of the judgment held as under;
"We are unable to accept the submission made by the learned Counsel. As already
explained the Supreme Court has, in cases arising under the Representation of the
People Act, spelt out the condition that all the courts dealing with an election petition
should not exercise its discretion to permit inspection of ballot papers unless the
petition contains an adequate statement of material facts on which the Petitioner
relies in support of his case (viz. that the petition meets the requirements of Section
83(1) of the Representation of the People Act regarding contents of an election
petition) for the reason that under the Act, it is a matter of utmost importance to
maintain the secrecy of ballot which is sacrosanct and which should not be lightly
allowed to be violated on vague and indefinite allegations. This reason applies equally
to an election held under the U.P. Panchayat Raj Act which too cherishes secrecy of
ballot to the same extent. Viewed from this angle, it becomes evident that the
amplitude and purpose of the requirement of Section 83(1)(a) of the Representation
of the People Act that the election petition must contain a concise statements of
material facts on which the Petitioner relies and that of Rule 24 of the Rules framed
under the U.P. Panchayat Raj Act to the effect that an application under Section
12-C(1) of the Act must specify the grounds on which the election of the Respondent
is being questioned as also a summary of circumstances alleged to justify the election
being questioned on such grounds, is the same, viz. that the court or the authority
dealing with an election petition under the respective enactments, should not
countenance or proceed to investigate into any ground taken in the election petition
unless the ground as well as the material in support of such ground have been
adequately disclosed in the petition. Neither of the two enactments countenances the
court or the authority to permit the election Petitioner to make or indulge into
making of a roving enquiry with a view to fish out material for declaring an election
void; and it is this weighty factor which impels the court or the authority not to look
into or permit inspection of ballot papers unless the foundation for the purpose has
been properly laid in the petition by specifying the ground and the material or the
circumstances in support of such ground. Viewed in this light, the provisions
contained in the U.P. Panchayat Raj Rules permitting the summary hearing of an
application under Section 12-C(1) of the Act and authorising the Sub-Divisional
Officer to, instead of recording evidence in full, merely maintain a memorandum
thereof, has no bearing on the question regarding circumstances in which the ballot
papers can either be looked into or permitted to be inspected in proceedings under
Section 12-C of the U.P. Panchayat Raj Act."
15. In Ram Sewak Yadav Vs. Hussain Kamil Kidwai & Ors. AIR 1964 Sc 1249, the Constitution Bench
of Apex Court while considering the matter under The Representation of People Act, 1951
(hereinafter referred as the 'Act of 1951') held that allegation made by the election petitioner against
the returned candidate must be clear and specific and must be supported by adequate statement of
material facts, making out prima facie case on the basis of material produced before the Court
regarding the truth of the allegations made on record. Relevant paragraph nos. 6 and 7 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 6
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
judgment are extracted hereasunder :
"6. An election petition must contain a concise statement of the material facts on
which the petitioner relies in support of his case. If such material facts are set out the
Tribunal has undoubtedly the power to direct discovery and inspection of documents
with which a civil court is invested under the Code of Civil Procedure when trying a
suit. But the power which the civil court may exercise in the trial of suits is confined
to the narrow limits of O. 11, Code of Civil Procedure. Inspection of documents under
O. 11, Code of Civil Procedure may be ordered under rule 15, of documents which are
referred to in the pleadings or particulars as disclosed in the affidavit of documents of
the other party, and under rule 18(2) of other documents in the possession or power
of the other party. The Returning Officer is not a party to an election petition, and an
order for production of the ballot papers cannot be made under O. 11 Code of Civil
Procedure. But the Election Tribunal is not on that account without authority in
respect of the ballot papers. In a proper case where the interests of justice demand it,
the Tribunal may call upon the Returning Officer to produce the ballot papers and
may permit inspection by the parties before it of the ballot papers. That power is
clearly implicit in Sections 100(1)(d)(iii), 101, 102 and rule 93 of the Conduct of
Election Rules, 1961. This power to order inspection of the ballot papers which is
apart from O. 11 Code of Civil Procedure may be exercised, subject to the statutory
restrictions about the secrecy of the ballot paper prescribed by 94 and 128(1).
7. An order for inspection may not be granted as a matter of course : having regard to
the insistence upon the secrecy of the ballot papers, the Court would be justified in
granting an order for inspection provided two conditions are fulfilled :
(i) that the petition for setting aside an election contains an adequate statement of
the material facts on which the petitioner relies in support of his case; and
(ii) the Tribunal is prima facie satisfied that in order to decide the dispute and to do
complete justice between parties inspection of the ballot papers is necessary.
But an order for inspection of ballot papers cannot be granted to support vague pleas made in the
petition not supported by material facts or to fish out evidence to support such pleas. The case of the
petitioner must be set out with precision supported by averments of material facts. To establish a
case so pleaded an order for inspection may undoubtedly, if the interests of justice require, be
granted. But a more allegation that the petitioner suspects or believes that there has been an
improper reception, refusal or rejection of votes will not be sufficient to support an order for
inspection."
16. In Udhav Singh Vs. Madhav Rao Scindia, (1977) 1 SCC 511, the Apex Court had the occasion to
consider the difference between "material facts" and "material particulars" in a case dealing with the
Act of 1951 held as under;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 7
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
"42. All the primary facts which must be proved at the trial by a party to establish the
existence of a cause of action or his defence, are "material facts". In the context of a
charge of corrupt practice, "material facts" would mean all the basic facts constituting
the ingredients of the particular corrupt practice alleged, which the petitioner is
bound to substantiate before he can succeed on that charge. Whether in an
election-petition, a particular fact is material or not, and as such required to be
pleaded is a question which depends on the nature of the charge levelled, the ground
relied upon and the special circumstances of the case. In short, all those facts which
are essential to clothe the petitioner with a complete cause of action, are "material
facts" which must be pleaded, and failure to plead even a single material fact amounts
to disobedience of the mandate of Section 83(1)(a).
43. "Particulars", on the other hand, are "the details of the case set up by the party".
"Material particulars" within the contemplation of clause (b) of Section 83(1) would
therefore mean all the details which are necessary to amplify, refine and embellish
the material facts already pleaded in the petition in compliance with the
requirements of clause (a). "Particulars" serve the purpose of finishing touches to the
basic contours of a picture already drawn, to make it full, more detailed and more
informative.
44. The distinction between "material facts" and "material particulars" was pointed
out by this Court in several cases, three of which have been cited at the Bar. It is not
necessary to refer to all of them. It will be sufficient to close the discussion by
extracting what A.N. Ray, J. (as he then was) said on this point in Hardwari Lal case:
[SCC p. 220, para 20] "It is therefore vital that the corrupt practice charged against
the respondent should be a full and complete statement of material facts to clothe the
petitioner with a complete cause of action and to give an equal and full opportunity to
the respondent to meet the case and to defend the charges. Merely, alleging that the
respondent obtained or procured or attempted to obtain or procure assistance are
extracting words from the statute which will have no meaning unless and until facts
are stated to show what that assistance is and how the prospect of election is
furthered by such assistance. In the present case, it was not even alleged that the
assistance obtained or procured was other than the giving of vote. It was said by
Counsel for the respondent that because the statute did not render the giving of vote
a corrupt practice the words 'any assistance' were full statement of material fact. The
submission is fallacious for the simple reason that the manner of assistance, the
measure of assistance are all various aspects of fact to clothe the petition with a cause
of action which will call for an answer. Material facts are facts which if established
would give the petitioner the relief asked for. If the respondent had not appeared,
could the court have given a verdict in favour of the election petitioner. The answer is
in the negative because the allegations in the petition did not disclose any cause of
action."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 8
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
17. In L.R. Shivaramagowda vs. T.M. Chandrashekar, (1999) 1 SCC 666, the Supreme Court again
reiterated that election petitioner has to plead that result of election insofar as it concerned the
returned candidate had been materially affected by the alleged non-compliance with the provisions
of the Act and Rules. The Court also stressed importance of pleading in an election petition and
distinction between "material facts" and "material particulars". Relevant paragraph 10 and 11 are
extracted hereasunder:-
"10. That apart, it is rightly pointed out by the appellant's counsel that in order to
declare an election to be void under Section 100(1)(d)(iv), it is absolutely necessary
for the election petitioner to plead that the result of the election insofar as it
concerned the returned candidate had been materially affected by the alleged
non-compliance with the provisions of the Act or of the Rules. We have already
extracted para 39 of the election petition which is the only relevant paragraph. One
will search in vain for an averment in that paragraph that the appellant had spent for
the election an amount exceeding the prescribed limit or that the result of the
election was materially affected by the failure of the appellant to give true and correct
accounts of expenditure. In the absence of either averment, it was not open to the
appellant to adduce evidence to that effect. It cannot be denied that the two matters
referred to above are material facts which ought to find a place in an election petition
if the election is sought to be set aside on the basis of such facts.
11. This Court has repeatedly stressed the importance of pleadings in an election
petition and pointed out the difference between "material facts" and "material
particulars". While the failure to plead material facts is fatal to the election petition
and no amendment of the pleading could be allowed to introduce such material facts
after the time-limit prescribed for filing the election petition, the absence of material
particulars can be cured at a later stage by an appropriate amendment. In Balwan
Singh v. Lakshmi Narain [AIR 1960 SC 770 : (1960) 3 SCR 91] the Constitution Bench
held that an election petition was not liable to be dismissed in limine merely because
full particulars of corrupt practice alleged were not set out. On the facts of the case,
the Court found that the alleged corrupt practice of hiring a vehicle for the
conveyance of the voters to the polling station was sufficiently set out in the pleading.
The Court pointed out that the corrupt practice being hiring or procuring of the
vehicle for the conveyance of the electors, if full particulars of conveying by a vehicle
of electors to or from any polling stations were given, Section 83 was duly complied
with, even if the particulars of the contract of hiring, as distinguished from the fact of
hiring were not given."
18. In H.D. Revanna vs. G. Puttaswamy Gowda, (1999) 2 SCC 217, the Apex Court pointed out the
distinction between the "material facts" and "particulars". Relevant paragraph 23 is extracted
hereasunder:-
"23. This Court has repeatedly pointed out the distinction between "material facts"
and "particulars". Insofar as "material facts" are concerned, this Court has held that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 9
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
they should be fully set out in the election petition and if any fact is not set out, the
petitioner cannot be permitted to adduce the evidence relating thereto later; nor will
he be permitted to amend the petition after expiry of the period of limitation
prescribed for an election petition. As regards particulars, the consistent view
expressed by this Court is that the petition cannot be dismissed in limine for want of
particulars and if the court finds that particulars are necessary, an opportunity
should be given to the petitioner to amend the petition and include the particulars.
The Constitution Bench in Balwan Singh v. Lakshmi Narain [AIR 1960 SC 770 :
(1960) 3 SCR 91] held that an election petition was not liable to be dismissed in
limine merely because full particulars of a corrupt practice alleged were not set out. It
was observed that if an objection was taken and the tribunal was of the view that
particulars had not been set out, the petitioner had to be given an opportunity to
amend or amplify the particulars and that it was only in the event of non-compliance
with the order to supply the particulars, the charge could be struck out."
19. In Virender Nath Gautam vs. Satpal Singh, (2007) 3 SCC 617, the Apex Court again had the
occasion to consider the difference between "material facts" and "particulars". The Hon'ble Court
further held that election petition is liable to be dismissed on the ground as the case is covered by
clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 83 of the Act of 1951 read with clause (a) of Rule 11 of Order
VII CPC. Relevant paragraphs 30, 31, 34 and 35 are extracted hereasunder:-
"30. All material facts, therefore, in accordance with the provisions of the Act, have to
be set out in the election petition. If the material facts are not stated in a petition, it is
liable to be dismissed on that ground as the case would be covered by clause (a) of
sub-section (1) of Section 83 of the Act read with clause (a) of Rule 11 of Order 7 of
the Code.
31. The expression "material facts" has neither been defined in the Act nor in the
Code. According to the dictionary meaning, "material" means "fundamental", "vital",
"basic", "cardinal", "central", "crucial", "decisive", "essential", "pivotal",
"indispensable", "elementary" or "primary". [Burton's Legal Thesaurus (3rd Edn.), p.
349]. The phrase "material facts", therefore, may be said to be those facts upon which
a party relies for his claim or defence. In other words, "material facts" are facts upon
which the plaintiff's cause of action or the defendant's defence depends. What
particulars could be said to be "material facts" would depend upon the facts of each
case and no rule of universal application can be laid down. It is, however, absolutely
essential that all basic and primary facts which must be proved at the trial by the
party to establish the existence of a cause of action or defence are material facts and
must be stated in the pleading by the party.
34. A distinction between "material facts" and "particulars", however, must not be
overlooked. "Material facts" are primary or basic facts which must be pleaded by the
plaintiff or by the defendant in support of the case set up by him either to prove his
cause of action or defence. "Particulars", on the other hand, are details in support of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 10
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
material facts pleaded by the party. They amplify, refine and embellish material facts
by giving distinctive touch to the basic contours of a picture already drawn so as to
make it full, more clear and more informative. "Particulars" thus ensure conduct of
fair trial and would not take the opposite party by surprise.
35. All "material facts" must be pleaded by the party in support of the case set up by
him. Since the object and purpose is to enable the opposite party to know the case he
has to meet with, in the absence of pleading, a party cannot be allowed to lead
evidence. Failure to state even a single material fact, hence, will entail dismissal of
the suit or petition. Particulars, on the other hand, are the details of the case which is
in the nature of evidence a party would be leading at the time of trial."
20. In Kanimozhi Karunanidhi Vs. A. Santhana Kumar 2023 LiveLaw (SC) 398, the Hon'ble Apex
Court again had the occasion to consider the distinction between "material facts" and "particulars"
and the Court relying upon its earlier decision enunciated the legal position and summed up the
case and held as under:-
"28. The legal position enunciated in afore-stated cases may be summed up as
under:-
i. Section 83(1)(a) of RP Act, 1951 mandates that an Election petition shall contain a
concise statement of material facts on which the petitioner relies. If material facts are
not stated in an Election petition, the same is liable to be dismissed on that ground
alone, as the case would be covered by Clause (a) of Rule 11 of Order 7 of the Code.
ii. The material facts must be such facts as would afford a basis for the allegations
made in the petition and would constitute the cause of action, that is every fact which
it would be necessary for the plaintiff/petitioner to prove, if traversed in order to
support his right to the judgement of court. Omission of a single material fact would
lead to an incomplete cause of action and the statement of plaint would become bad.
iii. Material facts mean the entire bundle of facts which would constitute a complete
cause of action. Material facts would include positive statement of facts as also
positive averment of a negative fact, if necessary.
iv. In order to get an election declared as void under Section 100(1)(d)(iv) of the RP
Act, the Election petitioner must aver that on account of non-compliance with the
provisions of the Constitution or of the Act or any rules or orders made under the Act,
the result of the election, in so far as it concerned the returned candidate, was
materially affected.
v. The Election petition is a serious matter and it cannot be treated lightly or in a
fanciful manner nor is it given to a person who uses it as a handle for vexatious
purpose.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 11
Anupam Pathak vs Dinesh Chandra @ Dinesh Chandra Bhatt ... on 30 May, 2025
vi. An Election petition can be summarily dismissed on the omission of a single
material fact leading to an incomplete cause of action, or omission to contain a
concise statement of material facts on which the petitioner relies for establishing a
cause of action, in exercise of the powers under Clause (a) of Rule 11 of Order VII CPC
read with the mandatory requirements enjoined by Section 83 of the RP Act."
21. In the instant case the returned candidate/revisionist has specifically set up a case that election
petition was not maintainable in view of Section 19 (2) of the Act of 1916 as vague allegations have
been made in the election petition especially in paragraph nos. 8 and 9 that 250 voters were added
who were not the resident of Nagar Panchayat Mudiya Dhureki without disclosing their names.
22. Similarly, clause (b) of Sub-section (2) of Section 19 also oust the institution of election petition
on the ground of non-compliance of any provision of the act or rules. Prima facie there is no
disclosure in the election petition as to who had wrongly voted in favour of election petitioner not
being the member of Nagar Panchayat Mudiya Dhureki. A vague figure of 250 voters have been
given without there being any disclosure as to their names.
23. Section 23 of the Act of 1916 clearly provides that the procedure of CPC would be followed to the
extent which are not inconsistent with the act or rules in question. The application filed under Order
VII Rule 11 CPC has to be considered in the light of Section 19 (2) of the Act of 1916. Reliance placed
upon the decision of the Apex Court rendered in case of M/S Bhagya Estate (Supra) would not come
to rescue of the election petitioner in view of the fact that prima facie election petition itself is not
maintainable for non-disclosure of material facts and particulars, which Section 20 mandates.
24. In an election questioned under the Act of 1951 the Apex Court in case of Kanimozhi
Karunanidhi (Supra) had summarized the legal position and held that in case material facts are not
disclosed in the election petition, the same is liable to be dismissed on that ground alone, as the case
would be covered by the clause (a) and Rule 11 of Order VII of the CPC.
25. In the instant case the election tribunal seems to have been swayed away by the fact that the
election petition was proceeding and, as such, the application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC was not
maintainable. Prima facie, this Court finds that the election tribunal has not decided the application
under Order VII Rule 11 CPC on merits and dismissed the same summarily without addressing on
Section 19 (2) of the Act of 1916.
26. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, I find that the order dated 28.2.2025 passed
by the District Judge, Budaun is unsustainable in the eyes of law and same is hereby set-aside.
27. Revision stands partly allowed. The matter is remitted to the election tribunal to decide the
application under Order VII Rule 11 CPC filed in Election Petition No. 1 of 2023 on merits and
thereafter proceed with the election petition, strictly in accordance with law, preferably within a
period of two months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order.
[Rohit Ranjan Agarwal, J.] Order Date :- 30.5.2025 Shekhar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13935948/ 12
