Anurag Tiwari And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
Anurag Tiwari And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30
April, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:69580
Court No. - 75
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 528 BNSS No. - 13882 of 2025
Applicant :- Anurag Tiwari And 2 Others
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Awadh Sharma,Shivniket Tripathi
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Rakesh Kumar Srivastava
Hon'ble Arun Kumar Singh Deshwal,J.
1. Short counter affidavit filed by Sri Rakesh Kumar Srivastava, learned counsel for opposite party
no.2 is taken on record.
2. Heard Sri Awadh Sharma, learned counsel for the applicants, Sri Rakesh Kumar Srivastava,
learned counsel for opposite party no.2 and Sri Mohd. Shoeib Khan, learned AGA for the State.
3. The present application has been filed to quash the entire criminal proceedings of Case No. 631 of
2024 (State vs. Anurag Tiwari and others), arising out of cognizance and summoning order dated
04.01.2024 passed by Civil Judge (J.D.) / F.T.C.-1, (Offence Against Women), Ghaziabad in case
crime no. 101 of 2023 (State vs. Anurag Tiwari and others) as well as charge sheet dated 17.10.2023,
under Sections-498A, 323, 504 and 506 IPC and Section 3/4 D.P. Act, Police Station- Mahila Thana,
District-Gramin Commissionarate Ghaziabad.
4. Facts giving rise to the present controversy is the matrimonial discord between applicant no.1 and
opposite party no.2 has culminated into the impugned proceeding, which is under challenge.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34061760/ 1
Anurag Tiwari And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
5. Learned counsel for the applicant as well as opposite party no.2 have jointly submitted that
parties have settled their dispute amicably and a written compromise has also been entered into
between the parties. This court in Application u/s 528 B.N.S.S. No.9815 of 2025 filed by the
applicant directed the court below vide order dated 26.03.2025 to verify the aforesaid compromise.
6. From perusal of record, it appears that in pursuance of the order dated 26.03.2025, court below
has verified the compromise vide order dated 09.04.2025, which has been annexed at page no.71 of
the affidavit.
7. As the parties have settled their dispute amicably and in pursuance of order of this court, court
below has also verified the compromise entered into between the parties. As per this compromise,
parties have decided to live separately. In such circumstances, permitting to continue the impugned
proceeding will amount to travesty of justice.
8. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Gian Singh Vs. State of Punjab & Another; (2012) 10 SCC 303,
in paragraph No. 61 of the judgement, observed as under:-
"The position that emerges from the above discussion can be summarised thus: the
power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to a
criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code. Inherent
power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in
accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz. : (i) to secure the ends of
justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised where the
offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case and no category can be prescribed. However, before
exercise of such power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences
like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not
private in nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise
between the victim and offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like
the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while
working in that capacity etc.; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the purposes of
quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category
of cases, High Court may quash the criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and the victim, the possibility of conviction is
remote and bleak and continuation of the criminal case would put the accused to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34061760/ 2
Anurag Tiwari And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
quashing the criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise
with the victim. In other words, the High Court must consider whether it would be
unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal proceeding
or continuation of the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of
law despite settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and
whether to secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an
end and if the answer to the above question(s) is in the affirmative, the High Court
shall be well within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."
9. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of State of M.P. vs. Laxmi Narayan; (2019) 5 SCC 688, observed as
under:-
"15.1. the power conferred under Section 482 of the Code to quash the criminal
proceedings for the non-compoundable offences under Section 320 of the Code can
be exercised having overwhelmingly and predominantly the civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of
matrimonial relationship or family disputes and when the parties have resolved the
entire dispute amongst themselves;
15.2. such power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions which involved heinous
and serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc.
Such offences are not private in nature and have a serious impact on society;
15.3 similarly, such power is not to be exercised for the offences under the special
statutes like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender.
15.4. Offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms Act, etc. would fall in the category
of heinous and serious offences and therefore are to be treated as crime against the
society and not against the individual alone, and therefore, the criminal proceedings
for the offence under Section 307 IPC and/or the Arms Act, etc. which have a serious
impact on the society cannot be quashed in exercise of powers under Section 482 of
the Code, on the ground that the parties have resolved their entire dispute amongst
themselves. However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely because
there is a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this
provision. It would be open to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation
of Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient
evidence, which if proved, would lead to framing the charge under Section 307 IPC.
For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the nature of injury
sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delicate parts of the body,
nature of weapons used, etc. However, such an exercise by the High Court would be
permissible only after the evidence is collected after investigation and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34061760/ 3
Anurag Tiwari And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
charge-sheet is filed/charge is framed and/or during the trial. Such exercise is not
permissible when the matter is still under investigation. Therefore, the ultimate
conclusion in paras 29.6 and 29.7 of the decision of this Court in Narinder Singh
[Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab, (2014) 6 SCC 466 : (2014) 3 SCC (Cri) 54] should
be read harmoniously and to be read as a whole and in the circumstances stated
hereinabove;"
10. From above noted judgements, it is clear that merely mentioning the section of serious offences
will not refrain the court from quashing the proceeding, if on considering the material on record,
offences under that section is not made out.
11. Considering the material on record, this Court finds that no serious offence is made out against
the applicant, which falls in the category of mental depravity or serious offences.
12. Considering the fact as well as on perusal of record, it appears that no heinous and serious
offences of mental depravity or other offences, which may affect the society in general, are made out
and both the parties have amicably settled their dispute through compromise which has been duly
verified by the court below as well as in view of the law laid down by the Apex Court in Gian Singh
Vs. State of Punjab & Another ; (2012) 10 SCC 303, Narinder Singh & Others vs. State of Punjab &
Another (2014) 6 SCC 477, State of M.P. Vs. Laxmi Narayan, (2019) 5 SCC 688 and State of M.P. vs.
Dhruv Gurjar, AIR 2017 SC 1106, the proceeding of the aforesaid case is hereby quashed.
13. With the aforesaid direction, the present application is allowed.
Order Date :- 30.4.2025 / Manoj
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34061760/ 4
