Arati Sahoo vs ) State Of Odisha ..... Opposite Parties on 31 January, 2025
Arati Sahoo vs ) State Of Odisha ..... Opposite Parties on 31
January, 2025
Author: Aditya Kumar Mohapatra
Bench: Aditya Kumar Mohapatra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
WP(C) No.987 of 2025
Arati Sahoo ..... Petitioner
Represented By Adv. -
Dr.patanjali Tripathy
-versus-
1) State Of Odisha ..... Opposite Parties
2) Collector And Dist. Magistrate,puri Represented By Adv. -
3) Registtat,co-operative Societies,bbsr Ms.Siba Mohanty,ASC
4) The Deputy Registrar Of
Cooperative Societies,puri
5) Asst. Registrar Of Cooperative
Societies,puri Circle
6) Saripur Service Cooperative Society
Ltd.,puri
CORAM:
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ADITYA KUMAR
MOHAPATRA
Order No.
ORDER
31.01.2025
02. 1. This matter is taken up through Hybrid Arrangement (Virtual/ Physical Mode).
2. Heard learned counsel for the Petitioner as well as the learned Additional Standing Counsel for
the State. Perused the records as well the documents annexed thereto.
3. The present Writ Petition has been filed by the Petitioner with the following prayer:
"In view of the above facts and circumstances more fully narrated herein above the
Petitioner most humbly prays that this Hon'ble Court may be graciously pleased to
allow the Writ Petition, issue Rule of NISI upon the Opposite Parties to show cause :-
A. As to why the impugned order dated 15.09.2023 under Annexure-11 was passed by
O.P.5 shall not be quashed, and, B. As to why the Opposite Parties No.4 shall not be
directed to conduct proper enquiries against the illegal unlawful act on the part of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3820406/ 1
Arati Sahoo vs ) State Of Odisha ..... Opposite Parties on 31 January, 2025
Opposite Party No.5 regarding illegal termination of the Petitioner by virtue of an
impugned order under Annexure-10, and C. And as to pass any order or orders,
direction/directions as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper.
And on their failure to show cause or showing insufficient cause, this Hon'ble Court
be pleased to make the said RULE absolute by way of issuance of appropriate writ or
writs, order or orders in the facts and circumstances of the present case."
4. Learned counsel for the Petitioner, at the outset, contended that being aggrieved by the order
dated 15.09.2023, under Annexure-11 passed by the A.R.C.S., Puri Circle, Puri, the Petitioner has
approached this Court by filing the present Writ Petition. Learned counsel for the Petitioner further
contended that, by virtue of the impugned order, the A.R.C.S.,Puri Circle, Puri on the ground of
administrative exigency has instructed the CEO of the existing PACS to take over the charge of
C.E.O. of the newly registered PACS as an interim arrangement as mentioned in the table appended
in the order dated 15.09.2023. The table which has been appended as Annexure-11, reveals that the
Saripur Service Cooperative Society Ltd. has been included in the said PACS as a newly created
PACS and accordingly the C.E.O. of existing Bantilo PACS has been asked to take over charge of
Saripur PACS. Learned counsel for the Petitioner further contended that being aggrieved by such
decision of the A.R.C.S., Puri Circle, Puri, the Petitioner has approached this Court by filing the
present Writ Petition.
5. Learned counsel for the Petitioner further contended that the impugned order dated 15.09.2023 is
not appealable under section 67-B of the O.C.S. Act, inasmuch as the order passed by the committee
of Management the Cooperative Society or any dispute relating to the election of the Office bearers
is appealable under section 67-B of the O.C.S. Act. Additionally, taking into consideration the nature
of the order under Annexure-11, the same does not fall within the scope of section 67-B. In such view
of the matter, learned counsel for the Petitioner contended that the present Writ Petition is
maintainable before this Court. He has also taken an additional ground that at present the Office of
the P.O., Odisha Co- operative Tribunal is lying vacant and as such the appellate tribunal is
non-functional.
6. Learned Additional Standing Counsel appearing for the State raised objection with regard to
maintainability of the Writ Petition. He further contended that the order passed by the A.R.C.S.
could very well be revised under section 112 of the O.C.S.Act, 1962, if the same is presumed to be not
appealable in nature.
7. Having heard learned counsels appearing for the respective parties, on a careful examination of
the materials on record and further taking into consideration the provisions contained in Section
67-B as well as 112 of the O.C.S.Act, 1962, this Court observes that Section 67-B) provides that the
learned Cooperative Tribunal can entertain appeals against any dispute in connection with election
of any office bearer of the Society and any action taken by the Society and its committee against a
paid servant of the society, who is not a workman within the meaning of Industrial Disputes Act,
1947. Applying the aforesaid provisions to the fact of the present case, this Court observes that the
order under Annexure-11, which is sought to be challenged in the present Writ Petition has been
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3820406/ 2
Arati Sahoo vs ) State Of Odisha ..... Opposite Parties on 31 January, 2025
passed by the A.R.C.S. Puri Circle, Puri, Opposite Party No.5. The impugned order also refers to the
Standard Operating Procedures issued by the R.C.S., Odisha vide order dated 15.04.2023. On a
careful analysis of the impugned order under Annexure-11, it is further revealed that power has been
exercised by the A.R.C.S., Puri in consultation with the R.C.S., Odisha with regard to posting of
Officers in the new PACS.
8. Learned counsel for the Petitioner at this juncture contended that the Petitioner being appointed
by the Committee of Management has been discharging his duty in the newly created PACS as
C.E.O.. He further contended that both the letters dated 15.10.2022 as well as 15.04.2023 has no
application, as appointment of C.E.O. and arrangements under those letters are purely temporary in
nature, till a regular CEO is appointed. Since a regular C.E.O. has been duly appointed by the
Managing committee of the concerned PACS as claimed by the Petitioner, therefore the exercise of
power by the A.R.C.S. by virtue of the order dated 15.09.2023 in respect of the present PACS
treating it at par with other PACS and in general terms without considering the fact that a CEO has
already been appointed, thus rendering such conduct of ARCS erroneous and illegal.
9. On a reading of Section 112 of the Odisha Co-operative Society Act, 1962, this Court observes that
the Registrar or the Additional Registrar are conferred with revisional power. Such revisional power
can be exercised by the Registrar on an application filed by any person aggrieved after giving the
party concerned an opportunity of hearing. Further, as per the provision under section 112 of the
Act, the order against which no appeal lies, such order can be revised by the Registrar in exercise of
his revisional power under section 112 of the OCS Act, 1952.
10. On a careful examination of the aforesaid provisions, further keeping in view the provisions
contained in section 112 of the Act, and keeping in view the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the Petitioner to the effect that the Committee of management has already appointed a
regular CEO, this Court is of the view that the order passed by the ARCS, Puri Circle, Puri under
Annexure-11 does not come within the purview of section 67-B. As such this Court has no hesitation
in reaching a conclusion that the order can be revised by the Registrar, Co-operative Societies,
Odisha in exercise of power under Section 112 of O.C.S.Act, 1962 keeping in view the aforesaid
factual position as well as the provision of law as has been laid down in section 67-B and 112 of the
Act, 1962. This Court is also of the considered view that the decision taken by the ARCS, Puri circle,
Opposite Party No.5 vide letter dated 15.09.2023 under Annexure-11 is required to be reviewed and
revised by the Registrar keeping in view the provision of law and the factual background of the
present case. This Court deems it proper to dispose of the Writ Petition at this stage, by directing the
Petitioner to approach the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Odisha within 10 days from today along
with certified copy of this order. In such eventuality, the Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Odisha
Opposite Party No.3 shall do well to call for the records and examine the whole issue and pass order
in consonance with the O.C.S. Act and Rules within a period of three weeks from the date of
approach by the Petitioner.
11. As an interim, it is directed that in the event the Committee of Management has duly appointed
the CEO in respect of Saripur PACS, then the order dated 15.09.2023 under Annexure-11 shall not
be given effect to for a period of four weeks in respect of the said PACS.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3820406/ 3
Arati Sahoo vs ) State Of Odisha ..... Opposite Parties on 31 January, 2025
12. With the aforesaid observation/direction the Writ Petition stands disposed of.
( Aditya Kumar Mohapatra)
RKS Judge
Location: High Court of Orissa
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3820406/ 4
