Arif vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
Arif vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:15069
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 41941 of 2024
Applicant :- Arif
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Maimoona Fatima
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised. As informed by learned A.G.A., notice has been served to the informant on
17.9.2024.
2. Heard Sri Awadh Bihari Pandey, learned counsel for the applicant as well as Sri J.K. Chaurasia,
learned State Law Officer and perused the material placed on record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 358 of 2024, U/S 313, 506, 376-D IPC, 5(g), 5(1)/6 POCSO
Act, Police Station Kotwali Orai, District Jalaun, during the pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48004898/ 1
Arif vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
4. The named accused person Shanu @ Munna is stated to have enticed away the sister of the
informant aged about 17 years and had committed rape with her and had even video-recorded the
said act and started blackmailing her and continued the said relationship for a substantial period of
time.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE APPLICANT:
5. The applicant is absolutely innocent and has been falsely implicated in the present case with a
view to cause unnecessary harassment and to victimize him. He has nothing to do with the said
offence.
6. The FIR itself is delayed, as there is no date and time mentioned therein.
7. The applicant is not named in the FIR. His name has come up in the statement of the victim
recorded u/s 180 and 183 B.N.S.S., as she has stated that the applicant and co-accused person both
have gang-raped her. The said allegations have been made after legal consultation and deliberations.
The victim by her looks, seems to be major, although her date of birth is 3.11.2006, as such, her age
comes out to be marginally less than 18 years.
8. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity of
the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
9. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since 25.5.2024.
In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF INFORMANT/STATE:
10. The bail application has been opposed but the fact that there is no criminal history of the
applicant has not been disputed.
CONCLUSION:
11. In the judgement of Supreme Court passed in Sushil Kumar vs. Rakesh Kumar, (2003) 8 SCC
673, it has been stated that it is more often in the Indian Society that person shows the age of their
wards much below than their actual age. In the case of Brij Mohan Singh vs. Priya Brat Narain
Sinha, AIR 1965 SC 282, this Court, inter alia, observed that in actual life it often happens that
persons give false age of the boy at the time of his admission to a school so that later in life he would
have an advantage when seeking public service for which a minimum age for eligibility is often
prescribed.
12. In light of the judgement of the Supreme Court passed in Niranjan Singh and another vs.
Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and others AIR 1980 SC 785 this Court has avoided detailed
examination of the evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the case as no party
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48004898/ 2
Arif vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
should have the impression that his case has been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is
needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive exploration of the merits in the order itself.
13. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
14. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
15. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasized that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that ?bail is a rule and jail is an exception?.
16. Learned State Law Officer could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would
warrant denial of bail to the applicant.
17. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned State Law Officer.
18. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
19. Let the applicant- Arif involved in aforementioned case crime number be released on bail on
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court
concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C./351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48004898/ 3
Arif vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
20. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
21. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025 Shalini (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48004898/ 4
