Arun Sharma vs State (Now Ut) Of J&K & Ors on 16 June, 2023
Arun Sharma vs State (Now Ut) Of J&K & Ors on 16 June, 2023
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
...
Reserved on: 12.06.2023
Pronounced:16.06.2023
CRMC No.529/2018
CrlM No.1/2018
Arun Sharma ....... Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Vikram Sharma, Senior Advocate
with Mr. Sachin Dev Singh, Advocate.
Versus
State (now UT) of J&K & Ors. .........Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Mandeep Singh, Advocate
CRMC No.134/2017
IA No.1/2017 & 1/2018
Dr. Sushil Sharma & Anr.
Through: Mr. Mandeep Singh, Advocate.
Versus
State (now UT) of J&K
& Ors. Through: Mr. Vikram Sharma, Sr.
Advocate with
Mr. Sachin Dev Singh,
Advocate.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Through the medium of this judgment, it is proposed to dispose of above two petitions clubbed
together, which have been filed invoking inherent jurisdiction, under Section 561-A of the J&K Code
of Criminal Procedure (since repealed) akin to Section 482 CrPC.
2. The petitioner Arun Sharma in CRMC No.529/2018 seeks indulgence of this court for setting
aside and quashing the order dated 24.05.2018 passed by the court of learned Judicial Magistrate
(Munsiff) Udhampur, whereby the learned Magistrate has, allegedly in a mechanical manner,
directed the respondent SHO, P/S Udhampur to register FIR against the petitioner herein on an
application moved by respondent no.3, Susheel Sharma under Section 156(3) CrPC.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95992000/ 1
Arun Sharma vs State (Now Ut) Of J&K & Ors on 16 June, 2023
3. Petitioners Dr. Susheel Sharma and Komal Sharma has also filed CRMC No.134/2017 whereby
FIR No. 98/2017 registered on 05.03.2017 at P/S Udampur for the commission of offences
punishable under Sections 341, 323, 504, 506 RPC, and all consequential proceedings allegedly on
false and flimsy grounds and with malafide/malicious intention and with ulterior motive by
respondent no.5, O. P. Sharma to wreak vengeance upon the petitioners by abusing the process of
law under the garb of the aforementioned FIR, has been sought to be quashed.
4. Succinctly stated the facts which goad the petitioners to file these petitions are that in CRMC
No.134/2017, petitioner no.1 Dr. Susheel Sharma and daughter of respondent no.5 namely Kavita
Sharma are admittedly husband and wife; that due to development of unfavourable circumstances,
Kavita Sharma, left the matrimonial home. It is averred in the petition that Dr. Susheel Sharma,
after having suffered cruel behaviour at the hands of his wife, filed petition under Section 13 of the
Hindu Marriage Act, before the court of learned Additional District Judge (Matrimonial Cases),
Jammu; also in the meantime, in order to counter the above development, Kavita Sharma had also
filed an application under Section 12 of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence Act before
Learned Trial Court Udhampur. It is further alleged in the petition that Arun Sharma, brother of Dr.
Kavita Sharma threatened and abused the petitioner no.1 and his family during the pendency of the
complaints filed by the parties. It is averred in the petition that Sh. O. P. Sharma, father of Dr.
Kavita Sharma, in order to counter the allegations made by Dr. Susheel Sharma and to wreak
vengeance, has got registered a false and frivolous FIR No.98/2017 dated 05.03.2017 against him
and his sister. It is further alleged in the petition, that under these circumstances, he filed OWP
No.829/2017 before this court earlier, which was disposed of on 10.05.2018 directing that in case
petitioner therein approaches the Magistrate with a prayer for fair and complete investigation, the
Magistrate shall ensure that free and fair investigation is carried out and depending upon outcome
of investigation, suitable action in accordance with law shall be taken; and finally vide order dated
24.05.2018 passed by the court of learned Munsiff, Udhampur on an application filed by Dr. Susheel
Sharma, the learned Magistrate directed SHO, Police Station Udhampur to register FIR against
Arun Sharma.
5. This is how these two petitions came to be filed before this court arising out of matrimonial
discord between the husband Dr. Susheel Sharma and his wife Dr. Kavita Sharma.
6. During pendency of both these petitions, the parties to these petitions have entered into a
compromise and their statements were duly recorded by the learned Registrar Judicial wherein they
have stated that they have amicably resolved all the disputes and issues and in view of compromise,
it was prayed to allow both the petitions and quash the order/FIR registered in the matter.
7. Learned counsel for the parties jointly submitted that pursuant to order dated 31.05.2023 passed
by this court, the petitioners and the private respondents appeared and got their statements
recorded before the Registrar Judicial on 01.06.2023 and in their statements, they have stated that
they have amicably resolved their disputes and issues between them out of court and prayed that
this court may set aside the order dated 24.05.2018 passed by the court of learned Judicial
Magistrate (Munsiff), Udhampur, whereby the learned Magistrate has directed the SHO, Police
Station Udhampur to register FIR against petitioner Arun Sharma which culminated into FIR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95992000/ 2
Arun Sharma vs State (Now Ut) Of J&K & Ors on 16 June, 2023
No.439/2019.
8. Heard, considered the submissions and perused the record.
9. A perusal of the statements of the petitioner and private respondents recorded by the learned
Registrar Judicial on 01.06.2023, would show that the parties have entered into a compromise. In
the statement of Susheel Sharma (husband), it is stated that he has amicably resolved all disputes
and issues with Arun Sharma (brother of his wife Kavita Sharma) out of court and he has no
objection in case this court quashes the order dated 24.05.2018 passed by the court of learned
Magistrate, Udhampur, whereby SHO, Police Station, Udhampur was directed to register FIR
against Arun Sharma which culminated into FIR No. 439/2019 and prayed that all the pending
proceedings pursuant to aforesaid FIR, and consequential proceedings may be quashed.
10. Though the parties have not placed on record a copy of the compromise deed but it is pellucid
from their statements recorded, that their differences are now ironed out; that they have amicably
settled their disputes out of court and are no longer inclined to pursue these petitions and prayed
that FIR No.98/2017 dated 05.03.2017 registered at Police Station Udhampur U/Ss
341/323/504/206 RPC and all consequential proceedings be quashed. So far as the facts alleged in
petitions pertaining to the compromise arrived at between the parties are concerned, the same are
not disputed. However, according to the parties, some of the offences of which accused/petitioners
have been charged are non-compoundable.
11. In the backdrop of this position, the question arises as to whether this Court has power to quash
the proceedings, particularly when some of the offences alleged to have been committed are
non-compoundable in nature. The Supreme Court in the case of Gian Singh. v. State of Punjab &
another, reported in (2012) 10 SCC 303, while considering this aspect, has observed as under:
"57. The position that emerges from the above discussion can be summarised thus:
the power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to
a criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code.
Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases
power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised
where the offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
and circumstances of each case and no category can be prescribed. However, before
exercise of such power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences
like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not
private in nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise
between the victim and offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like
Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95992000/ 3
Arun Sharma vs State (Now Ut) Of J&K & Ors on 16 June, 2023
working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the purposes of
quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category
of cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote
and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put accused to great oppression
and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise with the victim.
In other words, the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or contrary
to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of law despite
settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end and if
the answer to the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding.."
12. Similarly, the Supreme Court in the case titled Narinder Singh & Ors. Vs. State of Punjab & anr,
reported in (2014) 6 SCC 466, has laid down guidelines for quashing of criminal proceedings. The
guidelines are reproduced as under:
"31. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay down the following
principles by which the High Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
the settlement between c/w the parties and exercising its power under Section 482 of
the Code while accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
accept the settlement with direction to continue with the criminal proceedings:
(I) Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be distinguished from the
power which lies in the Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has inherent power
to quash the criminal proceedings even in those cases which are not compoundable,
where the parties have settled the matter between themselves. However, this power is
to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
(II) When the parties have reached the settlement and on that basis petition for
quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases would be
to secure:
(i) ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95992000/ 4
Arun Sharma vs State (Now Ut) Of J&K & Ors on 16 June, 2023
While exercising the power the High Court is to form an opinion on either of the aforesaid two
objectives. (III) Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions which involve heinous and
serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
private in nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for offences alleged to have been
committed under special statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by
Public Servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender.
(IV) On the other, those criminal cases having
overwhelmingly and pre-dominantly civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship
or family disputes should be quashed when the parties have resolved their entire disputes among
themselves.
(V) While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine as to whether the possibility of
conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases would put the accused to great
oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal cases. (VI) Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the category of heinous and
serious offences and therefore is to be generally treated as crime against the society and not against
the individual alone. However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely because there is a
mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this provision. It would be
open to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there for the
sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if proved, would lead to proving
the charge under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the
nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the body,
nature of weapons used etc. Medical report in respect of injuries suffered by the victim can generally
be the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis, the High Court can examine as to
whether there is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances of conviction are remote and bleak.
In the former case it can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the criminal proceedings whereas
in the later case it would be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea compounding the
offence based on complete settlement between the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be
swayed by the fact that the settlement between the parties is going to result in harmony between
them which may improve their future relationship.
(VII) While deciding whether to exercise its power under Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of
settlement play a crucial role. Those cases where the settlement is arrived at immediately after the
alleged commission of offence and the matter is still under investigation, the High Court may be
liberal in accepting the settlement to quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is because of
the reason that at this stage the investigation is still on and even the charge sheet has not been filed.
Likewise, those cases where the charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is
still at infancy stage, the High Court can show benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but
after prima facie assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned above. On the other hand,
where the prosecution evidence is almost complete or after the conclusion of the evidence the matter
is at the stage of argument, normally the High Court should refrain from exercising its power under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95992000/ 5
Arun Sharma vs State (Now Ut) Of J&K & Ors on 16 June, 2023
Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial court would be in a position to decide the case
finally on merits and to come a conclusion as to whether the offence under Section 307 IPC is
committed or not. Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is already recorded by the trial
court and the matter is at the appellate stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the
parties would not be a ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has
already been convicted by the trial court. Here charge is proved under Section 307 IPC and
conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question of sparing a
convict found guilty of such a crime."
13. From a perusal of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court, it is clear that in the cases or
disputes which have predominantly civil flavour particularly those arising out of matrimonial
relationship or family disputes and where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature and
the parties have resolved their entire disputes among themselves, the High Court is well within its
jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceedings, if it is known that because of the compromise arrived
at between the parties, there is remote possibility of securing conviction of the accused. In fact, in
such cases, the Supreme Court has clearly observed that it would amount to extreme injustice if
despite settlement having been arrived at by the parties, the criminal proceedings are allowed to
continue.
14. Adverting to the facts of the instant case, it is clear that the parties to the dispute have entered
into a compromise, whereby complainant/victim has decided not to pursue prosecution in the
impugned FIR against the accused/petitioners. Therefore, once the rival parties have arrived at a
settlement, allowing the prosecutions to continue merely because some of the offences alleged
against the accused are non-compoundable in nature, would amount to great injustice to both the
parties and, in fact, it will amount to frittering away the fruits of compromise that has been arrived
at between the parties. The continuance of criminal proceedings against the petitioners, in these
circumstances, will be nothing but an abuse of process of law in view of the fact that the parties,
more particularly, the husband and wife have ironed out their differences and settled the disputes
amicably.
15. In view of the aforesaid discussion, both the petitions along with pending application(s) are
allowed with the following directions:
i) Impugned order dated 24.05.2018 passed by the court of learned Judicial
Magistrate (Munsiff) Udhampur, and the consequent proceedings arising out of it,
including FIR, if any, is hereby quashed; and
ii) Impugned FIR No. 98/2017 dated 05.03.2017 registered at P/S Udhampur for the
commission of offences punishable U/Ss 341/323/504/506 RPC with all
consequential proceedings is quashed.
16. The petitions, alongwith pending application(s) are, accordingly, disposed of.
17. Copy of this Judgment shall be placed on the file of connected case as well.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95992000/ 6
Arun Sharma vs State (Now Ut) Of J&K & Ors on 16 June, 2023
(M A Chowdhary) Judge Jammu 16.06.2023 Raj Kumar Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95992000/ 7
