Arvind @ Arvind Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 4 February, 2025
Arvind @ Arvind Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy.
... on 4 February, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:7397
Court No. - 15
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION U/S 438 CR.P.C. No. - 2577 of 2024
Applicant :- Arvind @ Arvind Kumar
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. Deptt. Home Lko.
Counsel for Applicant :- Jay Krishna Shukla,Avaneesh Sharma
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Shree Prakash Singh,J.
1. Rejoinder affidavit filed today by learned counsel for the applicant is taken on record.
2. Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned AGA for the State and perused the material
placed on record.
3. Instant application has been filed with the prayer to enlarge the accused-applicant on anticipatory
bail in Case Crime No. 0003 of 2023, under sections 419, 420, 467, 468 and 471 of IPC P.S.- S.I.T.
District - Lucknow.
4. From perusal of the order sheet, it appears that on 19.11.2024, the following order was passed:-
"Heard learned cousnel for the applicant, Sri K. Shahi, learned Additional Advocate
General, assisted by Sri Neerav Kumar Pandey, counsels for the State and perused
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91899357/ 1
Arvind @ Arvind Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 4 February, 2025
the record.
The instant bail application has been filed on behalf of the applicant with the prayer
to release him on anticipatory bail in Case Crime No. 0003 of 2023, under sections
419, 420, 467, 468 and 471 of IPC P.S.- S.I.T. District - Lucknow.
The contention of learned counsel for the applicant is that the applicant is innocent
and has falsely been implicated in the instant matter due to ulterior motive. He
submits that the matter pertains to the year 2000, wherein, a registered sale deed
which is said to be a fake one was got executed in favour of one Santram and
thereafter, under the impression that the land in question belongs to Santram, the
applicant got executed an agreement to sale in his favour though, once this fact came
into knowledge that the original registered sale deed which was executed in favour of
Santram, is a fake one, the applicant asked to Santram to return his money and the
same was withdrawn. He submits that it is not the case that after the sale deed was
executed in favour of Santram and an agreement was also got executed in between
the present applicant and Santram thus, there can be no criminal intent so as to
commit any offence as is narrated in the FIR. He also submits that the applicant
himself is a victim and he was never involved in committing any offence and there is
no previous criminal history of the applicant. Further added that there is no
complaint that applicant was not cooperating with the investigation proceedings. He
also submits that the applicant has specifically undertaken that he will always remain
present before the trial court on each and every date and he will never abscond from
the trial proceedings and there is apprehension that police will arrest him thus,
submission is that the applicant may be granted interim anticipatory bail.
Sri V.K. Shahi, learned Additional Advocate General appearing for the State has
vehemently opposed the submissions aforesaid and submits that matter pertains to
be investigated by S.I.T. and the applicant was found involved in committing offence
and as such, he is not entitled for any relief.
Considering the submissions of counsels for the parties and after perusal of material
placed on record, it transpires that the initially the alleged fake registered sale deed
was executed in between Santram and other persons and prima facie, it seems that
under impression that Santram is original tenure holder after the sale deed was
executed in his favour, an agreement was entered into between the present applicant
and Santram and subsequently, when this fact came into his knowledge that the
'bainama'/registered sale deed is fake, then the applicant had taken back the amount
of consideration of the agreement to sale and thereafter, he never tried to get
executed the sale deed in his favour. It is not disputed that the applicant has ever
avoided with the investigation proceedings and he has no previous criminal history
and he has undertaken that he will always cooperate with the trial proceedings.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91899357/ 2
Arvind @ Arvind Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 4 February, 2025
In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the case, till the next date of
listing, the present applicant- Arvind @ Arvind Kumar shall be released forthwith in
the aforesaid case crime (supra) on an interim anticipatory bail on his furnishing
personal bond and two solvent sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of
the court concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) that the applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer
as and when required;
(ii) that the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence;
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the
court;
(iv) that in case chargesheet is submitted the applicant shall not tamper with the
evidence during the trial;
(v) that the applicant shall not pressurize/ intimidate the prosecution witness;
(vi) that the applicant shall appear before the trial court on each date fixed unless
personal presence is exempted;
(vii) that in case of breach of any of the above conditions the court concerned shall
have the liberty to cancel the bail.
List/put up this matter in the week commencing 06.01.2025.
In the meantime, the State counsel shall file counter affidavit. "
5. From perusal of the order dated 19.11.2024, it transpires that State counsel has failed to
demonstrate that there is any adversarial fact which are pleaded in the bail application. This Court
finds that the applicant was enlarged on an interim anticipatory bail after thorough considering the
merits of the case. The learned counsel for the State has also failed to substantiate that the present
applicant is not cooperating with the investigation proceedings.
6. In view of the aforesaid, the present anticipatory bail application is hereby allowed while
extending anticipatory bail to the applicant, namely, Arvind @ Arvind Kumar till disposal of the trial
subject to the following conditions:-
(i) that the applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer
as and when required;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91899357/ 3
Arvind @ Arvind Kumar vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 4 February, 2025
(ii) that the applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence;
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the
court;
(iv) that the applicant shall appear before the trial court on each date fixed, unless
personal presence is exempted; and
(v) that the applicant shall not pressurize/intimidate the prosecution witness.
7. In case of default, it would be open for the Investigating Agency to move application for vacation
of this interim protection.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025 Mohd. Sharif
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91899357/ 4
