Aseem Ghai & Ors vs Ut Of J&K & Ors on 20 February, 2023
Aseem Ghai & Ors vs Ut Of J&K & Ors on 20 February, 2023
Sr. No. 16
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
CRM(M) No. 398/2020
Reserved on: 15.02.2023
Pronounced on:20.02.2023
Aseem Ghai & Ors. .....Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. Vivek Sharma, Advocate
v/s
UT of J&K & Ors. .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. Pawan Dev Singh DyAG for R-1to 3
Respondent No.4 present in person
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MA.CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
ORDER
1. Inherent jurisdiction of this Court under Section 482 CrPC is being invoked by the petitioners for
quashment of challan titled "State of J&Kvs Aseem Ghai & Ors", pending before the Court of learned
1st Additional Sessions Judge Jammu(hereinafter „Trial Court(cid:129) for brevity), arising out of FIR No.
249/2018 registered at Police Station Gandhi Nagar, Jammu against the petitioners for the
commission of offences punishable under Sections 307, 341, 506 RPC (since repealed penal law of
J&K) and Sections 3/25/30 of Arms Act.
2. The parties are stated to have entered into a compromise and settled their disputes and
differences, whereunder the challan is pending before the Court of learned 1st Additional Sessions
Judge, Jammu, arising out of impugned FIR registered against the petitioners and consequently, a
compromise deed is placed on record of the instant petition.
3. In view of the compromise so arrived at between the parties, the petitioners, as also the
respondent No. 4 in terms of order dated 13.09.2022 were directed to appear before the Registrar
Judicial for recording their statements in support of the deed of compromise. The statements of the
petitioners, as also the respondent No. 4 have been recorded on 23.09.2022 by the Registrar
Judicial, wherein the petitioners namely, Aseem Ghai, Zohaib Choudhary and Farhan Kohli have
stated that they have amicably resolved all the disputes and issues with complainant
Satyajeet-respondent No.4 and have reached the compromise which was recorded on 26.09.2022.
They further prayed that the final report/challan No.844/2019 titled "State vs Aseem Ghai & Ors"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21639756/ 1
Aseem Ghai & Ors vs Ut Of J&K & Ors on 20 February, 2023
pending before the Trial Court, arising out of FIR No. 249/2018 registered at Police Station Gandhi
Nagar Jammu, against the petitioners for the commission of offences punishable under Sections
307, 341, 506 RPC and Sections 3/25/30 of Arms Act as well as the impugned FIR, be quashed, in
view of the compromise reached between the petitioners and respondent No.4. Similarly,
respondent No.4/complainant namely Satyajeet has also stated that he has entered into a
compromise with all the petitioners/accused in the case and he does not wish to prosecute his case
against them any further and prayed that the final report/challan No.844/2019 titled "State vs
Aseem Ghai & Ors" pending before the Trial Court, arising out of FIR No. 249/2018 registered at
Police Station Gandhi Nagar Jammu, against the petitioners for the commission of offences
punishable under Sections 307, 341, 506 RPC and Sections 3/25/30 of Arms Act, as well as, the
impugned FIR.
4. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
5. A question, in view of the aforesaid factual position, has arisen as to whether this Court has power
to quash the proceedings, particularly when some of the offences alleged to have been committed by
the petitioners, are non-compoundable in nature.
6. Learned counsel for the petitioners has relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court titled
"Gian Singh Vs. State of Punjab and Another"
reported in 2012 (10) SCC 303", wherein while considering the aspect of whether the
High Court has power to quash the proceedings when some of the offences alleged to
have been committed which are non-compoundable in nature, the Apex Court has
observed as follows:
"57. The position that emerges from the above discussion can be summarised thus:
the power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to
a criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code.
Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz;
(i) to secure the ends of justice or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
In what cases power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised where
the offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts and circumstances of
each case and no category can be prescribed. However, before exercise of such power, the High
Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of
mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though
the victim or victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not private
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21639756/ 2
Aseem Ghai & Ors vs Ut Of J&K & Ors on 20 February, 2023
in nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise between the victim and
offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like Prevention of Corruption Act or the
offences committed by public servants while working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any
basis for quashing criminal proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having
overwhelmingly and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the purposes of
quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile, civil, partnership
or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony relating to dowry, etc. or the
family disputes where the wrong is basically private or personal in nature and the parties have
resolved their entire dispute. In this category of cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings
if in its view, because of the compromise between the offender and victim, the possibility of
conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put accused to great
oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise with the victim. In other words,
the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to
continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of the criminal proceeding would tantamount
to abuse of process of law despite settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer
and whether to secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end and if
the answer to the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its
jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding".
7. Petitioners/accused pleaded following facts:
a) That the respondent No.4 has lodged FIR No. 249/2018 dated 11.11.2018 against
the petitioners in Police Station Gandhi Nagar Jammu, for commission of offences
under Sections 307, 341, 506 RPC and Section 3/25/30 Arms Act and respondent
No.3 in pursuance of the aforementioned FIR, has filed impugned challan/final
report on 08.02.2019, which is pending disposal before the Court of learned 1st
Additional Sessions Judge Jammu and till date charges have not been framed against
the petitioners, as such, the proceedings are at their initial stage in the
aforementioned case.
b) That during the pendency of the abovementioned challan, the petitioners and the respondent
No.4 have arrived on a compromise and in pursuance of the same, a compromise deed dated
11.02.2020, has been executed between the petitioners and respondent No.4, in which the
respondent No.4 has agreed to withdraw the FIR lodged by him against the petitioners as the
dispute in impugned FIR/challan has been amicably resolved by the petitioners and respondent
No.4.
8. Official respondents in their counter have stated that the present petition is not maintainable as
the same involves factual disputes which can only be adjudicated by leading evidence in the case and
requires a full dressed trial by the trial Court. It is averred that on 11.11.2018, complainant namely
Satyajeet S/O Sh. Bhushan Kumar R/O H.No. 115/4 Vikas Nagar Janipur Jammu, lodged a written
report at Police Station Gandhi Nagar to the effect that on the same day, he along with his friend
Alok Singh Pathania and his brother Danish went to Gandhi Nagar in his car, in the meantime, one
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21639756/ 3
Aseem Ghai & Ors vs Ut Of J&K & Ors on 20 February, 2023
Aseem Ghai along with two other unknown persons abused the complainant, he stopped his car and
told them that why they are abusing, on this, said Aseem Ghai went into his house and came back
with a loaded pistol, who fired three shots without any cause and told them to leave the place by
abusing them, thereafter the complainant, his friend and brother left the place to save their lives.
During the course of investigation, I.O visited the spot, prepared the site plan, recorded the
statements of witnesses under Section 161 CrPC. During further investigation, Aseem Ghai was put
to sustained questioning who confessed his involvement along with two other person namely Zahib
Choudhary S/O Mohd Sadaf Choudhary R/O H.No. 248-A Apsara Road Gandhi Nagar and Farhan
Kohli @ Raju Choudhary S/O Mohd Rafiq R/O H.No. 553 Lane No.02 Rani Talab, Digiana in the
case and on this instance, weapon of offence i.e pistol was recovered, sent to FSL Jammu and expert
opinion obtained. All the accused persons were bailed out. After completion of all the legal
formalities, offences punishable under sections 307, 34 RPC, 30 Arms Act have been proved against
the accused persons and the challan of the case was produced in the competent court of law against
the petitioners herein, thus prayed for dismissal of the present petition.
9. In the backdrop of the afore-stated legal position and adverting to the facts of the instant case,
that petitioners had an altercation and heated exchange with complainant who is a legal practitioner
and his two companions on 11.11.2018 at 2.20 AM at Gandhi Nagar; that petitioners not only abused
them but petitioner No.1 also fired shots at them. A case on the complaint of respondent No.4 was
registered at Police Station Gandhi Nagar vide FIR No. 249/2018 and after investigation, it was
concluded that accused namely Aseem Ghai, Zahib Choudhary and Farhan Kohli, when came out of
accused Aseem Ghai and found complainant and his two companions outside the gate who were
taking photographs, over which altercation started and the complainant also alleged that they were
fired at by all the accused with the licensed pistol of accused Aseem Ghai, as such, charge sheet was
laid against all the accused/petitioners for the commission of offences punishable under sections
307, 341, 506 RPC and 3/25/30 Arms Act.
Besides placing on record, compromise deed between the complainant and all the accused,
petitioners have also placed on record a report issued by Rajinder Singh Jamwal Ballistic Expert of
J&K FSL that signs of discharge of seized pistol did not reveal a case of fresh fire. No intervention
has been pleaded as to why the pistol shots fired at the complainant or his companions had deflected
from hitting them. In such a situation offence u/s 307 RPC is not constituted. Other offences are
minor in nature. In these facts and circumstances of the case there is no harm in allowing the parties
to act upon the compromise that have reached to secure the ends of justice.
10. The ratio of judgment of Gian Singh's case (supra) makes the legal proposition abundantly clear
that the High Court has inherent powers under Section 482 CrPC to quash the proceedings to meet
the ends of justice if the parties have settled their disputes amicably by a compromise. Thus, in view
of the amicable settlement between the parties, the possibility of conviction of the petitioners herein
is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal case rather would put the petitioners to great
oppression and extreme injustice despite full and complete settlement and compromise having been
arrived at with the respondent No. 4 and further continuation of the proceedings arising out of the
FIR in question would be unfair and contrary to the interests of justice and in essence, would
amount to abuse of process of law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21639756/ 4
Aseem Ghai & Ors vs Ut Of J&K & Ors on 20 February, 2023
11. For the reasons discussed hereinabove, the instant petition is allowed and the challan titled
"State of J&K vs Aseem Ghai & Ors", pending before the Trial Court, arising out of FIR No.249/2018
registered at Police Station Gandhi Nagar Jammu, against the petitioners for the commission of
offences punishable under Sections 307, 341, 506 RPC and Sections 3/25/30 of Arms Act, along
with impugned FIR, in view of compromise arrived at between the parties, is hereby quashed. Copy
of this order be sent to the Court below as well as SHO Police Station Gandhi Nagar Jammu, for
compliance.
12. Petition, along with pending application(s), if any, is thus disposed of, accordingly.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge JAMMU 20.02.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes Whether the
order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21639756/ 5
