Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September,
2021
Author: Sanjay Dwivedi
Bench: Sanjay Dwivedi
1
Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
PRINCIPAL SEAT AT JABALPUR
Writ Petition No.4633/2021
(Kirat Lodhi Vs State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.3626/2021
(Trilok Singh Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.3690/2021
(Ganesh Prasad Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.3693/2021
(Mahendra Kumar Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.4000/2021
(Jahar Singh Lodhi Vs The State of M.P. & others)
Writ Petition No.4066/2021
(Ram Din Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.4068/2021
(Dhan Singh Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.4069/2021
(Aannu Singh Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.4121/2021
(Prem Singh Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 1
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
Writ Petition No.4142/2021
(Laxman Singh Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.4145/2021
(Sheela Rani Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
2
Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions
Writ Petition No.4614/2021
(Kalu Singh Lodhi Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.4618/2021
(Jitendra Singh Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.4622/2021
(Khub Lal Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.4630/2021
(Jagat Singh Lodhi Vs The State of M.P. & others)
Writ Petition No.4638/2021
(Radhika Prasad Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Writ Petition No.4642/2021
(Asha Ram Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
&
Writ Petition No.4646/2021
(Naval Singh Vs The State of Madhya Pradesh & others)
Date of Order 22.09.2021
Bench Constituted Single Bench
Order delivered by Hon'ble Mr. Justice Sanjay Dwivedi
Whether approved for No
reporting
Name of counsels for For Petitioner: Mr. Varun Thakur,
parties Advocate.
For Respondents/State: Mr. A.P.
Singh, Deputy Advocate General Law laid down ---
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 2
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
Significant Para Nos. ---
Reserved on : 31.08.2021 Delivered on :22.09.2021 Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected
petitions (O R D E R) (22.09.2021) Since pleadings are complete and learned counsel for the parties
are ready to argue the matter finally, therefore, looking to the issue involved in all these petitions,
they are being heard concomitantly.
2. As in this batch of petitions similar relief is claimed, therefore, for the sake of convenience, facts
of W.P. No.4633/2021 are being taken up. At the outset, it is necessary to reproduce the relief clause
as sought by the petitioner, which is as follows:-
"i) issue a Writ Order or Direction in the nature of Certiorari and quash the
impugned award Dt.05.03.2020 (ANNEXURE P-2) passed by Respondent No.3
alongwith all proceedings in respect of Khasra No.152/2, total area measuring 1.23
Hectare situated at village Summer District Damoh, MP and;
ii) grant any other relief/s, order/s, direction/s which this Hon'ble Court deems fit
and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case may kindly be granted to the
petitioner including the cost of the petition."
3. Facts of the case in short are that the land belonging to the petitioner situates at Village Summer,
District Damoh proposed to be acquired under the provisions of the Right to Fair Compensation and
Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 (in short the 'Act,
2013'). As per the petitioner, the proposed land is an agricultural land and is being cultivated by the
forefathers and then the petitioner. As per the petitioner, the said land is only source of his
livelihood. Respondent No.5/Water Resources Department wanted to utilize the land for public
purpose as they wanted to construct a canal under 'Sitanagar Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other
connected petitions Irrigation Scheme'. For the said purpose, not only the land of Village Summer
but also the land of Villages Sitanagar, Bijori, Naringhgarh, Chainpura, Barkheda Nagar, Rangir,
Madiya, Baroda Tahsil Pathria/Batigarh Distrcit Damoh was proposed to be acquired and in that
regard, a notification under Section 11 of the Act, 2013 was published in the State Gazette on
05.10.2018. The said notice was also published in the local newspapers viz Deshbandhu and New
Rashtra Bhraman on 28.12.2018 and 29.12.2018.
(3.1) As per the petitioner, the respondents deliberately did not publish the said notice as per the
requirement of Section 11 of the Act, 2013 in a renowned newspaper, but got the same published in
the newspapers which are not in circulation in the area where he resides.
(3.2) As per the petitioner, the remedy available under Section 15 of the Act, 2013 could not be
availed because no such information about such hearing in which the petitioner could raise
objection, was given to him.
(3.3) As per the petitioner, copy of notification issued under Section 19 of the Act, 2013 was also not
given to him. The notification under Section 19 was issued on 15.03.2019 in two newspapers i.e.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 3
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
Dainik Bhaskar and New Rashtra Bhraman on 13.06.2019, but those newspapers have no proper
circulation in the locality where the petitioner resides. Further, as per the petitioner, Section 21
notice though issued but not served upon him. In response to Section 19 notice, the land owners
raised their objections, but those were considered and rejected without any reason.
Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions (3.4) Thereafter, an award was passed on
05.03.2020 and without any intimation, all of a sudden, the respondents/Authority came to take
possession of the agricultural land.
(3.5) Hence, this petition has been filed pointing out such irregularities asking relief therein that the
acquisition proceeding initiated under the provisions of Act, 2013 in respect of the land belonging to
Khasra No.152/2 total area 1.23 hectare be quashed.
4. The respondents have file their return seeking dismissal of the petition on the ground that after
passing the award, writ petition is not maintainable. As per the respondents, the petitioner has
suppressed the material fact and by mentioning the incorrect facts in the petition, misled the Court
saying that mandatory requirements were not followed. On the contrary, the respondents have
come-up with a case and filed the documents in their support that all the mandatory requirements
as provided under the provisions of the Act, 2013 were fulfilled and then only the award was passed
on 05.03.2020. It is also stated in the return that out of 708 villagers, whose land has been acquired,
361 villagers have given their account number and the amount of compensation to the tune of
Rs.23,34,96,969/- has already been deposited in their account. It is also stated in the return that
further proposal of 55 villagers has been forwarded to the Collector for paying their amount of
compensation and that will be paid to them very soon. A document has also been filed by the
respondents showing that some of the land owners namely Radhika and Prem Singh (petitioners in
the connected petitions) although received their amount of compensation and, therefore, the
petition on their behalf is otherwise not maintainable. The Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other
connected petitions respondents have also stated in the return that the Authorities are making all
sincere endeavours for getting the account numbers of the villagers so that the amount of
compensation could be deposited in their account. As per the return, the construction of the dam is
completed by 60% to 70%. The acquisition of the land is purely for the public purpose and it is not
done with a view to deprive the petitioner from his livelihood, but it is done considering the interest
of public at large so as to make their land more irrigated which would definitely increase the
productivity of the land. The respondents have also denied the allegations made by the petitioner
that the acquisition of his land has been done without following the mandatory requirements and
violating the provisions of the Act, 2013, on the contrary, the respondents have filed the documents
showing that all the mandatory requirements have been followed while acquiring the petitioner's
land.
5. Reiterating the same facts as have been mentioned in the petition, the petitioner has filed the
rejoinder.
6. The respondents in their additional return have relied upon several judgments and also stated
that the petition is liable to be dismissed on the grounds of suppression of material fact and also of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 4
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
delay because the award was passed on 05.03.2020 in pursuance to the notice of acquisition issued
under Section 11 of the Act, 2013 in the month of September, 2018 and the petition filed in the year
2021, therefore, the same deserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
7. Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted a written submission relying upon the decision
of the Supreme Court reported in (2012) 1 SCC 792 [Raghbir Singh Sehrawat Vs. State of Haryana
and others] and submitted that in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the Writ
Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions case of Raghbir Singh Sehrawat (supra), the
acquisition proceeding can be challenged even after passing the award if the mandatory
requirements for acquiring the land under the provisions of the Act, 2013 were not followed. He has
also placed reliance upon a decision of the Supreme Court reported in (2013) 1 SCC 353 [Tukaram
Kana Joshi and others Vs. Maharashtra Industrial Development Corporation and others] in which,
following the decision of Raghbir Singh Sehrawat Singh (supra), the Supreme Court has observed
that against the award passed in an acquisition proceeding, writ petition is maintainable ignoring
the fact that the same suffers from delay and laches because for rendering substantial justice, there
should not be any impediment exercising judicial discretion. According to learned counsel for the
petitioner, while acquiring the land, the Authority not fulfilled the mandatory requirements of
Sections 11 and 15 of the Act, 2013. He has also submitted that the land is means for livelihood of the
petitioner and the same cannot be snatched away from him in the manner it has been snatched. He
has further submitted that with the conduct of the respondents, it can be easily seen that they acted
contrary to the requirement of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
8. Per contra, learned Deputy Advocate General has opposed the submissions made by learned
counsel for the petitioner and submitted that the petition suffers from delay and laches as after
passing the award, writ petition is not maintainable. He has further submitted that the petitioner
suppressed the material facts and by mentioning incorrect facts in the petition, misled the Court
saying that mandatory requirements were not followed. In support of his contention, he has filed the
documents showing that all the mandatory requirements as provided under the provisions of the
Act, 2013 Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions were fulfilled and then only the
award was passed on 05.03.2020. As per the learned Deputy Advocate General, the construction of
the dam is completed by 60% to 70%. He has submitted that the acquisition of the land is purely for
the public purpose and it is not done with a view to deprive the petitioner from his livelihood, but it
is done considering the interest of public at large so as to make their land more irrigated which
would definitely increase the productivity of the land. In support of his contention, learned Deputy
Advocate General has filed several judgments passed by the Supreme Court and claimed that the
petition deserves to be dismissed on the ground of delay and laches.
9. Considering the rival submissions made by learned counsel for the parties and perusal of the
record available, this Court has to see whether the acquisition proceeding initiated by the
respondents under the provisions of the Act, 2013 suffers from material irregularity and illegality by
not following the mandatory requirements and whether such proceeding can be said to be illegal
depriving the petitioner from his right and as such, the same can be quashed or not?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 5
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
10. This is not the first occasion when the land of the farmers is being acquired. The provisions of
the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (in short the 'Act, 1894') empower the Government to acquire the
land for public purpose and after enforcement of the Act, 2013, the Act, 1894 has been repealed. The
acquisition proceeding cannot be challenged by the petitioner or by the land owners on the ground
that the acquired land was the only source of his/her livelihood. However, the provisions of the Act,
2013 provide that if the land is acquired for public purpose then an adequate amount of
compensation in lieu thereof would be paid to the land owners. The State Government also
formulates the policy whenever it Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions is
required for rehabilitation of the land owners and to provide them employment etc. so as to make
them comfortable for their livelihood. Since, the grievance of the petitioner that by depriving him
from his livelihood, his land has been acquired, therefore, the acquisition proceeding should be
quashed, cannot be considered to be a ground to challenge the acquisition proceeding. It is not in
dispute that in lieu of acquisition of land, an award has been passed under the provisions of the Act,
2013 on 05.03.2020. It is also not in dispute that several farmers have already received the amount
of compensation, but some of the farmers including the petitioner are agitating their grievance not
allowing the respondents/Authority to carry out the work for which the land has been acquired and
undoubtedly, the land has been acquired for public purpose as on the acquired land, a dam with
several canals has to be constructed so as to provide adequate quantity of water for irrigation and to
make the land more fertile so as to increase the production of agriculture produce.
11. In the case of Raghbir Singh Sehrawat (supra), massive acquisition of land was done by the State
and its instrumentalities that too without complying with the mandate of the statute. In the said
case, the Supreme Court has also observed that the law is well settled when there is inordinate delay
in filing the writ petition and when all steps taken in the acquisition proceedings have become final,
the Court should be loath to quash the notifications, but as per the Supreme Court, the acquisition
proceeding can be challenged even after passing the award on the grounds of violation of mandatory
provisions and also the mode in which the possession of the land has been taken. In Raghbir Singh
Sehrawat (supra), the acquisition proceeding was assailed mainly on the grounds that the mode
used by the Authority for taking possession of the land was Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other
connected petitions contrary to the provisions of the Act, 1894 and also that there was clear
violation of the provisions of Section 5-A(2) of the Act, 1894 as no opportunity was provided to the
land owners for raising their objection or providing them hearing to meet out their grievance and as
such, the Supreme Court has observed that it was a clear violation of the principle of natural justice
and in such an event, when the State has sufficient land to fulfill the public purpose or to provide the
same to any private organisation then the State has to use or provide its own land first and even
thereafter, if the need does not fulfill then only the private land needs to be acquired. Merely
because the Government wants development of infrastructure or industrialization, acquisition of
private land despite having sufficient Government land, cannot be made. In Raghbir Singh Sehrawat
(supra), the State Government issued a notification for acquiring the land for development of
industrial section in Sonepat and thereafter, the land owners opposing the said acquisition
proceeding, submitted their objection under Section 5-A(1) of the Act, 1894 saying that the land is
for their livelihood as the same is being used by them for their agriculture purpose. The acquisition
proceeding was also challenged on the ground that the notification issued under Section 4(1) was
not as per the requirement of statute, no opportunity as per Section 5-A(2) was given, land of large
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 6
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
number of persons had been excluded from the acquisition at the stage of Section 6 declaration and
as such, it was clear cut discrimination on the part of the Authority while acquiring the land, no
notice as per the provision of Section 9(3) and also no declaration was published as per the
requirement of Section 6(3). After finding several irregularities, the Supreme Court has allowed the
appeal of the land owners.
12. On perusal of return filed along with documents, it Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other
connected petitions is clear that the land was acquired for the purpose of constructing the dam and
canals so as to provide water for irrigation to the land where there is no source of irrigation. The
acquisition proceeding initiated under the provisions of the Act, 2013 and in that regard a
notification under Section 11 of the Act, 2013 was issued in the State Gazette on 05.10.2018 showing
that the land proposed to be acquired including the land of Village Sumeer, the village where land of
the petitioner situates. Section 11 of the Act, 2013 reads as under:-
"11. Publication of preliminary notification and power of officers thereupon.-(1)
Whenever, it appears to the appropriate Government that land in any area is required
or likely to be required for any public purpose, a notification (hereinafter referred to
as preliminary notification) to that effect along with details of the land to be acquired
in rural and urban areas shall be published in the following manner, namely:--
(a) in the Official Gazette;
(b) in two daily newspapers circulating in the locality of such area of which one shall
be in the regional language;
(c) in the local language in the Panchayat, Municipality or Municipal Corporation, as
the case may be and in the offices of the District Collector, the Sub-divisional
Magistrate and the Tehsil;
(d) uploaded on the website of the appropriate Government;
(e) in the affected areas, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(2) Immediately after issuance of the notification under sub-section (1), the
concerned Gram Sabha or Sabhas at the village level, municipalities in case of
municipal areas and the Autonomous Councils in case of the areas referred to in the
Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, shall be informed of the contents of the
notification issued under the said sub-section in all cases of land acquisition at a
meeting called especially for this purpose.
(3) The notification issued under sub-section (1) shall also contain a statement on the
nature of the public purpose involved, reasons necessitating Writ Petition
No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions the displacement of affected persons,
summary of the Social Impact Assessment Report and particulars of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 7
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
Administrator appointed for the purposes of rehabilitation and resettlement under
section 43.
(4) No person shall make any transaction or cause any transaction of land specified in
the preliminary notification or create any encumbrances on such land from the date
of publication of such notification till such time as the proceedings under this
Chapter are completed:
Provided that the Collector may, on the application made by the owner of the land so
notified, exempt in special circumstances to be recorded in writing, such owner from
the operation of this subsection:
Provided further that any loss or injury suffered by any person due to his wilful
violation of this provision shall not be made up by the Collector.
(5) After issuance of notice under sub-section (1), the Collector shall, before the issue
of a declaration under section 19, undertake and complete the exercise of updating of
land records as prescribed within a period of two months."
Perusal of the State Gazette dated 05.10.2018, it is clear that the notice dated 29.09.2018 under
Section 11 of the Act, 2013 was published in the regional language in two daily newspapers viz
'Deshbandhu and New Rashtra Bhraman' on 28.12.2018 and 29.12.2018 and the same have been
filed by the respondents in their reply showing that these two newspapers are in the circulation in
the area where the land owners of the proposed land reside.
13. Although, as per learned counsel for the petitioner since the aforesaid newspapers are not very
renowned, therefore, the publication for acquisition of the land should not be considered in
consonance with the requirement of Section 11 of the Act, 2013. However, I am not satisfied with the
submission made by learned counsel for the petitioner because it was not a requirement of the
statute that the news should be published in a renowned newspaper. It is also difficult to Writ
Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions determine as in the area where the land situates
which newspaper is in circulation. Sometimes, a newspaper which is very popular in the urban
locality does not have wide circulation in the rural locality, on the contrary, the newspaper which
does not have proper circulation in urban locality, has very wide circulation in the rural locality. As
per the respondents, the aforesaid two newspapers are in the wide circulation where the land
owners reside, therefore, the State has decided to get the notification published in these newspapers.
Likewise, Annexure-R/2 is a notification issued under Section 19 of the Act, 2013 which got
published in the State Gazette dated 15.03.2019 and also in two daily newspapers i.e. 'New Rashtra
Bhraman and Dainik Bhaskar' and the same fulfilled the requirement of Section 19. Thereafter,
notice dated 28.06.2019 (Annexure-R/3) issued under Section 21 of the Act, 2013 and got published
to the individuals including the petitioner. As per Section 21, it was a notice to an individual with
certain requirements and for the purpose of convenience, Section 21 is being reproduced
hereinbelow:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 8
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
"21. Notice to persons interested.-(1) The Collector shall publish the public notice on
his website and cause public notice to be given at convenient places on or near the
land to be taken, stating that the Government intends to take possession of the land,
and that claims to compensations and rehabilitation and resettlement for all interests
in such land may be made to him.
(2) The public notice referred to in sub-section (1) shall state the particulars of the
land so needed, and require all persons interested in the land to appear personally or
by agent or advocate before the Collector at a time and place mentioned in the public
notice not being less than thirty days and not more than six months after the date of
publication of the notice, and to state the nature of their respective interests in the
land and the amount and particulars of their claims to compensation for such
interests, their claims to rehabilitation and resettlement along Writ Petition
No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions with their objections, if any, to the
measurements made under section 20.
(3) The Collector may in any case require such statement referred to in sub-section
(2) to be made in writing and signed by the party or his agent.
(4) The Collector shall also serve notice to the same effect on the occupier, if any, of
such land and on all such persons known or believed to be interested therein, be
entitled to act for persons so interested, as reside or have agents authorised to receive
service on their behalf, within the revenue district in which the land is situated.
(5) In case any person so interested resides elsewhere, and has no such agent, the
Collector shall ensure that the notice shall be sent to him by post in letter addressed
to him at his last known residence, address of place or business and also publish the
same in at least two national daily newspapers and also on his website."
The respondents have filed the order-sheets to substantiate that even the land owners of the Village
Sumeer were also appeared before the Authority, participated in the proceeding and in fact given
consent for acquisition of land. The letters of the officers of the respondent/Department have also
been placed on record to indicate that the land owners were apprised about the tentative amount of
compensation which is to be awarded in lieu of acquisition of the land and the villagers had also
noted down the said fact and thereafter, the award was passed on 05.03.2020 (Annexure-P/2). It
has also been stated by the respondents that maximum villagers whose land acquired, have received
the amount of compensation. However, the petitioner is not satisfied, therefore, he has raised
objection in accepting the amount of compensation. Although, as per the stand taken by the
respondents, the petitioner had also participated in the proceeding initiated by the respondents
whereby he had been given an opportunity of public hearing.
14. In view of the stand taken by the respondents and the documents filed thereof, it is clear that the
instant case is Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions not in which material
illegality has been committed by the Authority while acquiring the land. It is also not a case in which
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 9
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
the petitioner has taken a stand that the Government itself has sufficient land for constructing the
dam or canals and the Government should first use its own land and then the land of the private
person should be acquired. In fact, the dam is constructed after searching the land where maximum
water which comes from the natural sources can be stored and thereafter, the same can be
distributed through canals in maximum areas with minimum efforts so as to make the maximum
land irrigated. It is the work of skilled team and technical experts which are the master in their field
and after their decision, the land is identified where the dam can be constructed. It is not a case
where the land has been acquired for the purpose of industrialization or for any private
organisation, but the land has been acquired by the State for their own so as to make the agricultural
land more fertile. It is a settled principle of law that in the matter of public policy, the preference is
to be given to the interest of public at large excluding the interest of an individual.
15. The Supreme Court in the case reported in (1998) 4 SCC 387 [Larsen & Toubro Ltd. Vs. State of
Gujarat and others] in paragraph 21 has observed as under:-
"21. This Court has repeatedly held that writ petition challenging the notifications
issued under Sections 4 and 6 of the Act is liable to be dismissed on the ground of
delay and laches if challenge is not made within a reasonable time. This Court has
said that the petitioner cannot sit on the fence and allow the State to complete the
acquisition proceedings on the basis that notification under Section 4 and the
declaration under Section 6 were valid and then to attack the notifications on the
grounds which were available to him at the time when these were published as
otherwise it would be putting a premium on dilatory tactics. Writ petition (SCA No.
5149 of 1989) is thus barred by laches as well."
Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions It is clear form the above enunciation of
law that in the present case, notifications under Sections 11 and 19 were issued following the
mandatory requirements, but even though the said notifications and the acquisition proceeding
were not assailed by the petitioner in time and he waited till passing the award and after passing the
same, he challenged the award by filing the writ petition. In such a case, the delay matters and the
writ petition, in my opinion, suffers from delay and laches. It is also not a case in which the
acquisition took place behind the back of the petitioner or he was not aware of the acquisition
proceeding because the order-sheets filed by the respondents clearly reveal that the farmers were
participating in the proceeding and not only that number of farmers have already received the
amount of compensation in pursuance to the award passed in their favour, but only some of the
farmers like the petitioner are still agitating the grievance.
16. The Supreme Court further in the case reported in (2000) 2 SCC 48 [Municipal Council,
Ahmednagar and another Vs. Shah Hyder Beig and others] in paragraph 14 has held as under:-
"14. The High Court has thus misplaced the factual details and misread the same. It is
now a well-settled principle of law and we need not dilate on this score to the effect
that while no period of limitation is fixed but in the normal course of events, the
period the party is required for filing a civil proceeding ought to be the guiding factor.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 10
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
While it is true that this extraordinary jurisdiction is available to mitigate the
sufferings of the people in general but it is not out of place to mention that this
extraordinary jurisdiction has been conferred on to the law courts under Article 226
of the Constitution on a very sound equitable principle. Hence, the equitable
doctrine, namely, "delay defeats equity" has its fullest application in the matter of
grant of relief under Article 226 of the Constitution. The discretionary relief can be
had provided one has not by his act or conduct given a go-by to his rights. Equity
favours a vigilant rather than an indolent litigant and this being Writ Petition
No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions the basic tenet of law, the question of
grant of an order as has been passed in the matter as regards restoration of
possession upon cancellation of the notification does not and cannot arise. The High
Court as a matter of fact lost sight of the fact that since the year 1952, the land was
specifically reserved for public purposes of a school playground and roads in the
development plan and by reason therefor, the notification to acquire the land has,
therefore, been issued under the provisions of the Act as stated above."
(emphasis supplied) The Supreme Court in the aforesaid case in paragraph 17 has also observed that
in a matter of acquisition, if award is passed, writ petition is not maintainable. Paragraph 17 reads
thus:-
"17. In any event, after the award is passed no writ petition can be filed challenging
the acquisition notice or against any proceeding thereunder. This has been the
consistent view taken by this Court and in one of the recent cases (C. Padma v. Dy.
Secy. to the Govt. of T.N. [(1997) 2 SCC 627]) this Court observed as below: (SCC p.
628, para 4) "4. The admitted position is that pursuant to the notification published
under Section 4(1) of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 (for short 'the Act') in GOR No.
1392 Industries dated 17-10-1962, total extent of 6 acres 41 cents of land in
Madhavaram Village, Saidapet Taluk, Chengalpattu District in Tamil Nadu was
acquired under Chapter VII of the Act for the manufacture of Synthetic Rasina by Tvl.
Reichold Chemicals India Ltd., Madras. The acquisition proceedings had become
final and possession of the land was taken on 30-4-1964. Pursuant to the agreement
executed by the company, it was handed over to Tvl. Simpson and General Finance
Co. which is a subsidiary of Reichold Chemicals India Ltd. It would appear that at a
request made by the said company, 66 cents of land out of one acre 37 cents in
respect of which the appellants originally had ownership, was transferred in GOMs
No. 816 Industries dated 24-3-1971 in favour of another subsidiary company. Shri
Rama Vilas Service Ltd., the 5th respondent which is also another subsidiary of the
Company had requested for two acres 75 cents Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other
connected petitions of land; the same came to be assigned on leasehold basis by the
Government after resumption in terms of the agreement in GOMs No. 439 Industries
dated 10-5-1985. In GOMs No. 546 Industries dated 30-3-1986, the same came to be
approved of. Then the appellants challenged the original GOMs No. 1392 Industries
dated 17-10-1962 contending that since the original purpose for which the land was
acquired had ceased to be in operation, the appellants are entitled to restitution of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 11
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
the possession taken from them. The learned Single Judge and the Division Bench
have held that the acquired land having already vested in the State, after receipt of
the compensation by the predecessor-in-title of the appellants, they have no right to
challenge the notification. Thus the writ petition and the writ appeal came to be
dismissed."
(emphasis supplied)
17. The Supreme Court in the case reported in (2011) 5 SCC 394 [Banda Development Authority,
Banda Vs. Moti Lal Agarwal and others] in paragraphs 15 to 27 has observed as under:-
"15. The above extracted portions of the plaint unmistakably show that Respondent 1
had no complaint against the acquisition of land or taking of possession by the State
Government and delivery thereof to BDA and the only prayer made by him was that
the defendants be directed to undertake fresh acquisition proceedings after
sub-dividing Plot No. 795 so that he may get his share of compensation. He filed writ
petition questioning the acquisition proceedings after almost 9 years of publication of
the declaration issued under Section 6(1) and about six years of the pronouncement
of award by the Special Land Acquisition Officer. During this interregnum, BDA took
possession of the acquired land after depositing 80% of the compensation in terms of
Section 17(3-A), prepared the layout, developed the acquired land, carved out plots,
constructed flats for economically weaker sections of the society, invited applications
and allotted plots and flats to the eligible persons belonging to economically weaker
sections as also LIG, MIG and HIG categories. Unfortunately, the High Court ignored
all this and allowed the writ Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions
petition on the specious ground that the acquired land did not vest in the State
Government because physical possession of the land belonging to Respondent 1 was
not taken till 31-7-2002 and the award was not passed within two years as per the
mandate of Section 11-A.
16. In our view, even if the objection of delay and laches had not been raised in the
affidavits filed on behalf of BDA and the State Government, the High Court was
duty-bound to take cognizance of the long time gap of nine years between the issue of
declaration under Section 6(1) and filing of the writ petition, and declined relief to
Respondent 1 on the ground that he was guilty of laches because the acquired land
had been utilised for implementing the residential scheme and third- party rights had
been created. The unexplained delay of about six years between the passing of award
and filing of the writ petition was also sufficient for refusing to entertain the prayer
made in the writ petition.
17. It is true that no limitation has been prescribed for filing a petition under Article
226 of the Constitution but one of the several rules of self-imposed restraint evolved
by the superior courts is that the High Court will not entertain petitions filed after
long lapse of time because that may adversely affect the settled/crystallised rights of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 12
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
the parties. If the writ petition is filed beyond the period of limitation prescribed for
filing a civil suit for similar cause, the High Court will treat the delay unreasonable
and decline to entertain the grievance of the petitioner on merits.
18. In State of M.P. v. Bhailal Bhai [AIR 1964 SC 1006] the Constitution Bench
considered the effect of delay in filing writ petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution and held: (AIR pp. 1011-12, paras 17 & 21) "17. ... It has been made clear
more than once that the power to give relief under Article 226 is a discretionary
power. This is specially true in the case of power to issue writs in the nature of
mandamus. Among the several matters which the High Courts rightly take into
consideration in the exercise of that discretion is the delay made by the aggrieved
party in seeking this special remedy and what excuse there is for it.
Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions ... It is not easy nor is it
desirable to lay down any rule for universal application. It may however be stated as a
general rule that if there has been unreasonable delay the court ought not ordinarily
to lend its aid to a party by this extraordinary remedy of mandamus.
* * *
21. ... The learned counsel is right in his submission that the provisions of the
Limitation Act do not as such apply to the granting of relief under Article 226. It
appears to us however that the maximum period fixed by the legislature as the time
within which the relief by a suit in a civil court must be brought may ordinarily be
taken to be a reasonable standard by which delay in seeking remedy under Article
226 can be measured. This Court may consider the delay unreasonable even if it is
less than the period of limitation prescribed for a civil action for the remedy but
where the delay is more than this period, it will almost always be proper for the court
to hold that it is unreasonable."
19. In matters involving challenge to the acquisition of land for public purpose, this Court has
consistently held that delay in filing the writ petition should be viewed seriously and relief denied to
the petitioner if he fails to offer plausible explanation for the delay. The Court has also held that the
delay of even few years would be fatal to the cause of the petitioner, if the acquired land has been
partly or wholly utilised for the public purpose.
20. In Ajodhya Bhagat v. State of Bihar [(1974) 2 SCC 501] this Court approved dismissal by the
High Court of the writ petition filed by the appellant for quashing the acquisition of his land and
observed: (SCC p. 506, para 23) "23. The High Court held that the appellants were guilty of delay
and laches. The High Court relied on two important facts. First, that there was delivery of
possession. The appellants alleged that it was a paper transaction.
The High Court rightly rejected that contention. Secondly, the High Court said that the Trust
invested several lakhs of rupees for the construction of roads Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 13
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
connected petitions and material for development purposes.
The appellants were in full knowledge of the same. The appellants did not take any steps. The High
Court rightly said that to allow this type of challenge to an acquisition of large block of land
piecemeal by the owners of some of the plots in succession would not be proper.
If this type of challenge is encouraged the various owners of small plots will come up with writ
petitions and hold up the acquisition proceedings for more than a generation. The High Court
rightly exercised discretion against the appellants. We do not see any reason to take a contrary view
to the discretion exercised by the High Court."
(emphasis supplied)
21. In State of Rajasthan v. D.R. Laxmi [(1996) 6 SCC 445] this Court referred to Administrative Law
by H.W.R. Wade (7th Edn.) at pp. 342-43 and observed: (SCC p. 453, para 10) "10. The order or
action, if ultra vires the power, becomes void and it does not confer any right. But the action need
not necessarily be set at naught in all events. Though the order may be void, if the party does not
approach the Court within reasonable time, which is always a question of fact and have the order
invalidated or acquiesced or waived, the discretion of the Court has to be exercised in a reasonable
manner. When the discretion has been conferred on the Court, the Court may in appropriate case
decline to grant the relief, even if it holds that the order was void. The net result is that
extraordinary jurisdiction of the Court may not be exercised in such circumstances."
22. In Girdharan Prasad Missir v. State of Bihar [(1980) 2 SCC 83], the delay of 17 months was
considered as a good ground for declining relief to the petitioner. In Municipal Corpn. of Greater
Bombay v. Industrial Development Investment Co. (P) Ltd. [(1996) 11 SCC 501] this Court held:
(SCC p. 452, para 9) "9. ... It is thus, well-settled law that when there is inordinate delay in filing the
writ petition and when all steps taken in the acquisition proceedings have Writ Petition
No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions become final, the Court should be loathe to quash the
notifications. The High Court has, no doubt, discretionary powers under Article 226 of the
Constitution to quash the notification under Section 4(1) and declaration under Section 6. But it
should be exercised taking all relevant factors into pragmatic consideration. When the award was
passed and possession was taken, the Court should not have exercised its power to quash the award
which is a material factor to be taken into consideration before exercising the power under Article
226. The fact that no third-party rights were created in the case, is hardly a ground for interference.
The Division Bench of the High Court was not right in interfering with the discretion exercised by
the learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition on the ground of laches."
23. In Urban Improvement Trust v. Bheru Lal [(2002) 7 SCC 712] this Court reversed the order of
the Rajasthan High Court and held that the writ petition filed for quashing of acquisition of land for
a residential scheme framed by the appellant Urban Improvement Trust was liable to be dismissed
on the ground that the same was filed after two years.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 14
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
24. In Ganpatibai v. State of M.P. [(2006) 7 SCC 508], the delay of 5 years was considered
unreasonable and the order passed by the High Court refusing to entertain the writ petition was
confirmed. In that case also the petitioner had initially filed a suit challenging the acquisition of
land. The suit was dismissed in 2001. Thereafter, the writ petition was filed. This Court referred to
an earlier judgment in State of Bihar v. Dhirendra Kumar [(1995) 4 SCC 229] and observed:
(Ganpatibai case [(2006) 7 SCC 508] , SCC p. 510, para 9) "9. In State of Bihar v.
Dhirendra Kumar [(1995) 4 SCC 229] this Court had observed that the civil suit was
not maintainable and the remedy to question notification under Section 4 and the
declaration under Section 6 of the Act was by filing a writ petition.
Even thereafter the appellant, as noted above, pursued the suit in the civil court. The stand that five
years after the filing of the suit, the decision was Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected
petitions rendered does not in any way help the appellant. Even after the decision of this Court, the
appellant continued to prosecute the suit till 2001, when the decision of this Court in 1995 had held
that suit was not maintainable."
25. In Sawaran Lata v. State of Haryana [(2010) 4 SCC 532 : (2010) 2 SCC (Civ) 220] the dismissal
of writ petition filed after seven years of the publication of declaration and five years of the award
passed by the Collector was upheld by the Court and it was observed: (SCC p. 535, para 11) "11. In
the instant case, it is not the case of the petitioners that they had not been aware of the acquisition
proceedings as the only ground taken in the writ petition has been that substance of the notification
under Section 4 and declaration under Section 6 of the 1894 Act had been published in the
newspapers having no wide circulation.
Even if the submission made by the petitioners is accepted, it cannot be presumed that they could
not be aware of the acquisition proceedings for the reason that a very huge chunk of land belonging
to a large number of tenure-
holders had been notified for acquisition. Therefore, it should have been the talk of the town. Thus,
it cannot be presumed that the petitioners could not have knowledge of the acquisition
proceedings."
26. In the instant case, the acquired land was utilised for implementing Tulsi Nagar Residential
Scheme inasmuch as after carrying out necessary development i.e. construction of roads, laying
electricity, water and sewer lines, etc. BDA carved out plots, constructed flats for economically
weaker sections and lower income group, invited applications for allotment of the plots and flats
from general as well as reserved categories and allotted the same to eligible persons. In the process,
BDA not only incurred huge expenditure but also created third-party rights. In this scenario, the
delay of nine years from the date of publication of the declaration issued under Section 6(1) and
almost six years from the date of passing of award should have been treated by the High Court as
more than sufficient for denying equitable relief to Respondent 1.
Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 15
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
27. The two judgments relied upon by the learned counsel for Respondent 1 are not helpful to the
cause of his client. In Vyalikaval Housebuilding Coop. Society v. V. Chandrappa [(2007) 9 SCC 304]
this Court held that where the acquisition was found to be vitiated by fraud and mala fide, the delay
in filing the writ petition cannot be made a ground for denying relief to the affected person. In Babu
Ram v. State of Haryana [(2009) 10 SCC 115 : (2009) 4 SCC (Civ) 69] this Court held that the
appellant cannot be denied relief merely because there was some delay in filing the writ petition.
The facts of that case were that 34 kanals 2 marlas of land situated at Jind (Haryana) was acquired
by the State Government under Section 4 read with Sections 17(2)(c) and 17(4) for construction of
sewage treatment plant. Notification under Section 4 was issued on 23- 11-2005 and declaration
under Section 6 was issued on 2-1-2006. Mitaso Educational Society, Narwana, filed a suit for
injuncting the State from constructing the sewage treatment plant in front of the school. On
15-2-2006, the trial court passed an order of injunction. In another suit filed by one Jagroop similar
order was passed by the trial court. After some time, the appellant filed writ petition under Article
226 of the Constitution. Before this Court it was argued that relief should be denied to the appellant
because there was delay in filing the writ petition. Rejecting this argument, the Court observed:
(Babu Ram case [(2009) 10 SCC 115 : (2009) 4 SCC (Civ) 69] , SCC p. 122, para 32)
"32. Since Section 5-A of the LA Act had been dispensed with, the stage under Section
9 was arrived at within six months from the date of the notice issued under Sections 4
and 17(2)(c) of the LA Act. While such notice was issued on 23-11-2005, the award
under Section 11 was made on 23-5-2006.
During this period, the appellants filed a suit and thereafter, withdrew the same and filed a writ
petition in an attempt to protect their constitutional right to the property. It cannot, therefore, be
said that there was either any negligence or lapse or delay on the part of the appellants.""
18. From the view expressed by the Supreme Court in the aforesaid cases, it is clear
that when there is an Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other connected petitions
unexplanatory delay, the writ petition cannot be entertained. Here in this case, the
petitioner has challenged the acquisition proceeding after lapse of almost three years
from initiation of the said proceeding that too after passing the award by the Land
Acquisition Officer on a very vague submission that the notification for initiation of
the land acquisition proceeding was published in the newspapers which are not very
renowned in the locality, but that stands does not survive for the reason that the
newspapers like Deshbandhu, New Rashtra Bhraman and Dainik Bhaskar cannot be
said to be the newspapers not in circulation or not known to the public. Even
thereafter, the order-sheets filed by the respondents indicate the signatures of the
farmers and even of the petitioner who took part in the proceeding, received the
awarded amount, but not challenged the action of the Authority. As per the facts and
stand taken by the respondents/State, the purpose for acquiring the land is nothing
but a proposed scheme over Sunar river with an estimated cost of Rs.518.09 Crores
for which the land of the Government area measuring 514.80 hectares is used and the
land of the individuals to the extent of 286.189 hectares has been acquired and out of
the said scheme, the expected area of the land to be irrigated and benefited would be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 16
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
16200 hectares by Micro Irrigation Pressurized Pipe System. Thus, it is clear that it is
not a case in which the Government is acquiring the land of the individuals and the
land of Government despite availability is not being used whereas maximum area of
the Government land is being utilized. It is also clear from the aforesaid that only on
the Government land, the scheme as has been proposed cannot be implemented,
therefore, the land of the individuals is also proposed to be acquired. Hence, the case
of Raghbir Singh Sehrawat (supra) on which learned counsel for the petitioner has
placed reliance is not applicable in the Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other
connected petitions present case.
19. The Supreme Court in the case reported in (1997) 1 SCC 134 [Ramniklal N. Bhutta
and another Vs. State of Maharashtra and others] while cautioning the High Courts
in interfering with the land acquisition proceedings in paragraph-10 of its judgment
has observed as under:-
"10......Our country is now launched upon an ambitious programme of all-round
economic advancement to make our economy competitive in the world market. We
are anxious to attract foreign direct investment to the maximum extent. We propose
to compete with China economically. We wish to attain the pace of progress achieved
by some of the Asian countries, referred to as "Asian tigers", e.g., South Korea,
Taiwan and Singapore. It is, however, recognised on all hands that the infrastructure
necessary for sustaining such a pace of progress is woefully lacking in our country.
The means of transportation, power and communications are in dire need of
substantial improvement, expansion and modernisation. These things very often call
for acquisition of land and that too without any delay. It is, however, natural that in
most of these cases, the persons affected challenge the acquisition proceedings in
courts. These challenges are generally in the shape of writ petitions filed in High
Courts. Invariably, stay of acquisition is asked for and in some cases, orders by way of
stay or injunction are also made. Whatever may have been the practices in the past, a
time has come where the courts should keep the larger public interest in mind while
exercising their power of granting stay/injunction. The power under Article 226 is
discretionary. It will be exercised only in furtherance of interests of justice and not
merely on the making out of a legal point. And in the matter of land acquisition for
public purposes, the interests of justice and the public interest coalesce....."
The Supreme Court in a case reported in (2004) 6 SCC 765 [Hira Tikko Vs. Union Territory,
Chandigarh and others] explaining the scope of principle of legitimate expectation has held that the
doctrine cannot be pressed into service where the public interest is likely to suffer as against the
personal interest of a party. The Supreme Court further in Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other
connected petitions the case reported in (2004) 6 SCC 733 [Friends Colony Development committee
Vs. State of Orissa] has held that the private interest would stand subordinate to the public good. In
the case at hand, over the acquired land, the respondents have completed their project by 60% to
70%, invested huge amount of money which is ultimately the public money and if the proceeding
challenged by filing the writ petition after such a long delay is entertained and award is quashed to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 17
Asha Ram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 22 September, 2021
protect the interest of an individual who is otherwise not entitled to get any equity of law that would
amount to great injustice with the public at large.
20. The Supreme Court, in fact, has observed that challenging the acquisition proceeding by filing
the writ petition even with the delay of few months is fatal and the same cannot be entertained.
However, the petitioner has disclosed in his petition that except the land acquired, he has no other
land, but in lieu of the acquired land, an adequate amount of compensation has been determined
and paid to the some of the land owners. The award was passed on 05.03.2020 and if the petitioner
is not satisfied with the quantum of the compensation awarded, he has a remedy to challenge the
award by filing a reference and the amount of award can also be enhanced by the competent Court.
21. Thus, I am not satisfied with the submissions made by learned counsel for the petitioner that for
raising the grievance against the acquisition proceeding, writ petition can be entertained even
ignoring the ground of delay and laches because there were material irregularities and the
mandatory requirements have also not been followed, for the reason that the respondents by filing
reply along with the documents have substantiated that the mandatory requirements have not been
violated and the acquisition proceeding has been completed Writ Petition No.4633/2021 & other
connected petitions after following due procedure of law and as such, the petitions filed by the
petitioners suffer from delay and laches. The petitions are also not maintainable on the ground that
the same have been filed after passing the award.
22. Ex consequentia, the petitions filed by the petitioners stand dismissed on the ground of delay
and laches.
(SANJAY DWIVEDI) JUDGE Devashish DEVASHISH MISHRA 2021.09.23 10:11:55 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184520281/ 18
