Ashish Goyal vs State Of U.P. And 4 Others on 30 April, 2025
Ashish Goyal vs State Of U.P. And 4 Others on 30 April, 2025
Author: Manoj Kumar Gupta
Bench: Manoj Kumar Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:70530-DB
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
(SN.35)
Court No. - 21
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 41707 of 2024
Petitioner :- Ashish Goyal
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 4 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Ajeet Sharma,Divakar Rai Sharma
Counsel for Respondent :- Atul Mehra,C.S.C.,Suresh C. Dwivedi
Hon'ble Manoj Kumar Gupta,J.
Hon'ble Anish Kumar Gupta,J.
1. Heard Shri Divakar Rai Sharma, learned counsel for the petitioner, Shri Rajeev Gupta, learned
Addl. Chief Standing Counsel for the respondents no. 1 and 2 and Shri Atul Mehra, learned counsel
for the respondents no. 3,4 and 5.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169159697/ 1
Ashish Goyal vs State Of U.P. And 4 Others on 30 April, 2025
2. The instant writ petition has been filed by the petitioner seeking quashing of the order dated
20.11.2024 passed by the respondent no. 5 whereby the allotment of Plot No. 2 under Nawalganj
Stone Market Yojana, Agra made in favour the petitioner on 13.5.2022 has been cancelled for the
reason that the said plot was previously allotted to R.Shree Chand and Company on 30.10.1976 and
thus the possession/registry of the said plot cannot be executed in favour of the petitioner. By the
said order the Development Authority has also refunded the allotment money deposited by the
petitioner. It is further prayed that the respondents be directed to offer any alternative plot similar
to the commercial plot allotted to the petitioner.
3. The brief facts of the case are that the respondent-authority invited E-auction bids for the
commercial Plot No. 2 under Nawalganj Stone Market Yojana, Agra. The tenders were opened on
2.5.2025 and the petitioner being the highest bidder, the said plot has been allotted in favour of the
petitioner. The cost of the plot allotted to the petitioner was Rs.70,24,501/- plus 12% free hold
charge i.e. Rs.8,42,941/-. Thus the total cost of the plot was calculated at the rate of Rs.78,67,442/-.
Against the requirement of deposit of earnest money of Rs.6,91,000/- the petitioner has deposited a
sum of Rs.6,92,150/- and as per the demand raised through the allotment letter, the petitioner has
deposited Rs.19,13,366/- on 21.5.2022, within the stipulated period. As per the allotment letter,
upon deposit of 25% of the total value of the plot the authority was required to handover the
possession of the said plot to the petitioner. Since the petitioner has deposited more than 25% of the
total value of the plot by 21.5.2022, he asked for the possession of the plot from the respondents so
that the same could be utilized and he also requested to the respondents authority to provide the site
plan of the plot and inform the total value of the plot in lump sum so that he can deposit the entire
balance amount in one time to get the lease deed executed in his favour. Instead of handing over the
possession or providing the site plan as requested by the petitioner, the development authority
issued a notice dated 12.12.2023 asking the petitioner to deposit a sum of Rs. 34,66,415/- before
15.12.2023. Despite repeated request of the petitioner he was neither provided the site plan nor
possession of the plot in question has been handed over to him. The petitioner repeatedly wrote
letters stating that he has not opted for the payment in installment rather he is interested in making
the payment as one time payment after the possession of the said plot and get the lease deed
executed in his favour. Vide impugned order dated 20.11.2024 the allotment has been cancelled by
the authority realizing that the said plot was already allotted to one R.Shree Chand and Company in
the year 1976, therefore, the petitioner could not be given the possession of the plot and the amount
was refunded. Hence this writ petition.
4. On 16.12.2024, this Court passed the following order:
"1. The stand taken by the respondent Development Authority is that by inadvertence
plot no.2 was put to auction and was allotted to the petitioner, although, it had been
allotted in the past to one M/s. R. Shreechand and Company.
2. The written instructions provided by the Development Authority mentions that the
previous allottee had deposited the entire allotment money but the sale deed could
not be executed in its favour. However, it has not been clarified when the previous
allottee had deposited the entire allotment money.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169159697/ 2
Ashish Goyal vs State Of U.P. And 4 Others on 30 April, 2025
3. Let such aspect be clarified by filing affidavit of a responsible officer of ADA.
3. Put up as fresh on 10.01.2025."
5. Again on 17.2.2025 and 4.3.2025 time was granted to the Vice Chairman, Agra Development
Authority to resolve the dispute, which read as under :
17.2.2025 "1. Sri Atul Mehra, learned counsel for the respondent-Development
Authority states that the Vice-Chairman has initiated proceeding in respect of plot
allotted in favour of M/s Sri Chand and Company. He submits that son of one of the
partners appeared before the Vice-Chairman and the matter is fixed for tomorrow.
He submits that the case may be taken up after two weeks so that in the meantime,
the Vice-Chairman, Agra Development Authority takes a final decision.
2. Accordingly, adjourned to 4.3.2025 as a fresh case."
4.3.2025 "1. Sri Atul Mehra, learned counsel for the respondent-Development
Authority, states that Manish Gupta, who is son of Devendra Kumar Gupta and
grandson of Ramdhan Gupta, one of the partners of the firm in whose favour there
was original allotment, appeared before the authority and gave his no objection. The
authority came to know from him that there are four other sons of late Ramdhan
Gupta and the authority is seeking information from Tehsildar Sadar in respect of
them and has prayed for four weeks' time to obtain their response. He further states
that there was one more partner in the firm, Shri Chand Gupta and Company, who
has died intestate.
2. Having regard to the prayer made, the proceedings are adjourned for four weeks.
3. Put up as fresh on 08.04.2025."
6. On 8.4.2025, the following order was passed by this Court granting one more opportunity to the
Agra Development Authority to resolve the dispute:
"1. It appears from the record that Agra Development Authority, Agra without
cancelling the allotment of the original allottee namely M/s R. Shreechand and
Company proceeded to advertise the plot, wherein, it came to be allotted in favour of
the petitioner. The petitioner has deposited the entire allotment money but sale deed
is not being executed for the reasons that all the heirs of the original allottee could
not be contacted so far to ascertain whether they are still interested in obtaining sale
deed/lease deed in their favour or not. It has come on record that one of the sons of
the deceased allottee has already clarified his stand that he is not interested in
obtaining the lease deed/sale deed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169159697/ 3
Ashish Goyal vs State Of U.P. And 4 Others on 30 April, 2025
2. The present situation is a result of callous approach of the Development Authority
in advertising the plot without examining its records.
3. As prayed by Shri Atul Mehra, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the
respondent, Development Authority, three weeks further time is granted to the
Development Authority to resolve the issue to the satisfaction of the petitioner.
4. Put up as fresh on 30 April 2025."
7. Shri Atul Mehra, learned counsel for the respondent-Development Authority states that the
Development Authority made hectic search for the grand-son of one of the partners of previous
allottee i.e. R.Shree Chandra and Company but since it could not find the details and therefore, the
Development Authority is not in a position to settle the plot with the petitioner. He further submits
that the Development Authority in the said backdrop is also not in a position to resolve the issue.
8. Having regard to the aforesaid stand of respondent-Development Authority, we proceeded to hear
the matter on merits.
9. It is the admitted case of the respondent-Development Authority that the plot in question which
was put to auction by them was already allotted to one R.Shree Chand and Company way back in the
year 1976. Despite the aforesaid fact which was well within the knowledge of the Development
Authority they have advertised the said plot and put the same into auction whereby the petitioner
being a bonafide person has participated in the auction proceedings and being the highest bidder he
has been allotted the said plot and despite the deposit of requisite amount of 25% of the total value
of the plot he has not been given the possession of the said plot despite repeated reminders and the
allotment has finally been cancelled on the ground that it was previously allotted to some one else.
This Court has seen very often the irresponsible behavior of the various Development Authorities in
proceeding with the auction and allotment of plots which are either disputed or possession thereof is
not with the Authority and therefore fail to deliver possession of the said plots which give rise to
unnecessary litigation and also harassment to such bonafide purchasers without there being any
fault on their part. This shows the callous and irresponsible approach of the Development
Authorities.
10. In the instant case the petitioner has participated in the auction proceedings and being the
highest bidder has succeeded in seeking the said commercial plot in his favour and deposited a
substantial amount, which is more than 25% of the total value of the plot in question. As per the
allotment letter the authority was under obligation to handover the possession of the said plot on
receipt of the 25% of the total value of the plot. Despite that, instead of handing over the possession
of the said plot, they continued to demand the balance amount but did not deliver the possession of
the said plot to the petitioner nor they had ever informed to the petitioner about the previous
allotment of the same plot for more than two and half years approximately and ultimately vide the
impugned order dated 20.11.2024 they have cancelled the allotment on the ground that the same
was already allotted to some one else in the year 1976 and after two and half years they have
refunded the amount with interest at the rate of 3.5%, whereas as per the allotment letter had there
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169159697/ 4
Ashish Goyal vs State Of U.P. And 4 Others on 30 April, 2025
been any default on the part of the petitioner they would have charged interest at the rate of 13% per
annum. The petitioner has repeatedly asked the Development Authority to give possession of the
plot and take the entire balance amount in lump sum and execute the lease deed in his favour. The
Development Authority since was not in a position to deliver the possession kept on dragging the
petitioner and demanding the amount in installments which has not only caused the harassment but
also financial loss to the petitioner and the action of the Authority has compelled the petitioner to
approach this Court by way of the instant petition. Learned counsel for the
respondent-Development authority has stated, on instructions, that the Development Authority is
unable to consider the second prayer of the petitioner for the grant of any alternative plot similar to
the commercial plot allotted to the petitioner.
11. For the aforesaid reasons, the instant petition is disposed of with the following directions:
a) The amount deposited by the petitioner shall carry the interest at the rate of 13%
per annum instead of 3.5% and the same shall be paid to the petitioner by the
respondent-Development Authority within two weeks on receipt of a certified copy of
this order:
b) The Development Authority shall refund the amount deposited by the petitioner,
so far, with 13% interest per annum to the petitioner within two weeks on receipt of a
certified copy of this order; and
c) The respondent-Development Authority shall also pay the cost of Rs.5,00,000/- to
the petitioner towards the harassment and mental agony caused to the petitioner for
their irresponsible and callous approach in the entire matter. This amount shall also
be paid by the respondent-Development Authority to the petitioner within two weeks
on receipt of a certified copy of this order.
12. The Registrar (Compliance) of this Court is directed to send a copy of this order to the
respondent-Agra Development Authority within a week for compliance.
Order Date :- 30.4.2025 o.k.
(Anish Kumar Gupta,J.) (Manoj Kumar Gupta, J.)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169159697/ 5
Ashish Goyal vs State Of U.P. And 4 Others on 30 April, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169159697/ 6
