Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
1 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR
(Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P.
and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.)
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
BENCH GWALIOR
SINGLE BENCH:
HON. SHRI JUSTICE G.S. AHLUWALIA
Criminal Appeal No.88/2012
.........Appellant: Tilak Singh
Versus
.......Respondent : The State of M.P.
Criminal Appeal No.91/2012
.........Appellant: Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu
Versus
.......Respondent : The State of M.P.
&
Criminal Appeal No.248/2012
.........Appellant: Ashish alias Ashu
Versus
.......Respondent : The State of M.P.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shri Rajmani Bansal, Advocate for appellant-Tilak Singh.
Shri A.K. Jain, Advocate for appellants-Dhruvpratap Singh alias
Sonu and Ashish alias Ashu.
Shri RVS Ghuraiya, Public Prosecutor for respondent/State.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JUDGMENT
(7/10/2017) Per Justice G.S. Ahluwalia This judgment shall dispose of Criminal Appeal No.88/2012
filed by appellant-Tilak Singh, Criminal Appeal No.91/2012 filed by appellant-Dhruvpratap Singh
alias Sonu and Criminal Appeal No.248/2012 filed by appellant-Ashish alias Ashu.
2. These Criminal Appeals under Section 374 of Cr.P.C. have been filed against the judgment dated
30/12/2011 passed by the Special Judge (MPDVPK, Act) Datia in Special Sessions Trial No.31/2010
by which the appellants Ashish and Tilak Singh have 2 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and
248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and
Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) been convicted under Section 394 read with Section 397 of IPC
and under Section 13 of the MPDVPK, Act and Section 25 (1) (1- B) (A) and 27 of the Arms Act and
the appellant-Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sony has been convicted under Section 394 read with Section
13 of the MPDVPK, Act. The appellants Ashish and Tilak Singh have been sentenced to undergo
rigorous imprisonment of 10 years for offence under Section 394 read with Section 397 of IPC and
fine of Rs.5,000/- each with default imprisonment, Rigorous imprisonment of 2 years for offence
under Section 25 (1) (1-B) (A) of the Arms Act and fine of Rs.1,000/- each with default
imprisonment and rigorous imprisonment of 3 years and fine of Rs.1,000/- with default
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 1
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
imprisonment for offence under Section 27 of the Arms Act and the appellant-Dhruvpratap Singh
has been sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment of 10 years for offence under Section 394 of
IPC and fine of Rs.5,000/- with default imprisonment.
3. The necessary facts for the disposal of the present appeals in short are that the Dehatinalishi was
lodged by the complainant- Ramsevak on 29/3/2010 at about 19:30 hours on the allegation that he
is the resident of Bundela Colony, Datia and is working as an Accountant in the shop of Lakhkha
Seth. Today he alongwith Balvan Yadav had withdrawn Rs.6,00,000/- from the State Bank of
Indore Branch Datia and was going towards Krishi Mandi. Balvan was driving the motorcycle and
he was sitting behind him and had money with him. The moment they reached near Bhairo Mandir,
one motorcycle of red colour on which three miscreants were riding came from behind and fired on
him, as a result of which, he sustained injury on his left shoulder and fell down from the motorcycle
and ran towards the shop of cold drinks situated in front of Bhairo Mandir and again one gunshot
was fired by the miscreants and they snatched the bag containing money and thereafter all the
miscreants escaped on the motorcycle. He was 3 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and
248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and
Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) taken to the hospital and he can identify the accused persons.
On this Dehalitnalishi, which was lodged in the District Hospital, Datia, the police registered the
FIR. The accused persons were arrested. They were put for test identification parade and they were
identified by the complainant. The money and the bag were seized. The bag was identified by the
complainant. The police after completing the investigation, filed the charge-sheet for offence under
Sections 394, 397 and 120-B of IPC.
4. The trial court by order dated 20/8/2010 framed charges under Section 394 of IPC read with
Section 13 of the MPDVPK, Act, under Section 397 of IPC read with Section 13 of the MPDVPK, Act
and under Section 25/27 of the Arms Act.
5. The appellants abjured their guilt and pleaded not guilty.
6. The trial court by judgment dated 30/12/2011 passed in Special Sessions Trial No.31/2010
convicted the appellants for the offence mentioned above and acquitted the accused No.4-
Omnarayan of all the charges. As the acquittal of Omnarayan has not been challenged by the State
Government, therefore, the case shall be considered only in respect of the present appellants.
7. It is submitted by the counsel for the appellants that the test identification parade was conducted
by the police belatedly and there is no evidence available on record that the complainant had no
opportunity to see the appellants after the incident and prior to holding the test identification
parade. No explanation for delay in holding the test identification parade has been given. The
evidence of Pratap Singh (PW-5) and Santosh Purohit (PW-6) is not reliable. Similarly the evidence
of Ramsevak is not sufficient to convict the appellants. From the evidence, it is clear that it is the
appellant-Ashish, who had fired on the complainant, therefore, the other appellants cannot be
convicted under Section 397 of IPC. In the present case, as the number of miscreants were less than
5, therefore, no offence for dacoity is made out. It is further 4 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012,
91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 2
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) submitted that the incident is alleged to have taken
place in the year 2010 and 7 long years have passed. Therefore, the period already undergone is
sufficient to meet the ends of justice.
8. Per contra, it is submitted by the State counsel that the report was lodged promptly. The
complainant had specifically stated that he can identify the assailants. The test identification parade
was conducted in which all the appellants were identified by the complainant. Money has been
recovered from the possession of the appellants for which no explanation has been given as to how
they came in possession of such a huge amount. It is further submitted that as the incident took
place in the public place on the road in the mid of the market and the manner in which the offence
was committed, clearly shows that the appellants were aware of the fact that the complainant had
withdrawn a huge amount of Rs.6,00,000/- and, therefore, the period of jail sentence already
undergone by the appellants cannot be said to be sufficient to meet the ends of justice.
9. Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
10. The prosecution in order to prove its case has examined complainant-Ramsevak (PW-1), Balvan
Singh (PW-2), Ashish Shrivastava (PW-3), Rajendra Sharma (PW-4), Pratap Singh (PW-5), Santosh
Purohit (PW-6), Mahendra Singh Balmiki (PW-
7), Shiv Govind Chaubey (PW-8), Rahul Pandey (PW-9), Brijmohan Gupta (PW-10), Suresh Singh
Parihar (PW-11), Arjundas (PW-12), Manendra Singh Bundela (PW-13), Smt. Manish Kaul (PW-14),
Vinod Bansal (PW-15), Satish Dubey (PW-
16), Megh Singh Jat (PW-17), Dr. T.C. Agrawal (PW-18) and Dr. Naveen Kumar Nagar (PW-19).
11. The appellants did not examine any witness in their defence.
12. Dr. Naveen Kumar Nagar (PW-19) has stated that on 29/3/2010 the injured-Ramsevak was
brought to the District Hospital at about 16:35 hours and on medical examination, he 5 Criminal
Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh
alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) had found an entry wound
below the scapula of left shoulder and blackening and charing in round shape. An exit wound was
found on left side of chest near armpit. The nature of the injury was dangerous to life. The MLC
report is Ex.P/24. This witness was cross-examined, who has stated that as the blackening and
charring was found and gun powder was found on the shirt and banyan of the injured, therefore, it
was clear that the gunshot was fired from a distance of about 5 ft. The corresponding gunshot mark
was found on the shirt and banyan of the injured. The cloths of the injured were sent for chemical
examination and they were sealed and handed over to the police. Although the injured was in a
serious condition, but he was responding. In further cross- examination this witness has stated that
the injured has sustained injury due to a bullet and not pallets. The injured was brought by a police
constable. The injured was referred to medical hospital, Gwalior.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 3
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
13. Dr. T.C. Agrawal (PW-18) has stated that he had examined the injured on 29/3/2010 at Sahara
Hospital, Gwalior. He was admitted in the ICU. His condition was stable, but he was having some
breathing troubles. Case-sheet of the injured is Ex.P/22. On 31/3/2010 the injured got himself
discharged against the medical advice. The discharge ticket is Ex.P/23. In cross-examination, this
witness has admitted that blood was not being given to the injured at the time of discharge. Even
oxygen was not being given. He had personally seen the injuries. Blackening was found around the
entry wound. This witness denied the suggestion there was only entry would, but stated that exit
wound was also found. At the time of admission the condition of the injured was serious. There was
no pallet injury on the body of the injured. This witness has further stated that he had examined the
injured only after he was admitted in the hospital, but prior to that he had not seen the injured.
6 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P,
Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.)
14. Thus, from the evidence of Dr. Naveen Kumar Nagar (PW-
19) and Dr. T.C. Agrawal (PW-18), it is clear that the complainant had sustained one gunshot injury
and the bullet had passed through and through, therefore, the exit wound was also found. According
to the doctors, the gunshot was fired from a distance of about 5 ft.
15. The next moot question for determination is that:-
Whether the appellants have committed the offence as alleged against them or not?
16. The prosecution case is based on the direct evidence of the injured-Ramsevak and the
independent witnesses Balvan Singh (PW-2), Ashish Shrivastava (PW-3), Rajendra Sharma (PW-4),
Pratap Singh (PW-5) and Santosh Purohit (PW-6). Ashish Shrivastava (PW-3) and Rajendra
Sharma (PW-4) have turned hostile and they have not supported the prosecution case, therefore, the
entire case is based on the testimony of Ramsevak (PW-1), Balvan Singh (PW-2), Pratap Singh
(PW-5) and Santosh Purohit (PW-6).
17. Ramsevak (PW-1) has stated that he is working as an Accountant under Lakkha Tilwani. On
29/3/2010 at about 4 PM he alongwith Balvan Yadav, after withdrawing an amount of
Rs.6,00,000/- from the State Bank of Indore, was going towards the Mandi. Balvan was driving the
motorcycle and he was sitting behind him and was carrying the bag containing the amount. The
moment the motorcycle reached near Bhairo Mandir, at that time three persons came on a
motorcycle of red colour and one person fired at him and the bullet hit on the left side of his back, as
a result of which he fell down. Thereafter, he ran towards the cold drink shop situated in front of
Bhairo Temple alongwith the bag. While he was trying to climb the stairs, at that time all the
accused persons came there. One more gunshot was fired, which hit the wall and they snatched
away the bag. The complainant-Ramsevak 7 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012
AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias
Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) (PW-1) identified all the three appellants, however, did not identify the
accused No.4-Omnarayan. It was further stated that the appellants thereafter went towards Rajgarh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 4
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
square on the motorcycle and he was taken to the District Hospital by Balvan and other persons.
From District Hospital, Datia he was referred to Hospital at Gwalior. He lodged the Dehatinalishi,
which is Ex.P/1. The bag in which the money was kept was got identified from him and he had
identified the bag and money. The identification memo was prepared by a Counselor, which is
Ex.P/2, and bears his signature from A to A. The appellants were got identified by the Tahsildar in
the Circle Jail, Datia and he had identified all the three appellants. The Tahsildar had prepared the
identification memo, which is Ex.P/3. The complainant has identified the bag in the Court, which is
marked as article A. This witness was cross-examined in detail and in cross-examination he has
clarified that he had seen the faces of the appellants at the time of incident. He further admitted the
suggestion that he had never seen the appellant-Tilak Singh prior to the date of incident. He further
clarified that after the incident, he had seen the appellant-Tilak Singh for the first time in jail and
not in the Court. He had seen the face of the appellant-Tilak, but he did not know his name and,
therefore, he has not mentioned his name in the FIR. He further clarified that he has mentioned in
the FIR that he can identify the miscreants. This witness further denied the suggestion that when he
reached Datia Hospital, he had fallen unconscious. He further denied that he sustained gunshot
while he was trying to run away, but once again clarified that when he was sitting behind the
motorcycle at that time he had sustained the gunshot injury. He could not identify the colour of the
cloths, which the accused persons were wearing, but this witness has specifically clarified that he
had seen their faces and denied the suggestion that the accused persons had covered their face. This
8 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P,
Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) witness has
further clarified that as the gunshot was fired from behind, therefore, he could not see from which
distance the gunshot was fired. The incident had taken place at a public place. There are some shops
on either side of the road, but there was not much traffic because it was the time of afternoon the
test identification parade was conducted on 31/5/2010. Although he could not point any specific
mark of identification, but clarified that he can identify any person after seeing him even for once.
He had identified the appellant from their faces in the test identification parade. He had seen the
appellants for the first time at the time of incident and thereafter he had seen them in the jail and
thereafter he is seeing them in the Court. The test identification parade was conducted in three
parts. The test identification parade was conducted by the Tahsildar, who was a lady and at the time
of test identification parade the police personnel were not present. Total two gunshots were fired on
the spot. His statement was recorded by the police on the very same day. In the Dehatinalishi as well
as in his statement he had not named the miscreants, but had clarified that he can identify them. He
further denied that he had any enmity with appellant-Tilak. He further clarified that as the word
"Reebok" was written on the bag and the colour of the bag was brown and since he was using the
same, therefore, he had identified the same. He further denied the fact that the miscreants have not
committed any offence and they have been falsely implicated. In further cross-examination this
witness has stated that he went to the bank at about 3 PM after the lunch hours and he had taken
about 30-45 minutes for reaching the bank. The firm has a bank account in the bank and he is the
Accountant in the firm. The bank account number of the firm is 6302944993 and he had not taken
the passbook with him, but he had taken a cheque. He denied that no offence was committed. As the
counsel for the accused was repeating the same questions, therefore, he was 9 Criminal Appeal
Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias
Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) suggested not to put the same
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 5
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
questions again and again. It was clarified by this witness that as soon as he sustained the gunshot
injury on his back, he had seen the appellants, as by that time all the three accused persons had
come near to him. The person who was sitting behind the motorcycle had fired the gunshot because
he had seen a country made pistol in his hand. He had received a notice from the Police Station
Kotwali for visiting jail for identification of the accused. He was never informed by the police that
the accused persons have been arrested. He had never gone to the police station, therefore, the
question of showing photographs by the police did not arise. He did not know the accused persons
prior to the date of the incident.
18. The evidence of Balvan Singh (PW-2) is also on the similar lines. He has also stated that on
29/3/2010 he alongwith the complainant-Ramsevak (PW-1) had gone to the State Bank of Indore,
Branch Datia for withdrawing the amount and amount of Rs.6,00,000/- was withdrawn, which
were kept in a bag and at about 3:45 PM, he alongwith the complainant-Ramsevak (PW-1) were
going back to the Mandi and he was driving the motorcycle and Ramsevak (PW-1) was sitting
behind him and was holding the bag containing the amount. The moment they reached near the
Bhairo Temple, three persons who were riding on the red coloured motorcycle, came and after
looking at the appellants, this witness stated that except Omnarayan, remaining three appellants
had come on the motorcycle. The gunshot was fired from behind, as a result of which, the
complainant-Ramsevak fell down and in injured condition he ran towards a shop situated in front of
Bhairo Mandir. The second gunshot was fired, which hit on the wall of the shop and the miscreants
snatched away the bag and went towards Rajgarh Tek and left an empty bag on the spot. Thereafter,
he informed his master and Brijmohan and took the complainant to District Hospital, Datia for
treatment from where he 10 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak
Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs.
State of M.P.) came back to the spot. The first gunshot was fired by appellant- Ashish and the second
gunshot was fired by appellant-Tilak, which hit on the wall. The spot map was prepared, which is
Ex.P/4. One empty cartridge, one fired bullet and one empty bag, which was lying on the spot was
seized by the police vide seizure memo Ex.P/5 and the police had recorded the statement. In
cross-examination, this witness has admitted that at present he is confined in jail and he has come
from the jail itself. He further stated that at Datia Hospital at about 4 PM, report was lodged. He was
brought back by the police to the spot, whereas Ramsevak was taken to Gwalior. One empty
cartridge was found inside the shop, whereas another was found outside the shop. He further
admitted that at present he is in jail in connection with an offence under Section 302 of IPC. He
further admitted that in his case diary statement, Ex.D/1, it is not mentioned that the first gunshot
was fired by appellant-Ashish and the second gunshot was fired by appellant-Tilak. He also
admitted that in his case diary statement, Ex.D/1, it was not mentioned that he can identify the
accused persons.
19. Pratap Singh (PW-5) and Santosh Purohit (PW-6) are independent witnesses.
20. Pratap Singh (PW-5) has stated that at about 4 PM after finishing his work, when he was coming
back to his house from Mandi and when he reached near Rajgarh Tek near Bhairo Temple, he saw
that Accountant of Lakkha was coming from Tikaliya Bazar and was going towards Mandi and the
motorcycle was being driven by Balvan and the complainant was sitting behind him. It is further
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 6
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
stated that at that time one motorcycle came from behind, which was being driven by the
appellant-Sonu. Tilak Singh was sitting in between and Ashish Sharma was sitting behind. Ashish
Sharma took out a country made pistol and fired at complainant from behind. The bullet hit the
complainant. The 11 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs.
State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of
M.P.) complainant ran towards a shop and at that time second gunshot was fired by Ashish. The
accused persons snatched the bag from complainant-Ramsevak and went towards Rajgarh Tek on
the motorcycle. In cross-examination this witness has denied that he is the partner of Lakkha or he
is his friend. He had seen the incident, but thereafter he had went away. About 10 minutes thereafter
all the businessmen had gone to Gwalior and he too went to the hospital at Gwalior alongwith them.
His statement was recorded on the next date of the incident. He denied that his statement was
recorded after six days of the incident. He could not tell the distance of the place of incident from
Mandi, as he had never measured the same. He further stated that Mandi might be situated at a
distance of 2-3 Km. from his house. He further admitted that neither his house nor his shop is
situated near the incident. He further admitted that it is a public way. However, stated that when the
gunshots are being fired, then nobody would stop. He further stated that when the gunshots were
fired, all the persons who were present there had left the place of incident, but he stayed back
because the injured was Accountant in the Mandi. After sustaining the gunshot injury the
Accountant had run towards the shop, however, he could not verify the colour of the cloths, which
the injured was wearing. Gunshot was fired from behind, but was not fired from a shot distance. He
could not see that where the empty cartridge had fallen, but clarified that when the gunshots are
being fired, then nobody would look for the empty cartridge. He further stated that he has no
relations with the appellant, but clarified that as the appellants used to move around in the area,
therefore, he knew them. He further admitted that Police Station Kotwali is in between the place of
incident and his house. He did not know the names of the accused persons, but he had come to
know about their names on the next date of the incident. He did not went to the Police Station
Kotwali on his own 12 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs.
State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of
M.P.) after the incident. He had informed the police that the gunshot was fired from behind,
however, could not clarify the reason of not mentioning the same in his case diary statement. He
further admitted that he had informed Lakkha Seth about the incident, which took place with his
Accountant. He further admitted that at present Lakkha Seth is the Vice President, Municipal
Council, Datia.
21. Evidence of Santosh Purohit (PW-6) is similar to that of the evidence of Pratap Singh (PW-5). In
his cross-examination he admitted that Lakkha Seth is also a Grain Merchant and he has business
relations with him and both of them are on visiting terms. He further submitted that as he is a
businessman, therefore, he was knowing the Accountant of Lakkha Seth. He further stated that he
had seen the appellants Sonu and Ashish on the date of the incident. As his motorcycle was behind
the motorcycle of the appellants and as he was frightened, therefore, he did not inform Lakkha Seth
about the incident and went to his house directly. He had talked with Lakkha Seth on the next date
of the incident. The police had recorded his statement about 5-6 days of the incident. Ashish was
having a country made pistol in his hand and had fired at Ramsevak from behind. He further
admitted that he did not take the complainant to the hospital and did not had any talk with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 7
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
complainant during the incident. He further clarified that in fact he had gone directly to his house.
He had seen the appellants roaming around in the Mandi area. Shops are situated on the either side
of the road. He further clarified that he could not say that whether any other person had seen the
incident or not. After the incident the people had stated running from here to there. Total two
gunshots were fired. The accused-Omnarayan was neither present on the spot nor he had committed
any offence.
22. Mahendra Singh Balmiki (PW-7) has stated that on 24/4/2010 the appellant-Ashish Sharma had
disclosed in his 13 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State
of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.)
confessional statement that an amount of Rs.1,00,000/-, one country made pistol, one round and
one bag has been kept by him in a room where he is residing and the confessional statement is
Ex.P/7. On the same day the police has seized an amount of Rs.1,00,000/-, one 315 bore country
made pistol, one 315 bore live cartridge and one rexine bag of brown colour vide seizure memo
Ex.P/8. Similarly the appellant-Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu has disclosed in his confessional
statement that he has kept an amount of Rs.1,00,000/- in the basement of his house and the
motorcycle is kept in his house. The memorandum is Ex.P/9. On the same day, an amount of
Rs.1,00,000/-, a motorcycle was seized by the police at the instance of appellant-Sonu alias
Dhruvpratap vide seizure memo Ex.P/10. In cross-examination he has stated that he is a labourer by
profession. On 23/4/2017 he had gone to do labour works, as he was called by Ghansu Kushwaha.
He was called by the police personnel and the proceedings were done in his presence. This witness
further denied the suggestion that he has simply signed the documents. He further specifically
stated that the confessional statements were made by the appellants in his presence. He know the
appellant-Ashish by his name because of his house is situated in Mandi, however, he had never
talked with the appellants and had never gone to their house. His signature for the first time was
obtained when the confessional statement was made and the signature was obtained for the second
time when the seizure was made. He has further stated that a petrol pump is situated at some
distance from the house of Sonu Bundela, however, he could not name the owner of the petrol
pump. The house of Sonu Bundela is single storey house and has a basement. He does not know
whether some more persons are also residing in the said house or not. He denied that he had not
gone to village Sakrar. He further denied that nothing was seized from the appellants in his 14
Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P,
Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) presence.
He further denied that he had signed the documents merely on the saying of the appellants. He
further denied that Lakkha Seth is the Counselor of his ward. He further denied that he is engaged
in selling liquor of Lakkha. He on his own clarified that once Lakkha has no liquor contract, then
selling of liquor does not arise. Only 2-4 houses are situated in village Sakrar from where seizure
were made.
23. Shiv Govind Chaubey (PW-8) has stated that the Town Inspector had interrogated the
appellant-Tilak in his presence, who had disclosed that he has kept Rs.50,000/-, a country made
pistol and a mobile in his house and he had also informed that he has already spent an amount of
Rs.50,000/-. The confessional statement is Ex.P/11. In cross-examination this witness admitted that
he is subordinate to the Town Inspector. At the time of recording of confessional statement he and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 8
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
Shivkumar were present, who is also an employee in the Police Department. He denied that no
confessional statement was made by appellant Tilak Singh.
24. Rahul Pandey (PW-9) has turned hostile and did not support the prosecution case.
25. Brijmohan Gupta (PW-10) has stated that one empty cartridge of 315 bore was seized by the
police from the place of incident. One 315 bore which was stuck in the wall of the shop of cold drink
belonging to Ashok Shrivastava and one bag was seized by the police from the spot vide seizure
memo Ex.P/5. On 17/4/2010 the police had seized an amount of Rs.50,000/- on the production of
the same by the appellant-Tilak from his house apart from one Nokia mobile, a 315 bore country
made pistol and 2 rounds of 315 bore vide seizure memo Ex.P/14. In cross- examination, this
witness has stated that he knows the appellant- Tilak Singh. He further clarified that there is no
specific identification mark on the seized currency notes. He further 15 Criminal Appeal
Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias
Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) admitted that he has a licence for
carrying out the business of Grain Merchant in Mandi. He further clarified that the mobile was of
Nokia company.
26. Suresh Singh Parihar (PW-11) is the Armorer, who had examined the country made pistols and 3
live round of 315 bore seized from the possession of Ashish and Tilak. They were found in working
condition. His report is Ex.P/15. In cross-examination this witness has stated that the weapons were
sealed in different bags.
27. Arjundas (PW-12) has conducted the test identification parade of the bag. He has stated that he
is the Counselor in the Municipal Council and had conducted the test identification parade of the
bag and the complainant-Ramsevak (PW-2) had identified the bag and the identification memo is
Ex.P/2. In cross- examination he admitted that Reebok was written only on the one bag and on the
remaining bags nothing was written. The identification memo was prepared by the police personnel
and he had merely signed the same.
28. Manendra Singh Bundela (PW-13) has also proved the seizure of Rs.50,000/-, one mobile of
Nokia company, one 315 bore country made pistol and 2 rounds of 315 bore from the possession of
Tilak Singh vide seizure memo, Ex.P/14.
29. Smt. Manish Kaul (PW-14) had conducted the test identification parade of accused persons. She
has stated that on 31/5/2010 she was posted on the post of Naib Tahsildar Office Datia. On the said
date, she had conducted the test identification parade of appellants in Circule Jail, Datia, at about 12
PM. Five persons were mixed with each of the appellants and all the three appellants were identified
by the complainant by putting his hand on their head. Sufficient light was available at the time of
test identification parade and body of the persons were covered with the blanket upto their shoulder
and no police person was present 16 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR
(Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu
Vs. State of M.P.) and the identification memo was prepared on the spot, which is Ex.P/3 and which
was signed by complainant-Ramsevak also. In cross-examination she had stated that though she
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 9
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
had conducted the test identification parade under the orders of the Tahsildar, but the said order
was not annexed alongwith the test identification memo and as it is never done so. She further
denied that the complainant had gone to jail alongwith her. When she reached, the complainant was
already waiting outside the jail. Police had not gone to the jail alongwith her. On the identification
memo neither seal of the jail was affixed nor the signatures of the Jailor were obtained because the
presence of any other person at the time of test identification parade is not required. She further
denied that she had not obtained the signatures of the Jailor, as she had never gone to the jail. She
further stated that the test identification parade of only 3 accused persons was got done and she
further denied that at the time of test identification parade only three accused persons were there.
The test identification parade was conducted in a closed room, which is used for meeting purposes.
The persons who were mixed with the appellants were of the same age. She further denied that she
had not conducted the test identification parade and had simply signed the memo.
30. Vinod Bansal (PW-15) is working as Arms Clerk in the office of District Magistrate, who has
stated that a police case diary alongwith seized weapons in sealed condition was received for the
purpose of sanction for prosecution. The case diary alongwith the seized weapons were produced
before the District Magistrate, who had personally seen the case diary as well as the seized weapons
and thereafter dictated the order granting sanction. The order granting sanction is Ex.P/16, which
was signed by the District Magistrate. In cross-examination this witness could not name the person
who brought the case diary and weapons. He further stated that the weapons were sealed in one bag,
whereas 17 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of
M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) the
case diary was sealed in another bag. This witness further clarified that both country made pistols
were sealed in different bags. He further denied that the weapons were not sealed.
31. Satish Dubey (PW-16) is the Investigating Officer. On 29/3/2010 he was posted on the post of
Town Inspector, Police Station Kotwali, District Datia. On the said date he received an information
that three unknown persons have fired gunshot on the complainant-Ramsevak and had looted an
amount of Rs.6,00,000/- and the injured-Ramsevak has been taken to Gwalior. He directly went to
Sahara Hospital, Datia from Bhind where he recorded the Dehatinalishi, which is Ex.P/1 and the
said Dehatinalishi was recorded verbatim as it was narrated by the complainant. After recording the
Dehatinalishi, Ex.P/1, he came back to Datia and registered the FIR against three unknown persons,
which is Ex.P7. Spot map was prepared on the instructions of Balvan, which is Ex.P/4. On 6/4/2010
he had arrested Omnarayan Sahu vide arrest memo Ex.P/12. On 29/3/2010 he had seized one
empty cartridge of 315 bore, which was lying on the spot, one fired bullet of 315 bore, which was
lying in the shop of Ashok Shrivastava and one bag from the spot vide seizure memo Ex.P/5. The
statements of the witnesses were recorded. He recorded the statements of Santosh and Pratap on
6/4/2010. On 16/4/2010 he had arrested Tilak and had recorded his confessional statement which
is Ex.P/11. On 17/4/2010 he had seized the amount of Rs.50,000/- from the house of the appellant-
Tilak Singh and had also seized one mobile of Nokia company, one 315 bore country made pistol and
2 rounds of 315 bore from the house of appellant-Tilak vide seizure memo Ex.P/14. On 24/4/2010
he had recorded the confessional statement of the appellant-Ashish, which is Ex.P/7. On the same
date he had seized an amount of Rs.1,00,000/- as well as one 315 bore country made pistol and one
live cartridge of 315 bore as well as 18 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 10
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
(Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu
Vs. State of M.P.) one empty cartridge of 315 bore, one bag of brown colour from the possession of
Ashish vide seizure memo Ex.P/8. On 24/4/2010 itself he had recorded the confessional statement
of appellant-Dhruvpratap, which is Ex.P/9 and had seized an amount of Rs.1,00,000/- and a
motorcycle from his possession vide seizure memo Ex.P/10.
32. He sent the seized weapons and catridges to Director, F.S.L. Sagar by draft Ex. P.18 and the
report is Ex. P.19. This witness was cross examined in detail, but no question was put to this witness
with regard to the delay in holding the Test Identification Parade. A question was also put to this
witness with regard to delayed recording of statements of Pratap Singh (P.W.5) and Santosh Purohit
(P.W.6). This witness has clarified that as he was busy in other works, therefore, he could not record
the statements of these witnesses at the earliest.
33. It is submitted by the Counsel for the appellants that the appellant Tilak Singh was arrested on
17-4-2010, whereas the appellants Ashish @ Ashu Sharma and Dhruv Pratap Singh were arrested on
24-4-2010 but the Test Identification Parade was conducted on 31-5-2010 and the prosecution has
not explained the delay in holding the Test Identification Parade of the appellants. Further, the
complainant Ramsewak (P.W.1) had full opportunity to see the appellants prior to holding of Test
Identification Parade, therefore, the identification of the appellants by Ramsewak (P.W.1) is not
reliable. To buttress his contentions, the Counsel for the appellants has relied upon the judgment of
the Chhatisgarh High Court in the case of Asif Ahmad Vs. State of Chhatisgarh reported in 2011
Cr.L.J. 4461.
34. The submission made by the Counsel for the appellants that as the Test Identification Parade
was conducted belatedly, therefore, the identification of the appellants by the complainant should be
discarded, cannot be accepted and hence rejected. 19 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and
248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and
Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) Mere delay in holding the Test Identification Parade, by itself
cannot be a ground to discard the identification of the accused. The Supreme Court in the case of
Chandra Prakash Vs. State of Rajasthan reported in (2014) 8 SCC 340 has held as under :
33. The next issue, to which we should advert to, pertains to the delay in holding the
test identification parade. The submission of Mr Balaji Srinivasan, learned counsel
appearing for accused Abdul Hamid and Raies Beg, is that there has been enormous
delay in conducting the test identification parade in respect of accused Abdul Hamid
and Raies Beg. There is no dispute that both of them were arrested on 8-6-1997 and
the test identification parade was held on 25-6-1997. Thus, it is evident that they were
arrested long after the occurrence but the test identification parade was held within a
period of three weeks from the date of arrest.
As the analysis of the trial court shows, they could not have been arrested as the materials could not
be collected against them and things got changed at a later stage. In this regard, we may refer with
profit to the decision in Ramanand Ramnath v. State of M.P., wherein identification parade was held
within a period of one month from the date of arrest. This Court observed that there was no unusual
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 11
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
delay in holding the test identification parade.
34. That apart, the witnesses, namely, Prem Prakash Gupta, PW 78, and Mohit Jain, PW 30, have
identified them in the Court. In State of Maharashtra v. Suresh, it has been held as follows: (SCC p.
478, para 22) "22. ... We remind ourselves that identification parades are not primarily meant for
the court. They are meant for investigation purposes. The object of conducting a test identification
parade is twofold. First is to enable the witnesses to satisfy themselves that the prisoner whom they
suspect is really the one who was seen by them in connection with the commission of the crime.
Second is to satisfy the investigating authorities that the suspect is the real person whom the
witnesses had seen in connection with the said occurrence."
20 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P,
Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.)
35. The said legal position has been reiterated in Anil Kumar v. State of U.P. Recently, in Munna
Kumar Upadhyay v. State of A.P., a two-
Judge Bench has observed thus: (SCC p. 197, para 66) "66. There was some delay in holding the
identification parade. But the delay per se cannot be fatal to the validity of holding an identification
parade, in all cases, without exception. The purpose of the identification parade is to provide
corroborative evidence and is more confirmatory in its nature. No other infirmity has been pointed
out by the learned counsel appearing for the appellant, in the holding of the identification parade.
The identification parade was held in accordance with law and the witnesses had identified the
accused from amongst a number of persons who had joined the identification parade."
36. In view of the aforesaid, the submission that there has been delay in holding the test
identification parade does not really affect the case of the prosecution. It is also noteworthy that the
witnesses had identified the accused persons in court and nothing has been elicited in the
cross-examination even to create a doubt. Thus, we repel the submission advanced by the learned
counsel for accused Abdul Hamid and Raies Beg.
35. The Supreme Court in the case of Sheikh Sintha Madhar Vs. State reported in (2016) 11 SCC 265
has held as under :
16. The next question is whether the test identification parades were vitiated on
account of delay or for holding those TIPs jointly, or on account of the identity of the
accused having been already revealed before the TIP could be conducted. It is clear
from the evidence that there is no inordinate delay in conducting the TIP. As and
when the accused were arrested, within reasonable time they were produced for the
TIP. Also, there is no invariable rule that two accused persons cannot be made part of
the same TIP. Joint TIP would thus, in no manner, affect the validity of the TIP. The
purpose of a 21 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak
Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish
alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) TIP is to ensure that the investigation is going on the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 12
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
right track and it is merely a corroborative evidence. The actual identification must
be done in the Court and that is the substantive evidence. If the accused is already
known to the witness, the TIP does not hold much value and it is the identification in
the Court which is of utmost importance. PW 1 identified all the seven
appellant-accused in the Court as well as in the TIP.
36. The Supreme Court in the case of Mulla Vs. State of U.P. reported in (2010) 3 SCC 508 has held
as under :
55. The identification parades are not primarily meant for the court. They are meant
for investigation purposes. The object of conducting a test identification parade is
twofold. First is to enable the witnesses to satisfy themselves that the accused whom
they suspect is really the one who was seen by them in connection with the
commission of the crime. Second is to satisfy the investigating authorities that the
suspect is the real person whom the witnesses had seen in connection with the said
occurrence. Therefore, the following principles regarding identification parade
emerge:
(1) an identification parade ideally must be conducted as soon as possible to avoid
any mistake on the part of witnesses;
(2) this condition can be revoked if proper explanation justifying the delay is
provided; and (3) the authorities must make sure that the delay does not result in
exposure of the accused which may lead to mistakes on the part of the witnesses.
37. In the case of Pramod Mandal v. State of Bihar reported in (2004) 13 SCC 150 the Supreme
Court has held as under :
"20. It is neither possible nor prudent to lay down any invariable rule as to the period
within which a test identification parade must be held, or the number of witnesses
who must correctly identify the accused, to sustain his conviction. These matters
must be left to the courts of fact 22 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and
248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State
of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) to decide in the facts and
circumstances of each case. If a rule is laid down prescribing a period within which
the test identification parade must be held, it would only benefit the professional
criminals in whose cases the arrests are delayed as the police have no clear clue about
their identity, they being persons unknown to the victims. They, therefore, have only
to avoid their arrest for the prescribed period to avoid conviction. Similarly, there
may be offences which by their very nature may be witnessed by a single witness,
such as rape. The offender may be unknown to the victim and the case depends solely
on the identification by the victim, who is otherwise found to be truthful and reliable.
What justification can be pleaded to contend that such cases must necessarily result
in acquittal because of there being only one identifying witness? Prudence therefore
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 13
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
demands that these matters must be left to the wisdom of the courts of fact which
must consider all aspects of the matter in the light of the evidence on record before
pronouncing upon the acceptability or rejection of such identification."
38. In the case of Anil Kumar v. State of U.P. reported in (2003) 3 SCC 569 the Supreme Court has
observed as under:
"9. ... It is to be seen that apart from stating that delay throws a doubt on the
genuineness of the identification parade and observing that after lapse of such a long
time it would be difficult for the witnesses to remember the facial expressions, no
other reasoning is given why such a small delay would be fatal."
A mere lapse of some days is not enough to erase the facial expressions of assailants from the
memory of father and mother who have seen them killing their son.
39. In the case of Lal Singh v. State of U.P. reported in (2003) 12 SCC 554 , the Supreme Court has
held as under :
43. It will thus be seen that the evidence of identification has to be considered in the
23 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State
of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs.
State of M.P.) peculiar facts and circumstances of each case.
Though it is desirable to hold the test identification parade at the earliest possible opportunity, no
hard-and-fast rule can be laid down in this regard. If the delay is inordinate and there is evidence
probabilising the possibility of the accused having been shown to the witnesses, the court may not
act on the basis of such evidence. Moreover, cases where the conviction is based not solely on the
basis of identification in court, but on the basis of other corroborative evidence, such as recovery of
looted articles, stand on a different footing and the court has to consider the evidence in its
entirety."
40. Thus, it is clear that it is desirable that the Test Identification Parade should be conducted as
early as possible, however, at the same time, the very purpose of conducting Test Identification
Parade during the investigation is for the satisfaction of the investigating officer that the suspect is
the real culprit, but the substantive evidence is the identification of the accused in the Court.
Therefore, no hard and fast rule can be laid down that in every case, where the Test Identification
Parade was conducted belatedly, the identification of the accused by the victim should be discarded.
If the delay in holding the Test Identification Parade is duly explained or where the delay had
occurred due to reasons beyond the control of the investigation officer, then the delay in holding the
Test Identification Parade may not be fatal. Thus, in nutshell, it can be said that in each and every
case, the effect of delay in holding the Test Identification Parade has to be considered.
41. In the present case, the complainant Ramsewak (P.W.1) has identified the appellants in the
Court. Four persons were standing in the Dock and the complainant Ramsewak (P.W.1) could not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 14
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
identify the accused no. 4 Om Narayan, whereas the appellants were identified. Although in the
present case, the 24 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs.
State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of
M.P.) appellants were arrested on 17-4-2010 and 24-4-2010 and the Test Identification Parade was
conducted on 31-5-2010, but no suggestion was given to the Investigating Officer seeking any
explanation. The Supreme Court in the case of V.K. Mishra Vs. State of Uttarakhand reported in
(2015) 9 SCC 588, has observed as under :
25. It has been further contended on behalf of the appellants that there was delay in recording the
statement of PW 2 by the investigating officer and therefore his evidence should be viewed with
suspicion, especially when he did not disclose about the alleged dowry demand before he left for
Dehradun or till his statement was recorded by the police. In this context as pointed out earlier, PW
2 went to Mumbai for treatment of his wife and on 14-8-1997 he was informed about the death of
Archana and on the next day he returned to Delhi by air and from Delhi he reached Dehradun by
taxi. In his evidence PW 2 stated that the police being busy in the programme of Ms Mayawati, the
then Chief Minister of Uttar Pradesh on 17-8- 1997, the police did not examine and record his
statement and it was only on 18-8-1997 that his statement was recorded by the investigating officer.
Considering the evidence of PW 2, it cannot be said that the prosecution was deliberately taking
time with a view to concoct a false case and decide about the shape to be given to the case. It is
pertinent to point out that on the delayed examination of PW 2, no question was put to the
investigating officer (PW 14) by the defence. Had such question been put to PW 14, he would have
certainly explained the reason for not examining PW 2 from 15-8-1997 to 17-8-1997. Having not
done so, the appellants are not right in contending that there was delay in recording the statement
of PW 2.
26. It cannot be held as a rule of universal application that the testimony of a witness becomes
unreliable merely because there is delay in examination of a particular witness. In Sunil Kumar v.
State of Rajasthan [(2005)9 25 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak
Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs.
State of M.P.) SCC 283], it was held that the question of delay in examining a witness during
investigation is material only if it is indicative and suggestive of some unfair practice by the
investigating agency for the purpose of introducing a core of witness to falsely support the
prosecution case. As such there was no delay in recording the statement of PW 2 and even assuming
that there was delay in questioning PW 2, that by itself cannot amount to any infirmity in the
prosecution case.
42. In the case of Gunnana Pentayya @ Pentadu and Ors Versus State of A. P reported in AIR 2009
SC (Supp) 940, the Supreme Court has held as under :
9. .......... Though it was raised that there was delay in examination of PW2, the same
is without substance in view of what has been stated by this Court in State of U. P. v.
Satish (2005 AIR SCW 905). It was observed that this Court in several decisions has
held that unless the investigating officer is categorically asked as to why there was
delay in examination of the witness, the defence cannot take advantage therefrom. In
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 15
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
the instant case, no question has been asked to the investigating officer PW53
regarding the reason for delay. There was even no suggestion that PW2 was not
present in the house when the incident took place.
43. Thus, it is clear that where an explanation is not sought from the investigating officer, in holding
the Test Identification Parade belatedly, then the delay in holding the Test Identification Parade, by
itself may not be fatal. Further, even not a single question was put to the Investigating Officer, Satish
Dubey (P.W.16) pertaining to Test Identification Parade. Not a single question was put to this
witness that whether the appellants were kept with their covered faces or not? No suggestion was
given that whether the complainant had ever seen the appellants prior to holding of Test
Identification Parade or not? Further, in the present case, not only 26 Criminal Appeal
Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias
Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) the complainant Ramsewak (P.W.1)
has identified the appellants in the Court, but the independent witnesses, Pratap Singh (P.W.5) and
Santosh Purohit (P.W.6) have also identified the appellants in the Court. Further more, they are the
eye witnesses. Although the statements of these witnesses were recorded on 6-4-2010, but the
Investigating Officer, Satish Dubey (P.W.16), has given an explanation that as he was busy in other
works, therefore, he could not record their statement at the earliest. Although it was expected that
the Investigating Officer, should have recorded the statements of the witnesses at the earliest, but at
the same time, it is also well settled principle of law that any faulty investigation cannot be a ground
to discard the direct evidence. The Supreme Court in the case of Prithvi Vs. Mam Raj and others
reported in AIR 2004 SC 2729 has held as under :
Unexplained delay in recording the statement may render it suspect, but the High
Court cannot make a fetish out of a rule of prudence. In Mohd. Khalid v. State of
West Bengal, (2002) 7 SCC 334 at 349 (para 12), this Court observed that :-
"Mere delay in examination of the witnesses for a few days cannot in all cases be
termed to be fatal so far as the prosecution is concerned. There may be several
reasons. When the delay is explained, whatever be the length of the delay, the Court
can act on the testimony of the witness if it is found to be cogent and credible."
44. The Supreme Court in the case of State of U.P. Vs. Jagdeo reported in (2003) 1 SCC 456 has held
as under :
8. Coming to the aspect of the investigation being allegedly faulty, we would like to
say that we do not agree with the view taken by the High Court. We would rather like
to say that assuming the investigation was faulty, for that reason alone the accused
persons cannot be let off or acquitted. For the fault of the prosecution, the
perpetrators of such a ghastly 27 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and
248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State
of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) crime cannot be allowed to go
scot-free.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 16
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
45. Thus, this Court is of the considered opinion, that the prosecution has established beyond
reasonable doubt, that the complainant Ramsewak (P.W.1), had seen the appellants at the time of
the incident and has duly identified them. Similarly, it is also proved that Prashant (P.W.5) and
Santosh Purohit (P.W.6) have seen the incident and had identified the appellants. Thus, it is proved
that the appellants by causing gun shot injury to the complainant Ramsewak (P.W.1) from behind,
had snatched the bag containing Rs. 6 lacs, from the complainant Ramsewak (P.W.1).
46. Mahendra Singh Balmik (P.W.7) has stated that the appellants Ashish and Dhruv Pratap had
made confessional statements Ex. P.7 and Ex. P.9. Accordingly, an amount of Rs. 1 lacs, one Country
Made Pistol of 315 bore, one live catridge and one bag was seized from the possession of Appellant
Ashish vide seizure memo Ex. P.8. An amount of Rs. One lac and a motor cycle was seized from the
possession of appellant Dhruv Pratap @ Sonu vide seizure memo Ex. P.10. Brijmohan Gupta
(P.W.10) and Manendra Singh Bundela (P.W. 13) have proved that an amount of Rs. 50,000 apart
from one 315 bore country made pistol and two rounds as well as one Nokia mobile was seized from
the possession of appellant Tilak. Satish Dubey (P.W.16), the investigating officer has also proved
the seizure of above mentioned articles. It is submitted by the Counsel for the appellants that in
absence of any special marking on the currency notes, it cannot be said that the amount seized from
the possession of the appellants Tilak, Ashish and Dhruv Pratap was the looted property and
therefore, the seized money cannot be linked with the offence. It is true that in absence of any
special marking on the currency notes, it may be difficult to link the seized money with the offence,
but as a huge amount was seized from 28 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012
AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias
Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) the possession of the appellants, therefore, they were under obligation to
prove the source of the said amount. No explanation has been given by the appellants as to how they
came in possession of such a huge amount. In absence of any explanation by the appellants, it is
held that the looted money was seized from the possession of the appellants.
47. Furthermore, the complainant Ramsewak (P.W.1) had stated that when he was trying to run
towards a shop of cold drinks situated in front of the Bhairav Temple, another gun shot was fired,
which had missed and had hit the wall of the shop. One bullet was found stuck in the wall of the
shop of Ashok Shrivastava and was accordingly seized. Thus, the evidence of complainant
Ramsewak (P.W.1) is corroborated by the surrounding circumstances. Further, the evidence of
complainant Ramsewak (P.W.1) is corroborated by the evidence of Balwan Yadav (P.W.2).
48. It is next contended by the Counsel for the appellants that as the allegations are that the
appellant Ashish had used the fire arm and the remaining two appellants namely Tilak and Dhruv
Pratap were on the motor cycles and were not having any weapon in their hand, therefore, Tilak and
Dhruv Pratap cannot be held guilty of offence under Section 397 of I.P.C. To buttress his
contentions, the Counsel for the appellants has relied upon the judgment of Supreme Court passed
in the case of Phool Kumar Vs. Delhi Administration reported in (1975) 1 SCC 797.
49. In the present case, the allegations are that three persons came on a motor cycle and the
appellant Ashish fired at the complainant Ramsewak (P.W.1) twice and other two accused persons
were not alleged to be carrying any weapon. There is no allegation that either Tilak or Dhruv Pratap
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 17
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
had used any weapon or had shown any weapon in order to put the witnesses or the complainant
under fear. The Trial Court has convicted the 29 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and
248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and
Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) appellant Ashish and Tilak for offence under Section 394/397 of
I.P.C. As no weapon was used by the appellant Tilak therefore, he is acquitted for offence under
Section 397 of I.P.C. but is convicted under Section 394 of I.P.C. simplicitor. However, Dhruv Pratap
Singh has not been convicted under Section 397 of I.P.C. by the Trial Court itself.
50. It is submitted that since, only three persons or four persons (Including the acquitted accused)
are alleged to have been involved in the offence, therefore, no offence of dacoity is made out. The
submission made by the Counsel for the appellants is misconceived and hence rejected. The
appellants have been convicted under Section 394/397 of I.P.C. Section 394 of I.P.C. deals with
Voluntarily causing hurt in committing robbery whereas Section 397 of I.P.C., deals with Robbery,
or dacoity, with attempt to cause death or grievous hurt. The appellants have not been convicted for
committing dacoity but they have been convicted for offence under Section 394 and 397 of I.P.C.
Offence under Section 397 of I.P.C. includes "Robbery" also. "Robbery" has been defined under
Section 390 of I.P.C. whereas "Dacoity" has been defined under Section 391 of I.P.C.
51. So far as the recovery of Country made pistol of 315 bore and cartridges from the possession of
the appellants Ashish and Tilak are concerned, the seizure of the weapons has not been challenged
by the appellants. Therefore, it is held that one country made pistol of 315 bore was seized from the
possession of each of appellant Ashish and Tilak and one cartridge and two cartridges of 315 bore
were also seized from the possession of Tilak and Ashish respectively. The District Magistrate had
granted sanction for prosecution under the Arms Act.
52. Thus, considering the facts and circumstances of the case and the evidence which has come on
record, this Court is of the considered opinion that the appellant Ashish is guilty of 30 Criminal
Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh
alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) committing offence under
Section 397 of I.P.C., whereas the appellants Dhruv Pratap Singh and Tilak are guilty of committing
offence under Section 394 of I.P.C. The appellant Ashish is also held guilty of committing offence
under Section 25(1)(1-B)(a) and 27 of Arms Act. There is no allegation that the appellant Tilak was
either having firearm with him at the time of commission of offence or had used the same, therefore,
he is acquitted of the charge under Section 27 of Arms Act.
53. Thus, the appellant Ashish is convicted under Section 397 read with Section 13 of M.P.D.V.P.K.
Act as well as under Section 25(1)(1-B)(a) and 27 of Arms Act. Appellants Tilak and Dhruv are
convicted under Section 394 read with Section 13 of M.P.D.V.P.K. Act. The appellant Tilak is also
convicted for offence under Section 25(1)(1-B)(a) of Arms Act.
54. It is next contended by the Counsel for the appellants, that the appellants Tilak and Dhruv
Pratap are on bail and they were in jail for a period of about 1 year during trial and have remained in
jail for a period of about 10 months after their conviction and thus, the appellants Tilak and Dhruv
Pratap have remained in jail for a period of approximately 1 year and 10 months. Similarly, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 18
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
appellant Ashish was although granted bail by this Court, but it appears that he did not furnish the
bail and therefore, he is still in jail. It is submitted that the period of jail sentence already undergone
by the appellants would meet the ends of justice therefore, the sentence may be modified. Heard the
learned Counsel for the appellants.
55. It is true that the incident took place in the year 2010, but the manner in which the offence was
committed it is clear that the appellants knew that the complainant is going to withdraw a huge
amount of Rs. 6 lacs and therefore, they were not only watching his movements but they chased
them, fired gun shots causing injuries to the complainant Ramsewak and looted an amount of 31
Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P,
Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) Rs. 6 lacs,
in the public place. Firing gun shots, on the road where shops are situated and persons are moving,
can be safely said to be a heinous offence. Some of the looted money has also been recovered from
their possession and they have failed to give any explanation as to how they came in possession of
the said amount. Deterrence is one of the important aspect of the sentencing policy.
56. The Supreme Court in the case of Shyam Narain Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) reported in (2013) 7
SCC 77 has held as under :
14. Primarily it is to be borne in mind that sentencing for any offence has a social
goal.
Sentence is to be imposed regard being had to the nature of the offence and the manner in which the
offence has been committed. The fundamental purpose of imposition of sentence is based on the
principle that the accused must realise that the crime committed by him has not only created a dent
in his life but also a concavity in the social fabric. The purpose of just punishment is designed so that
the individuals in the society which ultimately constitute the collective do not suffer time and again
for such crimes. It serves as a deterrent. True it is, on certain occasions, opportunities may be
granted to the convict for reforming himself but it is equally true that the principle of
proportionality between an offence committed and the penalty imposed are to be kept in view.
While carrying out this complex exercise, it is obligatory on the part of the court to see the impact of
the offence on the society as a whole and its ramifications on the immediate collective as well as its
repercussions on the victim.
15. In this context, we may refer with profit to the pronouncement in Jameel v. State of U.P.,
wherein this Court, speaking about the concept of sentence, has laid down that it is the duty of every
court to award proper sentence having regard to the nature of the offence and the manner in which
it was executed or committed. The sentencing courts are expected to consider all relevant facts and
circumstances bearing on the question of sentence and proceed to 32 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012,
91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of
M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) impose a sentence commensurate with the gravity of
the offence.
16. In Shailesh Jasvantbhai v. State of Gujarat the Court has observed thus: (SCC p. 362, para
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 19
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
7) "7. ... Friedman in his Law in Changing Society stated that: 'State of criminal law continues to
be--as it should be--a decisive reflection of social consciousness of society.' Therefore, in operating
the sentencing system, law should adopt the corrective machinery or deterrence based on factual
matrix. By deft modulation, sentencing process be stern where it should be, and tempered with
mercy where it warrants to be. The facts and given circumstances in each case, the nature of the
crime, the manner in which it was planned and committed, the motive for commission of the crime,
the conduct of the accused, the nature of weapons used and all other attending circumstances are
relevant facts which would enter into the area of consideration."
17. In State of M.P. v. Babulal, two learned Judges, while delineating about the adequacy of
sentence, have expressed thus: (SCC pp. 241- 42, paras 23-24) "23. Punishment is the sanction
imposed on the offender for the infringement of law committed by him. Once a person is tried for
commission of an offence and found guilty by a competent court, it is the duty of the court to impose
on him such sentence as is prescribed by law. The award of sentence is consequential on and
incidental to conviction. The law does not envisage a person being convicted for an offence without a
sentence being imposed therefor.
24. The object of punishment has been succinctly stated in Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edn.,
Vol. 11, Para 482), thus:
'482. Object of punishment.--The aims of punishment are now considered to be
retribution, justice, deterrence, reformation and protection and modern sentencing
policy reflects a combination of several or all of these 33 Criminal Appeal
Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P,
Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of
M.P.) aims. The retributive element is intended to show public revulsion to the
offence and to punish the offender for his wrong conduct. The concept of justice as an
aim of punishment means both that the punishment should fit the offence and also
that like offences should receive similar punishments. An increasingly important
aspect of punishment is deterrence and sentences are aimed at deterring not only the
actual offender from further offences but also potential offenders from breaking the
law.
The importance of reformation of the offender is shown by the growing emphasis laid upon it by
much modern legislation, but judicial opinion towards this particular aim is varied and
rehabilitation will not usually be accorded precedence over deterrence. The main aim of punishment
in judicial thought, however, is still the protection of society and the other objects frequently receive
only secondary consideration when sentences are being decided.'"
(emphasis in original)
18. In Gopal Singh v. State of Uttarakhand, while dealing with the philosophy of just
punishment which is the collective cry of the society, a two-Judge Bench has stated
that just punishment would be dependent on the facts of the case and rationalised
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 20
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
judicial discretion. Neither the personal perception of a Judge nor self-adhered
moralistic vision nor hypothetical apprehensions should be allowed to have any play.
For every offence, a drastic measure cannot be thought of. Similarly, an offender
cannot be allowed to be treated with leniency solely on the ground of discretion
vested in a court. The real requisite is to weigh the circumstances in which the crime
has been committed and other concomitant factors.
19. The aforesaid authorities deal with sentencing in general. As is seen, various
concepts, namely, gravity of the offence, manner of its execution, impact on the
society, repercussions on the victim and proportionality of punishment have been
emphasised upon. In the case at hand, we are concerned with the justification of life
imprisonment in a case of rape committed on an eight year old girl, 34 Criminal
Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P,
Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of
M.P.) helpless and vulnerable and, in a way, hapless. The victim was both physically
and psychologically vulnerable. It is worthy to note that any kind of sexual assault has
always been viewed with seriousness and sensitivity by this Court.
57. The Supreme Court in the case of Raj Bala Vs. State of Haryana reported in (2016)
1 SCC 463 has held as under :
4. We have commenced the judgment with the aforesaid pronouncements, and our
anguished observations, for the present case, in essentiality, depicts an exercise of
judicial discretion to be completely moving away from the objective parameters of
law which clearly postulate that the prime objective of criminal law is the imposition
of adequate, just and proportionate punishment which is commensurate with the
gravity, nature of the crime and manner in which the offence is committed keeping in
mind the social interest and the conscience of the society, as has been laid down in
State of M.P. v. Bablu, State of M.P. v. Surendra Singh and State of Punjab v.
Bawa Singh.
* * * * * * * *
16. A court, while imposing sentence, has a duty to respond to the collective cry of the society. The
legislature in its wisdom has conferred discretion on the court but the duty of the court in such a
situation becomes more difficult and complex. It has to exercise the discretion on reasonable and
rational parameters. The discretion cannot be allowed to yield to fancy or notion. A Judge has to
keep in mind the paramount concept of rule of law and the conscience of the collective and balance
it with the principle of proportionality but when the discretion is exercised in a capricious manner, it
tantamounts to relinquishment of duty and reckless abandonment of responsibility. One cannot
remain a total alien to the demand of the socio- 35 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and
248/2012 AFR (Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and
Ashish alias Ashu Vs. State of M.P.) cultural milieu regard being had to the command of law and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 21
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
also brush aside the agony of the victim or the survivors of the victim. Society waits with patience to
see that justice is done. There is a hope on the part of the society and when the criminal culpability
is established and the discretion is irrationally exercised by the court, the said hope is shattered and
the patience is wrecked. It is the duty of the court not to exercise the discretion in such a manner as
a consequence of which the expectation inherent in patience, which is the "finest part of fortitude" is
destroyed. A Judge should never feel that the individuals who constitute the society as a whole is
imperceptible to the exercise of discretion. He should always bear in mind that erroneous and
fallacious exercise of discretion is perceived by a visible collective.
58. Thus, if the facts of the present case are considered, then it would be clear that the jail sentence
awarded by the Trial Court does not call for any interference, and the jail sentence already
undergone by the appellants would not serve the ends of justice.
59. Accordingly, the jail sentence of rigorous imprisonment of 10 years and a fine of Rs. 5000 with
default imprisonment for offence under Section 397 of I.P.C. and rigorous imprisonment of 2 years
and a fine of Rs. 1000 with default imprisonment for offence under Section 25(1)(1-B)(a) of Arms
Act and rigorous imprisonment of 3 years and a fine of Rs. 1000 with default imprisonment as
awarded by the Trial Court to appellant Ashish is hereby affirmed.
60. The jail sentence of rigorous imprisonment of 10 years and a fine of Rs. 5000 with default
imprisonment for offence under Section 394 of I.P.C. and rigorous imprisonment of 2 years and a
fine of Rs. 1000 with default imprisonment for offence under Section 25(1)(1-B)(a) of Arms Act,
awarded by the Trial Court to the appellant Tilak is hereby affirmed.
61. The jail sentence of rigorous imprisonment of 10 years and a fine of Rs. 5000 with default
imprisonment for offence under 36 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR
(Tilak Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu
Vs. State of M.P.) Section 394 of I.P.C., awarded by the Trial Court to the appellant Dhruv Pratap is
hereby affirmed.
62. The appellants Tilak and Dhruv Pratap are on bail. Their bail bonds and surety bonds are hereby
cancelled. They are directed to immediately surrender before the Trial Court for undergoing the
remaining jail sentence.
63. The appellant Ashish is in jail as he had not furnished the bail in compliance of order dated
30-12-2013. The bail order dated 30-12-2013 is hereby recalled.
64. Accordingly, the judgment and sentence dated 30/12/2011 passed by Special Judge (MPDVPK,
Act) Datia in Special Sessions Trial No.31/2010 is hereby affirmed to the extent mentioned above.
With aforesaid modifications, the appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
(G.S. Ahluwalia) Judge Arun* 37 Criminal Appeal Nos.88/2012, 91/2012 and 248/2012 AFR (Tilak
Singh Vs. State of M.P, Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu Vs. State of M.P. and Ashish alias Ashu Vs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 22
Ashish @ Ashu vs State Of M.P. on 7 October, 2017
State of M.P.) 07/10/2017 Shri Rajmani Bansal, Advocate for appellant-Tilak Singh.
Shri A.K. Jain, Advocate for appellants-Dhruvpratap Singh alias Sonu and Ashish alias Ashu.
Shri RVS Ghuraiya, Public Prosecutor for
respondent/State.
Arguments heard.
Judgment is dictated, signed and dated on separate sheets.
(G.S. AHLUWALIA) Judge Arun*
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135761095/ 23
