Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its
... on 3 March, 2025
Author: Ajay Bhanot
Bench: Ajay Bhanot
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
A.F.R.
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:29491
Court No. - 5
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 52 of 2025
Petitioner :- Ashwani Kumar Srivastava
Respondent :- Central Bank Of India Through Its Managing Director, Chandennukhi, Nariman Point , Mumbai
Counsel for Petitioner :- Ritesh Srivastava
Counsel for Respondent :- Gyan Prakash Shrivastava
Hon'ble Ajay Bhanot,J.
1. The judgement is being structured in the following conceptual framework to facilitate the
discussion:
I Introduction II Submissions of learned counsels for the parties III Facts IV
Statutory Framework/Legal Provisions A. The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act,
2016 B. Office Memorandum of the Government of India C. Bank Circulars D.
Transfer : An incident of service V Rights of care givers and obligations of employers
in light of interplay of applicable statutory scheme and legal provisions VI
Conclusions I. Introduction
2. The petitioner has assailed the order dated 06.05.2024 passed by the respondent no. 4
transferring the petitioner from Raniganj Branch, District Pratapgarh (Varanasi Region) to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 1
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
Central Bank of India, Regional Office, Rajkot.
II. Submissions of learned counsel for the parties:
3. Shri Ritesh Srivastava, learned counsel for the petitioner while assailing the impugned transfer
order submits as follows:
I. The petitioner is the care giver of his wife who is a person suffering from disability
under the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 20161. II. The impugned order is
violative of the mandate of the Disabilities Act, 2016. Attention is called to various
provisions of the Disabilities Act, 2016. III. The impugned order of transfer is in the
teeth of the Office Memorandum dated 08.10.2018 issued by Government of India,
Bank Circular dated 28.06.2022 and transfer policy of the Bank dated 15.03.2024.
IV. The petitioner is entitled to exemption from transfer under the aforesaid
provisions of the Disabilities Act, 2016, Office Memorandum dated 08.10.2018 issued
by Government of India, Bank Circular dated 28.06.2022 and transfer policy of the
Bank dated 15.03.2024. V. The mother of the petitioner is also suffering from a
disability under the Disabilities Act, 2016. VI. The impugned order suffers from non
application of mind and was passed as a matter of routine. Submissions on behalf of
respondents
4. Shri Ashok Khare, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Shri Gyan Prakash, learned counsel for the
respondent Bank defended the impugned order by contending as under:
I. Transfer is an incident of service. The office memorandum of the Government of
India do not impose a complete ban on transfers of employees who are care givers. II.
The petitioner has misinterpreted the Disabilities Act, 2016. Such misreading will
have an adverse impact on the functioning of the institution as a whole. III. The
petitioner has been accommodated over the years to the greatest extent possible by
the respondents keeping in mind his duties as a care giver, and to provide support to
his wife who suffers from disability. IV. The impugned transfer order is not violative
of Office Memorandum dated 08.10.2018 issued by Government of India, Bank
Circular dated 28.06.2022 and transfer policy of the Bank dated 15.03.2024. V. No
documentation is in the record to support the claim of the mother's disability under
the Disabilities Act, 2016. VI. The impugned order was passed after due
consideration of all relevant aspects in the facts and circumstances of the case. III.
Facts
5. The petitioner is an employee in the Central Bank of India (hereinafter referred to as the Bank).
The wife of the petitioner suffers from benchmark disability as defined under Section 2(r) of the
Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016. The nature of disability of the petitioner's wife as
recorded in the disability certificate is extracted hereunder:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 2
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
"(A) She is a case of Locomotor Disability (B) the diagnosis in her case in Gradually
Progressive Muscular Dystrophy Right Lower Limb (C) She has 40% (in figure) Forty
percent (in words) Permanent Disability in relation to her Right Leg as per the
guidelines (Guidelines for the purpose of assessing the extent of specified disability in
a person included under RPwD Act, 2016 notified by Government of India vide S.O.
76(E) dated 04/01/2018)"
6. The petitioner claims that his mother is also a person suffering from disability under the
Disabilities Act, 2016. However, no certificate of disability of the petitioner's mother issued by the
competent authority is in the record. The respondent Bank has specifically refuted the claim of the
petitioner regarding his mother's disability. The pleadings made by the Bank are untraversed. The
claim of the petitioner as regards the disability of his mother is rejected.
7. The petitioner was posted for 10 years in the Varanasi Region, and for 15 years in Lucknow
Region. The petitioner was transferred to Allahabad at his own request. His second request for
transfer was also acceded to, and he was retained in Varanasi Region w.e.f. 22.07.2021. By the
impugned order the petitioner has been transferred to Rajkot Region.
IV. Statutory Framework/Legal Provisions A. The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016
8. The controversy at hands requires an examination of the statute, the Government of India
Memorandum and Bank circulars which hold the field.
9. The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 20162 was enacted to give effect to the United Nations
Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities and for matters connected therewith or
incidental thereto. The United Nations General Assembly adopted its Convention on the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities on the 13th day of December, 2006. The following principles for
empowerment of persons with disabilities were laid down in the Convention and guided the
legislative intent of the Rights of the Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016.
(a) respect for inherent dignity, individual autonomy including the freedom to make
one's own choices, and independence of persons;
(b) non-discrimination
(c) full and effective participation and inclusion in society
(d) respect for difference and acceptance of persons with disabilities as part of human
diversity and humanity;
(e) equality of opportunity;
(f) accessibility;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 3
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
(g) equality between men and women;
(h) respect for the evolving capacities of children with disabilities and respect for the
right of children with disabilities to preserve their identities;
10. It would be apposite to extract provisions of the Disabilities Act, 2016 which are germane to the
controversy. Section 2(r) of the Disabilities Act, 2016 defines the benchmark disability as under:
"Section 2(r) "person with benchmark disability" means a person with not less than
forty per cent. of a specified disability where specified disability has not been defined
in measurable terms and includes a person with disability where specified disability
has been defined in measurable terms, as certified by the certifying authority;"
11. Section 2 (s) of the Disabilities Act, 2016 states the definition of disability thus:
Section 2(s) "person with disability" means a person with long term physical, mental,
intellectual or sensory impairment which, in interaction with barriers, hinders his full
and effective participation in society equally with others;
12. The disability of the petitioner's wife which is relatable to the above said provision has been
discussed above.
13. Section 2(d) of the Disabilities Act, 2016 provides for a "care giver" to support a person with
disability and reads as under:
"Section 2(d) "care-giver" means any person including parents and other family
Members who with or without payment provides care, support or assistance to a
person with disability."
14. "Care givers" directly impact the quality of life of persons with disabilities. Care givers are key
facilitators who enable persons with disabilities to realize their rights under the Disabilities Act,
2016.
15. The definition of phrase "care giver" is widely worded and inclusive in nature. While the
definition prioritizes family members and parents, other care givers also receive equal recognition
under the scheme of the Disabilities Act, 2016. Care givers are important support system under the
Disabilities Act, 2016 for persons with disabilities.
16. "Establishment" has been defined in Section 2(i) of Disabilities Act, 2016 as follows:
Section 2(i) "establishment" includes a Government establishment and private
establishment;"
17. Section 2 (l) of Disabilities Act, 2016 defines "high support":
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 4
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
Section 2 (l) "high support" means an intensive support, physical, psychological and
otherwise, which may be required by a person with benchmark disability for daily
activities, to take independent and informed decision to access facilities and
participating in all areas of life including education, employment, family and
community life and treatment and therapy;"
18. Persons with disabilities are further categorized into persons with disability having high support
needs, as provided under Section 2(t) and Section 58 of Disabilities Act, 2016. The provisions are
extracted hereunder:
Section 2(t) "person with disability having high support needs" means a person with
benchmark disability certified under clause (a) of sub-section (2) of section 58 who
needs high support; Section 58. Procedure for certification--(1) Any person with
specified disability, may apply, in such manner as may be prescribed by the Central
Government, to a certifying authority having jurisdiction, for issuing of a certificate
of disability. (2) On receipt of an application under sub-section (1), the certifying
authority shall assess the disability of the concerned person in accordance with
relevant guidelines notified under section 56, and shall, after such assessment, as the
case may be,
(a) issue a certificate of disability to such person, in such form as may be prescribed
by the Central Government;
(b) inform him in writing that he has no specified disability.
(3) The certificate of disability issued under this section shall be valid across the
country."
19. Section 2 (y) of the Disabilities Act, 2016 serves legislative intent by contemplating "reasonable
accommodation" to enable persons with disabilities to enjoy their rights equally with others. The
provision is reproduced hereunder:
"Section 2(y) "reasonable accommodation" means necessary and appropriate
modification and adjustments, without imposing a disproportionate or undue burden
in a particular case, to ensure to persons with disabilities the enjoyment or exercise of
rights equally with others."
20. With a view to ensuring equality for persons with disabilities, Section 3 of the Disabilities Act,
2016 mandates the appropriate Government to take the required measures. At the same time the
provision also underscores the need for reasonable accommodation. The provision is extracted
hereunder:
"3. Equality and non-discrimination.--(1) The appropriate Government shall ensure
that the persons with disabilities enjoy the right to equality, life with dignity and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 5
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
respect for his or her integrity equally with others. (2) The appropriate Government
shall take steps to utilise the capacity of persons with disabilities by providing
appropriate environment. (3) No person with disability shall be discriminated on the
ground of disability, unless it is shown that the impugned act or omission is a
proportionate means of achieving a legitimate aim. (4) No person shall be deprived of
his or her personal liberty only on the ground of disability. (5) The appropriate
Government shall take necessary steps to ensure reasonable accommodation for
persons with disabilities."
21. Section 20 of the Disabilities Act, 2016 prohibits discrimination in employment in Government
establishments and also requires the appropriate government to frame policies for posting and
transfer of employees with disabilities:
"Section 20. Non-discrimination in employment--(1) No Government establishment
shall discriminate against any person with disability in any matter relating to
employment:
Provided that the appropriate Government may, having regard to the type of work
carried on in any establishment, by notification and subject to such conditions, if any,
exempt any establishment from the provisions of this section.
(2) Every Government establishment shall provide reasonable accommodation and
appropriate barrier free and conducive environment to employees with disability.
(3) No promotion shall be denied to a person merely on the ground of disability.
(4) No Government establishment shall dispense with or reduce in rank, an employee
who acquires a disability during his or her service:
Provided that, if an employee after acquiring disability is not suitable for the post he
was holding, shall be shifted to some other post with the same pay scale and service
benefits:
Provided further that if it is not possible to adjust the employee against any post, he
may be kept on a supernumerary post until a suitable post is available or he attains
the age of superannuation, whichever is earlier.
(5) The appropriate Government may frame policies for posting and transfer of
employees with disabilities."
(emphasis supplied) "Section 21. Equal opportunity policy-- (1) Every establishment shall notify
equal opportunity policy detailing measures proposed to be taken by it in pursuance of the
provisions of this Chapter in the manner as may be prescribed by the Central Government.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 6
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
(2) Every establishment shall register a copy of the said policy with the Chief Commissioner or the
State Commissioner, as the case may be."
22. The transfer policies expected of appropriate government include policies regarding care givers
as well. The said transfer policies have to be aligned with the scheme of the Disabilities Act, 2016.
IV B. Office Memorandum of the Government of India
23. The Government of India in keeping with the intent of the Disabilities Act, 2016 took out Office
Memorandum dated 08.10.2018 exempting persons with disability and care givers from routine
exercise of transfers/rotational transfer subject to administrative constraints:
"3 With the enactment of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 on April
17, 2017, the following instructions are issued in supersession of the
above-mentioned OMs of even number dated June 6, 2014, November 17, 2014 and
January 5, 2016 with regard to the eligibility for seeking exemption from routine
exercise of transfer/rotational transfer:
(i) A Government employee who is a care-giver of dependent
daughter/son/parents/spouse/brother/sister with Specified Disability, as certified by
the certifying authority as a Person with Benchmark Disability as defined under
Section 2 (r) of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 may be exempted
from the routine exercise of transfer/rotational transfer subject to the administrative
constraints.
(ii) The term "Specified Disability" as defined in the Schedule to the Rights of Persons
with Disabilities Act, 2016, covers (1) Locomotor disability including leprosy cured
person, cerebral palsy, dwarfism, muscular dystrophy and Acid attack victims (ii)
Blindness (iii) Low-vision (iv) Deaf (v) Hard of hearing (vi) Speech and language
disabilities (vii) Intellectual disability including specific learning disabilities and
autism spectrum disorder (viii) Mental illness (ix) Disability caused due to: (a)
Neurological conditions such as Multiple sclerosis and Parkinson's disease (b) Blood
disorder- Haemophilia, Thalassemia and Sickle cell-disease and (x) Multiple
disabilities (more than one of the above specified disabilities) including deaf
blindness and any other category of disabilities as may be notified by the Central
Government.
(iii) The term "Specified Disability" as defined herein is applicable as grounds only
for the purpose of seeking exemption from routine transfer/rotational transfer by a
Government employee, who is a care-giver of dependent daughter /son /parents
/spouse / brother /sister as stated in Para 3 (i) above.
4. All the Ministries/Departments are requested to bring these instructions to the notice of all
concerned under their control."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 7
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
IV C. Bank Circulars
24. The aforesaid Government of India guidelines granting exemptions to care givers from
routine/rotational transfers were adopted by the respondent Bank with the appropriate limitations.
The relevant parts of the transfer of policy are extracted hereunder:
"1. General Provision applicable to all types of transfer:
1.1 Notwithstanding, what is stated in these norms, the management at its own
discretion may' post/transfer any officer at any time to any Station/Region/Zone,
irrespective of the period of stay thereat, as per the administrative/ business needs of
the Bank or any other reason considered valid by the management in its own opinion.
1.2 In respect of transfer/ posting of physically challenged officer, with benchmark
disability and Officer who is caregiver of dependent daughter/son/parents/spouse/
brother/ sister with 'Specified Disability' as certified by the certifying authority, as a
Person with Benchmark Disability, as defined under Section 2(r) of the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016, in terms of DOPT guidelines
O.M.No.42011/3/2014-Estt(Res) dated 8 October, 2018, bank shall follow the
guidelines issued by Govt. of India from time to time, subject to administrative
constraint.
In order to effectively implement rotational transfer exemptions to Care-givers, it has been decided
to bestow precedence to employees who are Care-giver of Dependent Spouse & Dependent Children
over other family members.
ROTATIONAL TRANSFERS:
3.1 Officers in Scale I/II/III who have (subject to provisions of para 1.2 and 3.2 & 3.5)
- Completed a stay of 3 years in a Branch shall be rotated to another Branch within
the Station /Region.
- Completed 5 years of stay in Administrative posting combining immediate previous admin tenure
but have not completed continuous 5 years admin tenure in the present office, shall be posted in a
branch/office within the same Region. However, the officer shall be transferred out to another
Region on completion of continuous 5 years admin tenure in present region.
- Officers posted in CLD/SPBTC/CBOTC/ZAO/ZO/RO/LDMO/CGTMSE CELL and in any other
Department/ Offices which is not involved directly in customer dealing shall be treated as
administrative posting.
- Completed 6 years of stay in the region as an officer, irrespective of the scale, shall be transferred
to another region which could be within the Zone/other Zone.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 8
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
- Completed 10 years of stay as an officer in a particular zone, irrespective of the scale, shall be
transferred to another zone. However based on the Ranking on Performance appraisal in Central
Rise, Officers may be retained in the same zone to the extent of fulfilling administrative
requirements in order of merit.
- The Officers in Scale I, II & III who have been retained on Promotion in the Present Region/Zone
shall be retained in the same Region/Zone till the completion of their term 3 years as the case may
be.
- No Officer shall be transferred out of Branch/Administrative office prior to completion of 3 years/5
years tenure respectively without prior approval of GM-HCM Central Office.
- Notwithstanding what is stated above, the transfers will be subject to vacancies, suitability of
officers and management exigencies.
- The cutoff date for determining the requisite period of stay in present Region/Zone will be as of
30th of June.
Provided however, officers in JMG Scale I who have been posted to rural branches may be
transferred after completion of 2 years of rural stay so as to provide opportunities for other officers
who have still to complete the rural stint. Further, officers working at a place declared as Tribal Area
by the respective State Government may be given place of their choice out of 3 stations in the same
Zone after their stay of 2 years in such Tribal Area.
However, Officers posted as BM in Rural/SU branch should continue for minimum 2 years or upto
completion of the stint."
IV D. Transfer: An incident of service
25. Transfer is an incident of service. Transfer is called an exigency of service in service
jurisprudence. The employer has a right to transfer the employees subject to statutory provisions
and other instruments of law. No employee has a vested right to be posted to any particular place or
posting. Transfers expose employees to different situations and environments thus building their
capacities and quality of output. Transfers provide opportunities to all employees to serve in
different assignments, and prevent creation of vested interests which often result from long
continuance of an employee at one place or area. Rational policies of transfer operate to the benefit
of the institution, safeguard the interests of employees and also contribute to the efficiency of the
organization. Transfers are made in public interest and to enhance institutional efficiency.
V. Rights of care givers and obligations of employers in light of interplay of applicable statutory
scheme and legal provisions:
26. The interplay of the statutory scheme of the Disabilities Act, 2016, the Government of India
memorandum and the bank circulars, powers of transfer vested in an employer discussed earlier will
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 9
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
determine the rights of care givers, the obligations of the employers and shall finally govern the fate
of this case.
27. A conjoint reading of the Disabilities Act, 2016, the Office Memorandum dated 08.10.2018
issued by Government of India, Bank Circular dated 28.06.2022 and transfer policy of the Bank
dated 15.03.2024, the right of the employer to transfer an employee has to be made in order to
understand the scope of exemptions from transfer for care givers under the said transfer policies.
The Government of India Office Memorandum, and Transfer Policy are compatible with the
Disabilities Act, 2016 and together they comprise a composite scheme.
28. The Disabilities Act, 2016 contemplates equal opportunities for persons with disabilities in
exercise of their rights, enjoyment of life and development of their potentialities. The said legislative
enactment envisages that the society at large, appropriate government, governmental institutions
and other establishments are fully sensitized to requirements of persons with disabilities and create
appropriate support systems and a working ethos for realization of the rights of persons with
disabilities.
29. At the same time the Disabilities Act, 2016 also recognizes the limitations of employers which
have to be factored in while implementing the beneficent provisions of the Disabilities Act, 2016.
30. The words "reasonable accommodation" as defined in Section 2(y) and applied in Section 3 and
Section 20 (2) of the Disabilities Act, 2016 contemplate that establishments/institutions to make
necessary policy adjustments to create support systems for persons with disabilities enable to enjoy
their rights equally with others. The "care givers" under the Disabilities Act, 2016 are also entitled to
the benefit of "reasonable accommodation" under the transfer policies framed by the
Government/Government Institutions.
31. However, implicit in the said provisions are the restrictions on the scope of such
accommodation/adjustment to be made by the employer.
32. The meaning of "reasonable accommodation" in Black's Law Dictionary Eighth Edition is as
follows:
"reasonable accommodation. 1. An action taken to adapt or adjust for a disabled
person, done in a way that does not impose an undue hardship on the party taking
the action. Under the Americans with Disabilities Act, an employer must make
reasonable accommodations for an employee's disability. Examples of reasonable
accommodations that have been approved by the courts include providing additional
unpaid leave, modifying the employee's work schedule, and reassigning the employee
to a more appropriate, vacant position."
33. The phrase "reasonable accommodation" is a very clear and an explicit legislative standard for
framing and implementation of transfer policies by the concerned establishments. The legislature
has created a successful blend of empathy and pragmatism. The legislation obligates establishments
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 10
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
to create support systems for persons with disabilities, and limits the application of beneficent
measures by being cognizant of the constraints of employers. The provision emphasizes the
responsibilities of establishments/employers towards persons with disabilities, and advocates
flexibility in policy formulation and execution to achieve fruition of the rights of the said class of
persons. The said provision simultaneously precludes claims which impose undue hardships upon
the establishments/employers while implementing the beneficent intent of the Disabilities Act. The
legislature thus recognizes the limitations of the extent of accommodation that can be made by the
employer/establishment.
34. Notably the said legislative mandate for providing support to persons with disabilities and care
givers is not cast in absolute or non negotiable terms. Free play in the joints is provided to the
establishments to frame policies for "care givers". The legislative yardstick of "reasonable
accommodation" adopts the path of golden mean, and eschews the option of maximum positions.
35. The said Government of India Memorandum, and the Bank circular containing the transfer
policy extracted earlier predicate exemptions granted to care givers from routine exercise of
transfers/rotational transfers by certain qualifications.
36. The aforesaid Government of India Memorandum while requiring the government employers to
frame policies for exemptions to care givers from transfers employed the word "may", and further
limits the applicability of the said policy with the phrase "administrative constraints". As per the
said Government of India Office Memorandum, the employees who are seeking exemptions from
transfer have to be "care giver" to their dependant daughter, son, parents, spouse, brother, sister.
37. The phrase "administrative constraints" is also employed in the said Bank circular which
regulates the transfers and exemptions for care givers. "Administrative constraints" qualifies the
policy of exemptions for care givers, and states the restrictions in the exemptions from transfer
granted to them. The said "administrative constraints" includes consideration of public purpose
served by the establishment, institutional interests which are catered to by the policy of transfers,
and also encompasses the rights of other employees.
38. The composite scheme of Disabilities Act, 2016, the Government of India Office Memorandum
dated 08.10.2018 and the bank circular dated 28.06.2022, does not place absolute restraints or
perpetual exemptions from transfer for care givers.
39. The reasons for not creating a scheme for complete ban on transfers of care givers are not far to
seek. A blanket ban on transfers will fully denude the employer of the power of transfer, and have a
disproportionately negative impact on institutional interests. A full embargo on transfers of "care
givers" would thus impose onerous demands on the institution and create a disarray in its
functioning or cause disruption in the institutional policies.
40. Such extreme interpretation of the policy of exemptions from transfers will lead to supersession
of institutional needs, degrade the capacity of institutions to achieve the public purpose they serve,
negate the rights of other employees, and ultimately would be detrimental to public interest.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 11
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
41. The Disabilities Act, 2016 and the aforesaid Government of India Memorandum and the Bank
Circular respectively have to be read in harmony to give effect to the intendment of the legislative
enactment and achieve the aim of executive policy. Reasonable accommodation in favour of Care
Givers envisages acceding to their requests or adjusting to their needs, but also requires the
employers not to neglect institutional interests. The outer limit of "reasonable accommodation" is
reached when acceptance of demands of care givers exceeds institutional interests or causes undue
hardship to the establishment. Administrative constraints embedded in the transfer policy also
prevent the employer from superseding institutional interests or overriding the rights of other
employees beyond acceptable limits.
42. Broadly speaking the aforesaid statutory mandate of the Disabilities Act, 2016 the Government
of India Office memorandum and the Bank circulars can be implemented by two prolonged actions.
Realization of the said goals require accommodation of the exemption claims of care givers in the
facts and circumstances of each case. Simultaneously paramount establishment/institutional
purposes and requirements, interests served by the policy of transfers, right of other employees,
interests of establishment/institutional efficiency and public interest also merit examination in the
process. The decision will have to balance the rights of persons with disabilities and needs of their
care givers, and the imperatives of institutional purpose and requirements.
43. In practical terms such exercise would entail a consideration of relevant factors while processing
the claim for exemption from transfer made by care giver. Every request for exemption from
transfer will have to be dealt with in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case after due
application of mind. The first step in such enquiry would require examination of the condition of the
person with disability. The duties of a care giver and the nature of support they3 give to the person
with disability would have to be factored in while taking a final decision. Infact the Disabilities Act,
2016 acknowledges different categories of disabilities including those disabilities which have high
support needs. The employer will have to determine whether the person with disability is a
dependant of the care giver. Empathy towards the persons with disabilities/care givers, and
commitment to implement the beneficent provisions of the Disabilities Act, 2016 should be depicted
in the actions of the employer. Genuine efforts have to be made by the employer to accommodate
the "care giver" at the place of choice or grant exemption from transfer.
44. Institutional purpose and requirements and public interest served by the institution will also be
given due weight in the process. Repeated acceptance of exemption requests made by the care giver
and prolonged continuance in a particular region, and need of the employee for a wider exposure are
among relevant criteria to be factored in the final decision. Indefinite posting of a care giver
employee at a particular place will annul the concept of transfers, permanently foreclose the
opportunities of other employees for said assignments and undermine the institutional interests of
the bank. These vital aspects cannot be overlooked while implementing the exemption policy.
VI.Conclusions:
45. In wake of the preceding discussion it now remains to be seen whether an exercise of the above
nature was undertaken by the respondent Bank in this case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 12
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
46. The petitioner's requests for transfers have been regularly acceded to by the Bank. The petitioner
repeatedly was given postings of his choice. He was retained in one zone for more than a decade.
The petitioner was accommodated as a care giver to the greatest extent possible.
47. Further the Bank has rightly examined the extent of the disability suffered by the wife of the
petitioner. The petitioner's wife is an Assistant Teacher in a Primary School. Even though she suffers
from disability has been discharging her functions as an Assistant Teacher independently and
without blemish. Wife of the petitioner does her daily chores, lives with dignity, and has attained
excellence in her chosen profession. The wife of the petitioner has an independent income. The lady
is an inspiring example to the society at large.
48. The respondent bank has also accorded appropriate attention to the institutional requirements
of transferring the petitioner in the overall interests of the institution and the career profile of the
petitioner.
49. Empathetic considerations were made by the Bank on various transfer requests forwarded by
the petitioner evidences the approach of an employer who is sensitive to the needs of a person with
disability, and is committed to implement the Disabilities Act, 2016, Office Memorandum and Bank
circular in regard to exemption of care givers from routine transfers.
50. In these facts and circumstances, the transfer of the petitioner does not fall in the category of
routine/rotational transfer and disentitles him to claim exemption under the transfer policy.
51. Competing demands of institutional interests and individual rights have been neatly balanced
with due application of mind by the Bank while passing the impugned order. The impugned transfer
order has factored in all relevant criteria and is in consonance with the observations made in the
judgement. The conduct of the employer/ respondent Bank satisfies the test of "reasonable
accommodation" to protect the interests of the petitioner. Denial of the petitioner's claim for further
continuance at a place of his choice is within the ambit of "administrative constraints" of the
respondent Bank. The impugned order is consistent with the provisions of the Disabilities Act, 2016
Government of India Office Memorandum, Bank circular containing the transfer policy.
52. The judgement rendered by this Court in Neeraj Chaturvedi Vs. Central Bank of India and others
reported at 2022 (4) AWC 3722 and relied upon by the petitioner will now be referenced. Neeraj
Chaturvedi (supra) is distinguishable and is not applicable to the facts of this case. In Neeraj
Chaturvedi (supra) the wife of the petitioner was suffering from 100% disability. In Neeraj
Chaturvedi (supra) the person with disability was neither working nor drawing an independent
salary.
53. No infirmity in the impugned order could be established. The impugned transfer order is not
liable to be interfered with.
54. In wake of the preceding discussion the writ petition is liable to be dismissed and is accordingly
dismissed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 13
Ashwani Kumar Srivastava vs Central Bank Of India Through Its ... on 3 March, 2025
55. Considering the mandate of the Disabilities Act, 2016 it would be pertinent to part with these
observations. The critical place of care givers for realizing the rights of persons with disabilities, and
also the obligations casts on employers have been discussed at length in the judgement. In case care
givers are transferred the concerned employers should explore the feasibility of facilitating alternate
care givers for the persons with disability or smooth shifting of the latter to the new place of posting.
56. Copy of this order be placed before the respective employers namely Principal Secretary, Basic
Education, Government of UP and Managing Director, Central Bank of India for considering
development of a policy in regard to care givers in the above light. In case such policy is evolved the
petitioner and his wife will be entitled to its benefits.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Dhananjai Sharma
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27932631/ 14
