Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol
Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
[1]
SHOUGRA Digitally signed by
KPAM SHOUGRAKPAM
DEVANANDA SINGH
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
DEVANAN Date: 2024.05.15 AT IMPHAL
14:05:41 +05'30'
DA SINGH
CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023
Athokpam Mangi Singh, aged about 60 years, S/o Late A. Babu
Singh of Lanthabal Lep Awang Leikai, P.O. Canchipur, P.S.
Singjamei and District Imphal West, Manipur
... Petitioner/ Defendant
-Versus-
1. Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) Mangol Devi, aged
about 70 years (now deceased) of Mongshangei Mamang Leikai,
P.O. Canchipur, P.S. Singjamei and Imphal West District and her
LRs.
(i) Mayanglambam Manihar Singh, aged about 70 years, S/o
Late M. Mangol Devi of Mongsangei Mamang Leikai, P.O. &
P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West;
(ii) Mayanglambam Rajen Singh, aged about 66 years, S/o Late
M. Mangol Devi of Mangsangei Mamang Leikai, P.O. & P.S.
Singjamei, Imphal West;
(iii) Mayanglambam (N) Hijam (O) Ibemnungshi Devi, aged about
62 years, W/o Hijam Raghumani and D/o Late M. Mangol Devi
of Chingamakha, P.O. & P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West District;
(iv) Mayanglambam (N) Mongbijam (O) Nungshitombi Devi, aged
about 58 years, W/o Mongbijam Rajit Singh and D/o Late M.
Mangol Devi of Konjeng Leikai, P.O. Canchipur & P.S.
Singjamei, Imphal West District, Manipur;
(v) Mayanglambam (N) Aheibam (O) Ashalata Devi, aged about
46 years, W/o Aheibam Ojit Singh and D/o Late M. Mangol
Devi of Heiranggoithong, P.O. Canchipur and P.S. Singjamei,
Imphal West District, Manipur
2. Smt. Athokpam Ningol Konsam Ongbi Angoubi, aged about 75
years (now deceased) of Langthabal Lep Awang Leikai, Imphal,
represented by her LRs.
CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
[2]
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177588658/ 1
Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
(i) Konsam Manihar Singh, aged about 55 years, S/o Late
Konsam Ongbi Angoubi Devi;
(ii) Konsam Ahongjao Singh, aged about 52 years, S/o Late
Konsam Ongbi Angoubi Devi;
(iii) Konsam Sumanta Singh, aged about 49 years, S/o Late
Konsam Ongi Angoubi Devi;
(iv) Konsam Ratan Singh, aged about 47 years, S/o Late Konsam
Ongbi Angoubi Devi;
(v) Konsam Somorjit Singh, aged about 45 years, S/o Late
Konsam Ongi Angoubi Devi;
All are resident of Langthabal Lep Awang Leikai, P.O.
Canchipur & P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West District, Manipur.
(vi) Konsam Ningol Arambam Ongbi Radhe Devi, aged about 62
years, W/o A. Iboyaima Singh and D/o Late Konsam Ongbi
Angoubi Devi of Langthabal Mantrikhong, P.O. Canchipur &
P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West District, Manipur;
(vii) Konsam Ningol Thounaojam Ongbi Bino Devi, aged about 59
years, W/o Late Th. Mohindro Singh, D/o Late Konsam Ongbi
Angoubi Devi of Meijarao Makha Thounaojam, P.O. & P.S.
Wangoi, Bishnupur District, Manipur;
(viii) Konsam Ningol Athokpam Ongbi Sumati Devi, aged about 42
years, W/o A. Somendro Singh, D/o Late Konsam Ongbi
Angoubi Devi of Langthabal Lep Awang Leikai, P.O.
Canchipur & P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West District, Manipur.
... Respondents/ Plaintiffs
IN THE MATTER OF:
In the Judicial Misc. Case No. 59 of 2023,
Ref.: Original Suit No. 19 of 2012
1. Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) Mangol Devi, aged
about 70 years (now deceased) of Mongshangei Mamang
Leikai, Imphal West, Manipur and her LRs.
(i) Mayanglambam Manihar Singh, aged about 70 years, S/o
Late M. Mangol Devi of Mongsangei Mamang Leikai, P.O.
& P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West;
CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
[3]
(ii) Mayanglambam Rajen Singh, aged about 66 years, S/o
Late M. Mangol Devi of Mangsangei Mamang Leikai, P.O.
& P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177588658/ 2
Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
(iii) Mayanglambam (N) Hijam (O) Ibemnungshi Devi, aged
about 62 years, W/o Hijam Raghumani and D/o Late M.
Mangol Devi of Chingamakha, P.O. & P.S. Singjamei,
Imphal West District;
(iv) Mayanglambam (N) Mongbijam (O) Nungshitombi Devi,
aged about 58 years, W/o Mongbijam Rajit Singh and D/o
Late M. Mangol Devi of Konjeng Leikai, P.O. Canchipur &
P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West District, Manipur;
(v) Mayanglambam (N) Aheibam (O) Ashalata Devi, aged
about 46 years, W/o Aheibam Ojit Singh and D/o Late M.
Mangol Devi of Heiranggoithong, P.O. Canchipur and P.S.
Singjamei, Imphal West District, Manipur.
2. Smt. Athokpam Ningol Konsam Ongbi Angoubi, aged about 75
years (now deceased) represented by her LRs.
(i) Konsam Manihar Singh, aged about 55 years, S/o Late
Konsam Ongbi Angoubi Devi;
(ii) Konsam Ahongjao Singh, aged about 52 years, S/o Late
Konsam Ongbi Angoubi Devi;
(iii) Konsam Sumanta Singh, aged about 49 years, S/o Late
Konsam Ongi Angoubi Devi;
(iv) Konsam Ratan Singh, aged about 47 years, S/o Late
Konsam Ongbi Angoubi Devi;
(v) Konsam Somorjit Singh, aged about 45 years, S/o Late
Konsam Ongi Angoubi Devi;
All are resident of Langthabal Lep Awang Leikai, P.O.
Canchipur & P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West District, Manipur.
(vi) Konsam Ningol Arambam Ongbi Radhe Devi, aged about
62 years, W/o A. Iboyaima Singh and D/o Late Konsam
Ongbi Angoubi Devi of Langthabal Mantrikhong, P.O.
Canchipur & P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West District, Manipur;
(vii) Konsam Ningol Thounaojam Ongbi Bino Devi, aged about
59 years, W/o Late Th. Mohindro Singh, D/o Late Konsam
CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
[4]
Ongbi Angoubi Devi of Meijarao Makha Thounaojam, P.O.
& P.S. Wangoi, Bishnupur District, Manipur;
(viii) Konsam Ningol Athokpam Ongbi Sumati Devi, aged about
42 years, W/o A. Somendro Singh, D/o Late Konsam Ongbi
Angoubi Devi of Langthabal Lep Awang Leikai, P.O.
Canchipur & P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West District, Manipur.
... Plaintiffs/ Opposite Parties
-Versus-
Shri Athokpam Mangi Singh, aged about 60 years, S/o Late Babu
Singh, a resident of Langthabal Lep Awang Leikai, P.O. & P.S.
Singjamei, Imphal West District, Manipur.
... Defendant/ Applicant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177588658/ 3
Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
B E F O R E
HON'BLEMR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
For the petitioner :: Mr. R.K. Tomma, Advocate
For the respondents :: Mr. H. Pari, Advocate
Date of hearing :: 01-02-2024
Date of judgment :: 15-05-2024
J U D G M E N T
[1] Heard Mr. R.K. Tomma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. H. Pari, learned
counsel appearing for the respondents.
The present revision petition has been filed with the prayer for quashing and setting aside the order
dated 12-04-2023 passed by the Civil Judge, Junior Division, Imphal West - II in Judl. Misc. Case
No. 59 of 2023 (Ref:- O.S. No. 19 of 2012) coupled with the prayer for directing the Civil Judge,
Junior Division, Imphal West - II to proceed with the trial of the suit after allowing the amendment
of the written statement filed by the petitioner in connection with the said original suit.
CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
[2] The respondents No. 1 and 2, during their lifetime, filed the
aforesaid O.S. No. 19 of 2012 in the Court of Civil Judge, Junior Division, Imphal West against the
present petitioner claiming the following reliefs:-
(i) A decree declaring that the plaintiffs are the absolute owners of the suit land;
(ii) A decree declaring that the defendant acquires no right, title and interest over the
suit land;
(iii) A decree declaring the order dated 13-02-1980 passed by the SDC/ Hiyangthang
in Mutat5ion Case No. 18/SDC/IW(S)/1980 and order dated 15-09-1980 passed by
the SDC/ Hiyangthang in Mutation Case No. 294/SDC/IW(S)/1980 are illegal, void
and non-est and that has no binding effect to the plaintiffs;
(iv) A decree for eviction of the defendant from the suit land described in Schedule
"A" by demolishing the suit structures described in Schedule "B" Schedule "C-1" and
Schedule "C-2" of the plaint and deliver possession of the same to the plaintiffs;
(v) Cost of the litigation; and
(vi) Any other reliefs which the Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177588658/ 4
Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
[3] The petitioner, as the sole defendant, filed his written statement dated 30-01-2013 and as per
record, the petitioner also filed a recast of his written statement on 24-06-2015 thereby indicating
that the petitioner amended his original written statement filed on 30-01-2013. The said written
statement is an elaborate and detailed one and the main defence taken by the petitioner in his
written statement is that he purchased the suit land from the legal heirs of the original owner of the
suit land including the CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
present respondents No. 1 and 2 under an oral agreement and that he has been living on the suit
land along with his family members by constructing his dwelling house and out house inside the suit
land without any interruption from any quarter.
[4] After about ten years from the date of filing his written statement and when the suit was at the
stage of final hearing, the petitioner filed an application registered as Judl. Misc. Case No. 59 of
2023 (Ref:- O.S. No. 19 of 2012) before the Civil Judge, Junior Division, Imphal West-II with a
prayer for allowing amendment of his written statement as proposed in the said application. By the
proposed amendment, the petitioner seeks to insert a new line of defence in his written statement by
stating that he had acquired title by prescription by being in possession of the suit land to the
knowledge of the respondents/ plaintiffs for more than thirty years and as such, the possession of
the petitioner become adverse to the respondents including their legal heirs and interested persons.
In the said application, no reason has been given by the petitioner as to why he could not approach
the court for amendment of his written statement before commencement of the trial of the suit.
[5] The trial court rejected the amendment application filed by the petitioner by passing the order
dated 12-04-2023, impugned herein. The reasons given by the trial court for rejecting the
amendment application are as under:-
(a) The case was at the stage of final hearing and the plaintiffs' counsel had already
submitted their written argument and that written argument of the defendant was to
be submitted by his counsel before the amendment application was filed;
CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
(b) The proposed amendment are not necessary for the purpose of determining the
real question of controversy between the parties;
(c) By the proposed amendment, the petitioner has set up new claim of title over the
suit land through adverse possession; and
(d) The proposed amendment could have been made part of the written statement if
there was due diligence on the part of the petitioner and his counsel and that such
amendment cannot be allowed at the belated stage of final hearing of the case as
there was lack of due diligence on the part of the petitioner and his counsel.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177588658/ 5
Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
[6] Mr. R.K. Tomma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submitted that the impugned
order had been passed by the trial court by ignoring the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India regarding amendment cited by the counsel for the petitioner at the time of hearing of the
amendment application and as such, the impugned order is arbitrary and illegal and the same is a
defective order passed in violation of the settled laws. It has also been submitted that the trial court
has failed to apply its mind to the real facts and circumstances of the case at the time of passing the
impugned order and that the trial court has committed patent or flagrant error and the impugned
order had been passed perfunctorily on wrong premises and as such, the impugned order is liable to
be quash and set aside. It has also been submitted by the learned counsel that the amendment of the
petitioner's written statement as proposed in the aforesaid amendment application are highly
required to determine the real point of controversies between the parties and the same will help the
trial court to do complete justice to both sides and that if the proposed CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of
2023 Contd.../-
amendment is not allowed, the petitioner will suffer from irreparable loss and hardship. The learned
counsel, accordingly, prays for setting aside the impugned order and for allowing the amendment of
the written statement as proposed by the petitioner in his amendment application. [7] The learned
counsel for the respondents submitted that the amendment application was filed very belatedly and
at the stage of final hearing of the suit and that the petitioner did not give any explanation or reason
in his amendment application about the efforts made by him and his inability to make the proposed
amendment in his written statement before commencement of the trial of the suit. It has also been
submitted that the trial court declined to exercise its inherent discretion and rejected the
amendment application filed by the petitioner on the ground that there was lack of due diligence on
the part of the petitioner and his counsel in filing the amendment application and as such, there is
no ground for interfering with the impugned order passed by the trial court.
The learned counsel further submitted that if the claim of adverse possession as proposed
amendment is allowed, it will amount to allowing the petitioner to take contradictory pleas to his
earlier claim of title over the suit land by way of purchase, which is not permissible in law. In
support of his contention, the learned counsel cited the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the
case of "Government of Kerala & anr. Vs. Joseph & ors." Reported in AIR 2003 SC 3988 wherein it
has been held as under:-
"21.9 Claim of independent title and adverse possession at the same time amount to
contradictory pleas. The case of Annasaheb Bapusaheb Patil v. Balwant (two-Judge
Bench) elaborated this principle as:
"15. Where possession can be referred to a lawful title, it will not be considered to be
adverse. The reason being that a CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
person whose possession can be referred to a lawful title will not be permitted to
show that his possession was hostile to another's title. One who holds possession on
behalf of another, does not by mere denial of that other's title make his possession
adverse so as to give himself the benefit of the statute of limitation. Therefore, a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177588658/ 6
Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
person who enters into possession having a lawful title, cannot divest another of that
title by pretending that he had no title at all."
This principle was upheld in the case of Mohan Lal v.
Mirza Abdul Gaffar (two- Judge Bench) -
"4. As regards the first plea, it is inconsistent with the second plea. Having come into
possession under the agreement, he must disclaim his right thereunder and plead
and prove assertion of his independent hostile adverse possession to the knowledge
of the transferor or his successor in title or interest and that the latter had acquiesced
to his illegal possession during the entire period of 12 years, i.e., up to completing the
period of his title by prescription nec vi, nec clam, nec precario. Since the appellant's
claim is founded on Section 53-A, it goes without saying that he admits by
implication that he came into possession of the land lawfully under the agreement
and continued to remain in possession till date of the suit. Thereby the plea of
adverse possession is not available to the appellant. The Court in Uttam Chand
(supra) has reiterated this principle of adverse possession."
[8] In the case of "Rajkumar Gurawara (Dead) through LRs Vs. S.K. Sarwagi and Company Private
Limited & anr." Reported in (2008) 14 SCC 364, it has been held by the Hon'ble Apex Court as
under:-
"12. In order to consider whether the appellant-plaintiff has made out a case for
amendment of his plaint, it is useful to refer Order 6 Rule 17 CPC which reads as
under:
"17. Amendment of pleadings. The court may at any stage of the proceedings allow
either party to alter or amend his pleadings in such manner and on such terms as
may be just, and all such amendments shall be made as may be necessary for the
purpose of determining the real questions in controversy between the parties:
Provided that no application for amendment shall be allowed after the trial has
commenced, unless the court CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
comes to the conclusion that in spite of due diligence, the party could not have raised
the matter before the commencement of trial.
The first part of the rule makes it abundantly clear that at any stage of the
proceedings, parties are free to alter or amend their pleadings as may be necessary
for the purpose of determining the real questions in controversy. However, this Rule
is subject to proviso appended therein. The said Rule with proviso again substituted
by Act 22 of 2002 with effect from 1-7-2002 makes it clear that after the
commencement of the trial, no application for amendment shall be allowed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177588658/ 7
Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
However, if the parties to the proceedings are able to satisfy the court that in spite of
due diligence they could not raise the issue before the commencement of trial and the
court is satisfied with their explanation, amendment can be allowed even after
commencement of the trial."
"13. To put it clear. Order 6 Rule 17 CPC confers jurisdiction on the court to allow
either party to alter or amend his pleadings at any stage of the proceedings on such
terms as may be just. Such amendments seeking determination of the real question of
the controversy between the parties shall be permitted to be made. Pre-trial
amendments are to be allowed liberally than those which are sought to be made after
the commencement of the trial. As rightly pointed out by the High Court in the
former case, the opposite party is not prejudiced because he will have an opportunity
of meeting the amendment sought to be made. In the latter case, namely, after the
commencement of trial, particularly, after completion of the evidence, the question of
prejudice to the opposite party may arise and in such event, it is incumbent on the
part of the court to satisfy the conditions prescribed in the proviso."
[9] In the case of "Chander Kanta Bansal Vs. Rajinder Singh Anand" reported in AIR 2008 SC 2234,
the Hon'ble Apex Court held as under:-
"8. In order to find out whether the application of the defendant under Order VI,
Rule 17 for amendment of written statement is bona fide and sustainable at this stage
or not, it is useful to refer to the relevant provisions of CPC. Order 6, Rule 17 reads
thus:
"17. Amendment of pleadings. - The Court may at any stage of the proceedings allow
either party to alter or amend his pleadings in such manner and on such terms as
may be CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
just, and all such amendments shall be made as may be necessary for the purpose of
determining the real questions in controversy between the parties:
Provided that no application for amendment shall be allowed after the trial has
commenced, unless the Court comes to the conclusion that in spite of due diligence,
the party could not have raised the matter before the commencement of trial."
This rule was omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999. However, before the
enforcement of the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1999, the original rule was
substituted and restored with an additional proviso. The proviso limits the power to allow
amendment after the commencement of trial but grants discretion to the court to allow amendment
if it feels that the party could not have raised the matter before the commencement of trial in spite of
due diligence. It is true that the power to allow amendment should be liberally exercised. The liberal
principles which guide the exercise of discretion in allowing the amendment are that multiplicity of
proceedings should be avoided, that amendments which do not totally alter the character of an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177588658/ 8
Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
action should be granted, while care should be taken to see that injustice and prejudice of an
irremediable character are not inflicted upon the opposite party under pretence of amendment."
"9. With a view to shorten the litigation and speed up the trial of cases Rule 17 was
omitted by amending Act 46 of 1999. This rule had been on the statute for ages and
there was hardly a suit or proceeding where this provision had not been used. That
was the reason it evoked much controversy leading to protest all over the country.
Thereafter, the rule was restored in its original form by amending Act 22 of 2002
with a rider in the shape of the proviso limiting the power of amendment to some
extent. The new proviso lays down that no application for amendment shall be
allowed after the commencement of trial, unless the court comes to the conclusion
that in spite of due diligence, the party could not have raised the matter before the
commencement of trial. But whether a party has acted with due diligence or not
would depend upon the facts and circumstances of each case. This would, to some
extent, limit the scope of amendment to pleadings, but would still vest enough
powers in courts to deal with the unforeseen situations whenever they arise."
CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
"10. The entire object of the said amendment is to stall filing of applications for
amending a pleading subsequent to the commencement of trial, to avoid surprises
and the parties had sufficient knowledge of the other's case. It also helps in checking
the delays in filing the applications. Once, the trial commences on the known pleas, it
will be very difficult for any side to reconcile. In spite of the same, an exception is
made in the newly inserted proviso where it is shown that in spite of due diligence, he
could not raise a plea, it is for the court to consider the same. Therefore, it is not a
complete bar nor shuts out entertaining of any later application. As stated earlier, the
reason for adding proviso is to curtail delay and expedite hearing of cases."
"11. Keeping the above broad principles in mind, let us ascertain whether the
defendant has justiciable cause to file an application praying for amendment of a
written statement for bringing an agreement dated 10-09-1982. We have already
referred to the fact that the plaintiff had approached the court seeking a decree for
mandatory injunction as early as on 1986. We also refer to the fact that within a short
duration i.e. in 1986 itself, the defendant has filed a written statement. Absolutely,
there is no whisper about the prior partition agreement dated 10-09-1982. No doubt,
in the application for amendment, it was stated that her son who is a Chartered
Accountant all along was looking after this suit and he died in the year 1998. It is also
available from the very same application that apart from her first son, namely, Sunit
Gupta, defendant has another son by name Navneet Agarwal. Admittedly, the son
who looking after the suit was none else than a Chartered Accountant. In such
circumstances, if the alleged agreement dated 10-09-1982 between the plaintiff and
defendant was in existence nothing prevented her son, Chartered Accountant, to
bring it to the notice of her counsel and refer it in the written statement filed in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177588658/ 9
Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
year 1986. It is relevant to mention that in the reply, the plaintiff has specifically
denied the same and asserted that the alleged agreement/partition deed dated
10-09-1982 is a forged document and based on the same, the proposed amendment
cannot be allowed. It is also not in dispute and best known to both parties the suit
which is of the year 1986 came to be taken up for trial only in 2004 and admittedly on
the date of filing of the petition for amendment, the trial was on the verge of
completion. It was brought to our notice that both sides have closed their evidence
and completed their argument, but only at this stage the defendant filed the said
application for amendment of her written statement. As discussed above, CRP(CRP
Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
though first part of Rule 17 makes it clear that amendment of pleadings is permitted
at any stage of the proceeding, the proviso imposes certain restrictions. It makes it
clear that after the commencement of trial, no application for amendment shall be
allowed. However, if it is established that in spite of "due diligence" the party could
not have raised the matter before the commencement of trial depending on the
circumstances, the court is free to order such application. The words "due diligence"
has not been defined in the Code. According to Oxford Dictionary (Edition 2006), the
word "diligence" means careful and persistent application or effort. "Diligent" means
careful and steady in application to one's work and duties, showing care and effort.
As per Black's Law Dictionary (Eighth Edition), "diligence" means a continual effort
to accomplish something, care, caution; the attention and care required from a
person in a given situation. "Due diligence" means the diligence reasonably expected
from, and ordinarily exercised by, a person who seeks to satisfy a legal requirement
or to discharge an obligation. According to Words and Phrases by Drain-Dyspnea
(Permanent Edition 13A) "due diligence", in law, means doing everything reasonable,
not everything possible. "Due diligence" means reasonable diligence; it means such
diligence as a prudent man would exercise in the conduct of his own affairs. It is clear
that unless the party takes prompt steps, mere action cannot be accepted and file a
petition after the commencement of trial. As mentioned earlier, in the case on hand,
the application itself came to be filed only after 18 years and till the death of her first
son Sunit Gupta, Chartered Accountant, had not taken any step about the so-called
agreement. Even after his death in the year 1998, the petition was filed only in 2004.
The explanation offered by the defendant cannot be accepted since she did not
mention anything when she was examined as witness."
"12. As rightly referred to by the High Court in Union of India vs. Pramod Gupta
(dead) by L.Rs. and others, (2005) 12 SCC 1, this Court cautioned that delay and
laches on the part of the parties to the proceedings would also be a relevant factor for
allowing or disallowing an application for amendment of the pleadings."
[10] In my considered view, the principle of law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the
aforesaid judgments are applicable in the case in hand. In the present case, the petitioner filed his
written statement on 30-01-2013 and thereafter, the petitioner also filed a recast of the said
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177588658/ 10
Athokpam Mangi Singh vs Smt. Athokpam Ningol Mayanglambam (O) ... on 15 May, 2024
CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
written statement on 24-06-2015 thereby indicating that some amendment have been made in his
original written statement and the petitioner could have incorporated the proposed amendment at
that time but he failed to do so. After about ten years from the date of filing his written statement
and when the trial of the suit was at the stage of final hearing, the petitioner filed the amendment
application very belatedly and without giving any explanation about the delay and his inability to file
the said amendment application before commencement of the trial. Taking into consideration such
relevant factors, the trial court refused to exercise its inherent discretion as provided under the
proviso to Order VI Rule 17 of the CPC and rejected the amendment application on the grounds
mentioned in the impugned order.
In view of the above, this court did not find any ground or reason for interfering with the impugned
order passed by the learned trial court and accordingly, the present petition is hereby dismissed.
JUDGE
FR / NFR
Devananda
CRP(CRP Art. 227) No. 33 of 2023 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/177588658/ 11
