Atul vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
Atul vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:15223
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 43382 of 2024
Applicant :- Atul
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Mukesh Joshi
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Fatma Anjum,G.A.,Zaheer Asghar
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Mukesh Joshi, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Zaheer Asghar, learned counsel
for the informant as well as Sri Sushil Kumar Shukla, learned State Law Officer for the State and
perused the record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 761 of 2024, under Sections 65(1), 351(2), 352, 115(2),
127(7) B.N.S. and 3/4(2) POCSO Act, Police Station- Civil Lines, District- Moradabad, during the
pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56677586/ 1
Atul vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
4. The applicant is stated to have established corporeal relationship with the victim after marrying
her by converting her to his own religion and is stated to have even video recorded the said indecent
act and had threatened her to make it viral on social media.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT:
5. The applicant is absolutely innocent and has been falsely implicated in the present case.
6. The applicant has nothing to do with the said offence. The applicant and victim had married each
other in a temple and the said fact stands fortified from the statement of the victim recorded at the
time of her medical examination.
7. The date of birth of the victim is stated to be 1.1.2009, which is false. The victim by her looks
seems to be major, although as per her own statement her age comes out to be 15 years, 07 months
and 24 days on the date of incident. The applicant himself is a youth of 24 years.
8. A petition U/s 9 of Hindu Marriage Act was filed by the applicant as the husband and wife duo
had fallen apart. The said suit no.708 of 2024 is pending before the Principal Judge, Family Court,
Moradabad, which has been filed as Annexure-12 to the affidavit filed with bail application.
9. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity of
the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
10. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since 7.9.2024
and is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the
liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE/OPPOSITE PARTY:
11. The bail application has been opposed on the ground that victim was minor and she has been
forcibly converted to the religion of the applicant, as such, the anticipatory bail applications of other
co-accused persons have been rejected by the Co-ordinate Bench of this Court.
CONCLUSION:
12. In light of the judgement of the Supreme Court passed in Niranjan Singh and another vs
Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and others AIR 1980 SC 785, this Court has avoided detailed
examination of the evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the case as no party
should have the impression that his case has been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is
needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive exploration of the merits in the order itself.
13. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56677586/ 2
Atul vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
14. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
15. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that ?bail is a rule and jail is an exception?.
16. Learned State Law Officer could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would
warrant denial of bail to the applicant.
17. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned State Law Officer.
18. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
19. Let the applicant- Atul involved in aforementioned case crime number be released on bail on
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court
concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C./351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
20. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
21. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56677586/ 3
Atul vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
witnesses.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025 Vikas (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56677586/ 4
