Ayaz Ahmed & Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
Ayaz Ahmed & Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
=h475
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on : 13.06.2023
Pronounced on :16.06.2023
CRM(M) No.163/2023
CrlM Nos.288 & 301/2023
Ayaz Ahmed & Ors ...Petitioner(s)
Through:- Mr. Iqbal Hussain Bhat, Advocate &
Mr. Sanchit Verma, Advocate.
V/s
UT of J&K ...Respondent(s)
Through:- Mrs. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG.
CRM(M) No.164/2023
CrlM Nos.289 & 302/2023
Rayaz Ahmed
Through: Mr. Iqbal Hussain Bhat, Advocate.
Mr. Sanchit Verma, Advocate.
UT of J&K
Through: Mrs. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. By the medium of this common judgment, it is proposed to dispose of the above two petition as
both solicit to decide the same question as well arise out of the same order, passed by the Trial
Court. The petitioners initially filed appeals against the order dated 26.08.2022 passed in a case
titled 'State v. Rameez Raja & Ors' by the court of learned 3rd Additional Sessions Judge Jammu
(Special Judge designated under Section 22 of NIA Act) hereinafter referred to as 'Trial Court' by
virtue of which charges framed by the Trial Court vide order dated 25.10.2019 were not altered
against the petitioners, for the commission of offences punishable U/Ss 3/13 UAP Act, 7/25 Arms
Act and 4/5 Explosive Substances Act read with Section 120-B RPC, in a case arising out of an FIR
No. 182/2018 registered at P/S Kishtwar against all the accused including the petitioners.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22105233/ 1
Ayaz Ahmed & Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
2. The appeals filed by the petitioners were listed before the Division Bench of this Court and vide
order dated 16.02.2023, the Division Bench, after discussing law on the subject held that an order
framing charge or an order altering or refusing to alter the charge passed by the Special Court under
the NIA Act is an interlocutory order not appealable under sub section (1) of Section 21 of NIA Act
and held the appeals non maintainable. However, the request of the learned counsel for the
appellants to convert those proceedings in a petition under Section 482 CrPC was accepted. This is
how both the appeals were treated as petitions under Section 482 CrPC and came listed to be before
this Bench.
3. The petitioners are primarily aggrieved of the order dated 25.10.2019 passed by the Trial Court
whereby the charges were framed against the petitioners for the commission of offences punishable
U/Ss 3/13 UAP Act 1967, 7/25 Arms Act, 1959 and 4/5 Explosive Substances Act, 1908, read with
Section 120-B RPC and also the subsequent order dated 26.08.2022 whereby the Trial Court had
rejected their application seeking alteration of the charge, as such, both the orders have been
challenged by the petitioners before this court.
4. Both the orders have been assailed on the following grounds:
" a. That orders impugned are bad in the eyes of law and hence, deserves to be set
aside;
b. That from the perusal of the charge sheet there is no material or evidence or
witness against the appellant for the commission of the abovesaid offence, hence, the
appellants are entitled to be discharge from the abovesaid offence;
c. That the trial court has amended the charges of one of the accused i.e. accused no.2
namely Nisar Ahmed and the charges to the extent of the appellants have not been
altered or discharged on the ground that the trial court has no jurisdiction to alter the
charges framed against the appellant, hence, the appellant seek parity, on this ground
the impugned orders shall be set aside;
d. That the appellant is in incarceration since from the last five years without any
trial;
e. That from the perusal of the order dated 25.10.2019, it is evidence that the Hon'ble
Trial Court has not taken cognizance for the commission of offence under Section
120, 121-A, however, in the last para of the order dated 25.10.2019 Section 120-B of
the RPC has also been mentioned along with 3/13 UAP Act, 7/25 Arms Act, 4/5
Explosive Substances Act. It can be an error as in the absence of any offence in the
RPC Section 120-B of RPC cannot be charged; and f. That there is no recovery from
the possession of the appellant of any arms and ammunitions or explosives
substances, hence, framing of charge under Section 7/25 Arms Act, 4/25 Explosive
Substances Act is illegal and unwarranted under law, as charges under Section 120-B,
7/25 Arms Act and 4/5 Explosive Substances Act are not made out from the perusal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22105233/ 2
Ayaz Ahmed & Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
of the charge sheet. Furthermore, there is no statement against the appellants in the
charge sheet which constitute offence under Section 3/13 Unlawful Activities
Prevention Act, hence the impugned order deserves to be set aside and the appellant
may be discharged from the offence."
5. Learned counsel for the petitioners argued that the charge sheet was laid by the investigating
agency on conclusion of the investigation before the trial court for the commission of offences
punishable under Sections 3/13 UAP Act read with Section 120-B RPC against the petitioners
herein, however, the trial court vide order dated 25.10.2019 while framing charge, chargesheeted the
petitioners for the commission of offences punishable under sections 3/13 UAP Act, 7/25 Arms Act,
and 4/5 Explosive Substances Act read with Section 120-B RPC without any reason and it appears
that the charge had been framed for the commission of offences under the Arms Act and the
Explosive Substances Act under a misconception by the Trial Court while considering the same
charge against two of the accused from whom weapons/ammunition/explosives were stated to have
been recovered. He further argued that the trial court, in an application moved by a similarly placed
co-accused namely Nisar Ahmed, vide order dated 15.02.2022 was pleased to allow his application
for alteration of charge and from his charges the offences punishable under sections 4/5 ES Act read
with Section 120-B RPC were ordered to be deleted.
6. The grievance of the petitioners is that they had also moved application for alteration of charges
which came to be rejected vide impugned order dated 26.08.2022 wherein the trial court after
observing that the alteration of charge can only be considered after some evidence is adduced before
the court, otherwise, the order would amount to reviewing the order dated 25.10.2019 which was
passed after consideration of the material on record to frame the charge against the petitioners
along with other accused.
7. Learned counsel for the petitioners submits that the Trial Court has taken two different views
which are not permissible in the given facts and circumstances of the same case. He has also argued
that even otherwise on consideration of the material collected against the petitioners during
investigation no other offence than the offence punishable under UAP Act is established as there is
no evidence that arms/explosive/ammunition were recovered from them. He also argued that
Section 120-B RPC is also not attracted in the case as this section is attracted only in those cases
where the conspiracy is hatched to commit offences punishable under any of the sections of the
Ranbir Penal Code; that for a conspiracy for any offence punishable under UAP Act, there is
provision under Section 18 of a criminal conspiracy contained in the Act itself. It was finally prayed
that the orders impugned passed by the Trial Court be set aside and the trial court be asked to
consider the matter afresh for framing of charges against the petitioners.
8. Learned counsel for the respondent Mrs. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG, on the other hand, vehemently
argued that the petitioners had filed appeals initially against the impugned order whereby their
application for alteration of charge were rejected by the Trial Court, however, the same were treated
as petitions under Section 482 CrPC by the Division Bench of this court and the petitioners cannot
raise the plea they had raised in his appeal in these petitions as there is a limited scope while
invoking inherent jurisdiction of this court in terms of section 482 CrPC. Mrs. Kohli has further
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22105233/ 3
Ayaz Ahmed & Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
argued that the Trial Court has rightly observed that without recording any evidence, the Trial Court
which had considered and framed the charge, cannot alter the charge since it would amount to
review of the order which is not permissible under the criminal law. She has further argued that trial
court has rightly decided the application moved by the petitioners/accused for alteration of the
charges and no interference by this court is required, in the impugned orders.
9. Heard, perused and considered.
10. Before adverting to the rival submissions made by learned counsel for the parties, it will be
convenient to refer the factual aspects of the case. On 30.06.2018, a police party headed by
Inspector Sameer Geelani, SHO P/S Kishtwar at Girinagar found a person who disclosed his name
as Rameez Raja and on his search some weapons and ammunition were recovered from his
possession, who during his interrogation disclosed that another person namely Nisar Ahmed of
Amrtigarh was also involved and on the arrest of said Nisar Ahmed, three AK-47 magazines and 90
rounds of AK-47 were recovered at his instance, from a place in Kisthwar; that during their
interrogation, the names of some other persons including the petitoiners namely Riaz Ahmed,
Zahoor-ul-Hussain, Touseef Ul Nabi and Ayaz Ahmed also appeared as active supporters of banned
terrorist organization 'HM' as they were found to be in contact with the help of their cell phones
using WhatsApp etc with the militants based in Pakistan occupied Kashmir (POK), as such, they
were found to be involved in the commission of offence punishable under UAP Act.
11. After investigation of the case, the charge was laid against Rameez Raja and Nisar Ahmed from
whom arms/ammunition/explosives were recovered, for the commission of offences punishable
under Sections 7/25 Arms Act, 4/5 Explosive Substances Act, 3/12 UAP Act and Section 121, 121-A,
120-B RPC, whereas against other accused including the petitioners, the charge sheet was laid for
the commission of offences punishable under sections 3/13 UAP Act and 120-B RPC only.
12. The trial court after considering the material available on file vide order dated 25.10.2019 framed
the charge against all the accused including the petitioners/accused for the commission of offences
punishable under sections 3/13 UAP Act, 7/25 Arms Act, 4/5 Explosive Substances Act read with
Section 120-B RPC, after taking a view that the offences punishable under sections 121 and 121-A
read with Section 120-B of the Ranbir Penal Code is not attracted in the case for want of a complaint
by the District Magistrate as required in terms of Section 196 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.
13. One of the accused Nisar Ahmed moved an application for alteration of the charge and vide order
dated 15.02.2022 charge framed against him was ordered to be altered by deleting the offences
punishable under sections 4/5 Explosive Substances Act read with Section 120-B RPC. However, on
application moved by the petitioners/accused for alteration of the charge on the same grounds came
to be rejected vide order dated 26.08.2022 by the trial court holding that the charge cannot be
reviewed without recording any evidence.
14. On a keen consideration of the record available on file, since the petitioners/accused had been
accused through charge sheet by the investigating agency, for the commission of offences punishable
under sections 3/13 UAP Act, read with Section 120-B RPC, the court under some misconception,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22105233/ 4
Ayaz Ahmed & Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
with regard to the charge against two of the accused for the commission of other offences punishable
under Arms Act and the Explosive Substances Act, appears to have framed the charge against the
petitioners also for the offences under those statues. This appears so, since the order dated
25.10.2019 does not specify anything as to how these offences as against the assertions made in the
charge sheet are made out against the petitioners/accused. Therefore, on the basis of material on
record produced by the investigating agency through prosecution, the court at the most would have
framed the charge for those offences only of which they are alleged to have committed i.e. under
sections 3/13 UAP Act and 120-B RPC, and certainly not for the commission of offences punishable
under sections 7/25 Arms Act and 4/5 Explosive Substances Act without assigning any reason. The
Trial court has also taken two different views while considering the applications for alteration of
charge, the first view was taken by the then presiding officer Mr. Suneet Gupta who had allowed the
application and altered the charge whereas the other view had been taken by the next presiding
officer Mr. Ashwani Sharma, who had rejected the application for alteration of the charge.
15. In my considered opinion, a Trial Court is competent to alter the charge, in terms of Section 216
of CrPC, when it finds that the charge already framed to be defective for any reason, even without
recording evidence. The Trial court, has thus taken an erroneous view by holding that charge in
absence of any evidence is not permissible. The Trial Court rather was under a legal obligation to
remove the defect in charge, as in the reasons, nothing had been said about the charges, which were
slapped on the petitioners, without any material to take this view of 'prima facie' for the charges of
the offences under Arms Act, Explosives Act and the conspiracy under Penal Code. I am fortified to
take this view, in view of the law laid down by the Apex Court in a case titled Jasvinder Saini v. State
(NCT of Delhi) reported as (2013) 7 SCC 256. Relevant extract of para no. 11 is extracted as under:
"11. A plain reading of the above would show that the Court's power to alter or add
any charge is unrestrained provided such addition and/or alteration is made before
the judgment is pronounced. ......................................... The circumstances in which
such addition or alteration may be made are not, however, stipulated in Section 216.
It is all the same trite that the question of any such addition or alternation would
generally arise either because the Court finds the charge already framed to be
defective for any reason or because such addition is considered necessary after the
commencement of the trial having regard to the evidence that may come before the
Court."
Same view had been taken by the Apex Court again in a case titled 'Anant Parkash Sinha v. State of
Haryana' reported as (2016) 6 SCC 105. Relevant portion of para 18 is extracted as follows:
"18. ......the court can change or alter the charge if there is defect or something is left
out. The test is, it must be founded on the material available on record. It can be on
the basis of the complaint or the FIR or accompanying documents or the material
brought on record during the course of trial. It can also be done at any time before
pronouncement of judgment. It is not necessary to advert to each and every
circumstance. Suffice it to say, if the court has not framed a charge despite the
material on record, it has the jurisdiction to add a charge. Similarly, it has the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22105233/ 5
Ayaz Ahmed & Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 16 June, 2023
authority to alter the charge. The principle that has to be kept in mind is that the
charge so framed by the Magistrate is in accord with the materials produced before
him or if subsequent evidence comes on record. .........."
16. The contention of the learned counsel for the petitioners that Section 120-B RPC can also not be
attracted in the case as the offence under which some conspiracy is hatched with regard to the
commission punishable under the UAP Act has its own section 18 dealing with such a conspiracy, is
also tenable, particularly when the Trial Court had ordered not to frame charge for this offence.
17. For the foregoing reasons and observations made hereinabove, this court is of the considered
opinion that the trial court has wrongly framed the charge against the petitioners/accused for the
commission of offences punishable under sections 7/25 Arms Act and 4/5 Explosive Substances Act
against the petitioners/accused and also section 120-B RPC. However, on the basis of the material
available on record, there is sufficient material to proceed against the petitioners/accused for the
commission of offences punishable under sections 3/13 UAP Act, therefore, the charges to the extent
of commission of offences punishable under sections 7/25 Arms Act, 4/5 Explosive Substances Act
and 120-B RPC are quashed. However, the charge under section 3/13 UAP Act is maintained. The
trial court is directed to redraw the charge in terms of this order against the petitioners/accused for
their trial.
18. Having regard to the aforestated reasons and discussion made hereinabove, impugned order
dated 25.10.2019 passed in the case titled 'State v. Rameez Raja & Ors', is modified, in terms of this
order, qua the petitioners and impugned order dated 26.08.2022 is quashed.
19. Copy of this judgment shall be sent down to the trial court for compliance.
20. Copy of this judgment be placed on the file of connected petition as well.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge JAMMU.
16.06.2023 Raj Kumar Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22105233/ 6
