Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal
Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
Author: S.R.Krishna Kumar
Bench: S.R.Krishna Kumar
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA, BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 21st DAY OF APRIL 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE S.R.KRISHNA KUMAR
WRIT PETITION No.8059/2021 (T-IT)
BETWEEN:
AZIM PREMJI TRUSTEE COMPANY PVT. LTD.,
#134, DODDAKANNELLI, SARJAPUR ROAD
NEXT TO WIPRO CORPORATE OFFICE
BANGALORE-560 035
REPRESENTED HEREIN BY ITS DIRECTOR
MR.AZIM HASHAM PREMJI
...PETITIONER
(BY SRI S.GANESH, SENIOR ADVOCATE FOR
SRI. SANDEEP HUILGOL, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. PRINCIPAL COMMISSIONER OF
INCOME-TAX-2, BANGALORE
BMTC BUILDING, 80 FEET ROAD
6TH BLOCK, NEAR KHB GAMES VILLAGE
KORAMANGALA,
BENGALURU-560 095
2. DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX
CIRCLE 4(1)(1), BANGALORE
BMTC BUILDING, 80 FEET ROAD
6TH BLOCK, NEAR KHB GAMES VILLAGE
KORAMANGALA,
BENGALURU-560 095
3. CENTRAL BOARD OF DIRECT TAXES
DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 1
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
MINISTRY OF FINANCE,
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
NORTH BLOCK, NEW DELHI-110 002
REPRESENTED HEREIN BY ITS
CHAIRPERSON
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI.K.V.ARAVIND, ADVOCATE)
2
THIS W.P. IS FILED UNDER ARTICLE 226 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO QUASH THE IMPUGNED
NOTICE DATED 31.03.2021 ISSUED BY THE R2 U/S 148 OF THE
INCOME-TAX ACT, 1961 ANNEXURE-A AND QUASH THE
IMPUGNED CIRCULAR DATED 03.08.2012 ISSUED BY THE R3
ANNEXURE-B AND QUASH THE IMPUGNED CIRCULAR DATED
31.12.2018 ISSUED BY THE R3 ANNEXURE-C AND ETC.
THIS W.P. IS BEING HEARD AND RESERVED ON
18.12.2021, COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT OF ORDERS
THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:-
ORDER
In this petition, petitioner has sought for the following reliefs:-
" (i) Quashing the impugned notice dated 31.03.2021 bearing
No.ITBA/AST/S/148/2020-21/ 1032116338 (1) issued by the 2nd Respondent under
Section 148 of the Income-tax Act, 1961 (Annexure 'A').
(ii) Quashing the impugned Circular dated 03.08.2012 bearing No.6/2012
(F.No.133/44/2012-
SO (TPL)} issued by the 3rd Respondent (Annexure
- 'B')
(iii) Quashing the impugned Circular dated 31.12.2018 bearing No.10/2018
[F.No.173/626/2018-ITA.I] issued by the 3rd Respondent (Annexure - 'C')
(iv) Declaring that the impugned proceedings initiated by the 2nd Respondent under Sections 147
and 148 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, are wholly without jurisdiction, barred by limitation and,
therefore, without the authority of law;
(v) Declaring that Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the Income-tax Act, 1961, has no application to the gift of
shares of Wipro Ltd. Received by the Petitioner in the previous year relevant to the Assessment year
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 2
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
2013-14, and
(vi) Pass such other or further orders as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit in the facts and
circumstances of the case, and in the interests of justice and equity".
2. Briefly stated, the various contentions urged by the petitioner are as under:-
(i) The petitioner is a private limited company and is the sole Trustee of a private
discretionary Trust called "Azim Premji Trust" (for short 'the APT'). As per the trust
deed of APT, there are three settler partnership firms and three settlor companies.
The settlor firms, the settler companies, the petitioner and the beneficiary companies
are all part of the promoter group of Wipro Ltd., of which, Mr.Azim Hasham Premji
is the promoter. As a part of an inter se transfer within the promoter group, the APT
received certain securities being listed shares of Wipro Ltd., from the settlor firms in
financial year 2012-13 and the settlor companies in financial year 2010-11 as a gift to
be held as the corpus of APT and these transactions were duly disclosed
contemporaneously to the stock exchanges and this information was also
disseminated to the public at large. It is contended that the aforesaid gifts were duly
disclosed in the audited financial statements of APT for the respective financial years.
(ii) It is contended that thereafter, pursuant to a thorough examination and
verification of all the material placed on record by the petitioner which clearly
constituted the true and full disclosure on its part of all the material information
sought and required for the purpose of its assessment under the Act, an assessment
order came to be passed in the case of the petitioner under Section 143(3) of the
Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short 'the I.T.Act') for Assessment Year 2013-14, in which
the returned income was accepted.
(iii) It is further contended that thereafter, i.e., on 31.03.2021, which is well beyond
the stipulated period of four years from the end of Assessment Year 2013-14, the 2nd
respondent issued the impugned notice under Section 148 of the I.T.Act after
obtaining the sanction of respondent No.1 stating that there were reasons to believe
that APT's income chargeable to tax for the said Assessment Year had escaped
assessment and proposing to re-assess its income. In response, the petitioner
requested for the reasons for reopening APT's assessment. Acceding to its request,
the 2nd respondent furnished the purported reasons for re-opening the assessment
for Assessment Year 2013-14.
(iv) Petitioner has contended that the impugned notice is based on a patent error of law because it
equates a private limited company with an individual and on that erroneous basis, records the
reason to believe that the provisions of Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act are applicable to the
petitioner in respect of the gift of Wipro Ltd.'s shares received by it. Consequently, the so-called
"reason to believe" that its income has escaped assessment is completely baseless and non-est. It is
further contended that in the recorded reasons, extensive reliance has been placed upon the two
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 3
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
impugned Board Circulars of 2012 and 2018 despite them being directly contrary to the provisions
of Sections 2(31) and 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act.
(v) It is contended that in any event, there is no failure or omission whatsoever on the part of the
petitioner to disclose any material facts necessary for its assessment for Assessment Year 2013-14.
The impugned Section 148 Notice is therefore patently time barred and without jurisdiction; the
statutorily required sanction under section 151 has been granted by the 1st respondent without any
application of mind and without any consideration of the materials on record relating to the
Petitioner's assessment for assessment year 2013-14.
(vi) Alternatively, it is contended that Section 56(2) (vii)
(c) of the I.T. Act provided that where an individual or Hindu Undivided Family receives any
movable property in any year during the period 01.10.2009 to 01.04.2017 with a fair market value of
more than Rs.50,000/- for a consideration which is less than the fair market value , the same shall
be treated as the income of the recipient. The proviso to Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act provides
that this clause shall not apply to any property received from any relative as defined or on the
occasion of the marriage of the individual.
The term "relative" is defined in Explanation (e) to Section 56(2)(vii) in terms (of brother, sister,
spouse etc.) which make it absolutely clear that individual means only a natural person and not a
corporate entity.
(vii) During the year ending 31.03.2013, the petitioner received gift of Rs.29.55 crore number of
WIPRO shares from 3 Premji Group firms. This gift was fully disclosed in the petitioner's Balance
Sheet for the financial year 2012- 13, where the number of WIPRO shares received as gift, their face
value and the market value of the shares at the date of the Balance Sheet were all disclosed. Indeed,
there are no other details or particulars which could possibly be disclosed regarding the said WIPRO
shares received as gifts.
(viii) It is contended that during the regular assessment proceedings for A.Y 2013-14, the Assessing
Officer (A.O) issued a notice under Section 142(1) asking, inter alia, for the complete list of donors,
with address, PAN and amount donated. The Petitioner's reply gave complete particulars of the
donors, their PAN numbers and the number of WIPRO shares received as gifts and also the relevant
demat statements. It is contended that an assessee is under a duty or obligation to disclose only the
basic and primary facts relating to his assessment and thereafter, it is for the Assessing officer to
make further enquires and draw inferences and if he does not do so for any reason, then the revenue
cannot contend that there was any failure or omission on the part of the assessee.
(ix) It is contended that despite being in possession of all the relevant facts relating to the gifts of
shares received by the petitioner and the Trust Deed of Azim Premji Trust, the Assessing officer
chose not to apply Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act; instead, after the expiry of the period
mentioned in the proviso to Section 147, the Assessing officer has taken a new view, which is not
permissible under the proviso to Section 147 of the I.T. Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 4
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
(x) It is further contended that the Assessing officer passed the assessment order under Section
143(3) on 31.03.2016 recording that the petitioner's authorized representatives had attended from
time to time in connection with the assessment proceedings and had submitted the required details
which were taken on record.
The assessment was completed by accepting the income returned by the petitioner. It is contended
that in a case of reopening covered by the proviso to Section 147, the reasons recorded must set out
the exact particulars of the failure to disclose on the part of the assessee, on account of which the
escapement of income has taken place and a ritual repetition of the proviso to Section 147 would not
be sufficient. In the present case, the reasons recorded only state that though the number of WIPRO
shares received as a gift were disclosed but neither the book value nor the market value of the shares
was disclosed in the Balance Sheet. This is factually incorrect because the face value of the WIPRO
shares (Rs.2/- per share) and also their market value as on 31.03.2013 are clearly disclosed.
(xi) In any event, share of WIPRO is widely quoted and frequently traded and its market value from
minute to minute is readily available. The petitioner cannot possibly be accused of failing to disclose
information which is in the public domain and is continuously available to everybody.
In any event, the reasons recorded do not even attempt to claim that the non-application of Section
56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act and the consequent alleged escapement of income was because the
Assessing officer was allegedly unaware of the market price of WIPRO shares. For application of
Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act, even if a price as nominal as one paise is assigned to be the
market value of each Wipro share received as a gift with the number of shares received as a gift
being Rs.29.55 crores, the aggregate value would exceed the limit of Rs.50,000/-
specified in Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act. Thus, in the facts of the case, it is axiomatic that the
Assessing officer considered Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act not to be attracted at all rather than
being unaware of the market price of WIPRO shares as alleged. The market price of these shares is
irrelevant because in the reasons recorded, nowhere it is specifically allege and establish that the
alleged escapement of income was by reason of the so-
called non-disclosure of the share price. In any event, such an allegation, even if made, would be
false because the Balance Sheet states the market value. It is contended that the jurisdictional
condition precedent laid down under the proviso to Section 147 of the I.T.Act i.e., failure to disclose
the material fact, which failure allegedly is the proximate cause of the escapement of income has not
been fulfilled at all in the present case and the impugned Section 148 Notice requires to be struck
down on that ground alone and by itself.
(xii) Petitioner has also contended that the other jurisdictional condition precedent for re-opening
i.e., escapement of income also does not exist in the present case. The contentions urged by the
respondents that the income has escaped assessment because Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T. Act
was wrongly not applied to the gifts of WIPRO shares received by the petitioner as can be seen from
Annexure-M dated 09.04.2021 viz., the reasons recorded that the petitioner-limited company is an
individual to whom Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act applies is untenable and devoid of merit. It is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 5
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
therefore contended that on this distinct and independent ground also, the impugned Section 148
Notice requires to be struck down by this Hon'ble Court.
3. The respondents - Revenue have filed the statement of objections interalia contending that the
petition is premature, since the petitioner - assessee is required to file return of income to the
impugned assessment notice under Section 148 of the I.T.Act and seek reasons for reopening and
file objections before the assessing officer, who is required to pass an order on the same and only
upon the assessing officer passing such an order, the petitioner would be entitled to challenge the
same in accordance with law. It is contended that since the petitioner has approached this Court
without filing objections or the assessing officer passing orders, the present petition is not
maintainable.
3.1 The respondents have further contended that the challenge to the impugned circulars dated
03.08.2012 and 31.12.2018 are also misconceived and devoid of merits and the same are liable to be
rejected. It is contended that the challenge to the applicability of Section 56 (2) (vii) (c) of the I.T.Act
is also not sustainable in view of the equally efficacious and alternative remedy available to the
petitioner under the I.T.Act before the assessing officer and the higher authorities and as such, the
petition is not maintainable on this ground also.
3.2 It is also contended that though the prescribed period of six years to reopen the assessment of
the petitioner for the assessment year 2013-14 expired on 31.03.2020, in view of Section 3 of the
Taxation and other Laws (relaxation and amendment of certain provisions) Act, 2020, the period of
limitation was extended upto 31.12.2020 and thereafter, upto 31.03.2021 vide Notification dated
29.10.2020 issued by invoking the enabling powers under the said Section 3 of the said Act. It is
therefore contended that the impugned notice dated 31.03.2021 is within the extended period of
limitation and the contention of the petitioner that the impugned notice is beyond the period of
limitation is liable to be rejected.
3.3 The respondents have contended that in the return of income filed by the petitioner for the
assessment year 2013 - 14, the petitioner merely disclosed the receipt of gifts in the balance sheet as
part of long term investments at NIL value and neither the book value nor the market value of the
shares of Wipro Ltd., were disclosed by the petitioner. Further, in the notes to the accounts in the
summary of the transactions with parties having substantial interest, the names of the settlors and
only the number of shares of Wipro Ltd., gifted by them is mentioned and neither the book value
nor market value of the shares were disclosed and as such, the return of income without disclosing
the correct status and value of shares amounts to failure on the part of the petitioner to fully and
truly disclose all material facts necessary for assessment for that assessment year. It is therefore
contended that the assessing officer has correctly recorded that there are reasons to believe for
reopening of assessment under Section 148 of the I.T.Act and the impugned notice seeking to
re-open the assessment is in strict compliance and in conformity with the provisions of the I.T.Act
and several decisions of the Apex Court including the decision in the case of Assistant Commissioner
of Income Tax vs. Rajesh Jhavri Stock Brokers Ltd., - (2007) 291 ITR 500 (SC). It is also contended
that for the purpose of issuance of the notice of reassessment, only a prima facie satisfaction is
required on the part of the assessing officer and a detailed enquiry is neither required nor warranted
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 6
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
at that stage and on this ground also, the impugned notice is correct and proper. Putting forth these
contentions and denying the various contentions urged by the petitioner, respondents have sought
for dismissal of the petition.
4. I have heard Sri.S.Ganesh, learned Senior counsel appearing for Sri.Sandeep Huilgol for the
petitioner and Sri.K.V.Aravind, learned counsel for the respondents and perused the material on
record.
5. The material on record discloses that undisputedly, during the financial year 2012-13, which
corresponds to assessment year 2013-14, the petitioner received equity shares of Wipro Ltd., from 3
donors. The petitioner filed its returns which are produced along with the auditor's report as
Annexure-F to the petition. The said gift transactions were disclosed in the audited financial
statements for the year ending 31.03.2013.
6. On 09.06.2015, the Income tax officer issued a Notice to the petitioner under Section 142(1) of the
I.T.Act calling upon the petitioner to furnish details regarding assessment proceedings. In the said
notice, petitioner was called upon to produce complete list of donors with address, PAN and the
amount donated. The petitioner issued a reply dated 22.06.2015 furnishing all the details sought for
by the respondents, pursuant to which, the respondents passed an assessment order dated
31.03.2016 accepting the returns submitted by the petitioner.
7. Subsequently, on 11.03.2020, the respondents issued a notice under Section 133(6) of the I.T. Act
calling upon the petitioner to provide information relevant for the proceedings in relation to
financial year 2016-17; in the said notice, it was stated that the petitioner - assessee had been filing
returns as "AOP / BOI" and in view of the decision of the Delhi High Court, the petitioner is to be
assessed as an individual and reasons for filing the returns of income in the status of AOP / BOI is to
be furnished by the petitioner to the respondents.
8. The petitioner submitted a reply dated 19.03.2020 explaining in detail to the respondents that
apart from the fact that the decision of the Delhi High Court was not applicable to the petitioner, the
income tax returns and assessments made by the respondents categorizing the petitioner as a
company was correct and proper and that the petitioner cannot be assessed in the status of an
individual.
9. It is relevant to state that subsequent to the aforesaid reply submitted by the petitioner, the
respondents did not proceed further in the matter; instead, the respondents issued the impugned
Notice dated 31.03.2021 after more than one year proposing to reopen the assessment which has
been impugned in the present petition.
10. The first question that arises for consideration is, whether on 31.03.2021, the respondents were
entitled to reopen the assessment proceedings of the petitioner for the assessment year 2012-13
after the expiry of four years as contemplated in Section 147 of the I.T.Act; in this context, reliance is
placed upon the proviso to Section 147 of the I.T.Act by the respondents in order to contend that the
respondents had a valid reason to believe that the undisclosed income had escaped assessment on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 7
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
account of the petitioner - assessee not disclosing fully and truly all material facts during the course
of the original assessment.
11. The power / jurisdiction of the respondents -
revenue to reopen assessments under Section 147 of the I.T.Act 1961, beyond the prescribed period
of limitation on the ground that there were "income had escaped assessment due to failure on the
part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for assessment" came up
for consideration before the Apex Court while dealing with identical provisions in Section 34 of the
I.T.Act, 1922, in the case of Calcutta Discount Company Limited vs. Income Tax Officer -
AIR 1961 SC 372, wherein it was held as under:-
6. To confer jurisdiction under this section to issue notice in respect of assessments
beyond the period of four years, but within a period of eight years, from the end of
the relevant year two conditions have therefore to be satisfied. The first is that the
Income Tax Officer must have reason to believe that income, profits or gains
chargeable to income tax have been under-assessed. The second is that he must have
also reason to believe that such "underassessment"
has occurred by reason of either (i) omission or failure on the part of an assessee to make a return of
his income under Section 22, or (ii) omission or failure on the part of an assessee to disclose fully
and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment for that year. Both these conditions are
conditions precedent to be satisfied before the Income Tax Officer could have jurisdiction to issue a
notice for the assessment or reassessment beyond the period of four years but within the period of
eight years, from the end of the year in question.
7. No dispute appears to have been raised at any stage in this case as regards the first condition not
having been satisfied and we proceed on the basis that the Income Tax Officer had in fact reason to
believe that there had been an under-assessment in each of the assessment years, 1942-43, 1943-44
and 1944-45. The appellant's case has all along been that the second condition was not satisfied. As
admittedly the appellant had filed its return of income under Section 22, the Income Tax Officer
could have no reason to believe that underassessment had resulted from the failure to make a return
of income. The only question is whether the Income Tax Officer had reason to believe that "there
had been some omission or failure to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for the
assessment" for any of these years in consequence of which the under-assessment took place.
8. Before we proceed to consider the materials on record to see whether the appellant has succeeded
in showing that the Income Tax Officer could have no reason, on the materials before him, to believe
that there had been any omission to disclose material facts, as mentioned in the section, it is
necessary to examine the precise scope of disclosure which the section demands. The words used are
"omission or failure to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment for that
year". It postulates a duty on every assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for
his assessment. What facts are material, and necessary for assessment will differ from case to case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 8
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
In every assessment proceeding, the assessing authority will, for the purpose of computing or
determining the proper tax due from an assessee, require to know all the facts which help him in
coming to the correct conclusion. From the primary facts in his possession, whether on disclosure by
the assessee, or discovered by him on the basis of the facts disclosed, or otherwise -- the assessing
authority has to draw inferences as regards certain other facts; and ultimately, from the primary
facts and the further facts inferred from them, the authority has to draw the proper legal inferences,
and ascertain on a correct interpretation of the taxing enactment, the proper tax leviable. Thus,
when a question arises whether certain income received by an assessee is capital receipt, or revenue
receipt, the assessing authority has to find out what primary facts have been proved, what other
facts can be inferred from them, and taking all these together, to decide what the legal inference
should be.
9. There can be no doubt that the duty of disclosing all the primary facts relevant to the decision of
the question before the assessing authority lies on the assessee. To meet a possible contention that
when some account books or other evidence has been produced, there is no duty on the assessee to
disclose further facts, which on due diligence, the Income Tax Officer might have discovered, the
legislature has put in the Explanation, which has been set out above. In view of the Explanation, it
will not be open to the assessee to say, for example -- "I have produced the account books and the
documents: You, the assessing officer examine them, and find out the facts necessary for your
purpose: My duty is done with disclosing these account-books and the documents". His omission to
bring to the assessing authority's attention these particular items in the account books, or the
particular portions of the documents, which are relevant, amount to "omission to disclose fully and
truly all material facts necessary for his assessment". Nor will he be able to contend successfully that
by disclosing certain evidence, he should be deemed to have disclosed other evidence, which might
have been discovered by the assessing authority if he had pursued investigation on the basis of what
has been disclosed. The Explanation to the section, gives a quietus to all such contentions; and the
position remains that so far as primary facts are concerned, it is the assessee's duty to disclose all of
them -- including particular entries in account books, particular portions of documents and
documents, and other evidence, which could have been discovered by the assessing authority, from
the documents and other evidence disclosed.
10. Does the duty however extend beyond the full and truthful disclosure of all primary facts? In our
opinion, the answer to this question must be in the negative. Once all the primary facts are before
the assessing authority, he requires no further assistance by way of disclosure. It is for him to decide
what inferences of facts can be reasonably drawn and what legal inferences have ultimately to be
drawn. It is not for somebody else -- far less the assessee -- to tell the assessing authority what
inferences whether of facts or -- law should be drawn. Indeed, when it is remembered that people
often differ as regards what inferences should be drawn from given facts, it will be meaningless to
demand that the assessee must disclose what inferences -- whether of facts or law he would draw
from the primary facts.
11. If from primary facts more inferences than one could be drawn, it would not be possible to say
that the assessee should have drawn any particular inference and communicated it to the assessing
authority. How could an assessee be charged with failure to communicate an inference, which he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 9
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
might or might not have drawn?
12. It may be pointed out that the Explanation to the sub-section has nothing to do with "inferences"
and deals only with the question whether primary material facts not disclosed could still be said to
be constructively disclosed on the ground that with due diligence the Income Tax Officer could have
discovered them from the facts actually disclosed. The Explanation has not the effect of enlarging
the section, by casting a duty on the assessee to disclose "inferences" to draw the proper inferences
being the duty imposed on the Income Tax Officer.
13. We have therefore come to the conclusion that while the duty of the assessee is to disclose fully
and truly all primary relevant facts, it does not extend beyond this.
14. The position therefore is that if there were in fact some reasonable grounds for thinking that
there had been any non-disclosure as regards any primary fact, which could have a material bearing
on the question of "underassessment" that would be sufficient to give jurisdiction to the Income Tax
Officer to issue the notices under Section 34. Whether these grounds were adequate or not for
arriving at the conclusion that there was a non disclosure of material facts would not be open for the
court's investigation. In other words, all that is necessary to give this special jurisdiction is that the
Income Tax Officer had when he assumed jurisdiction some prima facie grounds for thinking that
there had been some non-disclosure of material facts.
15. Clearly it is the duty of the assessee who wants the court to hold that jurisdiction was lacking, to
establish that the Income Tax Officer had no material at all before him for believing that there had
been such non disclosure. To establish this the company has relied on the statements in the
assessment orders for the three years in question and on the statement of Kanakendra Narayan
Banerjee in the report made by him to the Commissioner of Income Tax for the purpose of obtaining
sanction to initiate proceedings under Section 34 and also on his statement in the affidavit on oath
in reply to the writ petition. The report is in these words:
"Profit of Rs 5,48,002 on sale of shares and securities escaped assessment altogether.
At the time of the original assessment the then Income Tax Officer merely accepted
the company's version that the sale of shares were casual transactions and were in the
nature of mere change of investments. Now the results of the Company's trading
from year to year show that the Company has really been systematically carrying out
a trade in the sale of investments. As such the Company had failed to disclose the true
intention behind the sale of the shares and as such Section 34(1)(a) may be
attracted."
16. The only non-disclosure mentioned in the report is that the Company had failed to disclose "the
true intention behind the sale of the shares". Mr Choudhury contends that this is not an omission to
disclose a material fact within the meaning of Section
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 10
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
34. The question whether sales of certain shares were by way of changing the investments or by way
of trading in shares has to be decided on a consideration of different circumstances, including the
frequency of the sales, the nature of the shares sold, the price received as compared with the cost
price, and several other relevant facts. It is the duty of the assessee to disclose all the facts which
have a bearing on the question; but whether the assessee had the intention to make a business profit
as distinguished from the intention to change the form of the investments is really an inference to be
drawn by the assessing authority from the material facts taken in conjunction with the surrounding
circumstances. The law does not require the assessee to state the conclusion that could reasonably
be drawn from the primary facts. The question of the assessee's intention is an inferential fact and
so the assessee's omission to state his "true intentions behind the sale of shares" cannot by itself be
considered to be a failure or omission to disclose any material fact within the meaning of Section 34.
Indeed, an assessee whose contention is that the shares were sold to change the form of investment
and not with the intention of making a business profit cannot be expected to say that his true
intention was other than what he contended it to be. Dealing with this question the learned Chief
Justice has said:
"The expression that the respondent had failed to disclose 'the true intention behind
the sale of shares' may lack directness, but that deficiency of language is not sufficient
to enable the respondent to contend, in view of the circumstances alleged, that no
failure to disclose facts was being complained of. On the facts as stated by the Income
Tax Officer, it is clear that there had been a failure to disclose the fact that the
respondent was a dealer in shares and what the Income Tax Officer meant by the
language used by him was that the respondent had not disclosed that the sale of
shares had been of the nature of a trading sale, made in pursuance of an intention to
make a business profit, and not of the nature of a change of investment, made in
pursuance of an intention to put certain capital assets into another form. If that be so,
it is equally clear that the Income Tax Officer who, by the way, was a successor to the
officers who had made the original assessments, was not merely changing his opinion
as to facts previously known, but was taking notice of a new fact."
17. The learned Chief Justice seems to have proceeded on the basis that when from certain facts
inferences are to be drawn there is a duty on the assessee to state what the correct inference should
be and if he has made a wrong statement as regards the inferences to be drawn that also is an
"omission or failure to disclose a material fact". For the reasons given earlier we do not think that
this is the correct position in law.
18. It is clear therefore that if one looked at this report only it would not be possible to say that the
Income Tax Officer had any non-disclosure of material facts by the assessee in mind when he
assumed jurisdiction. It has to be remembered however that in sending a report to the
Commissioner the Income Tax Officer might not fully set out what he thought amounted to a
non-disclosure, because it is conceivable that the report may not be drawn up carefully and may not
contain a reference to all the non-disclosures that operated on his mind. We have, however, on the
record an affidavit sworn by the same Income Tax Officer who started the Section 34 proceedings. It
is reasonable to expect that in this affidavit which was his opportunity to tell the court what
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 11
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
non-disclosure he took into consideration he would state as clearly as possible the material facts in
respect of which there had not been in his view a full and true disclosure. Mr Banerjee's statements
in this matter are contained in paras 5, 6 and 7 of his affidavit. They are in these words:
"5. With reference to paras 2 and 3 of the said petition, I crave reference to the
assessment orders therein mentioned. The assessment order dated 15th February,
1945, was made by Sri Kali Das Banerjee now Income Tax Officer Companies District
II and the other two assessment orders were made by L.D. Rozario who is now in the
employment of M/s Lovelock & Lewes. I find from the notes made by me in the order
sheet of the assessment year 1944-45 and my order dated 7th July, 1944 that Mr
Smith of M/s Lovelock & Lewes attended before me and stated that the profits of the
Company arising out of dealings in shares were not taxable as the Company was not a
dealer in shares and securities. Subsequently on 18th August, 1944, M/s Lovelock &
Lewes wrote a letter to me setting out the contentions of their clients and inter alia
stated that throughout the whole history the Company bought no shares whatsoever.
Sri K.D. Banerjee was accordingly led to believe that the dealings in shares were
casual transactions and were in the nature of mere change in investments and the
profits resulting therefrom were not taxable. The assessment orders were made on
the basis that the petitioner did not carry on any business dealings in shares. A copy
of the said letter dated 18th August, 1944, as also the relevant portion of the note
sheet are included in the schedule hereto anefnexed and marked 'A'.
6. In the assessments for 1945-46 and 1946-47, which were completed in April 1950,
the profits on sale of shares were included in the total assessable income of the
Company it having been then discovered that the petitioner was in fact carrying on
business in shares contrary to its representation that it was not. The Company filed
appeals before the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, which were rejected in
September 1950, and the assessments were confirmed. The Company thereafter filed
a second appeal before the Income Tax Tribunal which appeals are now pending.
7. With reference to para 5 of the said petition, I deny that I pretended to act under
Section 34 of the Income Tax Act as alleged. I have reasons to believe that by reason
of the omission or failure of the Company to disclose fully and truly all material facts
necessary for its assessments, the income, profits and gains chargeable to income Tax
had been under assessed. I recorded my reasons and made three reports one for each
year) in the prescribed form and submitted them before the Commissioner of Income
Tax and the latter was satisfied that it was a fit case for issue of a notice under Section
34 of the Income Tax Act. Thereafter I issued the prescribed notices under Section 34
of the Income Tax Act. The said reports were made and notices issued in respect of all
the three years mentioned in the petition and copies of the report and notice for one
of such years are included in the schedule hereto annexed and marked 'A'. The report
and notices for the two other years are exactly similar."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 12
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
19. It appears from this that the statements made by or on behalf of the Company which the
assessing authority considered to amount to non-disclosure of material facts were these: (i) the
Company was not a dealer in shares and securities, and (ii) throughout the whole of its history the
Company bought no shares whatsoever. It has not been suggested before us that, in fact at any time
up to the conclusion of the assessment proceedings for the years 1942-43, 1943- 44 and 1944-45 the
Company did in fact make a single purchase of shares. Clearly therefore the Income Tax Officer had
no reasonable ground for thinking that anything as regards the purchase of shares had not been
disclosed. The Company does not dispute that the statement was made on its behalf that it was not a
"dealer" in shares and securities. It appears clear that the Income Tax Officers who made the
assessments for the years 1942-43, 1943-44 and 1944-45 proceeded on the basis that this was an
investment company and considered the question whether in spite of its being an investment
company certain sales of shares wherefrom the Company made a profit were by way of trading in
shares and not by way of changing the form of investment. Whether these sales by an investment
company should in law be treated as trading transactions, and the profits made from the sales
trading profits liable to tax, was the matter which it was the Income Tax Officer's task to decide. No
duty lay on the Company to admit that these transactions were by way of trade. The fact that on
behalf of the Company Mr Smith of Lovelock & Lewes stated that the Company was not a dealer in
shares and securities does not therefore amount to an omission to disclose fully and truly any
material fact.
20. To ascertain whether the Income Tax Officer could have had in mind any non-disclosure as a
ground for thinking that by reason of such non- disclosure an underassessment had occurred --
apart from what was mentioned in the affidavit -- we enquired from respondent's counsel whether
he could suggest any other non-disclosure that might have taken place. Mr Sastri suggested two.
One is that the sales had not been disclosed; the other that the memorandum and articles of
association of the Company had not been shown. This suggestion is against the record and we have
no hesitation in repelling it. Not only is it not the ground set out by the Income Tax Officer at any
stage not even in the affidavit in court, but the matters mentioned by the officer that the assessee
had claimed that the profits realised were of a casual nature obviously indicate that the assessee
disclosed that a surplus resulted from the sales which were also disclosed.
21. The assessment orders it is true do not mention the details of the sales. They state however that
the audited accounts of the Company were furnished. The sales of shares were expressly mentioned
in the report. In these circumstances it is reasonable to believe that as regards sale of shares full
details were in fact disclosed.
22. Nor can we believe that the two Income Tax Officers L.D. Rozario and K.D. Banerjee concluded
the proceedings without referring to the memorandum and articles of association of the company.
These officers knew well that the Company was claiming to be an investment company only. They
had to consider the question whether sales were of the nature of trade or of the nature of change of
investment. It is unthinkable that they would not examine the memorandum of association. Besides,
it is pertinent to note that in para 4 of his affidavit Kanakendra Narayan Banerjee refers to the
memorandum and articles of association and states that "by its memorandum of association the
Company has been authorised to carry on the various kinds of business which have been specified in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 13
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
sub-section (1) and (2) of clause 3 of the said memorandum of associations". He does not say that
the articles or the memorandum of association were not shown during the assessment proceedings
for the years 1942-43, 1943-44 and 1944-45. If he had any reason to believe that these were not
shown he would have certainly mentioned that fact. For that would undoubtedly amount to non-
disclosure of a material fact.
23. It must therefore be held that the Income Tax Officer who issued the notices had not before him
any non-disclosure of a material fact and so he could have no material before him for believing that
there had been any material non-disclosure by reason of which an under-assessment had taken
place.
24. We are therefore bound to hold that the conditions precedent to the exercise of jurisdiction
under Section 34 of the Income Tax Act did not exist and the Income Tax Officer had therefore no
jurisdiction to issue the impugned notices under Section 34 in respect of the years 1942-43, 1943-44
and 1944-45 after the expiry of four years.
25. Mr Sastri argued that the question whether the Income Tax Officer had reason to believe that
underassessment had occurred "by reason of nondisclosure of material facts" should not be
investigated by the courts in an application under Article 226. learned counsel seems to suggest that
as soon as the Income Tax Officer has reason to believe that there has been underassessment in any
year he has jurisdiction to start proceedings under Section 34 by issuing a notice provided 8 years
have not elapsed from the end of the year in question, but whether the notices should have been
issued within a period of 4 years or not is only a question of limitation which could and should
properly be raised in assessment proceedings. It is wholly incorrect however to suppose that this is a
question of limitation only not touching the question of jurisdiction. The scheme of the law clearly is
that where the Income Tax Officer has reason to believe that an underassessment has resulted from
non-disclosure he shall have jurisdiction to start proceedings for re assessment within a period of 8
years; and where he has reason to believe that an underassessment has resulted from other causes
he shall have jurisdiction to start proceedings for reassessment within 4 years. Both the conditions,
(i) the Income Tax Officer having reason to believe that there has been underassessment, and (ii) his
having reason to believe that such underassessment has resulted from nondisclosure of material
facts, must co-exist before the Income Tax Officer has jurisdiction to start proceedings after the
expiry of 4 years. The argument that the Court ought not to investigate the existence of one of these
conditions viz. that the Income Tax Officer has reason to believe that underassessment has resulted
from non-disclosure of material facts cannot therefore be accepted.
26. Mr Sastri next pointed out that at the stage when the Income Tax Officer issued the notices he
was not acting judicially or quasi-judicially and so a writ of certiorari or prohibition cannot issue. It
is well settled however that though the writ of prohibition or certiorari will not issue against an
executive authority, the High Courts have power to issue in a fit case an order prohibiting an
executive authority from acting without jurisdiction. Where such action of an executive authority
acting without jurisdiction subjects or is likely to subject a person to lengthy proceedings and
unnecessary harassment, the High Courts, it is well settled, will issue appropriate orders or
directions to prevent such consequences.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 14
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
27. Mr Sastri mentioned more than once the fact that the Company would have sufficient
opportunity to raise this question viz. whether the Income Tax Officer had reason to believe that
underassessment had resulted from non-disclosure of material facts, before the Income Tax Officer
himself in the assessment proceedings and if unsuccessful there before the appellate officer or the
Appellate Tribunal or in the High Court under Section 66(2) of the Indian Income Tax Act. The
existence of such alternative remedy is not however always a sufficient reason for refusing a party
quick relief by a writ or order prohibiting an authority acting without jurisdiction from continuing
such action.
28. In the present case the Company contends that the conditions precedent for the assumption of
jurisdiction under Section 34 were not satisfied and come to the court at the earliest opportunity.
There is nothing in its conduct which would justify the refusal of proper relief under Article 226.
When the Constitution confers on the High Courts the power to give relief it becomes the duty of the
courts to give such relief in fit cases and the courts would be failing to perform their duty if relief is
refused without adequate reasons. In the present case we can find no reason for which relief should
be refused.
12. In the case of Mohini Bai M.Sarda vs. First Income Tax Officer - 1991 SCC Online KAR 599, this
Court held as under:-
14. Therefore, the question that arises for consideration on these facts is, whether the
Income-
tax Officer was put on notice that there was a trust created by the petitioner settling certain
properties in favour of eight minor beneficiaries and that exemption was claimed in respect of the
said income in her assessment? If this is the undisputed fact, can it be said that there was any failure
on the part of the assessee-petitioner to furnish full and correct particulars, and if so whether there
was reason to believe that any income had escaped assessment?
15. Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the following decisions in support of his
contentions:
Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. v. ITO[1961] 41 ITR 191 (SC).
As laid down by the Supreme Court in Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd.'s case[1961] 41 ITR 191, if certain
primary facts are disclosed by the asses-sees in the return, then the limited jurisdiction of the High
Court would be to find out whether this information was sufficient for the Income-tax Officer to
probe into the matter further and apply his mind to the aspect of clubbing the income that arose to
the minor beneficiaries under section 64 of the Income-tax Act.
16. CIT v. Bhanji Lavji[1971] 79 ITR 582, wherein the Supreme Court held that it is for the
Income-tax Officer to establish that the assessee has failed to disclose certain facts and material
necessary for the assessment of income which had escaped assessment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 15
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
17. Learned counsel had relied upon the following decisions:
Indian and Eastern Newspaper Society v. CIT[1979] 119 ITR 996 (SO);
Y.V. Anjaneyulu v. ITO[1990] 182 ITR 242 (AP).
18. These two decisions were rendered under section 147(b) and, therefore, have no relevance.
19. The other decisions relied upon by the petitioner are:
Thanthi Trust v. ITO[1989] 177 ITR 307 (Mad); Murlidhar Bhagwandas and Co. v.
CIT[1990] 181 ITR 319 (Bom);
New Excelsior Theatre P. Ltd. v. M.B. Naik, ITO[1990] 185 ITR 158 (Bom);
Technocraft Industries v. G.S. Tung, 2nd ITO[1990] 185 ITR 465 (Bom).
20. In all these cases, the reassessment proceedings taken under section 147(a) were challenged. On
the facts of each case, the High Court held that there was no basis for the plea that income had
escaped assessment and further that there was no failure on the part of the assessee to disclose true
and correct facts.
21. In Technocraft Industries' case[1990] 185 ITR 465 (Bom), the appraisal report of the Assistant
Director of Inspection that a number of creditors where mere name-lenders, was relied upon. It was
observed by the Bombay High Court that the loans and confirmation letters from creditors were
disclosed by the assessee along with the returns, and, therefore, there was no reason to hold the
assessee guilty of suppression and the section 147(a) notice was quashed. It was also held that the
information furnished by the Assistant Director of Inspection was very vague.
22. In Thanti Trust's case[1989] 177 ITR 307, the Madras High Court held that the assessee had
disclosed the primary facts relevant for the assessment and he was under no obligation to instruct
the Income-tax Officer about the inference. The notice under section 147(a) was, therefore, struck
down.
23. In Murlidhar Bhagwandas and Co's case[1990] 181 ITR 319, the Bombay High Court found that
there was disclosure of havala transactions by the assessee in the returns and for the fault of the
Department in not investigating the matter further as to the genuineness of the hundis, it was not
open to the Income-tax Officer to reopen the assessment under section 147(a).
24. As against this, learned counsel for the Department has relied upon the following decisions:
Maharaj Kumar Kamal Singh v. CIT[1959] 35 ITR 1 : AIR 1959 SC 257.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 16
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
25. That was a case arising under section 34(1)(b) of the 1922 Act. It was held that even in a case
where a return had been submitted disclosing certain facts, if the Income-tax Officer erroneously
fails to tax a part of the assessable income, it would be a case of bringing to tax the said part of the
income which had escaped assessment. The Supreme Court was explaining the scope and the
meaning of the word "information", and held that it includes information as to the true and correct
state of the law and so would cover the information as to relevant judicial decisions. This
observation was made by the Supreme Court in the context of what is "information" for purposes of
section 34(1)(b) of the Act. On the facts of the said case, certain income had escaped assessment
owing to inadvertence or oversight of the Income-tax Officer and it was held that, in such a case, the
assessment could be reopened by invoking section 34(1)(b).
26. The said decision is distinguishable on the facts of the present case and can have no application
and does not help the Department's case.
S. Narayanappa v. CIT[1967] 63 ITR 219 (SC).
27. It was a case arising under section 147(a) of the Income-tax Act. The Supreme Court enumerated
the conditions required to confer jurisdiction on the Income-tax Officer to issue the notice under
section 34 beyond the period of four years. On the facts of the said case, it was held that the
conditions precedent were satisfied before the Income-tax Officer initiated action to reopen the
assessment. The Supreme Court also observed that it would not be a matter for the court to examine
whether the reasons on which the Income-tax Officer issued notices were sufficient to form a belief
about the escapement and ruled that it is not a justifiable issue. The court further observed that the
existence of the belief can be challenged by the assessee but not the sufficiency of the reasons for the
belief. In the same case, the Supreme Court, however, held that it is open to the court to examine
whether the reasons for the belief have a rational connection or a relevant bearing to the formation
of the belief and are not extraneous or irrelevant to the purpose of the section.
28. This is no doubt the law laid down by the Supreme Court explaining the jurisdiction of the High
Court. But the said ratio has to be applied having regard to the facts of each case. I am of the opinion
that on the facts, the Supreme Court held that there was sufficient reason for the Income-tax Officer
to form an opinion about the escapement in that case, and the notice issued under section 34(1)(a)
was upheld.
29.Anandji Haridas and Co. P. Ltd. v. S.P. Kushare[1967] 66 ITR (Sh. N.) 13 : AIR 1968 SC
565.
30. That was an appeal arising under the C.P. and Berar Sales Tax Act from Bombay. The Supreme
Court explained the meaning of the word "information" occurring in section 34(1)(b) of the
Income-tax Act and observed that it need not be necessarily from an outside agency and such
information can be gathered from the assessment record itself leading to the belief that the income
has escaped assessment or under-assessed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 17
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
31.CIT v. Ayodhyakumari[1985] 154 ITR 604 (Raj).
32. The High Court laid down that where reassessment has been made under section 147(a), it is
open to the Appellate Assistant Commissioner, to treat it as one properly made under section 147(b)
provided that on the material on record all the necessary conditions prescribed under section 147(a)
are satisfied. This has no application to the facts of the present case.
33.T.M. Kousali v. Sixth ITO[1985] 155 ITR 739 (Kar).
34. This was a case where proceedings taken under section 147(a) were sustained under section
147(b). That was a case of the assessee being awarded higher compensation by the civil court and the
assessee had failed to disclose the pendency of the claim for higher compensation before the civil
court. That decision turned on the peculiar facts of the case, and has no analogy with the present
case.
35. Miheer Hemant Mafatlal v. N. Rama Iyer, ITO[1986] 159 ITR 515 (Bom).
36. In this case, each of the petitioners had submitted that their share in the income of the estate
was not liable to assessment in their hands pending administration of the estate. It was held that
there was no ground to reopen the assessment and the information furnished was sufficient. This
case helps the petitioner in this case, rather than the Department.
37.VXL India Ltd. v. ITO[1988] 173 ITR 124 (P & H).
38. It was held by the High Court that whether the income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment
has to be decided under the provisions of the Act itself, including the jurisdiction of the Income-tax
Officer, and not by way of a writ petition.
39. This view of the High Court is contrary to the rulings of the Supreme Court on the question of
jurisdiction.
40. On these facts, the question that arises for consideration is whether the petitioner had disclosed
all the facts necessary for the completion of the assessment in her case for the two years in question.
As already stated, the petitioner had stated in Part III of the returns that the income arising to eight
minor beneficiaries in Madan Lal Sarda Family Trust was not liable to be included in her returns.
The very same Income-tax Officer who completed the assessment in the case of the trust was also
the Income-tax Officer who had jurisdiction to assess the petitioner in her individual capacity.
41. What is required under section 147(a) of the Income-tax Act is that the assessee is required to
furnish such particulars of income and all other material facts necessary for his/her assessment.
This is not a case where the Income-tax Officer could find fault with the petitioner having regard to
the fact that the petitioner had mentioned about the trust as well as the income arising to the minor
beneficiaries in her returns and had also claimed exemption of that income in her hands in Part III
of the returns. This information was sufficient to alert the Income-tax Officer to make further
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 18
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
enquiries as to why the income arising to the minor beneficiaries should not be taxed in her hands
under section 64(1)(vi) of the Income-tax Act. The Income-tax Officer having overlooked to take
steps to assess the income of the minors in the hands of the petitioner, if it was permissible in law, it
is not open to the Income-tax Officer to reopen the assessments in the petitioner's case invoking the
provisions of section 147(a) of the Income-tax Act.
42. The decisions relied upon by the petitioner support her contentions. It cannot be disputed that
the petitioner had disclosed the primary fact in her returns, viz., that the petitioner had executed a
trust in favour of the eight minors. There was, therefore, no reason for the Income-tax Officer to say
that the income had escaped assessment on account of the failure of the petitioner-assessee to
disclose the income that has accrued to the petitioner which should have been taxed in her hands.
43. So far as the decisions relied upon by learned counsel for the Department are concerned, I have
stated, while referring to them in their order, that they are all distinguishable and have no
application to the facts of the present case.
44. On the other hand, the law that is well settled is that the burden is on the Department to show
that the escapement has occurred on account of the failure on the part of the assessee to disclose the
full particulars of the income. The other aspect of the case is, whether the Income-tax Officer had
reason to believe that the escapement had occurred on account of the omission or failure on the part
of the assessee. The formation of belief must have a nexus to the failure of the assessee to disclose
true and full particulars as held by the Supreme Court in Bhanji Lavji's case[1971] 79 ITR 582. It is
sufficient if the assessee has disclosed all the primary facts and any further enquiry or investigation
that is called for should be done by the Income-tax Officer. On the facts of the present case, it is clear
that the information furnished by the petitioner in Part III of the returns was sufficient for the
Income-tax Officer to enquire further into the matter and to take steps to include the income
accruing to the minors in the assessment of the petitioner. This was a clear case of failure on the part
of the Income-tax Officer rather than the assessee.
45. I am, therefore, of the opinion that, on the facts of the case, the Income-tax Officer was not
justified in reopening the assessment invoking section 147(a) of the Income-tax Act. The writ
petition is, therefore, liable to be allowed. The writ petition is accordingly allowed and the notices as
per annexures-F and G dated August 8, 1985 issued by the First Income-tax Officer, Gulbarga, under
section 148 of the Income-tax Act, 1961, are quashed.
13. So also, in the case of S.Narayanappa vs. Commissioner of Income Tax - AIR 1967 SC 523, the
Apex Court held as under:-
2. On behalf of the appellant Mr Gopalakrishnan contended in the first place that the
reasons which induced the Income Tax Officer to initiate the proceedings under
Section 34 were justiciable. It was submitted that those reasons should have been
communicated by the Income Tax Officer to the assessee before the assessment was
made. In this connection, the further argument of the appellant was that those
reasons "must be sufficient for a prudent man to come to the conclusion that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 19
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
income had escaped assessment". In our opinion, there is no substance in any one of
these arguments. It is true that two conditions must be satisfied in order to confer
jurisdiction on the Income Tax Officer to issue the notice under Section 34 in respect
of assessments beyond the period of four years, but within a period of eight years,
from the end of the relevant year. The first condition is that the Income Tax Officer
must have reason to believe that the income, profits or gains chargeable to income
tax had been underassessed. The second condition is that he must have reason to
believe that such "underassessment" had occurred by reason of either (i) omission or
failure on the part of an assessee to make a return of his income under Section 22, or
(ii) omission of failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all the
material facts necessary for his assessment for that year. Both these conditions are
conditions precedent to be satisfied before the Income Tax Officer acquires
jurisdiction to issue a notice under the section. But the legal position is that if there
are in fact some reasonable grounds for the Income Tax Officer to believe that there
had been any non-
disclosure as regards any fact, which could have a material bearing on the question of
underassessment that would be sufficient to give jurisdiction to the Income Tax Officer to issue the
notice under Section 34. Whether these grounds are adequate or not is not a matter for the court to
investigate. In other words, the sufficiency of the grounds which induced the Income Tax Officer to
act is not a justiciable issue. It is of course open for the assessee to contend that the Income Tax
Officer did not hold the belief that there had been such non- disclosure. In other words, the
existence of the belief can be challenged by the assessee but not the sufficiency of the reasons for the
belief. Again the expression "reason to believe" in Section 34 of the Income Tax Act does not mean a
purely subjective satisfaction on the part of the Income Tax Officer. The belief must be held in good
faith: it cannot be merely a pretence. To put it differently it is open to the court to examine the
question whether the reasons for the belief have a rational connection or a relevant bearing to the
formation of the belief and are not extraneous or irrelevant to the purpose of the section. To this
limited extent, the action of the Income Tax Officer in starting proceedings under Section 34 of the
Act is open to challenge in a court of law. (See Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. v. Income Tax Officer,
Companies District I, Calcutta [41 ITR 191]
3. In the present case the High Court has pointed out that the Income Tax Officer when examining
the relevant material in proceedings for Assessment Year 1955-56 found that the appellant had
made investments to the extent of Rs 39,000 in the account year under question when the income
assessed was only Rs 36,068. On further examination it was discovered that items of house property
acquired long before the relevant accounting year had been suppressed. The High Court, therefore,
held that the Income Tax Officer had reasonable grounds for thinking that there was non-disclosure
on the part of the appellant and that there was underassessment for Assessment Year 1951-52.
14. The Division Bench of the Madras High Court in the case of Thanthi Trust vs. Income Tax Officer
- 1972 SCC Online MAD 411, held as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 20
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
15. The learned counsel referred to the decisions in Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. v. Income-tax Officer
[[1961] 41 I.T.R. 191; [1961] 2 S.C.R. 241 (S.C.).] , S. Narayanappa v. Commissioner of Income- tax
[[1967] 63 I.T.R. 219; [1967] 1 SCR. 590 (S.C.).] and Commissioner of Income-tax v. Hemchandra
Kar [[1970] 77 I.T.R. 1; [1971] 1 S.C.R. 283 (S.C.).] in support of his plea that section 147 is intended
to prevent unnecessary harassment of the assessees by the Income-tax Officers changing opinions at
different stages on the same materials and that, therefore, the respondent can invoke the authority
under section 34 of the old Act and section 147 of the new Act only if the conditions set out therein
exist and not otherwise.
16. In Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. v. Income-tax Officer [[1961] 41 I.T.R. 191; [1961] 2 S.C.R. 241
(S.C.).] the Supreme Court came to consider the scope of section 34(1) for the first time. In that case
in the original assessments for the assessment years 1942-43, 1943-44 and 1944-45, profits realised
by a company by sale of shares were not assessed to tax on the ground that they were in the nature
of mere change in investments. The Income-tax Officer later proposed to initiate reassessment
proceedings against the company by issuing notices under section 34, and in his reports to the
Commissioner for the purpose of obtaining sanction he had stated that at the time of the original
assessments the representations made on behalf of the company that the sales of shares were casual
transactions in the nature of mere change of investments were accepted, but that the company's
accounts showed that it had been really and systematically carrying on a trade in the sale of
investments, that the purchase and sale of shares were not casual transactions and that there has
been a non-disclosure of the true intention behind the sale of shares. The Supreme Court, after
dealing with the scope of section 34 of the Act exhaustively, if we may say so with respect, held that
the question whether the sale of shares were by way of change of investments or by way of trading in
shares had to be decided by the Income-tax Officer on a consideration of different circumstances,
including the frequency of the sales, the nature of the shares sold, the price received as compared
with the cost price, and several other relevant facts, that though it was the duty of the company to
disclose all the primary facts which had a bearing on that question, the law did not require the
company to state the conclusion that could reasonably be drawn from the primary facts, and that the
Income-tax Officer who issued the notices did not have any material before him for believing that
there had been any material non-disclosure by reason of which an underassessment had taken
place. As to the scope of section 34, their Lordships of the Supreme Court stated [[1961] 41 I.T.R.
191, 207, 201 (S.C.).] :
"The scheme of the law clearly is that where the Income-tax Officer has reason to
believe that an under-assessment has resulted from nondisclosure he shall have
jurisdiction to start proceedings for reassessment within a period of eight years; and
where he has reason to believe that an under- assessment has resulted from other
causes he shall have jurisdiction to start proceedings for reassessment within four
years. Both the conditions,
(i) the Income-tax Officer having reason to believe that there has been
under-assessment, and (ii) his having reason to believe that such under-assessment
has resulted from non-disclosure of material facts, must co-exist before the
Income-tax Officer has jurisdiction to start proceedings after the expiry of four years.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 21
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
The argument that the court ought not to investigate the existence of one of these
conditions, viz., that the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe that
under-assessment has resulted from non-
disclosure of material facts, cannot therefore be accepted.
The position, therefore, is that if there were in fact some reasonable grounds for thinking that there
had been any non-disclosure as regards any primary fact, which could have a material bearing on
the question of 'under-assessment', that would be sufficient to give jurisdiction to the Income-tax
Officer to issue the notices under section 34. Whether these grounds were adequate or not for
arriving at the conclusion that there was a non-disclosure of material facts would not be open for the
court's investigation. In other words, all that is necessary to give this special jurisdiction is that the
Income-tax Officer had when he assumed jurisdiction some prima facie grounds for thinking that
there had been some non-disclosure of material facts.
Clearly it is the duty of the assessee who wants the court to hold that jurisdiction was lacking, to
establish that the Income-tax Officer had no material at all before him for believing that there had
been such nondisclosure."
17. The above decision is clearly an authority for two propositions, (1) that the court must be
satisfied as to the existence of the two conditions, namely, (i) reason to believe that there has been
under-assessment, (ii) such underassessment has resulted from the non- disclosure of primary and
material facts; and (2) that if all the primary and material facts had been placed by the assessee
before the Income-tax Officer at the stage of the original assessment, the assessee cannot be said to
be guilty of non-disclosure as the Income-tax Officer failed to draw a proper factual or legal
inference from those basic and primary facts.
18. In S. Narayanappa v. Commissioner of Income- tax [[1967] 63 I.T.R. 219, 221, 222; [1967] 1
S.C.R. 590 (S.C.).] the Supreme Court again reiterated the same principle thus:
"But the legal position is that if there are in fact some reasonable grounds for the
Income-tax Officer to believe that there had been any nondisclosure as regards any
fact, which could have a material bearing on the question of under-assessment, that
would be sufficient to give jurisdiction to the Income-tax Officer to issue the notice
under section 34. Whether these grounds are adequate or not is not a matter for the
court to investigate. In other words, the sufficiency of the grounds which induced the
Income-tax Officer to act is not a justiciable issue. It is of course open for the assessee
to contend that the Income-tax Officer did not hold the belief that there had been
such non- disclosure. In other words, the existence of the belief can be challenged by
the assessee, but not the sufficiency of the reasons for the belief."
19. As regards the scope of the expression "reason to believe" in section 34 of the Act, their
Lordships of the Supreme Court stated that it does not mean a purely subjective satisfaction on the
part of the Income-tax Officer, that it postulates belief and the existence of reasons for that belief,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 22
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
that the belief must be held in good faith and it cannot be merely a pretence and that the existence of
the belief and the reasons for the belief are justiciable. But on the question whether the assessee
should be informed of the material available on which the belief was entertained, the Supreme Court
has held that the Income-tax Officer is bound to disclose to the assessee the materials on the basis of
which the belief that the income has escaped assessment was entertained.
20. In Commissioner of Income-tax v. Hemchandra Kar [[1970] 77 I.T.R. 1; [1971] 1 S.C.R. 283
(S.C.).] , an assessee, a Hindu undivided family consisting of six members, had originally been
assessed for the assessment year 1946-47. Following the demonetisation of high denomination notes
in January, 1946, the assessee encashed notes of the value of Rs. 19,000 and five members of the
family encashed notes of the aggregate value of Rs. 1,10,000. The Income-tax Officer reopened the
assessments of the assessee and of the five members and by his reassessment orders made on
January 31, 1955, included the sum of Rs. 19,000 in the reassessment of the family and the sum of
Rs. 1,10,000 separately in the assessments of the five members in respect of the respective notes
encashed by them. Two days later, i.e., on February 2, 1955, the Income-tax Officer issued a notice
under section 34(1)(a) of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, seeking to include the sum of Rs.
1,10,000 in the hands of the family on the ground that the notes encashed by the five members
belonged to the Hindu undivided family. The Tribunal upheld the said reassessment. The validity of
that notice was challenged and ultimately the matter came to the High Court on a reference. The
High Court held that the notice dated February 2, 1955, was not valid, since it was found that when
the first reassessment was made the primary facts necessary for reassessment of the family were in
the possession of the Income-tax Officer, that at the time of the first reopening of the assessment of
the Hindu undivided family and of the individual members the question of assessment of the entire
amount represented by the high denomination notes was under direct consideration, that it was
open to the Income-tax Officer to assess the whole amount of Rs. 19,000 and Rs. 1,10,000 in the
hands of the Hindu undivided family at that stage, and that the escapement, if any, therefore, took
place by reason of the failure of the Income-tax Officer to assess the family with respect to the sum
of Rs. 1,10,000 when he was in full possession of all the material facts. On appeal, the Supreme
Court affirmed the decision of the High Court holding that because the primary facts were within the
knowledge of the Income-tax Officer when he completed the first reassessment, the escapement of
income took place by reason of the failure of the Income-tax Officer to include the sum of Rs.
1,10,000 in the assessment of the Hindu undivided family when he was in full possession of all the
necessary and material facts and that in such a situation the requirements of section 34(1)(a) were
not satisfied.
21. The above decisions dealing with the scope of section 34 of the Act have clearly pointed out that
in matters of this kind one has to see whether the Income-tax Officer could have reason to believe
that due to omission or failure on the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts
necessary for his assessment, there has been an escapement of income or whether the escapement of
income has resulted by reason of the failure of the Income-tax Officer to draw the proper factual or
legal inference from the primary and other facts furnished by the assessee. It is well established by
these and other decisions that the words "reason to believe" used in section 147 mean a belief which
an honest and reasonable person based upon reasonable grounds would entertain on facts before
him, that a notice under section 148 calling for a return need not set out the reason for such a belief,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 23
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
or specify the item of income which has escaped assessment or the source of income, or indicate
whether it is issued under clause (a) or clause (b) of section 147, that the Income-tax Officer is,
however, bound to disclose all the necessary materials to the assessee at the stage of the
reassessment proceedings so as to enable him to put forward all his objections to the proposed
reassessment. It is also well established by now that the Income-tax Officer is not required to
convene the assessee, or to intimate to him the nature of the alleged escapement or to give him an
opportunity of being heard, before he decides to issue a notice under section 148 (vide
Commissioner of Income-tax v. Mahaliram Ramjidas [[1940] 8 I.T.R. 442 (P.C.).] ). The power to
issue a notice under section 148 is made conditional on the Income-tax Officer recording his reasons
under sub-section (2). The Income-tax Officer is bound to record his reasons before issuing a notice
under sub-section (1), and it is on the basis of those reasons recorded by him the Commissioner's or
the Board's sanction must be obtained in cases where action is taken after the lapse of four years or
eight years, as the case may be, as contemplated in section 151. Such reasons recorded by the
Income- tax Officer need not be communicated or disclosed to the assessee before reassessment
proceedings under section 147 actually commence, but they have to be disclosed to the court when
his jurisdiction to issue the notice is challenged on the ground that there is no reason to believe that
certain income has escaped assessment by omission or failure of the assessee to disclose fully and
truly all material facts necessary for his assessment, and the Income-tax Officer has to justify his
assumption of jurisdiction only on those recorded reasons.
22. The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the Income-tax Officer, at the stage of the
original assessment proceedings, had thoroughly examined all the facts which are now referred to in
the counter- affidavit and was satisfied with the explanations given by the petitioner, and, therefore,
the Income-tax Officer had no reason to believe that by reason of the omission or failure on the part
of the petitioner to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for its assessment for the
various years the income, profits and gains, chargeable to income-tax for those years, have escaped
assessment. According to the learned counsel, once the petitioner disputes that the Income-tax
Officer had any reason before him to entertain the requisite belief and states that it had not omitted
or failed to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary at the stage of the assessment, it is the
duty of the Income-tax Officer to justify his action in issuing the notices by setting out in his
counter- affidavit filed before the court all the facts and circumstances which led him to entertain
the belief and by producing before the court all the materials in his possession. The learned counsel
took us through the counter-affidavit filed in each of these cases and stated that the averments
therein are so vague that no weight could be attached to the same. He also complains that no details
are given in the counter- affidavits to show whether the respondent is invoking clause (a) or clause
(b) of section 147. The learned counsel took pains to convince us that there had been a thorough and
full-fledged enquiry by the Income-tax Officer as also by the higher authorities at all levels on the
question of exemption of the income of petitioner- trust at the stage of the assessments, that all the
relevant materials had been considered at that stage, and that the respondent proposed to initiate
reassessment proceedings only on the basis of a change of opinion. He referred us to the various
queries made by the Income-tax Officer at the stage of the assessments for the various years and
also the replies given by the petitioner on various matters.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 24
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
23. Though in the counter-affidavit it has been stated that the deponent was not aware of the fact
that the earlier orders of exemption had been granted after a thorough and exhaustive enquiry by
the Income-tax Officer, Mr. T.V. Viswanatha Iyer, the learned counsel appearing for the revenue,
submits that we may proceed on the basis that there was a thorough and exhaustive enquiry by the
assessing officer at the stage of the assessments on the question of exemption of the income of the
trust. According to him even if a thorough and exhaustive enquiry has been made by the Income-tax
Officer at the stage of the original assessments, still section 147 could be invoked if fresh material
which subsequently came to the possession of the department shows that the disclosure made by the
petitioner at the stage of the original assessments was neither full nor true, and in this case the
assessing officer had sufficient material before him to entertain a belief that the income of the
petitioner had escaped proper assessment. The nature of the enquiry held at the stage of the
assessments is said to be not quite relevant for the purpose of finding out whether the impugned
notices have been properly issued. In support of his contention that even in cases where there has
been full and elaborate enquiries at the stage of original assessment, section 147(a) could still be
invoked, he refers to the decisions in Income-tax Officer v. Bachu Lal Kapoor [[1966] 60 I.T.R. 74;
[1966] 3 SCR. 68 (S.C.).] , Kantamani Venkata Narayana & Sons v. First Additional Income-tax
Officer [[1967] 63 I.T.R. 638; [1967] 1 S.C.R. 984 (S.C.).] Commissioner of Income-tax v. T.S.P.L.P.
Chidambaram Chettiar [[1971] 80 I.T.R. 467 (SC).] and K.P. Arthanariswamy Chettiar v. First
Income-tax Officer [[1972] 84 I.T.R. 51 (Mad.).] . In Income-tax Officer v. Bachu Lal Kapoor [[1966]
60 I.T.R. 74; [1966] 3 SCR. 68 (S.C.).] the Supreme Court laid down the proposition that the
acceptance of a return or the completion of the assessment does not take away the jurisdiction of the
Income-tax Officer to issue a notice to reassess on the ground that the information supplied by the
return was not correct. In Kantamani Venkata Narayana & Sons v. First Additional Income-tax
Officer [[1967] 63 I.T.R. 638; [1967] 1 S.C.R. 984 (S.C.).] the Supreme Court held that the assessee
does not discharge his duty to disclose by merely producing the books of account or other evidence.
He has to further bring to the notice of the Income-tax Officer particular items in the accounts or the
documents which are relevant. Even in cases where the Income-tax Officer, if he had been
circumspect, could have found out the truth from the books and other documents produced, he is
not precluded from exercising the power to assess the income which had escaped assessment. In the
third case reassessment proceedings were upheld as fully satisfying the requirement of section
34(1)(a) notwithstanding the fact that the assessing officer had before him the item of undisclosed
income, which was the subject-matter of the reassessment at the time of assessment. It was held
that the fact that the officer could have further inquired into that matter but did not do so, did not
take the case out of section 34(1)(a). In the fourth case, in the original assessment of an assessee, a
borrowal from a banker was accepted as true and the interest paid thereon allowed as deduction.
But the said banker in the course of his assessment proceedings denied the advance to the assessee.
Then a notice under section 147 was issued. That notice was challenged by the assessee contending
that all the primary facts were before the assessing officer when the assessment was completed. A
Bench of this court, to which one of us was a party, held that, notwithstanding the fact that the item
of the borrowal from the banker was considered and allowed at the stage of the original assessment,
still the Income-tax Officer could invoke section 147(a) on the basis of the subsequent information
secured from a co-ordinate official who made the assessment on the banker, which, if accepted,
would lead to a reasonable belief that the disclosure made by the assessee in the first instance was
not true. Thus, we find the recent trend of judicial decisions to be that even if the Income-tax Officer
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 25
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
has at the stage of assessment been satisfied with the facts and materials disclosed by the assessee
and completed the assessment on the basis of such materials disclosed, if, subsequently, on receipt
of information, he has reason to believe that some of the facts and materials were not true or
complete, he would have reason to believe that income has escaped assessment due to the assessee's
failure to disclose truly and fully all materials necessary for the assessment.
24. Though the impugned notices do not indicate whether the reopening is proposed under clause
(a) or clause (b), the learned counsel for the revenue states the Income-tax Officer proposes to
reopen the assessments only under clause (a) and not under clause (b), and this, the learned counsel
says, is clear from the notices themselves. He points out that reference to the sanction obtained from
the Commissioner of Income-tax or the Central Board of Revenue in the notices indicates that action
is being taken only under clause (a) of section 147, as no such sanction is necessary or contemplated
in cases coming under clause (b).
25. We, therefore, proceed to consider whether the impugned notices could be sustained as having
been validly issued for initiating proceedings under section 147(a). Clause (a) of section 147 may be
usefully set out at this stage:
"147. Income escaping assessment.--If--
(a) the Income-tax Officer has reason to believe that, by reason of the omission or
failure on the part of an assessee to make a return under section 139 for any
assessment year to the Income-tax Officer, or to disclose fully and truly all material
facts necessary for his assessment for that year, income chargeable to tax has escaped
assessment for that year, or..........
he may, subject to the provisions of sections 148 to 153, assess or reassess such income or
recompute the loss or the depreciation allowance, as the case may be, for the assessment year
concerned (hereafter in sections 148 to 153 referred to as the relevant assessment year)."
26. A reading of the above section along with sections 148 to 153 shows that the right to take action
under clause (a) of the said section is subject to the following conditions:
(1) The Income-tax Officer should have reason to believe that income chargeable to
tax has escaped proper assessment.
(2) He should have reason to believe that such escapement was by reason of the
omission or failure on the part of an assessee to disclose fully and truly all material
facts for his assessment for that year.
(3) He must issue a notice under section 148 calling for a return of income within the
time limit prescribed in section 149.
(4) He must, before issuing such a notice, record his reasons for doing so.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 26
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
(5) The notice under section 148 should be issued only after obtaining the prior
sanction of the Commissioner or the Board under section 151 in cases where action is
taken after the lapse of four or eight years respectively.
(6) The assessment or reassessment under section 147 should be completed within
the time limit prescribed under section 153(2).
27. It cannot be disputed that conditions Nos. 3, 4 and 5 are satisfied in those cases which fall under
section 147(a). Condition No. 6 will not arise at this stage when the reassessment proceedings are
yet to commence. The question is whether conditions Nos. 1 and 2 are satisfied in these cases.
28. To show that the above two conditions are satisfied, the learned counsel for the revenue has
placed before us all the files relating to the issue of the impugned notices. While the assessment files
show the nature of the enquiry conducted at the original stage as also the materials available before
the Income-tax Officer at that time, the files relating to the issue of the impugned notices contain
certain information which the Income-tax Officer is said to have received subsequent to the
completion of the assessments for the nine years in question, as also his reasons for issuing the
notice under section 148(1). Those reasons are contained in the reports submitted by him to the
Commissioner of Income-tax and and also the Central Board for getting the requisite sanction under
section 151 for initiating action under section 147(a). From those reasons set out for the various
years it is seen that some new materials which were not available before the Income- tax Officer at
the time of the original assessment have come to his possession from various sources.
29. The learned counsel for the petitioner, however, states that there is no allegation of
non-disclosure of primary facts in the counter-affidavits, that if the averments made therein are
taken to indicate the substance of the materials available, they would not constitute any new
material, for all those materials had been considered in elaborate detail by the Income-tax Officer at
the stage of the original assessment, that a mere change of opinion on the part of the Income-tax
Officer on the same materials will not enable him to initiate proceedings under section 147(a), and
that the counter-affidavits cannot be supplemented at the time of arguments by the production of
some records for the perusal of the court alone. We are not, however, inclined to hold that the
counter-affidavit alone should be looked into for deciding the question of jurisdiction. It is true that
some of the matters referred to in the counter- affidavits had been considered by the Income-tax
Officer at the stage of the original assessments as seen from the series of correspondence between
the petitioner and the department containing queries and explanations at that stage. But, a persual
of the files and records produced before us shows that all the materials were not there at the stage of
the original assessments but only a few of them had been considered and investigated. It is true that
there is some overlapping of the items. But, from that circumstance alone, we are not in a position to
say that all the materials which are now before the Income-tax Officer have been investigated at the
assessment stage. We are unable, therefore, to say that the Income-tax Officer has not acted in good
faith and that he has issued the notices only with a view to have a fresh roving enquiry as alleged by
the petitioner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 27
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
30. The learned counsel for the petitioner makes certain submissions with regard to the materials
produced by the revenue before us whose details have not been set out in the various counter
affidavits. It is contended that once a challenge is made by an assessee that the Income-tax Officer
had no materials before him to entertain a belief that the income has escaped assessment the
Income-tax Officer has to satisfy the court that he has acted within his jurisdiction in issuing the
notice under section 148 and in initiating proceedings under section 147, by disclosing such
materials as are in his possession to the court and also to the assessee so that whatever explanation
he could offer in relation to those materials may be placed before the court so as to enable the court
to properly appreciate the contentions of both the parties relating to the jurisdiction of the
Income-tax Officer. It is pointed out that if a particular material is shown to be before the
Income-tax Officer, the assessee if he becomes aware of that material may satisfy the court that the
same material was before the Income-tax Officer even at the stage of the assessments, and that the
Income-tax Officer merely in the guise of acting on a new material purports to change his earlier
opinion. The petitioner's learned counsel also states that once the matter comes before the court on
a challenge being made by the assessee on the question of jurisdiction of the Income-tax Officer to
issue a notice under section 148, the attempt to satisfy only the court about the existence of the
material is not sufficient, that it is not a private matter between the Income-tax Officer and the court
and that all materials which are disclosed to the court should also be disclosed to the assessee so
that he will assist the court in deciding the question of jurisdiction. What the learned counsel in
effect says is that the court will not be justified in deciding the question of jurisdiction on the files
and records being shown to the court without the petitioner having the benefit of the information
available therefrom, and that the court will have to decide the question of jurisdiction only after the
disclosure of that information to the petitioner. The learned counsel, however, concedes that in
exceptional cases where confidential and privileged documents are placed before the court, the
adversary cannot have a right to peruse the same. But in cases where no privilege is claimed or
where the documents produced are not confidential, the assessee, it is said, cannot be made to grope
in the dark as it were for sustaining his plea that the Income-tax Officer has issued the notice
without jurisdiction.
15. In the case of Income Tax Officer vs. Lakhmani - (1976) 3 SCC 757, it was held as under:-
7. It would appear from the perusal of the provisions reproduced above that two
conditions have to be satisfied before an Income Tax Officer acquires jurisdiction to
issue notice under Section 148 in respect of an assessment beyond the period of four
years but within a period of eight years from the end of the relevant year viz. (1) the
Income Tax Officer must have reason to believe that income chargeable to tax has
escaped assessment, and (2) he must have reason to believe that such income has
escaped assessment by reason of the omission or failure on the part of the assessee
(a) to make a return under Section 139 for the assessment year to the Income Tax
Officer, or (b) to disclose fully and truly material facts necessary for his assessment
for that year. Both these conditions must coexist in order to confer jurisdiction on the
Income Tax Officer. It is also imperative for the Income Tax Officer to record his
reasons before initiating proceedings as required by Section 148(2). Another
requirement is that before notice is issued after the expiry of four years from the end
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 28
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
of the relevant assessment years, the Commissioner should be satisfied on the
reasons recorded by the Income Tax Officer that it is a fit case for the issue of such
notice. We may add that the duty which is cast upon the assessee is to make a true
and full disclosure of the primary facts at the time of the original assessment.
Production before the Income Tax Officer of the account books or other evidence
from which material evidence could with due diligence have been discovered by the
Income Tax Officer will not necessarily amount to disclosure contemplated by law.
The duty of the assessee in any case does not extend beyond making a true and full
disclosure of primary facts. Once he has done that his duty ends. It is for the Income
Tax Officer to draw the correct inference from the primary facts. It is no
responsibility of the assessee to advise the Income Tax Officer with regard to the
inference which he should draw from the primary facts. If an Income Tax Officer
draws an inference which appears subsequently to be erroneous, mere change of
opinion with regard to that inference would not justify initiation of action for
reopening assessment.
8. The grounds or reasons which lead to the formation of the belief contemplated by
Section 147(a) of the Act must have a material bearing on the question of escapement
of income of the assessee from assessment because of his failure or omission to
disclose fully and truly all material facts. Once there exist reasonable grounds for the
Income Tax Officer to form the above belief, that would be sufficient to clothe him
with jurisdiction to issue notice. Whether the grounds are adequate or not is not a
matter for the court to investigate. The sufficiency of grounds which induce the
Income Tax Officer to act is, therefore, not a justifiable issue. It is, of course, open to
the assessee to contend that the Income Tax Officer did not hold the belief that there
had been such non-disclosure. The existence of the belief can be challenged by the
assessee but not the sufficiency of reasons for the belief. The expression "reason to
believe" does not mean a purely subjective satisfaction on the part of the Income Tax
Officer. The reason must be held in good faith. It cannot he merely a pretence. It is
open to the court to examine whether the reasons for the formation of the belief have
a rational connection with or a relevant bearing on the formation of the belief and are
not extraneous or irrelevant for the purpose of the section. To this limited extent, the
action of the Income Tax Officer in starting proceedings in respect of income
escaping assessment is open to challenge in a court of law see observations of this
Court in the cases of Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. V. Income Tax Officer [AIR 1961 SC
372 : (1961) 2 SCR 241 : 41 ITR 191] and S. Narayanappa v. CIT [AIR 1967 SC 523 :
(1967) 1 SCR 590 : 63 ITR 219] while dealing with corresponding provisions of the
Indian Income Tax Act, 1922).
9. Keeping the above principles in view, we may now turn our attention to the facts of
the present case. Two grounds were mentioned in the report made by the Income Tax
Officer for reopening the assessment of the assessee respondent with a view to show
that his income had been underassessed because of his failure to disclose fully and
truly material facts necessary for the assessment. One was that Mohansingh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 29
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
Kanayalal, who was shown to be one of the creditors of the assessee, had since
confessed that he was doing only name-lending. The other ground was that
Narayansingh Nandalal, D.K. Naraindas, Bhagwandas Srichand etc whose names too
were mentioned in the list of the creditors of the assessee, were known name-lenders.
So far as the second ground is concerned, neither the majority of the Judges of the
High Court nor the learned Judge who was in the minority relied upon that ground.
Regarding that ground, the learned Judge who was in the minority observed that no basis had been
indicated as to how it became known that those creditors were known name-lenders and when it
was known. The majority while not relying upon that ground placed reliance upon the case of
Chhugamal Rajpal. In that case the Income Tax Officer while submitting a report to the
Commissioner of Income Tax for obtaining his sanction with a view to issue notice under Section
148 of the Act stated:
"During the year the assessee has shown to have taken loans from various parties of
Calcutta. From D.I.'s Inv. No. A/P/Misc. (5) D.I./63-64/5623 dated August 13, 1965,
forwarded to the office under CIT, Bihar and Orissa, Patna's letter No. Inv. (Inv.)
15/65- 66/1953-2017 dated Patna September 24, 1965 it appears that these persons
are name-lenders and the transactions are bogus. Hence, proper investigation
residing these loans is necessary. The names of some of the persons from whom
money is alleged to have been taken on loan on hundis are:
1. Seth Bhagwan Singh Sricharan
2. Lakha Singh Lal Singh
3. Radhakissen Shyam Sunder The amount of escapement involved amounts to Rs
1,00,000."
In dealing with that report this Court observed:
"From the report submitted by the Income Tax Officer to the Commissioner, it is
clear that he could not have had reasons to believe that by reason of the assessee's
omission to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment for
the accounting year in question, income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment for
that year; nor could it be said that he, as a consequence of information in his
possession, had reasons to believe that the income chargeable to tax has escaped
assessment for that year. We are not satisfied that the Income Tax Officer had any
material before him which could satisfy the requirements of either clause (a) or
clause (b) of Section 147. Therefore, he could not have issued a notice under Section
148."
Reference to the names of Narayansingh Nandalal, D.K. Naraindas, Bhagwandas Srichand etc. in
the report of the Income Tax Officer to the Commissioner of Income Tax in the instant case does not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 30
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
stand on a better footing than the reference to the three names in the report made by the Income
Tax Officer in the case of Chhugamal Rajpal. We would, therefore, hold that the second ground
mentioned by the Income Tax Officer i.e. reference to the names of Narayansingh Nandalal, D.K.
Naraindas, Bhagwandas Srichand etc. could not have led to the formation of the belief that the
income of the respondent assessee chargeable to tax had escaped assessment for that year because
of the failure or omission of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts. All the three
learned Judges of the High Court, in our opinion, were justified in excluding the second ground
from consideration,
10. We may now deal with the first ground mentioned in the report of the Income Tax Officer to the
Commissioner of Income Tax. This ground relates to Mohansingh Kanayalal, against whose name
there was an entry about the payment of Rs 74 annas 3 as interest in the books of the assessee,
having made a confession that he was doing only name-lending. There is nothing to show that the
above confession related to a loan to the assessee and not to someone else, much less to the loan of
Rs 2500 which was shown to have been advanced by that person to the assessee-respondent. There
is also no indication as to when that confession was made and whether it relates to the period from
April 1, 1957 to March 31, 1958 which is the subject-matter of the assessment sought to be reopened.
The report was made on February 13, 1967. In the absence of the date of the alleged confession. It
would not be unreasonable to assume that the confession was made a few weeks or months before
the report. To infer from that confession that it relates to the period from April 1, 1957 to March 31,
1958 and that it pertains to the loan shown to have been advanced to the assessee, in our opinion,
would be rather farf etched.
11. As stated earlier, the reasons for the formation of the belief must have a rational connection with
or relevant bearing on the formation of the belief. Rational connection postulates that there must be
a direct nexus or live link between the material coming to the notice of the Income Tax Officer and
the formation of his belief that there has been escapement of the income of the assessee from
assessment in the particular year because of his failure to disclose fully and truly all material facts. It
is no doubt true that the court cannot go into the sufficiency or adequacy of the material and
substitute its own opinion for that of the Income Tax Officer on the point as to whether action
should be initiated for reopening assessment. At the same time we have to bear in mind that it is not
any and every material, howsoever vague and indefinite or distant, remote and farfetched, which
would warrant the formation of the belief relating to escapement of the income of the assessee from
assessment. The fact that the words "definite information" which were there in Section 34 of the Act
of 1922 at one time before its amendment in 1948 are not there in Section 147 of the Act of 1961
would not lead to the conclusion that action can now be taken for reopening assessment even if the
information is wholly vague, indefinite, farfetched and remote. The reason for the formation of the
belief must be held in good faith and should not be a mere pretence.
12. The powers of the Income Tax Officer to reopen assessment though wide are not plenary. The
words of the statute are "reason to believe" and not "reason to suspect" The reopening of the
assessment after the lapse of many years is a serious matter. The Act, no doubt, contemplates the
reopening of the assessment if grounds exist for believing that income of the assessee has escaped
assessment. The underlying reason for that is that instances of concealed income or other income
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 31
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
escaping assessment in a large number of cases come to the notice of the Income Tax Authorities
after the assessment has been completed. The provisions of the Act in this respect depart from the
normal rule that there should be, subject to right of appeal and revision, finality about orders made
in judicial and quasi-judicial proceedings. It is, therefore, essential that before such action is taken
the requirements of the law should be satisfied. The live link or close nexus which should be there
between the material before the Income Tax Officer in the present case and the belief which he was
to form regarding the escapement of the income of the assessee from assessment because of the
latter's failure or omission to disclose fully and truly all material facts was missing in the case. In any
event, the link was too tenuous to provide a legally sound basis for reopening the assessment. The
majority of the learned Judges in the High Court, in our opinion, were not in error in holding that
the said material could not have led to the formation of the belief that the income of the assessee
respondent had escaped assessment because of his failure or omission to disclose fully and truly all
material facts. We would, therefore, uphold the view of the majority and dismiss the appeal with
costs.
14. In the case of Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax vs. ICICI - (2012) 13 SCC 514, it was held as
under:-
5. We have noted the submissions of both the parties. The petitioner is a public
limited company engaged in the business of carrying on various non-
banking financial activities. The present petition is concerning Assessment Year 1999-2000. The
assessment of the petitioner for that year had been finalised under Section 143 of the Income Tax
Act. An order in that behalf was passed earlier on 28-3- 2002 determining the income of the
petitioner as Rs 27.72 crores. Thereafter the first respondent sought to reopen the assessment and
the reasons for reopening the assessment recorded vide his letter dated 27-3-2006 disclose that it is
essentially after having another look at the annual accounts which had been furnished earlier. The
officer records that now it is noticed that during that year the assessee Company had incurred a loss
in trading in shares. The officer thereafter discusses the various entries appearing in the opening
and closing stocks and purchases and sales of those stocks. Thereafter the officer has concluded that
there is a loss of Rs 19.86 crores and that the loss was speculative one. He has therefore come to a
conclusion that the income chargeable to tax to the extent of Rs 19.86 crores has escaped the
assessment and that is how he has passed the order under Section 147 of the Income Tax Act
although almost four years have gone after the assessment of the year concerned.
6. Mr Mistry, learned counsel for the petitioner, points out that the reasons given by the first
respondent in his order dated 27-3-2006 are clearly based on the documents which the petitioner
had already furnished, containing the accounts tendered by the petitioner. There is nothing new that
has come to the notice of the Revenue at this point of time. It is only a different analysis which is
now being done and the conclusion is being drawn that its income to the extent of Rs.19.86 crores
has escaped the assessment. In his submission, this is impermissible under the powers that are
available to the Revenue under Section 147 of the Income Tax Act. It can only be where there is a
failure on the part of the assessee to make a true return which is what is provided in the proviso to
Section 147 and wherein such a reopening would be permissible after the expiry of four years. In the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 32
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
instant case, nothing of the kind has happened.
7. Mr Kotangale, learned counsel for the respondents, has drawn our attention to a judgment of the
Apex Court in Srikrishna (P) Ltd. v. ITO [(1996) 9 SCC 534 : (1996) 221 ITR 538] . In this case, what
is held by the Apex Court is that where certain loan transactions were relied upon and which were
subsequently discovered to be false, reassessment proceedings were validly initiated. What is
however material to note is that in that particular case the Court has given a clear finding that the
assessee had created and recorded bogus entries of loan and, therefore, the Court held that the
assessee could not say that it had truly and fully disclosed all material facts necessary for the
assessment for the year concerned.
8. The second judgment relied upon by Mr Kotangale is Phool Chand Bajrang Lal v. ITO [(1993) 4
SCC 77 : (1993) 203 ITR 456] . In this case, the reopening was permitted in view of subsequent
information which was found to be definite, specific and reliable. This subsequent information
included the confession of the Managing Director that the company had not advanced any loan to
any person during the period covered and for which certain cash loans were supposed to have been
advanced. It was in the facts of this particular development that the Apex Court held that the
reopening was justified.
9. In the facts of the present case, there is nothing new which has come to the notice of the Revenue.
The accounts had been furnished by the petitioner when called upon. Thereafter the assessment was
completed under Section 143(3) of the Income Tax Act. Now, on a mere relook, the officer has come
to the conclusion that the income has escaped assessment and he is of course justified in his
analysis. In our view, this is not something which is permissible under the proviso to Section 147 of
the Income Tax Act which speaks about a failure on the part of the assessee to make a proper return.
In the present case, no such case is made out on the record.
15. In the case of New Delhi Television Ltd., vs. Deputy Commissioner - (2020) SCC Online 446, the
Apex Court held as under:-
11. In our opinion, the following issues arise for consideration in this case:--
(i) Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, it can be said that the revenue
had a valid reason to believe that undisclosed income had escaped assessment?
(ii) Whether the assessee did not disclose fully and truly all material facts during the
course of original assessment which led to the finalisation of the assessment order
and undisclosed income escaping detection?
(iii) Whether the notice dated 31.03.2015 along with reasons communicated on
04.08.2015 could be termed to be a notice invoking the provisions of the second
proviso to Section 147 of the Act?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 33
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
12. At the outset we may note that it has been strenuously urged on behalf of the assessee that its
assessment was done under scrutiny procedure and a very detailed procedure was followed during
the original assessment proceedings and all aspects of the case were noted by the assessing officer.
That may be true, but merely the fact that the original assessment is a detailed one, cannot take
away the powers of the assessing officer to issue notice under Section 147 of the Act.
13. We would like to make it clear that we are not going into the merits of the allegations made
against the assessee. At this stage we are only required to decide whether the revenue has sufficient
reasons to believe that undisclosed income of the asseessee has escaped assessment and therefore
there are grounds to issue notice. Obviously, during the assessment proceedings the assessee will
have the right to place material on record to show that the transaction in question was a genuine
transaction.
14. It is trite law that an assessing officer can only re-open an assessment if he has 'reason to believe'
that undisclosed income has escaped assessment. Mere change of opinion of the assessing officer is
not a sufficient to meet the standard of 'reason to believe'. Relevant portion of Section 147 reads as
follows:--
147. Income escaping assessment.--If the Assessing Officer, has reason to believe that
any income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment for any assessment year, he
may, subject to the provisions of sections 148 to 153, assess or reassess such income
and also any other income chargeable to tax which has escaped assessment and
which comes to his notice subsequently in the course of the proceedings under this
section, or recompute the loss or the depreciation allowance or any other allowance,
as the case may be, for the assessment year concerned (hereafter in this section and
in sections 148 to 153 referred to as the relevant assessment year):
Provided that where an assessment under sub- section (3) of section 143 or this
section has been made for the relevant assessment year, no action shall be taken
under this section after the expiry of four years from the end of the relevant
assessment year, unless any income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment for
such assessment year by reason of the failure on the part of the assessee to make a
return under section 139 or in response to a notice issued under subsection (1) of
section 142 or section 148 or to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for
his assessment for that assessment year:
Provided further that nothing contained in the first proviso shall apply in a case
where any income in relation to any asset (including financial interest in any entity)
located outside India, chargeable to tax, has escaped assessment for any assessment
year:
Provided also that the Assessing Officer may assess or reassess such income, other
than the income involving matters which are the subject- matter of any appeal,
reference or revision, which is chargeable to tax and has escaped assessment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 34
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
Explanation 1.--Production before the Assessing Officer of account books or other
evidence from which material evidence could, with due diligence, have been
discovered by the Assessing Officer will not necessarily amount to disclosure within
the meaning of the foregoing proviso.
Explanation 2.--For the purposes of this section, the following shall also be deemed
to be cases where income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment, namely:--
(a) where no return of income has been furnished by the assessee although his total
income or the total income of any other person in respect of which he is assessable
under this Act during the previous year exceeded the maximum amount which is not
chargeable to income-tax;
(b) where a return of income has been furnished by the assessee but no assessment
has been made and it is noticed by the Assessing Officer that the assessee has
understated the income or has claimed excessive loss, deduction, allowance or relief
in the return;
(ba) where the assessee has failed to furnish a report in respect of any international
transaction which he was so required under section 92E;
(c) where an assessment has been made, but--
(i) income chargeable to tax has been under assessed; or
(ii) such income has been assessed at too low a rate; or
(iii) such income has been made the subject of excessive relief under this Act; or
(iv) excessive loss or depreciation allowance or any other allowance under this Act
has been computed.
(ca) where a return of income has not been furnished by the assessee or a return of
income has been furnished by him and on the basis of information or document
received from the prescribed income-tax authority, under sub-section (2) of section
133C, it is noticed by the Assessing Officer that the income of the assessee exceeds the
maximum amount not chargeable to tax, or as the case may be, the assessee has
understated the income or has claimed excessive loss, deduction, allowance or relief
in the return;
(d) where a person is found to have any asset (including financial interest in any
entity) located outside India.
xxxxxxxxx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 35
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
15. The case of the assessee is that the transaction of step-up coupon bonds was scrutinised in great
detail by the assessing officer before he passed the order of assessment dated 03.08.2012. According
to the assessee there is an attempt on behalf of the revenue to deliberately mix-up the transactions
relating to the Netherlands subsidiary with the U.K. subsidiary. According to the assessee the order
of the DRP for the assessment year 2009-10 is in two distinct compartments. While the DRP held
the Netherlands' transactions of Rs.642 crores to be a sham, the transaction of issuance of US$ 100
million convertible bonds was not questioned. Therefore, according to the assessee there was no
fresh material before the assessing officer to have reason to believe that the undisclosed income of
the assessee had escaped assessment.
16. On behalf of the assessee it has been urged that once the transaction of step-up coupon bonds
has been accepted to be correct, then the revenue cannot re-open the same and doubt the genuiness
of the transaction. We are not in agreement with the first part of the submission but we make it clear
that we are not commenting on the genuineness of the transaction, which will be considered by the
concerned assessing officer.
17. On the other hand, on behalf of the revenue it is submitted that at the stage of issue of show
cause notice the revenue only has to establish a tentative and prima facie view. At this stage, this
Court is not expected to go into the merits of the case but can only ascertain whether the revenue
has prima facie ground to show that it had reasons to believe that income has escaped assessment. It
is further submitted that the scope of judicial review in such matters is very limited. It is also
submitted that since the revenue discovered fresh tangible material subsequent to the assessment
order of 03.08.2012, it cannot be said that the assessing officer did not have reasons to believe that
income had escaped assessment.
18. The main issue is whether there was sufficient material before the assessing officer to take a
prima facie view that income of the assessee had escaped assessment. The original order of
assessment was passed on 03.08.2012. It was thereafter on 31.12.2013 that the DRP in the case of
AY 2009-10 raised doubts with regard to the corporate structure of the assessee and its subsidiaries.
It was noted in the order of the DRP that certain shares of NNPLC had been acquired by Universal
Studios International B.V., Netherlands, indirectly by subscribing to the shares of NNIH. As already
noted above it was recorded in the reasons communicated on 04.08.2015 that NNPLC was not
having any business activity in London. It had no fixed assets and was not even paying rent. Other
than the fact that NNPLC was incorporated in the U.K., it had no other commercial business there.
NNPLC had declared a loss of Rs.8.34 crores for the relevant year. It was also noticed from the order
of the assessing officer that the assessee is the parent company of NNPLC and it is the dictates of the
assessee which are important for running NNPLC.
19. Pursuant to the directions of the DRP, the assessing officer passed the final assessment order for
AY 2009-10 on 21.02.2014 which also disclosed similar facts.
20. According to the revenue Tax Evasion Petitions were filed by the minority shareholders of the
assessee company on various dates, i.e., 11.03.2014, 25.07.2014, 13.10.2014 and 11.03.2015, which
complaints describe in detail the communication between the assessee and the subsidiaries and also
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 36
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
allegedly showed evidence of round tripping of the assessee's undisclosed income through a layer of
subsidiaries which led to the issuance of the notice in question.
21. Whether the facts which came to the knowledge of the assessment officer after the assessment
proceedings for the relevant year were completed, could be taken into consideration for coming to
the conclusion that there were reasons to believe that income had escaped assessment is the
question that requires to be answered. Though a number of judgments have been cited in this
behalf, we shall make reference to only a few.
22. In Claggett Brachi Co. Ltd., London v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Andhra Pradesh1, this
Court held as follows:--
"7. Two points have been urged before us by learned counsel for the assessee. It is
contended that the Income Tax Officer has no jurisdiction to take proceedings under
Sections 147 and 148 of the Income Tax Act because the conditions prerequisite for
making the reassessments were not satisfied. The re-assessments were made with
reference to clause (b) of Section 147 of the Act, and apparently the Income Tax
Officer proceeded on the basis that in consequence of information in his possession
he had reason to believe that income chargeable to tax had escaped assessment for
the two assessment years. From the material before us it appears that the Income Tax
Officer came to realise that income had escaped assessment for the two assessment
years when he was in the process of making assessment for a subsequent assessment
year. While making that assessment he came to know from the documents pertaining
to that assessment that the overhead expenses related to the entire business
including the business as commission agents and were not confined to the business of
purchase and sale. It is true, as the High Court has observed, that this information
could have been acquired by the Income Tax Officer if he had exercised due diligence
at the time of the original assessment itself. It does not appear, however, that the
attention of the Income Tax Officer was directed by anything before him to the fact
that the overhead expenses related to the entire business. The information derived by
the Income Tax Officer evidently came into his possession when taking assessment
proceedings for the subsequent year. In the circumstances, it cannot be doubted that
the case falls within the terms of clause (b) of Section 147 of the Act, and that,
therefore, the High Court is right in holding against the assessee."
23. In Phool Chand Bajrang Lal v. Income Tax Officer2, this Court held as follows:--
"19...Acquiring fresh information, specific in nature and reliable in character, relating
to the concluded assessment which goes to expose the falsity of the statement made
by the assessee at the time of original assessment is different from drawing a fresh
inference from the same facts and material which was available with the ITO at the
time of original assessment proceedings. The two situations are distinct and different.
Thus, where the transaction itself on the basis of subsequent information, is found to
be a bogus transaction, the mere disclosure of that transaction at the time of original
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 37
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
assessment proceedings, cannot be said to be disclosure of the "true" and "full" facts
in the case and the ITO would have the jurisdiction to reopen the concluded
assessment in such a case. It is correct that the assessing authority could have
deferred the completion of the original assessment proceedings for further enquiry
and investigation into the genuineness to the loan transaction but in our opinion his
failure to do so and complete the original assessment proceedings would not take
away his jurisdiction to act under Section 147 of the Act, on receipt of the information
subsequently. The subsequent information on the basis of which the ITO acquired
reasons to believe that income chargeable to tax had escaped assessment on account
of the omission of the assessee to make a full and true disclosure of the primary facts
was relevant, reliable and specific. It was not at all vague or non-specific."
24. In Ess Kay Engineering Co.(P) Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Amritsar3, this Court held
as follows:--
"This is a case of reopening. We have perused the documents. We find there was
material on the basis of which the Income Tax Officer could proceed to reopen the
case. It is not a case of mere change of opinion. We are not inclined to interfere with
the decision of the High Court merely because the case of the assessee was accepted
as correct in the original assessment for this assessment year. It does not preclude the
Income Tax Officer from reopening the assessment of an earlier year on the basis of
his findings of fact made on the basis of fresh materials in course of assessment of the
next assessment year. The appeal is dismissed. No order as to costs."
25. A perusal of the aforesaid judgments clearly shows that subsequent facts which come to the
knowledge of the assessing officer can be taken into account to decide whether the assessment
proceedings should be re-opened or not. Information which comes to the notice of the assessing
officer during proceedings for subsequent assessment years can definitely form tangible material to
invoke powers vested with the assessing officer under Section 147 of the Act.
26. The material disclosed in the assessment proceedings for the subsequent years as well as the
material placed on record by the minority shareholders form the basis for taking action under
Section 147 of the Act. At the stage of issuance of notice, the assessing officer is to only form a prima
facie view. In our opinion the material disclosed in assessment proceedings for subsequent years
was sufficient to form such a view. We accordingly hold that there were reasons to believe that
income had escaped assessment in this case. Question No. 1 is answered accordingly.
27. Coming to the second question as to whether there was failure on the part of the assessee to
make a full and true disclosure of all the relevant facts. The case of the assessee is that it had
disclosed all facts which were required to be disclosed.
28. The revenue has placed reliance on certain complaints made by the minority shareholders and it
is alleged that those complaints reveal that the assessee was indulging in round-tripping of its funds.
According to the revenue the material disclosed in these complaints clearly shows that the assessee
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 38
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
is guilty of creating a network of shell companies with a view to transfer its un-taxed income in India
to entities abroad and then bring it back to India thereby avoiding taxation. We make it clear that we
are not going into this aspect of the matter because those complaints have not seen light of the day
either before the High Court or this Court and, therefore, it would be unfair to the assessee if we rely
upon such material which the assessee has not been confronted with.
29. Even before the assessment order was passed on 03.08.2012, the assessing officer was aware of
the entities which had subscribed to the convertible bonds. This is apparent from the
communication dated 08.04.2011. The case of the revenue is that the assessee did not disclose the
amount subscribed by each of the entities and furthermore the management structure of these
companies. We are not in agreement with this submission of the revenue. It is apparent from the
records of the case that the revenue was aware of the entities which subscribed to the convertible
bonds. It has been urged that these are bogus companies, but we are not concerned with that at this
stage. The issue before us is whether the revenue can take the benefit of the extended period of
limitation of 6 years for initiating proceedings under the first proviso Section 147 of the Act. This can
only be done if the revenue can show that the assessee had failed to disclose fully and truly all
material facts necessary for its assessment. The assessee, in our view had disclosed all the facts it
was bound to disclose. If the revenue wanted to investigate the matter further at that stage it could
have easily directed the assessee to furnish more facts.
30. The High Court held that there was no "true and fair disclosure" in view of the law laid down by
this Court in Phool Chand's case (supra), and the judgment of the Delhi High Court in Honda Siel
Power Products Limited v. Deputy Commissioner Income-Tax4. We have already referred to the
judgment in Phool Chand's case (supra), wherein it was held that where the transaction of a
particular assessment year is found to be a bogus transaction, the disclosures made could not be
said to be all "true" and "full". Relying upon the said judgment the High Court held that merely
because the transaction of convertible bonds was disclosed at the time of original assessment does
not mean that there is true and full disclosure of facts.
31. We are unable to agree with this reasoning given by the High Court. The assessee as mentioned
above made a disclosure about having agreed to stand guarantee for the transaction by NNPLC and
it had also disclosed the factum of the issuance of convertible bonds and their redemption.
The income, if any, arose because of the redemption at a discounted price. This was an event which
took place subsequent to the assessment year in question though it may be income for the
assessment year. As we have observed above, all relevant facts were duly within the knowledge of
the assessing officer. The assessing officer knew who were the entities who had subscribed to other
convertible bonds and in other proceedings relating to the subsidiaries the same assessing officer
had knowledge of addresses and the consideration paid by each of the bondholders as is apparent
from assessment orders dated 03.08.2012 passed in the cases of M/s. NDTV Labs Ltd. and M/s.
NDTV Lifestyle Ltd. Therefore, in our opinion there was full and true disclosure of all material facts
necessary for its assessment by the assessee.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 39
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
32. The fact that step-up coupon bonds for US$ 100 million were issued by NNPLC was disclosed;
who were the entities which subscribed to the bonds was disclosed; and the fact that the bonds were
discounted at a lower rate was also disclosed before the assessment was finalised. This transaction
was accepted by the assessing officer and it was clearly held that the assessee was only liable to
receive a guarantee fees on the same which was added to its income. Without saying anything
further on merits of the transaction we are of the view that it cannot be said that the assessee had
withheld any material information from the revenue.
33. According to the revenue the assessee to avoid detection of the actual source of funds of its
subsidiaries did not disclose the details of the subsidiaries in its final accounts, balance sheets, and
profit and loss account for the relevant period as was mandatory under the provisions of the Indian
Companies Act, 1956. It is not disputed that the assessee had obtained an exemption from the
competent authority under the Companies Act, 1956 from providing such details in its final
accounts, balance sheets, etc. As such it cannot be said that the assessee was bound to disclose this
to the Assessing Officer. The Assessing Officer before finalising the assessment of 03.08.2012 had
never asked the assessee to furnish the details.
34. The revenue now has come up with the plea that certain documents were not supplied but
according to us all these documents cannot be said to be documents which the assessee was bound
to disclose at the time of assessment. The main ground raised by the revenue is that the assessee did
not disclose as to who had subscribed what amount and what was its relationship with the assessee.
As far as the first part is concerned it does not appear to be correct. There is material on record to
show that on 08.04.2011 NNPLC had sent a communication to the Deputy Director of Income Tax
(Investigation), wherein it had not only disclosed the names of all the bond holders but also their
addresses; number of bonds along with the total consideration received. This chart forms part of the
assessment orders dated 03.08.2012 in the case of M/s. NDTV Labs Ltd. and M/s. NDTV Lifestyle
Ltd. The said two assessment orders were passed by the same officer who had passed the assessment
order in the case of the assessee on the same date itself. Therefore, the entire material was available
with the revenue.
35. A number of decisions have been cited as to what is meant by true and full disclosure. It is not
necessary to multiply decisions, as law in this regard has been succinctly laid down by a Constitution
Bench of this Court in Calcutta Discount Co. Ltd. v. Income-tax Officer, Companies District I,
Calcutta5, wherein it was held as follows:--
"(8)...The words used are "omission or failure to disclose fully and truly all material
facts necessary for his assessment for that year". It postulates a duty on every
assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment.
What facts are material, and necessary for assessment will differ from case to case. In
every assessment proceeding, the assessing authority will, for the purpose of
computing or determining the proper tax due from an assessee, require to know all
the facts which help him in coming to the correct conclusion.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 40
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
From the primary facts in his possession, whether on disclosure by the assessee, or discovered by
him on the basis of the facts disclosed, or otherwise -- the assessing authority has to draw inferences
as regards certain other facts; and ultimately, from the primary facts and the further facts inferred
from them, the authority has to draw the proper legal inferences, and ascertain on a correct
interpretation of the taxing enactment, the proper tax leviable. Thus, when a question arises
whether certain income received by an assessee is capital receipt, or revenue receipt, the assessing
authority has to find out what primary facts have been proved, what other facts can be inferred from
them, and taking all these together, to decide what the legal inference should be.
(9) There can be no doubt that the duty of disclosing all the primary facts relevant to the decision of
the question before the assessing authority lies on the assessee. To meet a possible contention that
when some account books or other evidence has been produced, there is no duty on the assessee to
disclose further facts, which on due diligence, the Income- tax Officer might have discovered, the
Legislature has put in the Explanation, which has been set out above. In view of the Explanation, it
will not be open to the assessee to say, for example -- "I have produced the account books and the
documents: You, the assessing officer examine them, and find out the facts necessary for your
purpose: My duty is done with disclosing these account-books and the documents." His omission to
bring to the assessing authority's attention these particular items in the account books, or the
particular portions of the documents, which are relevant, will amount to "omission to disclose fully
and truly all material facts necessary for his assessment." Nor will he be able to contend successfully
that by disclosing certain evidence, he should be deemed to have disclosed other evidence, which
might have been discovered by the assessing authority if he had pursued investigation on the basis
of what has been disclosed. The Explanation to the section, gives a quietus to all such contentions;
and the position remains that so far as primary facts are concerned, it is the assessee's duty to
disclose all of them -- including particular entries in account books, particular portions of
documents and documents, and other evidence, which could have been discovered by the assessing
authority, from the documents and other evidence disclosed.
(10) Does the duty however extend beyond the full and truthful disclosure of all primary facts? In
our opinion, the answer to this question must be in the negative. Once all the primary facts are
before the assessing authority, he requires no further assistance by way of disclosure. It is for him to
decide what inferences of facts can be reasonably drawn and what legal inferences have ultimately to
be drawn. It is not for somebody else -- far less the assessee -- to tell the assessing authority what
inferences -- whether of facts or law should be drawn. Indeed, when it is remembered that people
often differ as regards what inferences should be drawn from given facts, it will be meaningless to
demand that the assessee must disclose what inferences -- whether of facts or law -- he would draw
from the primary facts.
(11) If from primary facts more inferences than one could be drawn, it would not be possible to say
that the assessee should have drawn any particular inference and communicated it to the assessing
authority. How could an assessee be charged with failure to communicate an inference, which he
might or might not have drawn?"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 41
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
A careful analysis of this judgment indicates that the Constitution Bench held that it
is the duty of the assessee to disclose full and truly all material facts which it termed
as primary facts. Nondisclosure of other facts which may be termed as secondary
facts is not necessary. In light of the above law, we shall deal with the facts of the
present case.
36. In our view the assessee disclosed all the primary facts necessary for assessment of its case to the
assessing officer. What the revenue urges is that the assessee did not make a full and true disclosure
of certain other facts. We are of the view that the assessee had disclosed all primary facts before the
assessing officer and it was not required to give any further assistance to the assessing officer by
disclosure of other facts. It was for the assessing officer at this stage to decide what inference should
be drawn from the facts of the case. In the present case the assessing officer on the basis of the facts
disclosed to him did not doubt the genuiness of the transaction set up by the assessee. This the
assessing officer could have done even at that stage on the basis of the facts which he already knew.
The other facts relied upon by the revenue are the proceedings before the DRP and facts subsequent
to the assessment order, and we have already dealt with the same while deciding Issue No. 1.
However, that cannot lead to the conclusion that there is non-disclosure of true and material facts
by the assessee.
37. It is interesting to note that whereas before this Court the revenue is strenuously urging that the
assessee is guilty of nondisclosure of material facts, before the High Court the case of the revenue
was just opposite. We may quote a portion of the counter-affidavit filed by the revenue in response
to the writ petition filed by the assessee before the High Court which reads as follows:--
"...It is evident from these facts that second proviso to Section 147 is clearly attracted
in this case and first proviso to Section 147 is not applicable to facts of this case, i.e. in
this case, the only requirement to reopen assessment U/s 147 was that the AO has
reason to believe that any income chargeable to tax has escaped assessment. The
second condition that the income should have escaped assessment due to failure on
the part of the assessee to disclose fully and truly all material facts necessary for
making assessment is not relevant to decide issue before the Hon'ble Court"
38. This submission has been repeated a number of times in the counter-affidavit. Therefore, in our
opinion the revenue cannot now turn around and urge that the assessee is guilty of nondisclosure of
facts. We are also of the view that the revenue could not be permitted to blow hot and cold at the
same time.
39. We are clearly of the view that the revenue in view of its counter-affidavit before the High Court
that it was not relying upon the non-disclosure of facts by the assessee could not have been
permitted to orally urge the same. Even otherwise we find that the assessee had fully and truly
disclosed all material facts necessary for its assessment and, therefore, the revenue cannot take
benefit of the extended period of limitation of 6 years. We answer Question No. 2 accordingly.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 42
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
16. As held in the aforesaid decisions, the respondents - Revenue are entitled to invoke the proviso
to Section 147 of the I.T.Act and reopen the proceedings even after the prescribed period of four
years only if the petitioner - assessee had failed to fully and truly disclose all material facts for the
purpose of assessment; failure on the part of the assessee to fully and truly disclose all facts which
are material, relevant and germane for the purpose of assessment is a sine qua non for the purpose
of reopening the assessment; in other words, in the absence of any material to show that the facts
which were not fully and truly disclosed by the assessee were material, relevant and germane for the
purpose of assessment which had been concluded by the revenue, the revenue did not have
jurisdiction or authority of law to reopen the assessment beyond the prescribed period of four years;
so also, even assuming that all facts had not been disclosed by the assessee at the time of
assessment, so long as the said facts are not material, relevant or germane nor have an impact or
bearing on the assessment, it cannot be said that the petitioner - assessee had not fully and truly
disclosed material facts so as to enable the respondents - revenue to reopen a concluded assessment.
17. In the instant case, it is the specific contention of the petitioner that all relevant and material
facts had been stated and disclosed by the petitioner in its income tax returns as well as the reply to
the queries put forth by the respondents and the same having been accepted without any demur by
the respondents who had concluded the assessment proceedings and passed an assessment order on
31.03.2016, the impugned Demand notice dated 31.03.2021 which was issued beyond the period of
limitation of four years was illegal, arbitrary and without jurisdiction or authority of law. It is also
contended that a perusal of income tax returns as well as the reply submitted by the petitioner on
22.06.2015 to the notice dated 09.06.2015 issued by the respondents will indicate that the face value
/ book value of the shares as well as the total market value of all the quoted investments including
the shares had been mentioned / stated in the returns in addition to other material particulars and
details and consequently, there has not been any failure of full and true disclosure of material facts
for the purpose of assessment.
18. Per contra, it is contended by the respondents that the petitioner had not disclosed and full and
true facts in as much as the book value and the market value of the shares gifted in favour of the
petitioner was not disclosed either in the returns or in the reply submitted by the petitioner and as
such, the respondents were entitled to invoke the proviso to Section 147 of the I.T.Act and reopen
the assessment.
19. As rightly contended by the petitioner, a perusal of the income tax returns submitted by the
petitioner for the financial year 2012-13 will indicate that the same contains the following details:-
(i) In the Annexures to the returns showing the schedules forming part of the Balance
sheet, schedule - 3 contains the details of the investments, among which, long term
investments are shown as A, B, C and D while short term investments are shown as A
and B.
(ii) At page No.1 of the schedules, among long term investments, quoted shares are
shown at Sl.No.A, in which, shares of Wipro Ltd., having a face value of Rs.2/- each
are shown as 49, 07,14,120 in number.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 43
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
(iii) At Page No.2 of the aforesaid schedules annexed to the returns, the details of the
Wipro shares received by the petitioner as gift have been explained including how the
aforesaid number of 49,07,14,120 had been arrived at by the petitioner.
(iv) At Page No.1 referred to supra, the total number of shares for the previous year
i.e., 19,51,87,120 has also been stated. So also, at page No.2, the market value of all
the quoted investments including the shares gifted in favour of the petitioner has
been stated for assessment year 2012-
13 and 2013-14.
20. The aforesaid details contained in the income tax returns submitted by the petitioner clearly
falsifies the allegation of the respondents that the book value of the shares had not been mentioned /
stated by the petitioner;
so also, undisputedly, in order to attract Section 56 (2) (vii)
(c) of the I.T.Act, the aggregate fair market value should exceed Rs.50,000/-; the aforesaid details
mentioned in the income tax returns are sufficient to indicate that even if the market value of
49,07,14,120 shares is taken at 1 paise per share, it would exceed the aforesaid fair market value of
Rs.50,000/- for the purpose of income tax; in other words, in the light of all the details furnished by
the petitioner in the returns including the total number of shares, the methodology adopted to
compute / quantify the number of shares, the total number of shares for the previous assessment
year, the face value / book value of the shares being shown as Rs.2/- each and the total market value
of the quoted investments including the gifted shares coupled with the fact that the market value of
the shares of Wipro Ltd., which is the public limited company whose share value is available readily
in the public domain, it cannot be said that the petitioner had failed to fully and truly disclose all
material facts necessary for its assessment.
21. As stated supra, in the light of all the aforesaid material and relevant facts being fully disclosed
by the petitioner in its returns, which were more than sufficient to complete the assessment, mere
non-disclosure of the market value of the shares separately by the petitioner in its returns cannot
lead to an inference that the petitioner has not fully and truly disclosed all material facts necessary
for assessment; to put it differently, so long as all other material and relevant facts had been
furnished and disclosed and it can be clearly discerned from the returns and the documents that the
market value of the shares was in excess of Rs.50,000/-, simply because the market value of
49,07,14,120 shares had not been separately stated / mentioned, it cannot be said that the
respondents were entitled to take shelter under the proviso to Section 147 of the I.T. Act and seek to
reopen the concluded proceedings of 2016 beyond the period of limitation on 31.03.2021.
22. The material on record also discloses that at the time of assessment proceedings, it was not the
case of the respondents that the market value of the shares was a material fact that was not disclosed
by the petitioner; on the other hand, in its notice dated 09.06.2015 issued under Section 142(1) of
the I.T.Act, the only details sought for by the respondents was with regard to the complete list of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 44
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
donors with address, PAN and the amount donated. In the said notice, though there is a separate
column which enables the respondents to seek details with regard to computation of income, audit
report along with financial statements / schedules, additional information in this regard with regard
to non-furnishing of the market value of the shares was not sought for by the respondents in the
aforesaid notice dated 09.06.2015 (Annexure-G). This circumstance is also a pointer to the fact that
the details furnished by the petitioner in its returns were sufficient and that the petitioner had fully
and truly disclosed all material facts.
23. In response to the aforesaid notice dated 09.06.2015, petitioner submitted a reply dated
22.06.2015 and provided complete details of the corpus donors including mail, address and PAN
and enclosed documentary evidence of the same. Despite receiving the said reply and documents
submitted by the petitioner, respondents did not seek further information / clarification from the
petitioner either with regard to the details and documents submitted in the reply or with regard to
the market value of the shares or the other details mentioned in the returns submitted earlier,
thereby indicating that in view of the information already submitted by the petitioner including the
market value of the total quoted investments including the market value of the shares apart from the
fact that the market value of Wipro shares were readily available in the public domain and exceeding
Rs.50,000/-, the respondents did not deem it necessary or warranted to call upon the petitioner to
provide a separate market value of the shares. Accordingly, the respondents proceeded to complete /
conclude the assessment proceedings and passed an assessment order on 31.03.2016 accepting the
returns submitted by the petitioner. Under these circumstances, I am of the considered view that the
impugned notice at Annexure-A and the reasons for reopening the same vide Annexure-A which
proceed on the sole premise that the petitioner had not disclosed the boom value and the market
value of the shares which tantamount to not fully and truly disclosing material facts are clearly
illegal, arbitrary, factually incorrect and perverse and contrary to the material on record warranting
interference by this Court in the present petition.
24. As held by the Apex Court and other High Courts including this Court, in the aforesaid decisions,
in order to invoke the proviso to Section 147 of the I.T.Act, it is incumbent upon the respondents to
establish that the relevant material facts essential for the purpose of assessment had not been
disclosed by the petitioner; it cannot be gainsaid that all facts / particulars which have not been
stated / mentioned in the returns are not material facts and it is only those facts which would have
an impact / bearing upon the assessment that can be construed or treated as essential. In the instant
case, all relevant material facts viz., details of shares for the assessment years 2011-12 and 2012-13
have been stated including the breakup, face value of the shares at Rs.2/- per share, the details of
the shares for the previous year, market value of all the quoted investments including the shares
etc., have been furnished by the petitioner and accepted at the time of assessment without any
demur; under these circumstances, the respondents are not entitled to invoke the proviso to Section
147 of the I.T.Act in order to contend that the income from the shares has escaped assessment on
account of failure on the part of the petitioner to fully and truly disclose all material facts. Viewed
from this angle also, the impugned notice and the reasons assigned by the respondents deserve to be
quashed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 45
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
25. As can be seen from the aforesaid decisions, it is the settled legal position that an assessee is
under a duty or obligation to disclose only the basic and primary facts relating to his assessment and
thereafter, it is for the Assessing officer to make further enquires and draw inferences and if he does
not do so for any reason , then the Revenue cannot contend that there was any failure or omission
on the part of the assessee. In the instant case, after being in possession of all the relevant facts
relating to the gifts of shares received by the petitioner, the Assessing officer consciously chose not
to apply Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act. However, after the expiry of the period of four years
mentioned in the proviso to Section 147, the A.O has attempted to take a new view, which is not
permissible in law.
26. It is well settled that in a case of reopening covered by the proviso to Section 147 of the I.T.Act,
the reasons recorded must set out the exact particulars of the failure to disclose on the part of the
assessee, on account of which the escapement of income has taken place and a ritual repetition of
the proviso to Section 147 of the I.T.Act would not be sufficient. In the present case, the reasons
recorded only state that though the number of WIPRO shares received as a gift were disclosed, but
neither the book value nor the market value of the shares was disclosed in the Balance Sheet. This is
factually incorrect because the returns submitted by the petitioner indicate that the face value of the
WIPRO shares (Rs.2/- per share) and also their market value as on 31.03.2013 which is included in
the total market value of the quoted investments are clearly disclosed. In any event, the share of
WIPRO is widely quoted and frequently traded and its market value from minute to minute is
readily available and it cannot be said that the petitioner has failed to disclose the information which
is in the public domain and is continuously available to everybody. Further, the reasons recorded do
not even attempt to claim that the non-application of Section 56(2)
(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act and the consequent alleged escapement of income was because the Assessing
officer was allegedly unaware of the market price of WIPRO shares. For application of Section
56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act, even if a price as nominal as one paise is assigned to be the market value
of each Wipro share received as a gift with the number of shares received as a gift being Rs.29.55
crores, the aggregate value will far exceed the limit of Rs.50,000/- specified in Section 56(2)(vii)(c)
of the I.T.Act. Thus, in the facts of the case, it is axiomatic that the Assessing officer considered
Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act not to be attracted at all rather than being unaware of the market
price of WIPRO shares as alleged. The market price of these shares is irrelevant because in the
reasons recorded, nowhere it is specifically alleged and established that the alleged escapement of
income was by reason of the so-called non-disclosure of the share price. In any event, such an
allegation even if made, would be false because the Balance Sheet states the market value and
consequently, on this ground also, the impugned notice and reasons assigned by the respondents
deserve to be quashed. It is therefore clear that the jurisdictional condition precedent laid down by
the proviso to Section 147 i.e failure to disclose a material fact, which failure allegedly is the
proximate cause of the escapement of income has not been fulfilled at all in the present case and the
impugned notice deserves to be quashed.
27. Insofar as the decisions relied upon by the learned counsel for the respondents are concerned,
the same are clearly distinguishable on facts and are not adverted to for the purpose of the present
case; suffice it to state that the impugned notice and order which proceed on the premise that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 46
Azim Premji Trustee Company Pvt Ltd vs Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax-2 on 21 April, 2022
face value / book value of the shares has not been stated is clearly factually incorrect; so also, in the
peculiar facts of the instant case and the details / particulars of the shares and their value already
available with the respondents as stated supra, mere non-mentioning of the market value of the
shares also is neither relevant nor germane for the purpose of invoking the proviso to Section 147 of
the I.T. Act and consequently, the impugned notice and reasons deserve to be quashed on this
ground also.
28. Insofar as the rival claims with regard to applicability of Section 56(2)(vii)(c) of the I.T.Act to the
petitioner as well as the challenge to the impugned circulars dated 03.08.2012 and 31.12.2018 are
concerned, in view of my finding above that the impugned notice and reasons assigned by the
respondents being illegal and vitiated, since the proviso to Section 147 of the I.T.Act is inapplicable
to the facts of the instant case, I am of the considered opinion that it is not necessary to advert to the
said other contentions for the purpose of adjudication of this petition.
29. In the result, I pass the following:-
ORDER
(i) Petition is partly allowed.
(ii) The impugned Notice at Annexure-A dated 31.03.2021 and the reasons for
reopening the assessment vide Annexure-M dated 09.04.2021 are hereby quashed.
SD/-
JUDGE Srl.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22447893/ 47
