B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on
1 March, 2024
Author: A.K. Mohapatra
Bench: A.K.Mohapatra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.40936 of 2023
(In the matters of the applications under Articles 226 and 227
of the Constitution of India.)
B.Ajaya Patro .... Petitioner
Mr. S.K. Mishra, Advocate
-versus-
State of Odisha and others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. N.K.Praharaj, A.G.A.
W.P.(C) No.38200 of 2023
Lipsarani Parida .... Petitioner
Mr. S.K. Samal, Advocate
-versus-
State of Odisha and others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. N.K.Praharaj, A.G.A.
W.P.(C) No.38203 of 2023
Loree Hati .... Petitioner
Mr. S.K. Samal, Advocate
-versus-
State of Odisha and others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. N.K.Praharaj, A.G.A.
W.P.(C) No.38478 of 2023
Rashmirekha Mohanta and others .... Petitioners
Mr. Tanmay Mishra, Advocate
-versus-
State of Odisha and others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. N.K.Praharaj, A.G.A.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 1
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
// 2 //
W.P.(C) No.38741 of 2023
Jyotismita Parida and others .... Petitioners
Mr. Tanmay Mishra, Advocate
-versus-
State of Odisha and others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. N.K.Praharaj, A.G.A.
CORAM:
JUSTICE A.K.MOHAPATRA
Date of hearing : 21.02.2024 : Date of judgment : 01.03.2024
A.K. Mohapatra, J.
1. The present batch of writ applications have been filed by some of the candidates who have applied
pursuant to the advertisement under Annexure-1 dated 21st January, 2023 for appointment as
Nursing Officers against a total of 7483 advertised posts of district cadre Group-C post of Nursing
Officer, 2023. The petitioners in all the writ applications are all qualified Nursing staff having
received their post-Nursing Diploma/Degree certificate from the recognized institutions. The
present writ application has been filed with a specific prayer to quash the reject-list dated
08.08.2023 and for a further direction to the opposite parties to consider the case of the petitioners
by granting the weightage mark of 5% as has been provided for the Healthcare Workers who have
rendered their services during the Covid-19 Pandemic in the State of Odisha. Accordingly, the
petitioners have also prayed for a direction that in the event the petitioners are found to be eligible
with such weightage // 3 // mark of 5%, they shall also be given appointment to the post of Nursing
Officer as has been advertisement under Annexure-1 to the writ application.
2. Heard Sri. B.Routray, learned Senior Counsel, Sri. Manoj Mishra, learned Senior Counsel, Mr.
Sukant Kumar Mishra, learned counsel and many other counsels appearing for the petitioners in the
present batch of writ petitions. Heard Mr. N.K.Prharaj, learned Additional Government Advocate
for the State-Opposite Parties. Perused the writ application as well as the documents/materials
placed in record by the petitioners.
3. Since the batch of writ applications referred to hereinabove involve a common question of law,
this Court deems it proper to dispose of all the writ applications by the following common order. For
the sake of convenience the facts involved in case of the Lipsarani Parida in W.P.(C) No.38200 of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 2
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
2023 is being taken up for analysis of the factual background of the above noted batch of writ
applications.
4. The factual background of the abovenoted batch of writ applications leading to the filing of the
present writ applications, in short, is that the petitioners have completed Diploma in GNM, 2020
from the Subham School of Nursing situated in Bhadrak district, after completing her +2 Science
degree course from Salandi Residential College, Bhadrak. In the abovenoted Diploma GNM course,
the petitioners had secured 76.44% mark. It appears from the record that the petitioners was
engaged as short-term Covid Worker during the Covid-19 Pandemic, which has been duly certified
by the authorities. On perusal of the certificate attached to the writ application, it appears that the
petitioners were engaged by the Tata Steel Medical Hospital at Jajpur under the Covid scheme from
// 4 // 29.08.2022 to 02.02.2022 as such the petitioners were eligible for being appointed against
regular vacancy post by giving her the weightage marks as provided in the Rules, as well as in the
advertisement.
5. While the matter stood thus, the Odisha Subordinate Staff Selection Commission published an
advertisement on 21st January, 2023, under Annexure-1 to the writ application, to fill up 7483 posts
of district cadre Group-C Nursing Officer, 2023. Such advertisement reveals that the applications
were to be filed online from the starting date of application on 27.01.2023 to the end date of
application on 17.02.2023. It has been stated in the writ application that the present petitioners
satisfies all the eligibility criteria as has been provided under clause 3 of the said advertisement.
Further, the said advertisement under clause 3(A)(III) provides for grant of weightage for Covid-19
health workers. Pursuant to Rule 3 of Odisha grant of weightage in marks in the Recruitment for
Short-Term COVID-19 Healthcare workers Rules, 2022, the aforesaid clause in the advertisement
also provides that the persons who have rendered the service as covid-19 healthcare workers and
have been engaged to perform such duties for a minimum period of 3 months shall be allowed 5%
extra mark on the total marks secured by him/her in the recruitment examination. It is further
contended that although the petitioners are entitled to the weightage mark of 5% as has been
provided pursuant to the Rules, 2022 and as per the advertisement under clause 3(A)(III), such
weightage mark has not been awarded to the petitioners. Being aggrieved by such conduct of the
OSSSC the petitioners have approached this Court by filing the present writ application.
// 5 //
6. Learned Senior Counsels as well as other counsels appearing for the petitioners, at the outset,
contended that the petitioners in the batch of writ applications have all submitted their documents
in support of their contention that they have worked as Short-term Covid-19 Health Workers for
more than three months in different hospitals/ healthcare institutions in the State of Odisha. It was
also contended that during the Covid-19 Pandemic both hospitals run by the Government as well as
the private hospitals were engaged in Covid-19 duty under active & direct supervision of the Govt. of
Odisha. Learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners also contended that since the covid-19
healthcare operation was being conducted under the direct supervision of the Government and the
local bodies, almost all the hospitals were following a common protocol so far as the Covid-19
patients are concerned. Keeping in view the valuable service rendered by the petitioners in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 3
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
present batch of writ applications, the Government took a policy decision and accordingly the Rules,
2022 was formulated thereunder providing a 5% weightage mark to such Health Workers who had
worked as short-term Covid-19 healthcare workers for more than three months.
7. Accordingly, learned Senior counsels appearing for the petitioners in the batch of writ
applications submitted that it is not open to the Government to discriminate amongst the
petitioners and to create a sub-class by classifying and differentiating the applicants with regard to
the grant of weightage mark by denoting one group as health workers serving in the Government
hospitals and the other as health workers serving in private hospitals. It was further emphatically
contended by learned senior counsel that the same would be violative of the underlying principles of
Article 14 and 16 // 6 // of the Constitution of India. Therefore, such an approach, in the event same
is adopted by the State Government while granting such weightage mark to the applicants, would be
against the spirit of law as well as the mandate of the Constitution.
8. In view of the aforesaid submissions, learned counsels appearing for the petitioners in the present
batch of writ applications submitted that the Opposite Parties be directed to consider the case of the
petitioners afresh by keeping in view the certificate submitted by them in support of their contention
for grant of 5% weightage mark under clause 3(A)(III) of the advertisement, as well as pursuant to
the rules of the year 2022. With a further direction to the Opposite Parties, including the OSSSC, to
recommend such eligible candidates for appointment to post of Nursing Officer immediately within
a stipulated period of time, since many such posts are still lying vacant at the moment.
9. In course of their arguments Mr. Routray & Mr. Mishra, leaned senior counsels appearing for the
petitioners in the present batch of writ petitions, referred to the Health & Family Welfare
department, Govt. of Odisha letter No.6599 dated 03.07.2020 and submitted that the same contains
a guideline for management of Covid-19 positive cases in Covid care centers by PSUs, Corporate
Institutions, Private and NGO Sector. In such view of the matter, learned Senior Counsel submitted
that the entire healthcare operation during the Covid-19 pandemic was being supervised and was
being carried out under the active & direct control of the Health & Family Welfare department,
Govt. of Odisha.
10. The guidelines attached to the aforesaid letter also provides the details with regard to the
treatment of such Covid-19 positive patients. Further, referring to the said guidelines under the
heading // 7 // "human resources" learned senior counsels for the petitioners submitted that the
guideline provides one GDMO/Ayush Doctor, two Pharmacist/Staff nurse/ANM, two attendants,
two cleaning staffs and one BLS ambulance should be attached per 50 persons per shift. Therefore,
he submitted that it is beyond any doubt that all the hospitals during Covid-19 Pandemic were
governed and guided by the aforesaid guideline of the state Govt. and accordingly, such healthcare
workers were engaged pursuant to such guidelines.
11. For better appreciation of the factual background of the petitioners' case, this court deems it
proper to quote the letter dated 13.07.2020 of the Health & Family Welfare Department,
Government of Odisha as well as the relevant portion of such guidelines:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 4
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
"GOVERNMENT OF ODISHA HEALTH & FAMILY WELFARE DEPARTMENT File
No.HFW-MEII-COVID-0006-2020-16599/H&F.W. Dated 13.07.2020 From Shri
P.K. Mohapatra, IAS Additional Chief Secretary to Government To All Collector &
District Magistrates All Municipal Commissioner All CDM & PHOs, Sub:- Guideline
for management of COVID-19 positive cases in COVID Care Centres by PSU,
Corporate, Institutions, private and NGO sectors. Sir, In inviting a reference to the
subject cited above, I am directed to send herewith the guideline for management of
COVID-19 positive cases in COVID Care Centres by PSU, Corporate, Institutions,
private and NGO sectors for information and necessary action.
You are therefore requested to take necessary steps to circulate the above guideline
among all concerned and to instruct them to follow the guideline scrupulously.
// 8 // Yours faithfully Additional Chief Secretary to Government"
"COVID CARE CENTRES BY CORPORATE, PRIVATE AND NGO SECTOR The
COVID care centres (CCC) Created by the Govt. in the state are facilities to
accommodate mild and asymptomatic COVID-19 positive cases without requiring
advanced medical attention. These facilities have either separate room or dormitories
with confortable beds with adequate spacing and required hygiene and care by
trained manpower. Such facilities can be replicated to isolate and monitor the health
of the COVID-19 positive cases till they recover and the discharged to return to their
homes, in accordance with the protocols laid down by health authorities."
"Human Resource :
(cid:128) One Authorised Medical Officer/Nodal Officer to be attached to the CCC.
(cid:128) One GDMO/AYUS Doctor, two Pharmacists/staff Nurse/ANM, two attendants, two
cleaning staff (M&F) and one BLS Ambulance should be attached per 50 persons per
shift."
"The local authorities i.e., District Collectors/Municipal Commissioners shall
administer local/specific required stipulation in addition to the above to meet with
any unforeseen contingencies."
12. Learned Additional Government Advocate on the other hand, referring to the instruction
received from the OSSSC vide letter dated 15th December 2023, submitted before this Court that
some of the candidates who are petitioners in the abovenoted batch of writ applications had not
applied and thereby not claimed the weightage mark for short-term covid-19 healthcare workers, in
their online applications. They OSSSC on such instruction has specifically referred to the case of
Smt. Lipasrani Parida in W.P.(C) // 9 // No.38200 of 2023 and Smt. Lori Hati in W.P.(C) No.38203
of 2023. In respect of other applicants in other writ applications in the present batch, the OSSSC has
instructed the learned Additional Government Advocate that after verification of such applicaitons
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 5
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
by the Health & Family Welfare department, a list of candidates who are eligible to get the weightage
mark of 5% towards short-term Covid 19 health workers has been prepared and on such basis their
cases have been recommended for appointment to the post of Nursing officer. The instruction dated
15th December, 2023 further reveals that 26 petitioners who are not eligible to get weightage as
short term covid- 19 healthcare worker, as per the report received from H & FW department, their
cases have not been considered and they have not been awarded the weightage mark as has been
prescribed under clause 3(A)(III) of the advertisement.
13. In course of his argument learned Additional Government Advocate referred to the gazette
notification dated 29th November 2022, whereunder the 'Odisha grant of weightage in marks in the
Recruitment for Short-Term COVID-19 Healthcare workers Rules, 2022' has been duly notified.
Further, referring to Rule 2(C), learned Additional Government Advocate submitted before this
Court that the words "short term Covid-19 health workers" has been defined in the aforesaid rules of
the year 2022. The definition contained in Rule 2(C) provides that the persons specially engaged by
Health and Family Welfare department as Nursing Officers, Pharmacists, Laboratory Technicians,
Radiographers, MPHW(M) MPHW(F) for covid-19 duty, for a minimum period of 3 months are to
be certified by family welfare department. In such view of the matter, learned Additional
Government Advocate submitted that weightage as provided under Rule 3 of 2022 rules notified on
29th // 10 // November, 2022 by the GA & PG Department Govt. of Odisha applies to the persons
who have been engaged by the Health and Family Welfare department as Nursing officers in
different capacities as has been provided under Rule 2(c) of 2022 Rules.
Rule-2(c)- "Short-Term COVID-19 healthcare workers" means the persons specially engaged by the
Health and Family Welfare Department as Nursing Officers, Pharmacists, Laboratory Technicians,
Radiographers, Multipurpose Health Workers (Male) and Multipurpose Health Workers (Female)
for COVID-19 duty for a minimum period of 3 months to be certified by the Health and Family
Welfare Department."
"Rule-3 - Notwithstanding anything contained in the relevant recruitment rules, the
Short-Term COVID-19 healthcare workers who have been engaged in and performed
COVID-19 duty for a minimum period of 3 months shall be allowed 5 per cent extra
marks on the total marks of the recruitment examination under the said relevant
recruitment rules subject to the award of marks upto the maximum marks for which
recruitment is conducted, as an onetime measure only for the next one recruitment
process to be conducted after commencement of these rules."
Therefore, it was contended that petitioners having been engaged in private hospitals and their
cases having not been recommended by the Health and Family Welfare department, they have not
been awarded the 5% weightage mark that has been given to similarly situated other candidates who
have been appointed by // 11 // the Government as short-term covid-19 healthcare workers. In such
view of the matter, learned Additional Government Advocate submitted that in view of the aforesaid
provision in the rules, the petitioners are not eligible to get such weightage mark.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 6
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
14. In reply to the aforesaid contention raised by the learned Additional Government Advocate,
learned senior counsels appearing for the petitioners in the above noted batch of writ petitions on
the other hand, contended that the aforesaid Rules of the year 2022 have been formulated in
exercise of the powers conferred upon the State Government by the proviso to Article 309 of the
Constitution of India. They further contended that the definition contained in clause 2(C), which
defines short-term covid-19 health workers, has been given a restrictive interpretation. In other
words, by interpreting the rules in a restrictive manner, the Government has confined the benefit
under Rule 3 to a particular class of persons, i.e. the short- term covid-19 healthcare workers
specially engaged by the Health and Family Welfare department in different capacities as mentioned
in Rule 2(C).
15. Moreover, such sub-classification within a broader class is unreasonable and the same has no
nexus with the objects sought to be achieved through the Rules of the year 2022. Accordingly,
learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners submitted that creation of such a sub-class
would not be protected under Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India as the same is not based
on any sound principle and reasoning. Accordingly, learned senior counsels appearing for the
petitioners further contended that the provision contained in Rule 2(C) cannot be interpreted in
such a restrictive manner, so as the same would not pass the test of Article 14 and 16 of Constitution
of India. In such background, it was also prayed that // 12 // the aforesaid rules should have been
modified to include the short- term COVID-19 healthcare workers who have worked in any hospital
of the state of Odisha during the Covid-19 pandemic as short term COVID-healthcare workers for
more than 3 months, as the entire operation was being carried out under the direct supervision and
control of the State Government with the help of the local bodies/local administration.
16. Having heard learned senior counsels and other advocates appearing for the parties, on a careful
examination of their contentions as well as the materials on record, this Court found that the
petitioners who are eligible for being appointed as Nursing officers, pursuant to advertisement
under Annexure-1, satisfy all the requirements/eligibility criteria as provided under clause 3 of the
aforesaid advertisement. Further, it is not disputed that they have worked as short-term covid-19
healthcare workers at different hospitals and healthcare centers in the State of Odisha. In
recognition of their service during a difficult time for the entire humanity, the State Government
formulated the Rule of the year 2022 in exercise of the power conferred by the proviso to Article 309
of Constitution of India.
17. On a careful analysis of the submissions and arguments advanced by learned Additional
Government Advocate, this Court observes that the Health and Family Welfare department,
Government of Odisha has given the rule a restrictive interpretation, thereby extending the benefit
under Rule 3 only to the persons engaged as short-term covid-19 healthcare workers by the Health
and Family Welfare department in different capacities as mentioned Rule 2(C). While extending the
benefit to the aforesaid category of persons, the petitioners in present batch of writ applications,
who // 13 // have rendered their services during such covid-19 pandemic by putting their life in
great danger, have been discriminated against and they have not been extended the benefit of Rule 3
of the 2022 Rules. As a result of which they have not been awarded the 5% weightage mark, as has
been done in the case of their counterparts who had worked in Government hospitals during those
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 7
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
days. Furthermore, on a careful analysis of the materials on record and instructions received by the
learned Additional Government Advocate, taking into consideration the submissions advanced by
the learned Additional Government Advocate, this Court finds absolutely no valid ground and
justification for creation of such a sub-class amongst the short-term COVID-19 healthcare workers.
Moreover, it is not that the healthcare workers employed in private hospitals during COVID-19 were
immense to such pandemic and such workers did not die due to COVID-19 during such pandemic.
18. Additionally, on perusal of records of the writ application, and while considering the instructions
provided by the OSSSC to the effect that two of the candidates namely Lipsarani Parida and Lori
Hati have not claimed such benefit and thereby they have not been provided with such certificate,
this Court on a careful examination of the records of those writ applications found that they have
annexed the copies of the online application form claiming such benefit along with supporting
certificates. In fact, in almost all the cases the petitioners have claimed such additional weightage
mark of 5% and such claims have been supported by medical certificate issued by the authorities,
where they have worked.
19. While considering the validity of Rule-2(c) of the Rules, 2022, this Court is required to examine
the source of power conferred upon the State to enact such a rule. On a careful reading of // 14 //
Gazette Notification dated 29th November, 2022, it appears that the Rule, 2022 has been
formulated in exercise of power conferred by the proviso to Article-309 of the Constitution of India.
The preamble of the rule reveals that the Hon'ble Governor of Odisha is pleased to make the rules to
provide one time weightage to short-term COVID-19 Healthcare Workers engaged by the Health &
Family Welfare Department in the recruitment to the post of Nursing Officer. It is not disputed that
service condition of the employees including the process of recruitment can be regulated by the
appropriate Government by bringing appropriate legislation in exercise of the power conferred upon
the competent legislature by the Constitution to enact the rules and the laws. Moreover, the power
conferred under Article-309 of the Constitution of India is subject to other provisions of the
Constitution of India, as has been reflected in the opening words used in Article-309. Thus, it is
needless to mention here that in the law/rules framed under Article-309 in violation of the
provisions contained in the Constitution of India, including the provisions of Part III of the
Constitution, i.e. Article 14, 16, 19 and 21, then in such eventuality, the constitutional guarantee in
the shape of aforesaid Articles will prevail over every rules/laws enacted by the State.
20. In the present case, the Rule of the year 2022 having been framed in exercise of the power
conferred by the proviso to Article-309, such Rules and laws shall have to conform to the underlying
principles of Article-14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. Furthermore, the President of India or
the Governor of the State, as the case may be, may notify an appropriate rule to regulate the relevant
service conditions of Government servants. However, notifications of such rules are transitional in
nature. In other words, // 15 // the rules framed by the executive and notified in the aforesaid
manner shall remain in force till the appropriate legislature enacts the law on the subject matter.
The aforesaid analysis finds support from the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in A.K.
Krishna Vs. State of Karnataka reported in AIR 1998 SC 1050.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 8
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
21. It is also a well-settled proposition of law that the rules framed under Article-309 of the
Constitution of India may be struck down by a court of law on any of the grounds that may
invalidate a legislative measure. Thus, if the rules famed under Article-309 of the Constitution of
India are not in conformity with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India, which are a part of
the basic structure of the Constitution of India, then such rules are liable to be struck down by a
Court of law in exercise of power contained under Article-226 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, in the event and on the basis of the materials on record, if this Court holds that, in view of
the Rules in question, the present Petitioners have been discriminated against without any
reasonable ground and without any legal justification, then such rules would be considered to have
been in contravention of the provisions contained in Article-14 and 16 of the Constitution of India
and, as such, they are liable to be struck down. Furthermore, taking into consideration the factual
background of the present case, this Court observes that the short-term COVID-19 Healthcare
Workers, who were engaged in treatment of COVID-19 infected patients during the pandemic, were
engaged by various hospitals including the Government Hospitals, as is evident that the entire
Health Care Operation during COVID-19 pandemic and the same was being carried out under the
active and direct supervision of the State Government.
// 16 //
22. Moreover, such Health Care Operations were being actively supervised by the local
administration and they were conferred with power to take remedial measures under the guidelines.
Additionally, the guidelines issued by the State Government in this regard provides the procedure to
be followed by all hospitals without any discrimination which includes engagement of Healthcare
Workers. It is also a fact that such Healthcare Workers, by putting their life in danger, have
rendered their service in such hospitals for the betterment of the humanity. As such, this Court
found there is no difference between the class of Health Workers engaged in either Government
Hospitals or by the Health and Family Welfare Department and the ones who are engaged either in
private hospitals or pursuant to the guidelines issued by the Government for management of the
COVID-19 pandemic. Therefore, this Court found no justification in creating a sub-class by the
executive by putting the Healthcare Workers, who have been engaged by the Health & Family
Welfare Department in a different category altogether. Such classification, according to this Court,
would be in contravention of the fundamental principles as enshrined in Article 14 and 16 of the
Constitution of India.
23. Even assuming for a moment that the rule in question is based on a policy decision of the
Government or a scheme prepared by the State Government to provide benefit to a certain class of
persons, such policy/scheme must pass the test of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. In
other words, the policy decisions taken by the executives are not immune to the test of Article 14 and
16 of the Constitution of India.
24. Having said that, this Court is aware of the scope and authority of the Government to change any
policy decision keeping // 17 // in view the larger public interest. Such policy decision, even if
creates a sub-class within a class, if it is done keeping in view a definite objective which is sought to
be achieved by the Government, then it would definitely be protected within the purview of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 9
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
exceptions to Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. On a careful examination of the factual
background of the present case this Court observes that such reasoning/justification for creation of
such sub-class within a class is conspicuously absent in the present case. Even in course of the
argument, neither could the learned Additional Government Advocate justify the same, nor any
reasoning is come forth from the side of the Government to defend the classification under
Rule-2(c) of the Rules, 2022. The State Government and its authorities while taking a policy
decision or preparing a scheme, under its authority, are required to adhere to the principles
contained in Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and they must act fairly, and provide
equal opportunity to all in the matters of public employment. Such an objective is nothing but to
transform the goal of social justice, which is enshrined in the preamble of the Constitution of India
and casts and obligation on the State to ensure that equal opportunity is provided to all persons
coming under the same category without any discrimination on any of the grounds which are not
acceptable under the law and the provisions of the Constitution. In the aforesaid context, this Court
would like to refer to the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Distt. Registrar v.
M.B. Koyakutty reported in AIR 1979 SC 1060 and S.L. Sachdev v. Union of India, reported in AIR
1981 SC 411.
25. In view of the aforesaid analysis, this Court would be well within its jurisdiction to test the rules
with the touchstone of Article // 18 // 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. In the event the
impugned legislation/rules or the policy fails to pass such tests, this Court would be justified in
interfering with the rules/policies/schemes and may pass a suitable direction with regard to
adoption of the principles of fairness by the State and for providing equal opportunity to the citizens
in the matter of public employment. It is also not disputed that the principle enshrined in Article 14
of the Constitution of India applies to cases of appointment by whatever mode to public
offices/posts and Government jobs. Therefore, the conduct of the Opposite Parties in restricting the
benefit under Rule- 3 to a certain class of persons without any valid and justifiable reason is
definitely in violation of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. It is not disputed at bar that
the Petitioners along with similarly situated many other persons have rendered services to the
COVID-19 patients during the COVID-19 pandemic by putting their life in great danger. Therefore,
the State Government was under a constitutional obligation to treat the Petitioners on par with
persons who were engaged in Government Hospitals or by order of the Health and Family Welfare
Department, Government of Odisha. More so, when both categories of persons were engaged as
short-term COVID-19 Healthcare Workers. In such background, this Court is of the considered view
that the definition in Rule-2(C) would not pass the test of judicial scrutiny by this Court while
weighing he same in the scale of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
26. In the present case, this Court would like to refer to the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in
National Highway Authority of India Vs. Madhukar Kumar (Civil Appeal No.11141 of 2018) decided
on 23.09.2021 wherein by following the ratio laid // 19 // down by the earlier constitutional Bench
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ajay Hasia Vs. Khalid Mujib Sehravardi reported in AIR
1981 SC 487, the constitutional Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that every state action
must be fair, failing which, it was found to be violative of the mandate of Article- 14 of the
Constitution of India. Moreover, Article 14 of the Constitution of India strikes at arbitrariness
because, an action that is arbitrary must necessarily involve negation of equality. Whenever,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 10
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
therefore, there is arbitrariness in State action, whether it be of the legislature or of the executive,
Article 14 immediately springs into action and strikes down such action.
27. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has also taken similar views in E.P. Royappa Vs. State of T.N.
reported in AIR 1974 SC 555 and Maneka Gandhi Vs. Union of India reported in AIR 1978 SC 597.
The word "arbitrariness" has been defined in a judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in Sharma
Transport Vs. Govt. of A.P. reported in (2002) 2 SCC 188. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has defined
arbitrariness by observing that in order to describe an action as arbitrary, a party has to satisfy that
such action was not reasonable and was manifestly arbitrary. The expression "arbitrarily" means an
act done in an unreasonable manner, or as fixed or done capriciously or at pleasure without
adequately determining the principle, not founded in the nature of things, non-rational, not done or
acting according to reason or judgment, depending on the will alone. Such view has also been
reiterated in Bombay Dyeing & Mfg. Co.Ltd Vs. Bombay Environmental Action Group reported in
(2006) 3 SCC
434.
28. In Bidhannagar (Salt Lake) Welfare Assn. Vs. Central Valuation Board reported in AIR 2007 SC
2276 and in Grand // 20 // Kakatiya Sheraton Hotel and Towers Employees and workers union Vs.
Srinivasa Resorts Ltd. reported in (2009) 5 SCC 342, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed that
a law cannot be declared ultra vires on the ground of hardship. However, the same can be done on
the ground of total unreasonableness. The piece of legislation can be challenged and questioned as
arbitrary and ultra vires under Article 14. Before declaring the act ultra vires under Article 14, the
Court must be satisfied in respect of substantive unreasonableness in the statute itself. Similarly, in
A.P. Dairy Development Corpn. Federation Vs. B. Narasimha Reddy reported in (2011) 9 SCC 286,
the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that it is a settled legal proposition that Article 14 of the
Constitution of India strikes at arbitrariness because an action that is arbitrary must necessarily
involve negation of equality. Furthermore, such doctrine of arbitrariness is not restricted only to
executive action, but also applies to the legislature. Thus, an action of the legislature, which is
violative of Article 14 of the Constitution, should ordinarily be manifestly arbitrary. There must be
case of substantive unreasonableness in the Statute itself for declaring the Act ultra vires to Article
14 of the Constitution of India.
29. In the context of the present case, this Court would like to specifically refer to the finding of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Krishnan Kakkanth Vs. Govt. of Kerala reported in (1997) 9 SCC
495. In para-36 of the said judgment, which is relevant for the purpose of our case, is quoted herein
below:-
"36. To ascertain unreasonableness and arbitrariness in the context of Article 14 of
the Constitution, it is not necessary to enter upon any exercise for finding out the
wisdom in the policy decision of the state government. It is immaterial whether a
better or more comprehensive could have been taken. It is equally immaterial if it can
// 21 // be demonstrated that the policy decision is unwise and is likely to defeat the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 11
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
purpose for which such decision has been taken. Unless the policy decision is
demonstrably capricious or arbitrary and not informed by any reason whatsoever or
it suffers from the vice of discrimination or infringes any statute or provisions of the
Constitution, the policy decision cannot be struck down. It should be borne in mind
that except for the limited purpose of testing a public policy in the context of illegality
and unconstitutionality, courts should avoid "embarking on uncharted ocean of
public policy"."
In the aforesaid context, it would also be apt to refer to some of the other land mark judgments of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court, i.e. in the case of S. Nagaraj Vs. State of Karnataka reported in (1993)
Supp. 4 SCC 595 and Shrilekha Vidyarthi (Kumari) Vs. State of U.P. reported in (1991) 1 SCC 212.
30. In the ultimate analysis of the factual background of the present case, which is apparent from
the materials on record and further keeping in view the analysis of law made hereinabove, this Court
is of the considered view that the provision contained in Rule- 2(c) of the 2022 Rules is not in
compliance with the principles mandated by Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, this Court has no hesitation in coming to a conclusion that the discrimination meted out
to the Petitioners would be hit by the principles enshrined in the Article 14 and 16 of the
Constitution of India. However, before striking down the rule, this Court, by applying the golden
rule of interpretation, would make an attempt to bring the said rule in conformity with Article 14
and 16 of the Constitution of India. Furthermore, in the event such interpretation is possible, this
Court would first opt for reading down the rule to bring the same in conformity with Article 14 and
16 of the Constitution of India before striking down the same by holding that // 22 // the same is
ultra vires of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India.
31. By applying the aforesaid proposition to the facts of the present case, particularly Rule-2(c) of
the Rules, 2022, this Court is of the considered view that by reading down the provisions contained
in Rule-2(c) of the Rules, 2022, the same can be brought in conformity with Articles 14 ad 16 of the
Constitution of India. Therefore, this Court is of the considered opinion that by removing the words
"by health and family welfare department" and reading down such provision in Rule-2(c), the same
can be made compliant of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. Accordingly, this Court, by
reading down the aforesaid words, directs the Opposite Parties to bring an end to the disparity or
discrimination between the two classes of Healthcare Workers, who had rendered their services
during COVID-19 pandemic. As a result, the aforesaid words in Rule-2(c) are hereby struck down.
Further, the Opposite Parties are directed to consider the case of the Petitioners. Further, this Court
directs the Opposite Parties to interpret Rule-2(c) in a manner which would include all categories of
persons, who have rendered their services as Short-Term COVID-19 Healthcare Workers for a
period of more than three years as has been provided in the Rules. The eligibility criteria with regard
to their rendering service as Short- Term COVID-19 Healthcare Workers for three months can very
well be verified from the local administration, who were keeping record of such healthcare workers
during COVID-19 pandemic and such healthcare workers were working under the active and direct
control of the local administration.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 12
B.Ajaya Patro vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
32. Lastly, subject to verification of the aforesaid fact, the Opposite Parties are directed to consider
the case of the Petitioners // 23 // by granting them the weightage of mark as has been provided
under Rule-3 of Rule-2022 and subject to Petitioners eligibility, the case of the Petitioners shall be
considered for appointment as Nursing Officer pursuant to the advertisement under Annexure-1 to
the writ petition. The Opposite Parties are further directed to carry out aforesaid exercise within a
period of two months from the date of communication of a copy of this judgment by the Petitioners.
Furthermore, in view of the aforesaid direction, the rejection list in respect of the Petitioners in the
batch of writ application dated 08.08.2023 is hereby quashed. It is also directed that while
examining the cases of the Petitioners, the Opposite Parties shall provide opportunity to the
Petitioners to furnish their respective certificates in support of their claim and thereafter, it is open
to the Opposite Parties to verify such certificates from the local administration. Subject to
satisfaction of the aforesaid criteria, the cases of the Petitioners if found eligible for such
appointment shall be recommended by the OSSC to the Government by including their name in the
merit list for appointment as Nursing Officer against the vacant post of Nursing Officers.
33. Accordingly, the batch of writ petitions stand allowed. However, in the facts and circumstances
of the present case, there shall be no order as to costs.
(A.K. Mohapatra) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack Reason: Authentication 1 March, 2024/Rubi
Behera, Jr. Stemo/ The Location: OHC, CUTTACK. D. Aech, Secretary Date: 01-Mar-2024 20:38:36
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122958710/ 13
