B.Divya vs The City Commissioner on 20 December, 2024
B.Divya vs The City Commissioner on 20 December, 2024
Author: G.K.Ilanthiraiyan
Bench: G.K.Ilanthiraiyan
W.P(MD)No.22605 of 2021
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 20.12.2024
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE G.K.ILANTHIRAIYAN
W.P(MD)No.22605 of 2021
and
W.M.P(MD)No.19117 of 2021
B.Divya ... Petitioner
Vs
1.The City Commissioner,
Tiruchirappalli City Corporation,
Bharathidasan Salai,
Tiruchirappalli – 620 001.
2.T.Rajkumar ... Respondents
PRAYER: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of Constitution of
India, to issue a Writ of Certiorari, calling for the records of the
permanent Lok Adalat in Case No.3 of 2021 dated 22.11.2021 and
quash the same.
For Petitioner : Mr.V.Panneerselvam
For R – 1 : Mr.K.R.Kishore Ram
for M/s.R.B.Law Associates
For R – 2 : Mr.P.Arun Jayatram
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
1/10
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108150612/ 1
B.Divya vs The City Commissioner on 20 December, 2024
(cid:12) W.P(MD)No.22605 of 2021
ORDER
This Writ Petition has been filed by the petitioner challenging the award passed by the Lok Adalat in
permanent Lok Adalat Case No.3 of 2021 dated 22.11.2021.
2.Heard the learned counsel appearing on either side and perused the materials placed before this
Court.
3.Originally, the second respondent lodged complaint before the Legal Services Authority and the
said complaint was referred before the Permanent Lok Adalat, Tiruchirappalli. The Presiding Officer
of the Permanent Lok Adalat order on merits, in the complaint lodged by the second respondent, by
setting aside the petitioner as exparte. Before the Lok Adalat, no order can be passed on merits.
4.In this regard, it is relevant to extract the provision under Section 22-C (4) to (8) of the Legal
Services Authorities Act, 1987 hereunder:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis “22-C. Cognizance of cases by Permanent Lok
Adalat:
..........
(4) When statement, additional statement and reply, if any, have been filed under
sub-section(3), to the satisfaction of the Permanent Lok Adalat, it shall conduct
conciliation proceedings between the parties to the application in such manner as it
thinks appropriate taking into account the circumstances of the dispute.
(5) The Permanent Lok Adalat shall, during conduct of conciliation proceedings
under sub-
Section(4), assist the parties in their attempt to reach an amicable settlement of the dispute in an
independent and impartial manner.
(6) It shall be the duty of the every party to the application to cooperate in good faith with the
Permanent Lok Adalat in conciliation of the dispute relating to the application and to comply with
the direction of the Permanent Lok Adalat to produce evidence and other related documents before
it.
(7) When a Permanent Lok Adalat, in the aforesaid conciliation proceedings, is of opinion that there
exist elements of settlement in such proceedings which may be acceptable to the parties, it may
formulate the terms of a possible settlement of the dispute and give to the parties concerned for
their observations and in case the parties reach at an agreement on the settlement of the dispute,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108150612/ 2
B.Divya vs The City Commissioner on 20 December, 2024
they shall https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis sign the settlement agreement and the Permanent Lok
Adalat shall pass an award in terms thereof and furnish a copy of the same to each of the parties
concerned.
(8) Where the parties fail to reach at an agreement under sub-section (7), the Permanent Lok Adalat
shall, if the dispute does not relate to any offence, decide the dispute.”
5.Further, it is relevant to rely upon the Judgment cited by the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners in Canara Bank Vs. G.S.Jayarama reported in (2022) 7 SCC 776, in which, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India dealt with the issue that whether the conciliation proceedings before the
permanent Lok Adalats are mandatory before it can decide a dispute on its merits and the relevant
paragraphs are extracted hereunder:
“36.The appellant’s argument, however, is that if the opposite party does not appear
before the Permanent Lok Adalat, it can dispense with the conciliation proceedings
and straightaway adjudicate the dispute under Section 22-C(8). We are unable to
accept this submission. Even if the opposite party does not appear, the Permanent
Lok Adalat is still bound to follow the step-by-step procedure laid down by Section
22-C. Under Section 22-C(3), it would require the party before it to file
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis their submissions and documents, and make the
best efforts to communicate them to the opposite party for their response. If it is
satisfied that no response is forthcoming from the absent opposite party, the
Permanent Lok Adalat shall still attempt to settle the dispute through settlement
under Section 22-C(4). It is important to remember that Section 22-C(5) imposes a
duty upon the Permanent Lok Adalat to be independent and impartial in attempting
to amicably settle the dispute, while Section 22-C(6) imposes a duty upon the party
present before the Permanent Lok Adalat to cooperate in good faith and assist the
Permanent Lok Adalat. Thereafter, the Permanent Lok Adalat, based on the materials
before it, shall propose terms of settlement and communicate them to both parties,
regardless of whether they participated in the proceedings. If the party present before
the Permanent Lok Adalat does not agree or if the absent party does not respond in a
PART C sufficient period of time, only then can the Permanent Lok Adalat adjudicate
the dispute on its merits under Section 22-C(8). Keeping in mind the principles
enshrined in Section 22-D, the Permanent Lok Adalat shall once again notify the
absent party of its decision to adjudicate the dispute on its merits, in case it wishes to
join the proceedings at that stage.
37.Section 22-C(8) is amply clear that it only comes into effect once an agreement
under https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Section 22-C(7) has failed. The corollary of
this is that the proposed terms of settlement under Section 22-C(7), and the
conciliation proceedings preceding it, are mandatory. If Permanent Lok Adalats are
allowed to bypass this step just because a party is absent, it would be tantamount to
deciding disputes on their merit ex parte and issuing awards which will be final,
binding and will be deemed to be decrees of civil courts. This was simply not the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108150612/ 3
B.Divya vs The City Commissioner on 20 December, 2024
intention of the Parliament when it introduced the LSA Amendment Act. Its main
goal was still the conciliation and settlement of disputes in relation to public utilities,
with a decision on merits always being the last resort. Therefore, we hold that
conciliation proceedings under Section 22-
C of the LSA Act are mandatory in nature.”
6.If the opposite party does not appear, the Permanent Lok Adalat is still bound to follow the
step-by-step procedure contemplated under Section 22-C of the said Act, 1973. It would require the
party before it to file their submissions and documents and make the best efforts to communicate
them to the opposite party for their response. Even no response, the Permanent Lok Adalat shall
still attempt to settle the dispute through a settlement under Section 22-C(4) of the said Act, 1987. It
imposes a duty upon the Permanent Lok Adalat to be independent and impartial in
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis attempting to amicably settle the dispute. Therefore, if the
Permanent Lok Adalat bypass this step just because of the absence of the opposite party, it would be
tantamount to decide the disputes on their merit exparte and issuing awards which will be final
binding and will be deemed to be decrees of civil Courts. It was not an intention of the Parliament
when it had introduced the Legal Services Authority Amendment Act. The main goal is conciliation
and settlement of disputes in relation to public utilities. Therefore, it is mandatory in nature.
7.That apart, on perusal of the complaint lodged by the second respondent alleging that the
petitioner herein was running an Industrial Unit in the name and style of 'Abinash Creatives' doing
Fabrication work for flex and placard on constructing one large shed with colossal iron beams by
obstructing the Corporation's pathway sprawling 20 feet width on east-west direction near the
house of the second respondent, now the petitioner herein shifted the Industry to some other place
and there is no nuisance or any hindrance to the second respondent. In view of the above, the award
passed in permanent Lok Adalat in Case No.3 of 2021 dated 22.11.2021 cannot be sustained and the
same is liable to be quashed. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
8.Accordingly, the award passed in permanent Lok Adalat in Case No.3 of 2021 dated 22.11.2021 is
quashed and the Writ Petition is allowed. There shall be no order as to costs. Consequently,
connected Miscellaneous Petition is closed.
20.12.2024
NCC : Yes / No
Index : Yes / No
Internet : Yes
ps
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108150612/ 4
B.Divya vs The City Commissioner on 20 December, 2024
To
The City Commissioner,
Tiruchirappalli City Corporation,
Bharathidasan Salai,
Tiruchirappalli – 620 001.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
G.K.ILANTHIRAIYAN, J.
ps
Order made in
20.12.2024
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108150612/ 5
