Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December,
2017
Author: G. S. Ahluwalia
Bench: G. S. Ahluwalia
1 CrA. 427/2009
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
BENCH AT GWALIOR
*****************
DB: Hon'ble Shri Justice Anand Pathak &
Hon'ble Shri Justice G. S. Ahluwalia, J.J.
Cr.A.427/2009
Bablu alias Virendra Kumar
Vs.
State of MP
===============================
Ms. Chitra Saxena, counsel for the appellant.
Shri Ravindra Singh, Public Prosecutor for the respondent/
State.
====== ======================
JUDGMENT
(Delivered on 21/ 12 /2017)
Per G. S. Ahluwalia, J
This Criminal Appeal under Section 374 of Cr.P.C. has been filed against the judgment and sentence
dated 26-2- 2009 passed by 2nd A.S.J. (Fast Track Court), Ganj Basoda, Distt. Vidisha in Sessions
Trial No.193/2007, by which the appellant has been convicted under Sections 302, 307 of I.P.C. and
has been sentenced to undergo the Life Imprisonment and a fine of Rs.2,000/- with default
imprisonment and rigorous imprisonment of 10 years and a fine of Rs. 500/- with default
imprisonment respectively.
2. The necessary facts for the disposal of the present appeal in short are that, on 5-6-2007 at about
20:00, the appellant himself lodged a F.I.R., Ex.18, giving information that he is a labourer by
profession and came back to house at about 7:30 P.M. After taking out his sleepers outside the
house, he went inside the house and his step sister Puja was sitting outside on the platform. Umesh,
who is neighbor enquired from Puja about the sleepers who informed that the appellant is inside the
house. At that time, the deceased Prembai, who is the real mother of the appellant also came there,
and the appellant enquired from his mother that what is going on in the house. Her mother
(deceased) replied that the appellant is nobody to ask such a question. The appellant also enquired
from Puja that what Umesh was saying to her but Puja replied that Umesh had not said anything. It
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 1
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
was also mentioned by the appellant in the F.I.R. that, Puja and his mother were carrying on illicit
activities in the house therefore, he has caused multiple knife injuries to his mother and Puja and
both are lying in the house.
3. On the basis of this information, report No. 13/2007 under Section 307 of I.P.C. was registered at
Police Outpost and the F.I.R. was registered at Police Station Basoda in crime no. 517/2007. The
injured Puja and Prembai were sent for medical treatment. The dying declarations of Puja and
Prembai were recorded. Prembai, subsequently succumbed to the injuries. The postmortem of the
deceased Prembai was done. Spot map was prepared, the statements of the witnesses were recorded,
Memorandum of the appellant was recorded, knife etc were seized. After completing the
investigation, the police filed the charge sheet for offence under Section 307,302 of I.P.C.
4. The Trial Court framed charges under Sections 302,307 of I.P.C.
5. The appellant abjured his guilt and pleaded not guilty.
6. The Prosecution in order to prove its case, examined Puja (P.W.1), Leela Bai (P.W.2), Banti
Prajapati (P.W.3), Raju (P.W.4), Dr. B.P. Khare (P.W.5), Mindia bai (P.W.6), Raj bai (P.W.7),
Kishan Gopal Pathak (P.W.8), Bansilal (P.W.9), Dr.Sarvesh Jain (P.W.10), Dr. Dhanesh Tripathi
(P.W.11), S.S. Kushwah (P.W.12), and Gopal Singh Verma (P.W.13). The appellant did not examine
any witness in his defence.
7. The Trial Court by judgment and sentence dated 26-2-2009 convicted the appellant under
Sections 302, 307 of I.P.C. and sentenced him to undergo the Life Imprisonment and a fine of
Rs.2,000/- with default imprisonment and rigorous imprisonment of 10 years and a fine of Rs.
500/- with default imprisonment, respectively.
8. Challenging the judgment and sentence passed by the Court below, it is submitted by the Counsel
for the appellant, that the appellant has been falsely implicated. Puja (P.W.1) is the step sister of the
appellant and She herself has admitted in her cross-examination, that She is annoyed with the
appellant, therefore, She has falsely implicated the appellant. It is further submitted that since, no
blood was found on the knife, therefore, the seizure of the knife is not proved which creates doubt on
the truthfulness of the witnesses. Further, the appellant was annoyed with the fact that one Umesh
used to visit the house of the deceased Prembai and he was objecting to it and when he found that
Umesh has come to the house, inspite of his objection, therefore, he got provoked and under sudden
and grave provocation, he assaulted the deceased and Puja and thus, the offence would not be under
Section 302 of I.P.C. but would be at the most 304 Part I of I.P.C. It is further submitted that the
deceased Prembai died because of septicemia and not due to the injuries, therefore, the appellant
cannot be held liable for causing death of Prembai.
9. Per contra, it is submitted by the Counsel for the State that the F.I.R. was lodged by the appellant
himself and on his disclosure statement, knife has been recovered. Puja (P.W.1) herself is an injured
witness, therefore, her presence on the spot cannot be doubted and her evidence cannot be brushed
aside very lightly. It is further submitted that Umesh was the neighbour and he had not come to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 2
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
house of the appellant but he had simply enquired from Puja about the sleepers which were lying
outside the house. There is nothing on record that any illicit activities were going on in the house as
claimed by the appellant in his F.I.R. No body had provoked the appellant and therefore, he cannot
take advantage of Exception 5 to Section 300 of I.P.C. Both the injured were assaulted brutally. The
injured Puja (P.W.1) had sustained as many as 4 stab/incised wounds whereas the deceased
Prembai had sustained multiple stab wounds. It is further submitted that septicemia and infection
had developed because of the injuries sustained by the deceased Prembai and looking to the number
of injuries as well as the part of the body on which the injuries were caused, it leaves no doubt that
the appellant had caused such injuries with intention and knowledge to cause death.
10. Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
11. The first question for determination is that whether the death of Prembai was homicidal in
nature or not?
12. Dr. Suresh Jain (P.W.10) had medically examined the injured Prembai (Deceased) and had
found the following injuries :
(i) Stab wound over left side of abdomen. Loops of intestine are protruding outside.
Depth of wound cannot be assessed. Loops of intestine cannot be repoisted inside
abdomen, hence length and width of wound cannot be measured. Adv. X-Ray
abdomen in standing position.
(ii) Incised wound Lt. Side of chest. 7 cm medially from Rt. Nipple Obliquely situated.
Size 1.5 X 0.5X depth not explored.
The patient was referred to Hamidia Hospital, Bhopal. The M.L.C. Report of Prembai is Ex. P.14.
13. Dr. Dharmesh Tripathi (P.W. 11) had treated Prembai at Hamidia Hospital, Bhopal.According to
this witness, the patient was brought by one Raju who had informed that known person has
assaulted the injured. At the time of admission, her general condition was poor, pulse was 116 per
minute, B.P. was 100/70 and RR 20 per minute, RS was 20 minute. Following injuries were found :-
''(i) A single incised would on 3x2cm over Lt. Hypocondrium with Prolapsed Bowel
Loops from the wound (with sharp Margins)
(ii) Stitched wound of 1 cm over Rt. Chest just below medial aspect of breast tissue.''
The patient was operated upon twice. After first operation the following repair
findings were given :-
''(i) Transverse Colon tear of 3 cm intestine at mesocolan border'' Partial mesenetric
tear of 2 cm about 4 ft distal to DJ. Dusky Bowel Loop of about 3 ft intestine, 2 ft
distal to DJ.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 3
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
2nd Operation :- Rexploration of parietal wall of abdomen at the site of entry wound.
The nature of injury was dangerous to life and caused by sharp and hard object.
The report is Ex. P.16.
14. It appears that after treatment, the deceased came back to her house and expired on 3-7-2007.
An information Ex. P.5 was given by Raju (P.W.4) to the police. The inquest report was prepared.
The dead body of the deceased Prembai was sent for Postmortem. Dr. B.P. Khare (P.W.5) conducted
the Postmortem and on external examination it was found as under :-
"Non-healed secondary infected wounds 17 in number, in anterior abdominal wall all
over on both sides varies from 2 ½'' x 1 ¼ '' to 1/3'' x 1/5''. One surgical healed scar
cut in mid-line of abdomen 8'' long extending downwards from difisternum one of
the above wound left infra costal region 2 ½'' x 1 ¼'' size connecting to abdominal
cavity. One more of above wounds on left side of abdomen 1½'' below above wound, 1
''x ¾'' also connecting to abdomen cavity, all above wounds are infected.''
15. According to Dr. B.P. Khare (P.W.5), the cause of death was septicemia due to infection and
gangrene of peritoneum, omentum and intestine coil. The Postmortem report is Ex. P.8.
16. Thus, it is established that the deceased Prembai had sustained two wounds, i.e., stab wound and
an incised wound and loops of intestine were outside and could not be repaired at Ganjbasoda
Hospital, therefore, she was referred to Hamidia Hospital, Bhopal. The deceased was operated upon
twice and infected organs of the body were removed. However, the deceased Prembai ultimately
died on 3-7-2007 due to septicemia and gangrene of peritoneum, omentum and intestine coils.
17. It is submitted by the Counsel for the appellant that since, the cause of death was septicemia and
gangrene, therefore, it cannot be said that Prembai died because of the injuries caused by the
appellant. The submission made by the Counsel for the appellant is misconceived and cannot be
accepted and hence rejected. Dr. B.P.Khare (P.W.5) has specifically stated that the septicemia had
developed due to infection and gangrene of Peritoneum, omentum and intestine coil and the injuries
were caused by the appellant at the very same place. Thus, the septicemia had developed due to
infection and gangrene of internal organs. Thus, it is clear that septicemia had developed due to the
injuries caused to the deceased and not because of any other reason.
18. The Supreme Court in the case of Raghubir Singh Vs. State of Haryana reported in AIR 2000 SC
3395 has held as under :-
''18.Furthermore, the evidence of Dr. Dalbir Singh who conducted the postmortem
examination of Arjun Singh (PW-4) was that four injuries had been caused to the
body of and 5 could be caused by a fire-arm. He also opined that "............the cause of
death was due to shock due to septicaemia following peritonitis due to injuries to the
large gut, liver and intervening structures". PW-4 also stated that the bullet wound on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 4
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
the chest, if left untreated, was sufficient to have caused death in the ordinary course
of nature.
19.The evidence thus clearly shows that peritonitis, renal failure, septicaemia etc. were directly
relatable to the bullet injury.''
19. The Supreme Court in the case of State of Rajasthan Vs. Arjun Singh and others, reported in AIR
2011 SC 3380 has held as under :-
''17.Finally, learned senior counsel for the accused pointed out that inasmuch as
Himmat Raj Singh died after 35 days due to septicemia, the Courts below are not
justified in convicting the accused persons for an offence under Section 302 IPC for
his death. Considering the medical evidence that Himmat Raj Singh sustained 7 gun
shot injuries which were sufficient to cause death in the ordinary course, we are
satisfied that the death of Himmat Raj Singh undoubtedly falls within the ambit of
302 IPC.''
20. The Supreme Court in the case of Patel Hiralal Joitaram Vs. State of Gujarat, reported in (2002)
1 SCC 22 has held as under :-
'' 14. The interval between the date of the incident when the deceased sustained burns
and the date of her death was a fortnight. PW 2 Dr Vikarambhai, who examined Asha
Ben at 10.30 a.m. on 21-10-1988, noticed second-degree burns on the upper and
lower portions of her hands, front and back of her chest and on the neck, ears and
forehead. He found that her condition was "critical" when he saw her first.
15. PW 12 Dr N.N. Parikh, a tutor in Forensic Medicine of B.J. Medical College,
Ahmedabad, conducted autopsy on her dead body on 15-11-1988. He noticed burns of
the third degree on the front and back of her trunk, both thighs etc., besides second-
degree burns on some other limbs. In his opinion the death of the deceased was due to a stroke on
account of such burns and that those burns were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause
her death.
16. Harping on an answer given by PW 12 in cross-examination that death of the deceased had
occurred due to "septic" learned Senior Counsel made out an argument that such septic condition
could have developed on account of other causes. Mere possibility of other causes supervening
during her hospitalisation is not a safe premise for deciding whether she would not have died due to
the burns sustained on 21- 10-1988. The cause of death can be determined on broad probabilities. In
this context we may refer to a passage from Modi's Medical Jurisprudence and Toxicology, dealing
with death by burns:
"As already mentioned, death may occur within 24 to 48 hours, but usually the first
week is the most fatal. In suppurative cases, death may occur after five or six weeks
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 5
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
or even longer."
17. In Om Parkash v. State of Punjab, the victim was set ablaze on 17-3-1979 and she sustained burns
with which she died only 13 days thereafter. The assailant was convicted of murder and the
conviction was confirmed by this Court.
18. It is preposterous to say that the deceased in this case would have been healed of the burn
injuries and that she would have contracted infection through some other causes and developed
septicaemia and died of that on 15-11-1988. Court of law need not countenance mere academic
possibilities when the prosecution case regarding death of the deceased was established on broad
probabilities as a sequel to the burns sustained by her. Hence we repel the contention of the learned
counsel on that score.''
21. Thus, this Court is of the considered opinion, that the death of Prembai was homicidal in nature
and the cause of death was septicemia due to infection and gangrene of peritoneum, omentum and
intestine coil. There is nothing on record to suggest that the septicemia had developed due to post
operational complications. Thus, the septicemia had developed due to infection and gangrene
because of injuries caused by the appellant. Thus, the cause of homicidal death is directly relatable
to the injuries caused by the appellant.
22. The next question for determination is that whether Puja (P.W.1) had sustained any injury or not
?
22. Dr. Sarvesh Jain (P.W.10) had medically examined Puja (P.W.1) and had found the following
injuries on her body :
(i) Incised wound over left side of chest near interior axillary line 2.3x0.8cm x depth
cannot be taken. Margins clean cut. Soft Clot present.
(ii) stab wound of 2.5 cm x 0.5 cm x depth cannot be assessed. Slft clotted, blood
present, margins clean cut. Left Hypochondrium
(iii) Stab wound over abdomen in left Hypochondrium 7 cm lateral to first wound size
2 cm x 0.6 cm x depth cannot be assessed.
(iv) Incised wound over flexor aspect of left elbow.
Size 4 cm x 1 cm x muscle deep. Soft clotted blood present margins clean cut.
She was referred to Hamidia Hospital. The M.L.C. Report of Puja (P.W.1) is Ex. P.13.
23. Dr. Dharmesh Tripathi (P.W.11) had treated the injured Puja (P.W.1) at Hamidia Hospital. He
found the above mentioned injuries. The injured Puja (P.W.1) was operated upon on 6-6-2007 and
internal organs were repaired. The injuries were found to be dangerous to life and were caused by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 6
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
sharp and hard object. The report is Ex. P. 17.
24. Thus, it is proved beyond reasonable doubt that Puja (P.W.1) had sustained four stab/incised
wounds which were caused by Hard and Sharp object.
25. The moot question for determination is that who is the author of injuries caused to the deceased
Prembai and injured Puja (P.W.1).
26. The Case is based on the dying declaration of the deceased, evidence of Puja (P.W.1).
27. In the present case, the F.I.R. Ex. P.18 was lodged by the appellant himself admitting that he has
caused multiple injuries to his mother and step sister Puja (P.W.1). Since the confessional
statement, in the form of F.I.R. was made by the appellant before the police, therefore, the
centripetal question is that whether the F.I.R. Ex. P.18, lodged by the appellant is admissible in law
or not? The question is no more in res integra.
28. The Supreme Court in the case of Aghnoo Nagesia Vs. State reported in AIR 1966 SC 119 has
held as under :
''10. Section 154 of the Code of Criminal Procedure provides for the recording of the
first information. The information report as such is not substantive evidence. It may
be used to corroborate the informant under S. 157 of the Evidence Act or to contradict
him under S. 145 of the Act, if the informant is called as a witness. If the first
information is given by the accused himself, the fact of his giving the information is
admissible against him as evidence of his conduct under S. 8 of the Evidence Act. If
the information is a non-confessional statement, it is admissible against the accused
as an admission under S. 21 of the Evidence Act and is relevant, see Faddi v. State of
Madhya Pradesh, Cri.
Appeal No. 210 of 1963, dated 24-1-1964:
(AIR 1964 SC 1850), explaining Nisar Ali v. State of U. P., (S) AIR 1957 SC 366 and
Dal Singh v. King Emperor, 44 Ind App 137:
(AIR 1917 PC 25). But a confessional first information report to a police Officer
cannot be used against the accused in view of S. 25 of the Evidence Act.
11.The Indian Evidence Act does not define "confession". For a long time, the Courts
in India adopted the definition of "confession"
given in Art. 22 of Stephen's Digest of the Law of Evidence. According to that definition a confession
is an admission made at any time by a person charged with crime, stating or suggesting the
inference that he committed that crime. This definition was discarded by the Judicial Committee in
Pakala Narayanaswami v. Emperor, 66 Ind App 66 at p. 81: (AIR 1939 PC 47 at p. 52). Lord Atkin
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 7
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
observed:
1.".......no statement that contains self exculpatory matter can amount to confession,
if the exculpatory statement is of some fact which if true would negative the offence
alleged to be confessed. Moreover, a confession must either admit in terms the
offence, or at any rate substantially all the facts which constitute the offence. An
admission of a gravely incriminating fact, even a conclusively incriminating fact, is
not of itself a confession, e.g., an admission that the accused is the owner of and was
in recent possession of the knife or revolver which caused a death with no
explanation of any other man's possession."
These observations received the approval of this Court in Palvinder Kaur v. State of Punjab (1), 1953
SCR 94 at p. 104; (AIR 1952 SC 354 at p. 357). In State of U. P. v. Deoman Upadhyaya, (1961) 1 SCR
14 at p. 21: (AIR 1960 SC 1125 at pp. 1128-1129). Shah, J., referred to a confession as a statement
made by a person stating or suggesting the inference that he has committed a crime.
12.Shortly put, a confession may be defined as an admission of the offence by a person charged with
the offence. A statement which contains self-exculpatory matter cannot amount to a confession, if
the exculpatory statement is of some fact which, if true, would negative the offence alleged to be
confessed. If an admission of an accused is to be used against him, the whole of it should be
tendered in evidence and if part of the admission is exculpatory and part inculpatory, the
prosecution is not at liberty to use in evidence the inculpatory part only. See Hanumant Govind v.
State of M. P. 1952 SCR 1091 at p. 1111: (AIR 1952 SC 343 at p. 350) and 1953 SCR 94 : (AIR 1952 SC
354). The accused is entitled to insist that the entire admission including the exculpatory part must
be tendered in evidence. But this principle is of no assistance to the accused where no part of his
statement is self-exculpatory; and the prosecution intends to use the whole of the statement against
the accused.
13.Now, a confession may consist of several parts and may reveal not only the actual commission of
the crime but also the motive the preparation, the opportunity, the provocation the weapons used,
the intention, the concealment of the weapon and the subsequent conduct of the accused. If the
confession is tainted the taint attaches to each part of it. It is not permissible in law to separate one
part and to admit it in evidence as a non-confessional statement. Each part discloses some
incriminating fact, i.e., some fact which by itself or along with other admitted or proved facts
suggests the inference that the accused committed the crime, and though each part taken singly may
not amount to a confession, each of them being part of a confessional statement partakes of the
character of a confession. If a statement contains an admission of an offence, not only that
admission but also every other admission of an incriminating fact contained in the statement is part
of the confession.
14.If proof of the confession is excluded by any provision of law such as S.24, S. 25 and S. 26 of the
Evidence Act, the entire confessional statement in all its parts including the admissions of minor
incriminating facts must also be excluded, unless proof of it is permitted by some other section
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 8
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
under as S. 27 of the Evidence Act. Little substance and content would be left in Ss. 24, 25 and 26 if
proof of admission of incriminating facts in a confessional statement is permitted.
15.Sometimes, a single sentence in a statement may not amount to a confession at all. Take a case of
a person charged under S. 301-A of the Indian Penal Code and a statement made by him to a police
officer that "I was drunk: I was driving a car at a speed of 80 miles per hour. I could see A on the
road at a distance of 80 yards; I did not blow the horn: I made no attempt to stop the car; the car
knocked down A". No single sentence in this statement amounts to a confession; but the statement
read as a whole amounts to a confession of an offence under S. 304-A of the Indian Penal Code, and
it would not be permissible to admit in evidence each sentence separately as a non- confessional
statement. Again, take a case where a single sentence in a statement amounts to an admission of an
offence. 'A' states "I struck 'B' with a tangi and hurt him". In consequence of the injury 'B' died. 'A'
committed an offence and is chargeable under various sections of the Indian Penal Code. Unless he
brings his case within one of the recognised exceptions, his statement amounts to an admission of
an offence, but the other parts of the statement such as the motive, the preparation, the absence of
provocation, concealment of the weapon and the subsequent conduct, all throw light upon the
gravity of the offence and the intention and knowledge of the accused, and negatives the right of
private defence, accident and other possible defences. Each and every admission of an incriminating
fact contained in the confessional statement is part of the confession.
16.If the confession is caused by an inducement, threat or promise as contemplated by S. 24 of the
Evidence Act, the whole of the confession is excluded by S.
24. Proof of not only the admission of the offence but also the admission of every other
incriminating fact such as the motive, the preparation and the subsequent conduct is excluded by S.
24. To hold that the proof of the admission of other incriminating facts is not barred by S. 24 is to
rob the section of its practical utility and content. It may be suggested that the bar of S. 24 does not
apply to the other admissions, but though receivable in evidence, they are of no weight, as they were
caused by inducement, threat or promise. According to this suggestion, the other admissions are
relevant but are of no value. But we think that on a plain construction of S. 24, proof of all the
admissions of incriminating facts contained in a confessional statement is excluded by the section.
Similarly, Ss. 25 and 26 bar not only proof of admission of an offence by an accused to a police
officer or made by him while in the custody of a police officer but also admissions contained in the
confessional statement of all incriminating facts related to the offence.
17.A little reflection will show that the expression "confession" in Ss. 24 to 30 refers to the
confessional statement as a whole including not only the admissions of the offence but also all other
admissions of the offence but also all other admissions of incriminating facts related to the offence.
Section 27 partially lifts the ban imposed by Ss. 24, 25 and 26 in respect of so much of the
information whether it amounts to a confession or not, as relates distinctly to the fact discovered in
consequence of the information, if the other conditions of the section are satisfied. Section 27
distinctly contemplates that an information leading to a discovery may be a part of the confession of
the accused and thus fall within the purview of Ss. 24, 25 and 26. Section 27 thus shows that a
confessional statement admitting the offence may contain additional information as part of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 9
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
confession. Again, S. 30 permits the Court to take into consideration against a co-accused a
confession of another accused affecting not only himself that the other co-accused. Section 30 thus
shows that matters affecting other persons may form part of the confession.
18.If the first information report is given by the accused to a police officer and amounts to a
confessional statement, proof of the confession is prohibited by S. 25. The confession includes not
only the admission of the offence but all other admissions of incriminating facts related to the
offence contained in the confessional statement. No part of the confessional statement is receivable
in evidence except to the extent that the ban of S. 25 is lifted by S. 27.
19.Our attention is not drawn to any decision of this Court or of the Privy Council on the question
whether apart from S. 27, a confessional first information report given by an accused is receivable in
evidence against him. Decisions of the High Court on this point are hopelessly conflicting. They
contain all shades of opinion, ranging from total exclusion of the confession to total inclusion; of all
admissions of incriminating facts except the actual commission of the crime. In Harji v. Emperor,
AIR 1918 Lah 69 and Nur Muhammad v. Emperor, 90 Ind Cas 148 (Lah), the Lahore High Court
held that the entire confessional first information report was inadmissible in evidence. In Emperor
v. Harman Kisha. ILR 59 Bom 120: (AIR 1935 Bom 260, the Bombay High Court held that the entire
confessional report dealing with events on the right of the offence was hit by S. 25, and it could not
be said that portions of it dealing with the motive and the opportunity were not parts of the
confession. In Emperor v. Kommoju Brahman. ILR 1940- 19 Pat 301 at pp. 308, 314: (AIR 1940 Pat
163 at pp. 165, 167), the Patna High Court held that no part of the confessional first information
report was receivable in evidence, the entire report formed a single connected story and no part of it
had any meaning or significance except in relation to the whole, and it would be wrong to extract
parts of the statement and treat them as relevant. This case was followed in Adi Moola Padayachi v.
State, 1960 Mad WN 528 and the Court admitted only the portion of the confessional first
information report which showed it was given by the accused and investigation had started thereon.
In State of Rajasthan v. Shiv Singh, AIR 1962 Raj 3, the Court admitted in evidence the last part of
the report dealing with the movements of the accused after the commission of the offence, but
excluded the other parts of the statement including those relating to motive and opportunity. In
Legal Remembrancer v. Lalit Mohan Singh Roy, ILR 49 Cal 167 : (AIR 1922 Cal 342), the Calcutta
High Court admitted in evidence the narrative of the events prior to the night of the occurrence
disclosing the motive of the offence. This case was followed by the Nagpur Court in Bharova
Ramdayal v. Emperor, AIR 1941 Nag
86. In Kartar Singh v. State, AIR 1952 Pepsu 98, the Court admitted in evidence the introductory
part and the portion narrating the motive and the opportunity. In Ram Singh v. The State, ILR
(1952) 2 Raj 93, the Rajasthan High Court held that where it is possible to separate parts of the first
information report by an accused from that in which he had made a confession that part which can
be so separated should be admitted in evidence, and on this view, admitted a part of the report
relating to motive and subsequent conduct including the statement that the accused had left the
deceased lying wounded and breathing in the tibari and there was no hope of her surviving and he
had come having covered her with a cloth. In Lachman Munda v. The State of Bhiar, AIR 1964 Pat
210, the Patna High Court admitted in evidence portions of the first information report relating to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 10
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
the motive the opportunity and the entire narrative of events before and after the crime. This case
was followed in the judgment under appeal. Some of the decided cases took the view that if a part of
the report is properly severable from the strict confessional part, then the severable part could be
tendered in evidence. We think that the separability test is misleading and the entire confessional
statement is hit by S. 25 and save and except as provided by S. 27 and save and except the formal
part identifying the accused as the maker of the report, no part of it could be tendered in evidence.
20.We think, therefore, that save and except parts 1, 15 and 18 identifying the appellant as the maker
of the first information report and save and except the portions coming within the purview of S. 27,
the entire first information report must be excluded from evidence.'' The Supreme Court in the case
of Bheru singh Vs. State of Rajasthan reported in (1994) 2 SCC 467 has held as under :
''17. Where the first information report is given by an accused himself to a police
officer and amounts to a confessional statement, proof of the confession is prohibited
by Section 25 of the Evidence Act. No part of the confessional statement can be
proved or received in evidence, except to the extent it is permitted by Section 27 of
the Evidence Act. The first information report recorded under Section 154 CrPC is not
a substantive piece of evidence. It may be used to corroborate the informant under
Section 157 of the Evidence Act or to contradict him under Section 145 of the
Evidence Act in case the informant appears as a witness at the trial.
Where the accused himself lodges the first information report, the fact of his giving the information
to the police is admissible against him as evidence of his conduct under Section 8 of the Evidence
Act and to the extent it is non-confessional in nature, it would also be relevant under Section 21 of
the Evidence Act but the confessional part of the first information report by the accused to the police
officer cannot be used at all against him in view of the ban of Section 25 of the Evidence Act.''
29. Thus, the confessional part of the F.I.R. lodged by the appellant would not be admissible in law
and only that part of the F.I.R. would be admissible which led to discovery of fact. However, no
information was given by the appellant with regard to the knife allegedly used by him in the F.I.R.,
Ex. P.18, therefore, we are of the considered opinion, that the F.I.R. Ex. P.18, lodged by the
appellant, cannot be used either against or in favor of the appellant.
30. The dying declaration of the deceased Prembai, Ex. P.15, was recorded, by Gopal Singh Verma
(P.W.13), Tahsildar, Ganj Basoda. Gopal Singh Verma (P.W.13) has stated that he received a letter
from Police Station Basoda for recording dying declaration and accordingly, he had recorded the
dying declaration of Prembai, Ex. P.15 after obtaining fitness certificate from the Doctor. The victim
Prembai had informed that She has been assaulted by her son Bablu who is also known as Virendra.
The injuries were caused by knife at about 7:30 P.M. This witness was cross examined in detail. This
witness denied the suggestion that the dying declaration is not in his handwriting. However, he
admitted that it is not mentioned that the thumb impression of the declarant, is of which hand? He
further admitted that the dying declaration is not in question-answer form. He further denied that
he had written the dying declaration on his own. Thus, nothing could be elicited from the cross
examination of this witness, which may make the dying declaration of the deceased Prembai, Ex.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 11
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
P.15, unreliable or doubtful. The submission made by the Counsel for the appellant that since, the
dying declaration was not in question-answer form, therefore, it should be discarded, cannot be
accepted.
The Supreme Court in the case of Vithal Vs. State of Maharashtra reported in (2006) 13 SCC 54 has
held as under :-
''10. Dying declarations which were four in number were made before different
authorities including a Magistrate. The Executive Magistrate Shashikant was
examined as PW 6. The learned trial Judge was not correct in discarding the said
dying declarations. It is now well settled that a dying declaration if found to be
acceptable, the same need not be described to be in question and answer form.
11. In Laxman v. State of Maharashtra the law has been laid down in the following
terms: (SCC pp. 713-14, para 3)
2."Normally, therefore, the court in order to satisfy whether the deceased was in a fit
mental condition to make the dying declaration looks up to the medical opinion. But
where the eyewitnesses state that the deceased was in a fit and conscious state to
make the declaration, the medical opinion will not prevail, nor can it be said that
since there is no certification of the doctor as to the fitness of the mind of the
declarant, the dying declaration is not acceptable. A dying declaration can be oral or
in writing and any adequate method of communication whether by words or by signs
or otherwise will suffice provided the indication is positive and definite. In most
cases, however, such statements are made orally before death ensues and is reduced
to writing by someone like a Magistrate or a doctor or a police officer.
When it is recorded, no oath is necessary nor is the presence of a Magistrate absolutely necessary,
although to assure authenticity it is usual to call a Magistrate, if available for recording the
statement of a man about to die. There is no requirement of law that a dying declaration must
necessarily be made to a Magistrate and when such statement is recorded by a Magistrate there is no
specified statutory form for such recording.
Consequently, what evidential value or weight has to be attached to such statement necessarily
depends on the facts and circumstances of each particular case. What is essentially required is that
the person who records a dying declaration must be satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state of
mind. Where it is proved by the testimony of the Magistrate that the declarant was fit to make the
statement even without examination by the doctor the declaration can be acted upon provided the
court ultimately holds the same to be voluntary and truthful. A certification by the doctor is
essentially a rule of caution and therefore the voluntary and truthful nature of the declaration can be
established otherwise."
12. It was further held:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 12
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
3."It is indeed a hypertechnical view that the certification of the doctor was to the
effect that the patient is conscious and there was no certification that the patient was
in a fit state of mind especially when the Magistrate categorically stated in his
evidence indicating the questions he had put to the patient and from the answers
elicited was satisfied that the patient was in a fit state of mind whereafter he recorded
the dying declaration."
13. In Balbir Singh v. State of Punjab it is stated:
4."18. The law does not provide that a dying declaration should be made in any
prescribed manner or in the form of questions and answers.''
31. The Supreme Court in the case of State of Karnataka Vs. Shariff reported in
(2003) 2 SCC 473 has held as under :-
'' 21. It is true that PW 11 and PW 14 were the police personnel and a Magistrate could
have been called to the hospital to record the dying declaration of Muneera Begum,
however, there is no requirement of law that a dying declaration must necessarily be
made to a Magistrate. In Bhagirath v. State of Haryana on receiving message from the
hospital that a person with gunshot injuries had been admitted, a head constable
rushed to the place after making entry in the police register and after obtaining
certificate from the doctor about the condition of the injured took his statement for
the purposes of registering the case. It was held that the statement recorded by the
head constable was admissible as dying declaration. Similar view was taken in
Munnu Raja v. State of M.P. wherein the statement made by the deceased to the
investigating officer at the police station by way of first information report, which was
recorded in writing, was held to be admissible in evidence.
22. The other reason given by the High Court is that the dying declaration was not in
question-answer form. Very often the deceased is merely asked as to how the incident
took place and the statement is recorded in a narrative form. In fact such a statement
is more natural and gives the version of the incident as it has been perceived by the
victim. The question whether a dying declaration which has not been recorded in
question-answer form can be accepted in evidence or not has been considered by this
Court on several occasions. In Ram Bihari Yadav v. State of Bihar it was held as
follows:
5.It cannot be said that unless the dying declaration is in question-answer form, it
could not be accepted. Having regard to the sanctity attached to a dying declaration
as it comes from the mouth of a dying person though, unlike the principle of English
law he need not be under apprehension of death, it should be in the actual words of
the maker of the declaration. Generally, the dying declaration ought to be recorded in
the form of questions and answers but if a dying declaration is not elaborate but
consists of only a few sentences and is in the actual words of the maker the mere fact
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 13
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
that it is not in question-answer form cannot be a ground against its acceptability or
reliability. The mental condition of the maker of the declaration, alertness of mind,
memory and understanding of what he is saying, are matters which can be observed
by any person. But to lend assurance to those factors having regard to the importance
of the dying declaration, the certificate of a medically trained person is insisted upon.
23. In Padmaben Shamalbhai Patel v.
State of Gujarat it was held that the failure on the part of the medical men to record the statement of
the deceased in question-and-answer form cannot in any manner affect the probative value to be
attached to their evidence. This view was reiterated in State of Rajasthan v. Bhup Ram and Jai
Prakash v. State of Haryana.'' Thus, the dying declaration cannot be discarded, merely on the
ground that the same was not recorded in question- answer form.
32. Gopal Singh Verma (P.W.13) had obtained the certificate of fitness from Dr. Sarvesh Jain, prior
to and after the recording of dying declaration of Prembai, Ex. P.15. Dr. Sarvesh Jain (P.W.10) has
also stated that the victim Prembai was conscious and in fit state of mind prior to and during the
recording of dying declaration. Thus, this Court is of the considered opinion that the victim
Prembai, was conscious and in fit state of mind and had given a dying declaration which was
recorded by an Executive Magistrate. Thus, the dying declaration Ex. P.15 of the deceased Prembai
is reliable and can form basis for conviction of the appellant.
33. The Supreme Court in the case of Ramesh Vs. State of Haryana reported in (2017) 1 SCC 529 has
held as under :
''31. Law on the admissibility of the dying declarations is well settled. In Jai Karan v.
State (NCT of Delhi), this Court explained that a dying declaration is admissible in
evidence on the principle of necessity and can form the basis of conviction if it is
found to be reliable. In order that a dying declaration may form the sole basis for
conviction without the need for independent corroboration it must be shown that the
person making it had the opportunity of identifying the person implicated and is
thoroughly reliable and free from blemish. If, in the facts and circumstances of the
case, it is found that the maker of the statement was in a fit state of mind and had
voluntarily made the statement on the basis of personal knowledge without being
influenced by others and the court on strict scrutiny finds it to be reliable, there is no
rule of law or even of prudence that such a reliable piece of evidence cannot be acted
upon unless it is corroborated. A dying declaration is an independent piece of
evidence like any other piece of evidence, neither extra strong or weak, and can be
acted upon without corroboration if it is found to be otherwise true and reliable.
There is no hard-and-fast rule of universal application as to whether percentage of
burns suffered is determinative factor to affect credibility of dying declaration and
improbability of its recording. Much depends upon the nature of the burn, part of the
body affected by the burn, impact of the burn on the faculties to think and convey the
idea or facts coming to mind and other relevant factors. Percentage of burns alone
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 14
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
would not determine the probability or otherwise of making dying declaration.
Physical state or injuries on the declarant do not by themselves become
determinative of mental fitness of the declarant to make the statement (see Rambai v.
State of Chhattisgarh).
32. It is immaterial to whom the declaration is made. The declaration may be made to
a Magistrate, to a police officer, a public servant or a private person. It may be made
before the doctor; indeed, he would be the best person to opine about the fitness of
the dying man to make the statement, and to record the statement, where he found
that life was fast ebbing out of the dying man and there was no time to call the police
or the Magistrate. In such a situation the doctor would be justified, rather
duty-bound, to record the dying declaration of the dying man. At the same time, it
also needs to be emphasised that in the instant case, dying declaration is recorded by
a competent Magistrate who was having no animus with the accused persons. As held
in Khushal Rao v. State of Bombay, this kind of dying declaration would stand on a
much higher footing. After all, a competent Magistrate has no axe to grind against the
person named in the dying declaration of the victim and in the absence of
circumstances showing anything to the contrary, he should not be disbelieved by the
court (see Vikas v. State of Maharashtra).
34. The Supreme Court in the case of Mukesh Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) reported in (2017) 6 SCC 1
has held as under :
''174. A dying declaration is an important piece of evidence which, if found veracious
and voluntary by the court, could be the sole basis for conviction. If a dying
declaration is found to be voluntary and made in a fit mental condition, it can be
relied upon even without any corroboration. However, the court, while admitting a
dying declaration, must be vigilant towards the need for "compos mentis certificate"
from a doctor as well as the absence of any kind of tutoring.
175. In Laxman v. State of Maharashtra, the law relating to dying declaration was
succinctly put in the following words:
"3. ... A dying declaration can be oral or in writing and any adequate method of
communication whether by words or by signs or otherwise will suffice provided the
indication is positive and definite. In most cases, however, such statements are made
orally before death ensues and is reduced to writing by someone like a Magistrate or
a doctor or a police officer. When it is recorded, no oath is necessary nor is the
presence of a Magistrate absolutely necessary, although to assure authenticity it is
usual to call a Magistrate, if available for recording the statement of a man about to
die. There is no requirement of law that a dying declaration must necessarily be made
to a Magistrate and when such statement is recorded by a Magistrate there is no
specified statutory form for such recording. Consequently, what evidential value or
weight has to be attached to such statement necessarily depends on the facts and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 15
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
circumstances of each particular case. What is essentially required is that the person
who records a dying declaration must be satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state
of mind. Where it is proved by the testimony of the Magistrate that the declarant was
fit to make the statement even without examination by the doctor the declaration can
be acted upon provided the court ultimately holds the same to be voluntary and
truthful. A certification by the doctor is essentially a rule of caution and therefore the
voluntary and truthful nature of the declaration can be established otherwise."
176. The legal position regarding the admissibility of a dying declaration is settled by this Court in
several judgments. This Court in Atbir v. Govt. (NCT of Delhi), taking into consideration the earlier
judgment of this Court in Paniben v. State of Gujarat and another judgment of this Court in
Panneerselvam v. State of T.N., has exhaustively laid down the following guidelines with respect to
the admissibility of dying declaration:
"22. (i) Dying declaration can be the sole basis of conviction if it inspires the full
confidence of the court.
(ii) The court should be satisfied that the deceased was in a fit state of mind at the
time of making the statement and that it was not the result of tutoring, prompting or
imagination.
(iii) Where the court is satisfied that the declaration is true and voluntary, it can base
its conviction without any further corroboration.
(iv) It cannot be laid down as an absolute rule of law that the dying declaration
cannot form the sole basis of conviction unless it is corroborated. The rule requiring
corroboration is merely a rule of prudence.
(v) Where the dying declaration is suspicious, it should not be acted upon without
corroborative evidence.
(vi) A dying declaration which suffers from infirmity such as the deceased was
unconscious and could never make any statement cannot form the basis of
conviction.
(vii) Merely because a dying declaration does not contain all the details as to the
occurrence, it is not to be rejected.
(viii) Even if it is a brief statement, it is not to be discarded.
(ix) When the eyewitness affirms that the deceased was not in a fit and conscious
state to make the dying declaration, medical opinion cannot prevail.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 16
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
(x) If after careful scrutiny, the court is satisfied that it is true and free from any effort
to induce the deceased to make a false statement and if it is coherent and consistent,
there shall be no legal impediment to make it the basis of conviction, even if there is
no corroboration."
177. It is well settled that dying declaration can form the sole basis of conviction provided that it is
free from infirmities and satisfies various other tests. In a case where there are more than one dying
declaration, if some inconsistencies are noticed between one and the other, the court has to examine
the nature of inconsistencies as to whether they are material or not. The court has to examine the
contents of the dying declarations in the light of the various surrounding facts and circumstances.''
35. Thus, it is well established principle of law that where the dying declaration is found to be
reliable, then the same may be a sole ground for convicting the accused. In the present case, the
dying declaration of the deceased Prembai, Ex. P.15 was recorded by an Executive Magistrate, Gopal
Singh Verma (P.W.13) after obtaining certificate of fitness from Dr. Sarvesh Jain (P.W10) who has
specifically stated that the victim was in fit state of mind and conscious during the recording of
dying declaration, it is, accordingly held that the dying declaration of the deceased is sufficient to
hold the appellant guilty of causing injuries to the deceased Prembai.
36. Apart from the written dying declaration, Leela Bai (P.W.2), has stated that the deceased
Prembai was lying on the ground in an injured condition and had informed this witness, that She
has been assaulted by the appellant. This witness has not been cross examined in detail. One one
question was put to this witness, that whether the information given by the deceased Prembai was
correct or not, which was suitably replied by this witness that She cannot say that whether the said
information was correct or not. Undisputedly, Leela bai (P.W.2) is not an eye witness, therefore,
there was no occasion for her to verify the information given by the deceased, but the oral dying
declaration given by the deceased Prembai has been proved beyond reasonable doubt, as nothing
could be elicited from the evidence of this witness, which may make her evidence unreliable.
37. The next question would be that what offence has been committed by the appellant by causing
injuries to the deceased Prembai ?
38. In the dying declaration of the deceased Prembai, Ex. P.15, no motive has been assigned by the
deceased. In fact, no question was put to the victim by the Executive Magistrate, with regard to the
reason for committing the offence. Similarly, the dying declaration of Puja (P.W.1), Ex. D-1 was also
recorded in which the injured Puja (P.W.1) has expressed her ignorance as to why the appellant
committed offence. It is further submitted that Puja (P.W.1) in her evidence has stated that the
appellant had demanded Rs. 20,000/- and when his mother, Prembai, refused to give the same,
they both were assaulted by the appellant. In cross examination, Puja (P.W.1) has admitted that She
was sitting outside the house on a platform, when the appellant came there. She also admitted the
appellant had enquired about the sleeper and Umesh was inside the house. She further admitted
that the appellant is her step brother. She clarified that their fathers are different. She further
admitted that Umesh had enquired as to who has come and then she had informed that the
appellant had come. Thereafter, a suggestion was given to this witness, that the appellant had
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 17
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
alleged that illicit activities are going on in the house, which was denied by this witness. She further
denied the suggestion that since, her relations with Umesh were not proper therefore, the appellant
was objecting to it. She further denied that in fact the appellant had attacked Umesh and this
witness and the deceased had tried to intervene in the matter and therefore, they had sustained
injuries. It is submitted that since, the appellant was objecting to the illicit relations between Puja
(P.W.1) and Umesh and on the date of incident, after noticing Umesh in the house, the appellant lost
his self control and attacked Umesh and since, the injured Puja (P.W.1) and the deceased intervene
in the matter, therefore, they also sustained injuries. Thus, it is submitted by the Counsel for the
appellant that since, the incident took place without premeditation and in a heat of passion, upon a
sudden quarrel, therefore, the act of the appellant would fall within Exception 4 to Section 300 of
I.P.C.
39. Exception 4 to Section 300 I.P.C. reads as under :
''Exception 4.--Culpable homicide is not murder if it is committed without
premeditation in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel and
without the offender's having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual
manner.
6.Explanation.--It is immaterial in such cases which party offers the provocation or
commits the first assault.''
40. Thus, in order to invoke the applicability of Exception 4 to Section 300 of i.P.C., the following
conditions are to be satisfied :
(i) that the incident took place without premeditation
(ii) the incident took place in a sudden fight
(iii) the incident took place in a heat of passion.
(iv) upon a sudden quarrel
(v) that the offender without having taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or
unusual manner.
41. The Supreme Court in the case of Sridhar Bhuyan Vs. State of Orissa reported in (2004) 11 SCC
395 has held as under :-
''8. The fourth exception of Section 300 IPC covers acts done in a sudden fight. The
said exception deals with a case of prosecution not covered by the first exception,
after which its place would have been more appropriate. The exception is founded
upon the same principle, for in both there is absence of premeditation. But, while in
the case of Exception 1 there is total deprivation of self-control, in case of Exception
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 18
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
4, there is only that heat of passion which clouds men's sober reason and urges them
to deeds which they would not otherwise do. There is provocation in Exception 4 as
in Exception 1; but the injury done is not the direct consequence of that provocation.
In fact Exception 4 deals with cases in which notwithstanding that a blow may have
been struck, or some provocation given in the origin of the dispute or in whatever
way the quarrel may have originated, yet the subsequent conduct of both parties puts
them in respect of guilt upon equal footing. A "sudden fight" implies mutual
provocation and blows on each side. The homicide committed is then clearly not
traceable to unilateral provocation, nor in such cases could the whole blame be
placed on one side. For if it were so, the exception more appropriately applicable
would be Exception
1. There is no previous deliberation or determination to fight. A fight suddenly takes
place, for which both parties are more or less to be blamed. It may be that one of
them starts it, but if the other had not aggravated it by his own conduct it would not
have taken the serious turn it did. There is then mutual provocation and aggravation,
and it is difficult to apportion the share of blame which attaches to each fighter. The
help of Exception 4 can be invoked if death is caused: (a) without premeditation; (b)
in a sudden fight; (c) without the offender's having taken undue advantage or acted in
a cruel or unusual manner; and (d) the fight must have been with the person killed.
To bring a case within Exception 4 all the ingredients mentioned in it must be found.
It is to be noted that the "fight" occurring in Exception 4 to Section 300 IPC is not defined in IPC. It
takes two to make a fight. Heat of passion requires that there must be no time for the passions to
cool down and in this case, the parties have worked themselves into a fury on account of the verbal
altercation in the beginning. A fight is a combat between two and more persons whether with or
without weapons. It is not possible to enunciate any general rule as to what shall be deemed to be a
sudden quarrel. It is a question of fact and whether a quarrel is sudden or not must necessarily
depend upon the proved facts of each case. For the application of Exception 4, it is not sufficient to
show that there was a sudden quarrel and there was no premeditation. It must further be shown that
the offender has not taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. The expression
"undue advantage" as used in the provision means "unfair advantage".
42. The Supreme Court in the case of Rampal Singh Vs. State of U.P. reported in (2012) 8 SCC 289
has held as under :
7.22. Thus, where the act committed is done with the clear intention to kill the other
person, it will be a murder within the meaning of Section 300 of the Code and
punishable under Section 302 of the Code but where the act is done on grave and
sudden provocation which is not sought or voluntarily provoked by the offender
himself, the offence would fall under the Exceptions to Section 300 of the Code and is
punishable under Section 304 of the Code. Another fine tool which would help in
determining such matters is the extent of brutality or cruelty with which such an
offence is committed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 19
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
Thus, the provocation should be from the side of the complainant party and should not be voluntary
by the offender himself.
43. In Holmes v. Director of Public Prosecutionns [1946 AC 588] provocation has been explained as
under:
8."The whole doctrine relating to provocation depends on the fact that it causes, or
may cause, a sudden and temporary loss of self-
control, whereby malice, which is the formation of an intention to kill or to inflict grievous bodily
harm, is negatived. Consequently, where the provocation inspires an actual intention to kill, or to
inflict grievous bodily harm, the doctrine that provocation may reduce murder to manslaughter
seldom applies."
44. The Supreme Court in the case of B.D. Khunte Vs. Union of India reported in (2015) 1 SCC 286
has held as under :
''12. What is critical for a case to fall under Exception 1 to Section 300 IPC is that the
provocation must not only be grave but sudden as well. It is only where the following
ingredients of Exception 1 are satisfied that an accused can claim mitigation of the
offence committed by him from murder to culpable homicide not amounting to
murder:
(1) The deceased must have given provocation to the accused.
(2) The provocation so given must have been grave.
(3) The provocation given by the deceased must have been sudden.
(4) The offender by reason of such grave and sudden provocation must have been
deprived of his power of self-control; and (5) The offender must have killed the
deceased or any other person by mistake or accident during the continuance of the
deprivation of the power of self-control.''
45. The Supreme Court in the case of Pappu Vs. State of M.P. reported in (2006) 7 SCC 391 has held
as under :-
''12. For bringing in its operation it has to be established that the act was committed
without premeditation, in a sudden fight in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel
without the offender having taken undue advantage and not having acted in a cruel or
unusual manner.''
46. Thus, if the facts of the case are considered, it appears that after the appellant came back to the
house, one Umesh, who is the neighbour enquired about the sleepers which were kept outside the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 20
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
house. Although suggestions were given to Puja (P.W.1) about her intimate relations with Umesh,
but the same were denied. Nothing could be brought on record by the appellant, that since, the
appellant was opposed to intimate relationship between Umesh and Puja (P.W.1) and was
continuously objecting to it, therefore, he was under
prolonged provocation. Even another suggestion has been given by the appellant that
in fact, the appellant had a fight with Umesh, and since, the injured Puja (P.W.1) and
the deceased Prembai, intervened in the matter, therefore, accidentally they got
injured. If the number of injuries sustained by Puja (P.W.1) and the deceased are
considered, then it would be clear that Puja (P.W.1) had sustained 4 stab/incised
wounds, whereas the deceased Prembai had sustained two stab/incised wounds and
her intestine had come out of the stomach. The force with which the injuries were
caused, can be inferred. Thus, it cannot be said that the injured Puja (P.W.1) and
deceased Prembai, accidentally sustained injuries while they were trying to intervene
in the matter, as repeated blows were given to them.
47. It is further submitted by the Counsel for the appellant, that the prosecution has not examined
Umesh, whose presence on the spot was admitted by the injured Puja (P.W.1) and therefore, it must
be inferred that the prosecution has suppressed the very genesis of the incident. The submission
made by the Counsel for the appellant is misconceived and cannot be accepted.
48. The Supreme Court in the case of Takhatji Hiraji Vs. Thakore Kubersing Chamansingh reported
in (2001) 6 SCC 145 has held as under :-
''19. So is the case with the criticism levelled by the High Court on the prosecution
case finding fault therewith for non-examination of independent witnesses. It is true
that if a material witness, who would unfold the genesis of the incident or an essential
part of the prosecution case, not convincingly brought to fore otherwise, or where
there is a gap or infirmity in the prosecution case which could have been supplied or
made good by examining a witness who though available is not examined, the
prosecution case can be termed as suffering from a deficiency and withholding of
such a material witness would oblige the court to draw an adverse inference against
the prosecution by holding that if the witness would have been examined it would not
have supported the prosecution case. On the other hand if already overwhelming
evidence is available and examination of other witnesses would only be a repetition
or duplication of the evidence already adduced, non-examination of such other
witnesses may not be material. In such a case the court ought to scrutinise the worth
of the evidence adduced. The court of facts must ask itself
-- whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, it was necessary to examine
such other witness, and if so, whether such witness was available to be examined and
yet was being withheld from the court. If the answer be positive then only a question
of drawing an adverse inference may arise. If the witnesses already examined are
reliable and the testimony coming from their mouth is unimpeachable the court can
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 21
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
safely act upon it, uninfluenced by the factum of non- examination of other
witnesses.......''
49. The Supreme Court in the case of Vijendra Singh Vs. State of U.P. Reported in (2017) 11 SCC 129
has held as under :-
''37. In Dahari Vs. State of U.P. [2012)10 SCC 256], while discussing about the non-
examination of material witness, the Court expressed the view that when he was not
the only competent witness who would have been fully capable of explaining the
factual situation correctly and the prosecution case stood fully corroborated by the
medical evidence and the testimony of other reliable witnesses, no adverse inference
could be drawn against the prosecution. Similar view has been expressed in Manjit
Singh [(2013) 12 SCC 746], and Joginder Singh Vs. State of Haryana [(2014) 11 SCC
335].''
50. The Supreme Court in the case of State of H.P. Vs. Gian Chand reported in (2001) 5 SCC 71 has
held as under :
9.14............Non-examination of a material witness is again not a mathematical
formula for discarding the weight of the testimony available on record howsoever
natural, trustworthy and convincing it may be. The charge of withholding a material
witness from the court levelled against the prosecution should be examined in the
background of facts and circumstances of each case so as to find whether the
witnesses were available for being examined in the court and were yet withheld by the
prosecution. The court has first to assess the trustworthiness of the evidence adduced
and available on record. If the court finds the evidence adduced worthy of being
relied on then the testimony has to be accepted and acted on though there may be
other witnesses available who could also have been examined but were not examined.
However, if the available evidence suffers from some infirmity or cannot be accepted in the absence
of other evidence, which though available has been withheld from the court, then the question of
drawing an adverse inference against the prosecution for non-examination of such witnesses may
arise. It is now well settled that conviction for an offence of rape can be based on the sole testimony
of the prosecutrix corroborated by medical evidence and other circumstances such as the report of
chemical examination etc. if the same is found to be natural, trustworthy and worth being relied on.
51. In the case of Yogesh Singh Vs. Mahabeer Singh and others reported in (2017) 11 SCC 195, the
Supreme Court has held as under :
''51. Similarly, in Raghubir Singh Vs. State of U.P. [(1972) 3 SCC 79], it was held that
the prosecution is not bound to produce all the witnesses said to have seen the
occurrence. Material witnesses considered necessary by the prosecution for unfolding
the prosecution story alone need be produced without unnecessary and redundant
mulitplication of witnesses. In this connection, general reluntance of an average
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 22
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
villager to appear as a witness and get himself ivolved in cases of rival village factions
when tempers on both sides are running high has to be borne in mind.
52. Further, in Appabhai Vs. State of Gujarat [1988 Supp SCC 241], this Court has observed :
11........ Experience reminds us that civilised people are generally insensitive when a
crime is committed even in their presence. They withdraw both from the victim and
the vigilante. They keep themselves away from the court unless it is inevitable. They
think that crime like civil dispute is between two individuals or parties and they
should not involve themselves. This kind of apathy of the general public is indeed
unfortunate, but it is there everywhere, whether in village life, towns or cities.''
52. Thus, the evidence of Puja (P.W.1) cannot be discarded merely on the ground that
although Umesh was present on the spot, but still he has not been examined by the
prosecution.
53. In the alternative, it was next submitted by the Counsel for the applicant that
even otherwise, the prosecution has failed to prove motive to commit suicide. It is
well established principle of law that where the case is based on direct evidence and
the evidence led by the prosecution is worth reliance, then the same cannot be
discarded merely on the ground of absence of motive. The Supreme Court in the case
of Yogesh Singh (Supra) has held as under :
''46....... It is a settled legal proposition that even if the absence of motive, as alleged,
is accepted that is of no consequence and pales into insignificance when direct
evidence establishes the crime.
Therefore, in case there is direct trustworthy evidence of the witnesses as to
commission of an offence, motive loses its significance. Therefore, if the gensis of the
motive of the occurrence is not proved, the ocular testimony of the witnesses as to the
occurrence could not be discarded only on the ground of absence of motive, if
otherwise, the evidence is worthy of reliance. (Harishanker Vs. State of U.P. [(1996) 9
SCC 40], Bikau Pandey Vs. State of Bihar [(2003) 12 SCC 616], State of U.P. Vs.
Kishanpal [(2008) 16 SCC 73], Abu Thakir Vs. State of T.N. [(2010) 5 SCC 91], and
Bipin Kumar Mondal Vs. State of W.B. [(2010) 12 SCC 91].''
54. It is further submitted by the Counsel for the appellant that since, no blood stains
were found on the knife, therefore, the prosecution has failed to prove the recovery of
knife and thus, it gives a deep dent to the prosecution case. The submission made by
the Counsel for the appellant cannot be accepted and hence rejected. The
non-recovery of weapon of offence, would not be material, where the case is based on
direct evidence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 23
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
55. The Supreme Court in the case of Nankaunoo V. State of U.P. Reported in (2016)
3 SCC 317, has held as under :-
9. The learned counsel for the appellant contended that the courts below failed to
take note of the fact that the alleged weapon "country-made pistol" was never
recovered by the investigating officer and in the absence of any clear connection
between the weapon used for crime and ballistic report and resultant injury, the
prosecution cannot be said to have established the guilt of the appellant. In the light
of unimpeachable oral evidence which is amply corroborated by the medical
evidence, non-
recovery of "country-made pistol" does not materially affect the case of the prosecution. In a case of
this nature, any omission on the part of the investigating officer cannot go against the prosecution
case. Story of the prosecution is to be examined de hors such omission by the investigating agency.
Otherwise, it would shake the confidence of the people not merely in the law enforcing agency but
also in the administration of justice.''
56. The Supreme Court in the case of Mritunjoy Biswas Vs. Pranab reported in (2013) 12 SCC 796
has held as under :
''33. The learned counsel for the respondent has urged before us that there has been
no recovery of weapon from the accused and hence, the prosecution case deserves to
be thrown overboard and, therefore, the judgment of acquittal does not warrant
interference.
34. In Lakshmi v. State of U.P. (2002) 7 SCC 198this Court has ruled that: (SCC p.
205, para 16) "16. Undoubtedly, the identification of the body, cause of death and
recovery of weapon with which the injury may have been inflicted on the deceased are
some of the important factors to be established by the prosecution in an ordinary
given case to bring home the charge of offence under Section 302 IPC. This, however,
is not an inflexible rule. It cannot be held as a general and broad proposition of law
that where these aspects are not established, it would be fatal to the case of the
prosecution and in all cases and eventualities, it ought to result in the acquittal of
those who may be charged with the offence of murder."
35. In Lakhan Sao v. State of Bihar (2000) 9 SCC 82 it has been opined that: (SCC p.
87, para 18) "18. The non-recovery of the pistol or spent cartridge does not detract
from the case of the prosecution where the direct evidence is acceptable."
36. In State of Rajasthan v. Arjun Singh (2011) 9 SCC 115 this Court has expressed
that: (SCC p. 122, para 18) "18. ... mere non-recovery of pistol or cartridge does not
detract the case of the prosecution where clinching and direct evidence is acceptable.
Likewise, absence of evidence regarding recovery of used pellets, bloodstained
clothes, etc. cannot be taken or construed as no such occurrence had taken place."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 24
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
57. Thus, when there is ample unimpeachable ocular evidence and the same has been corroborated
by the medical evidence, non-recovery of the weapon does not affect the prosecution case.
58. Thus, where the oral evidence is unimpeachable and reliable and further corroborated by the
medical evidence, then the prosecution case cannot be thrown overboard merely on the basis of
non-recovery of weapon of offence.
59. Thus, the appellant has failed to prove that he was provoked by the situation and under the said
sudden and grave provocation, he lost the power of self control. Further more, the number of
injuries and the part of the body on which the injuries were caused as well as the internal damage
caused by the injuries, clearly suggests that the appellant had acted in a cruel manner. Thus, the
case of the appellant would not be covered by Exception 4 to Section 300 of I.P.C., and thus, he is
held guilty of committing murder of his mother Prembai, making himself liable for conviction under
Section 302 of I.P.C.
60. The next question for determination is that whether the appellant had caused injuries to the
injured Puja (P.W.1) and whether they were dangerous to life?
61. Dr. Sarvesh Jain (P.W.10) had medically examined the injured Puja (P.W.1) and had found the
following injuries on her body :
(i) Incised wound over left side of chest near interior axillary line 2.3x0.8cm x depth
cannot be taken. Margins clean cut. Soft Clot present.
(ii) stab wound of 2.5 cm x 0.5 cm x depth cannot be assessed. Slft clotted, blood
present, margins clean cut. Left Hypochondrium
(iii) Stab wound over abdomen in left Hypochondrium 7 cm lateral to first wound size
2 cm x 0.6 cm x depth cannot be assessed.
(iv) Incised wound over flexor aspect of left elbow.
Size 4 cm x 1 cm x muscle deep. Soft clotted blood present margins clean cut.'' She was referred to
Hamidia Hospital. The M.L.C. Report of Puja (P.W.1) is Ex. P.13. Dr. Dharmesh Tripathi (P.W.11)
had treated the injured Puja (P.W.1) at Hamidia Hospital. He found the above mentioned injuries.
The injured Puja (P.W.1) was operated upon on 6-6-2007 and internal organs were repaired. The
injuries were found to be dangerous to life and were caused by sharp and hard object. The report is
Ex. P. 17.
62. Puja (P.W.1) has stated that the appellant had caused multiple injuries (four in number) to her.
She has stated that the appellant had demanded Rs. 20,000 from the deceased and when She
refused to give the same, the appellant started assaulting her. When this witness tried to intervene
in the matter, She too was assaulted by the appellant. The witness was cross examined in detail, but
nothing could be elicited from her cross examination, which may make her evidence unreliable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 25
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
63. The Supreme Court in the case of Jage Ram Vs. State of Haryana reported in (2015) 11 SCC 366
has held as under -
''12. For the purpose of conviction under Section 307 IPC, the prosecution has to establish (i) the
intention to commit murder; and (ii) the act done by the accused. The burden is on the prosecution
that the accused had attempted to commit the murder of the prosecution witness. Whether the
accused person intended to commit murder of another person would depend upon the facts and
circumstances of each case. To justify a conviction under Section 307 IPC, it is not essential that
fatal injury capable of causing death should have been caused. Although the nature of injury actually
caused may be of assistance in coming to a finding as to the intention of the accused, such intention
may also be adduced from other circumstances. The intention of the accused is to be gathered from
the circumstances like the nature of the weapon used, words used by the accused at the time of the
incident, motive of the accused, parts of the body where the injury was caused and the nature of
injury and severity of the blows given, etc.
13. In State of M.P. v. Kashiram [(2009) 4 SCC 26 ], the scope of intention for attracting conviction
under Section 307 IPC was elaborated and it was held as under:
(SCC pp. 29-30, paras 12-13) "12. ... '13. It is sufficient to justify a conviction under
Section 307 if there is present an intent coupled with some overt act in execution
thereof. It is not essential that bodily injury capable of causing death should have
been inflicted. The section makes a distinction between the act of the accused and its
result, if any. The court has to see whether the act, irrespective of its result, was done
with the intention or knowledge and under circumstances mentioned in the section.
Therefore, an accused charged under Section 307 IPC cannot be acquitted merely
because the injuries inflicted on the victim were in the nature of a simple hurt.
14. This position was highlighted in State of Maharashtra v. Balram Bama Patil [(1983) 2 SCC 28 ],
Girija Shankar v. State of U.P. [(2004) 3 SCC 793 ]and R. Prakash v. State of Karnataka [(2004) 9
SCC 27].
* * *
16. Whether there was intention to kill or knowledge that death will be caused is a question of fact
and would depend on the facts of a given case. The circumstances that the injury inflicted by the
accused was simple or minor will not by itself rule out application of Section 307 IPC. The
determinative question is the intention or knowledge, as the case may be, and not the nature of the
injury.' See State of M.P. v. Saleem [(2005) 5 SCC 554], SCC pp. 559-60, paras 13-14 and 16. 13 '6.
Undue sympathy to impose inadequate sentence would do more harm to the justice system to
undermine the public confidence in the efficacy of law and society could not long endure under such
serious threats. It is, therefore, the duty of every court to award proper sentence having regard to the
nature of the offence and the manner in which it was executed or committed, etc. This position was
illuminatingly stated by this Court in Sevaka Perumal v. State of T.N. [(1991) 3 SCC 47] (Saleem case
[(2005) 5 SCC 554], SCC p. 558, para 6)"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 26
Babloo @ Virendra Kumar vs State Of M.P. on 21 December, 2017
64. Thus, in view of the number of injuries, situs of injuries, weapon used by the
appellant, this Court is of the considered opinion that the appellant had an intention
to commit murder of Puja (P.W.1) and there was an overt act on the part of the
appellant.
65. Thus, the appellant is held guilty of making an attempt to kill Puja (P.W.1) and
thus, has made himself liable for conviction under Section 307 of I.P.C.
66. Accordingly, the conviction of the appellant under Sections 302, 307 of I.P.C.
recorded by the Trial Court, is hereby upheld.
67. So far as the question of sentence is concerned, the minimum sentence provided
for offence under Section 302 of I.P.C. is Life Imprisonment and therefore, no
interference is permissible. So far as the sentence awarded under Section 307 of
I.P.C. is concerned, the Trial Court has awarded the jail sentence of rigorous
imprisonment of 10 years and a fine of Rs.500/- with default imprisonment. The
manner in which the offence has been committed by the appellant considering the
fact that he had given multiple knife blows to his own step sister, this Court is of the
considered opinion, that the jail sentence of rigorous imprisonment of 10 years and a
fine of Rs. 500/- does not call for any interference. The Trial Court has directed that
both the sentences shall run concurrently.
68. Consequently, the judgment and sentence dated 26-2- 2009 passed by 2nd A.S.J.
(Fast Track Court), Ganj Basoda, Distt. Vidisha in Sessions Trial No.193/2007, is
hereby affirmed.
69. The appellant is in jail.
70. The appeal fails and is hereby dismissed.
(Anand Pathak ) (G.S. Ahluwalia)
Judge Judge
*MKB*
MAHENDRA KUMAR BARIK
2017.12.22 14:00:54 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80356524/ 27
