Bachan Singh (Age 37 Years) vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 20 October, 2023
Bachan Singh (Age 37 Years) vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir
on 20 October, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on 13.10.2023
Pronounced on 20.10.2023
CRR No. 21/2016
Bachan Singh (Age 37 years) .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
S/o. Sh. Onkar Singh R/o. Nogram,
Tehsil Bishnah, District, Jammu
Q
Through: Mr. D. K. Khajuria, Adv.
vs
1. State of Jammu and Kashmir, ..... Respondent(s)
Commissioner/Secretary Home
Department, Civil Secretariat, Jammu
2. State through SHO, Police Station,
Gandhi Nagar, Jammu
Through: Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy.AG
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Through the medium of instant revision petition, the petitioner has challenged order dated
20.04.2016 passed by the learned 1 st Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu (hereinafter to be referred
as the appellate court), whereby judgment of conviction and sentence dated 10.06.2015 passed by
learned Judicial Magistrate 1st Class(Electricity Magistrate), Jammu(hereinafter to be referred as
the trial court) has been upheld and the petitioner has been sentenced to imprisonment of one year
and a fine of rupees one thousand in proof of offences under Sections 304-A and 279 RPC.
2. The facts giving rise to the present revision petition are that on 27.02.2008 a Minibus bearing
registration No. JK02V 0583 was being driven rashly and negligently by its driver, while proceeding
from Satwari towards Jammu. On reaching near Convent School Crossing at Gandhi Nagar, Jammu,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184135301/ 1
Bachan Singh (Age 37 Years) vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 20 October, 2023
the deceased-Harnam Kour, who was crossing the road, was knocked down by the vehicle in
question, as a result of which, she received grievous injuries. She was moved to hospital and in the
meanwhile, the driver of the offending vehicle fled away from the spot. The Police swing into action,
registered FIR No. 38/2008 for offences under Sections 279, 337 and 338 RPC with Police Station,
Gandhi Nagar, Jammu and proceeded to undertake investigation of the case. On 03.03.2008,
injured Harnam Kour succumbed to the injuries in the hospital. After investigation of the case,
offences under Sections 279 and 304-A RPC were found proved against the petitioner and a charge
sheet was laid against the petitioner before the trial court.
3. Vide order dated 05.05.2008, the learned trial court framed charges for offences under Sections
279 and 304-A RPC against the petitioner and his plea was recorded. The petitioner denied the
charges and accordingly, the prosecution was directed to lead evidence in support of its case. The
prosecution examined PWs Bhopinder Singh, Jagdish Raj, Hardeep Singh, Jasmeet Kour, Vishnesh
Kumar and Dr. L. D. Bhagat as witnesses in support of its case. Though the prosecution had cited as
many as 15 witnesses in the charge sheet, yet only the afore-named witnesses were examined leaving
out other witnesses including the Investigating Officer. After completion of the prosecution
evidence, statement of the petitioner/accused under section 342 J&K Cr.P.C. was recorded in which
he denied his involvement in the offence and claimed that a false case has been foisted upon him.
The petitioner did not choose to lead any evidence in defence.
4. Learned trial court, after appreciating the evidence led by the prosecution came to the conclusion
that the accident, which resulted in death of the deceased, had taken place on account of rash and
negligent driving of the offending vehicle by the petitioner/accused. Accordingly, he was convicted
of offences under Sections 279 and 304-A RPC in terms of judgment dated 10.06.2015. In proof of
offence under Section 279 RPC, the petitioner was sentenced to a fine of Rs. 1,000/- whereas in
proof of offence under Section 304-A RPC, he was sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for a
period of one year.
5. The petitioner challenged the impugned judgment of conviction and sentence dated 10.06.2015
by way of an appeal before the appellate court. The learned appellate court vide its impugned
judgment of 20.04.2016 dismissed the appeal and upheld the judgment of conviction and sentence
passed by the learned trial court. It is this judgment which is under challenge by way of the present
revision petition before this Court.
6. The petitioner has challenged the impugned judgment of conviction and sentence through the
medium of instant revision petition on a number of grounds but during the course of proceedings,
learned counsel for the petitioner has confined the challenge only to two grounds, one that the
petitioner has been convicted on the basis of his dock identification and since he had no previous
acquaintance with the prosecution witnesses, therefore, in the absence of any corroborative evidence
in the shape of test identification during investigation of the case, the courts below could not have
concluded that it was the petitioner only who was at the wheels at the time of the accident. The other
ground that has been urged is that omission of prosecution to examine the Investigating Officer of
the case as a witness, has resulted in grave prejudice to the petitioner because the contradictions in
the prosecution evidence could not be proved.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184135301/ 2
Bachan Singh (Age 37 Years) vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 20 October, 2023
7. Before embarking upon decision on merits of the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the
petitioner, it would be apt to notice that the petitioner has been convicted by the trial court and his
conviction has been upheld by the appellate court. Therefore, conviction of the petitioner
concurrently upheld by two inferior courts has to be appreciated within the limits of revisonal
jurisdiction. In the absence of any serious infirmity that would amount to miscarriage of justice, this
Court would not be in a position to interfere under revisional jurisdiction. This is clear from the
language of Sections 397 and 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Cr.P.C.) which are in pari
materia with Sections 435 and 439 of the J&K Cr.P.C. applicable to the present case. A revisional
court is only vested with jurisdiction to correct and rectify the orders of inferior courts provided
such orders suffer from serious infirmities likely to cause miscarriage of justice. While exercising
revisional jurisdiction, fresh appreciation of evidence is not permissible unless the findings arrived
at by the inferior courts are perverse and unacceptable. Merely because another view is possible
than what was formed by the inferior courts on the basis of the evidence on record, would not be a
ground to exercise revisional jurisdiction.
8. In light of aforesaid legal position, the issue that needs to determined is whether in the instant
case, the inferior courts have committed any illegality or impropriety, while passing the impugned
judgment of conviction and sentence.
9. As already noted, the first contention of the petitioner is that during the investigation of the case,
no test identification parade of the petitioner was conducted and the witnesses have seen him for the
first time in the court at the time of making their statements. It has been contended that prior to the
accident, the prosecution witnesses did not have any previous acquaintance with the petitioner and
as per the story narrated by the prosecution witnesses, the petitioner had fled away from spot after
the accident, therefore, there was no occasion for the witnesses to have identified the petitioner on
spot, particularly when he was not arrested on spot and he was not even named in the FIR. In this
regard, learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance upon the judgments of the Supreme
Court in the case of Dana Yadav alias Dahuand and others v State of Bihar, (2002)7 SCC 295 and
Mahavir vs State of Delhi, (2008)16 SCC 481.
10. Before dealing with the merits of the contention raised by learned counsel for the petitioner, it
would be apt to notice the legal position laid down by the Supreme Court in the cases referred to and
relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner. In Dana Yadav's case (supra), the Supreme
Court has, while discussing the legal position as regards the importance of test identification in a
case where identity of the accused who is stranger to the witnesses, becomes an issue for
determination, observed as under:
"5..........Section 9 of the Evidence Act deals with relevancy of facts necessary to
explain or introduce relevant facts. It says, inter alia, facts which establish the
identity of anything or person whose identity is relevant, in so far as they are
necessary for the purpose, are .relevant. So the evidence of identification is a relevant
piece of evidence under Section 9 of the Evidence Act where the evidence consists of
identification of the accused at his trial. The identification of an accused by a witness
in court is substantive evidence whereas evidence of identification in test
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184135301/ 3
Bachan Singh (Age 37 Years) vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 20 October, 2023
identification parade is though primary evidence but not substantive one and the
same can be used only to corroborate identification of the accused by a witness in
court. This Court has dealt with this question on several occasions. In the case of
Vaikuntam Chandmppa and Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR (1960) SC 1340
which is a three Judge Bench decision of this Court, Wanchoo, J., with whom A.K.
Sarkar and K. Subba Rao, JJ. agreed, speaking for. the Court, observed that the
substantive evidence of a witness is his statement in court but the purpose of test
identification is to test that evidence and the safe rule is that the sworn testimony of
witnesses in court as to the identity of the accused who are stranger to the witnesses,
generally speaking, requires corroboration which should be in the form of an earlier
identification proceeding or any other evidence. The law laid down in the aforesaid
decision has been reiterated in the cases of Budhsen and Anr. v. State of U.P., [1970]
2 SCC 128, Sheikh Hasib alias Tabarak v. The State of Bihar, [1972] 4 SCC 773,
Bollavaram Pedda Narsi Reddy and Ors. v. State of Andhra Pradesh, [1991] 3 SCC
434, Ronny alias Ronald James Alwaris and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra, [1998] 3
SCC 625 and Rajesh Govind Jagesha v. State of Maharashtra, [1999] 8 SCC 428. It is
well settled that identification parades are held ordinarily at the instance of the
investigating officer for the purpose of enabling the witnesses to identify either the
properties which are the subject matter of alleged offence or the persons who are
alleged to have been involved in the offence. Such tests or parades, in ordinary
course, belong to the investigation stage and they serve to provide the investigating
authorities with material to assure themselves if the investigation is proceeding on
right lines. In other words, it is through these identification parades that the
investigating agency is required to ascertain whether the persons whom they suspect
to have committed the offence were the real culprits.......
6. -----------
7-------------
8. In the case of State of Maharashtra (supra), it was laid down that if a witness had
any particular reason to remember about the identity of an accused, in that event, the
case can be brought under the exception and upon solitary evidence of identification
of an accused in court for the first time, conviction can be based. In the case of Ronny
alias Ronald James Alwaris and Ors. (supra), it has been laid down that where the
witness had a chance to interact with the accused or that in a case where the witness
had an opportunity to notice the distinctive features of the accused which lends
assurance to his testimony in court, the evidence of identification in court for the first
time by such a witness cannot be thrown away merely because no test Identification
parade was held. In that case, the concerned accused had a talk with the identifying
witnesses for about 7/8 minutes. In these circumstances, the conviction of the
accused, on the basis of sworn testimony of witnesses identifying for the first time in
court without the same being corroborated either by previous identification in the
test identification parade or any other evidence, was upheld by this Court. In the case
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184135301/ 4
Bachan Singh (Age 37 Years) vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 20 October, 2023
of Rajesh Govind Jagesha (supra), it was laid down that the absence of test
identification parade may not be fatal if the accused is sufficiently described in the
complaint leaving no doubt in the mind of the court regarding his involvement or is
arrested on the spot immediately after the occurrence and in either eventuality, the
evidence of witnesses identifying the accused for the first time in court can form the
basis for conviction without the same being corroborated by any other evidence and,
accordingly, conviction of the accused was upheld by this Court. In the case of State
of H.P. (supra), it was observed that ".....test identification is considered a safe rule of
prudence to generally look for corroboration of the sworn testimony of witnesses in
court as to the identity of the accused who are strangers to them. There may,
however, be exceptions to this general rule, when, for example, the court is impressed
by a particular witness on whose testimony it can safely rely without such or other
corroboration." In that case, laying down the aforesaid law, acquittal of one of the
accused by High Court was converted into conviction by this Court on the basis of
identification by a witness for the first time in court without the same being
corroborated by any other evidence. In the case of Ramanbhai Naranbhai Patel and
Ors. (supra), it was observed "It, therefore, cannot be held, as tried to be submitted
by learned counsel for the appellants, that in the absence of a test identification
parade, the evidence of an eyewitness identifying the accused would become
inadmissible or totally useless; whether the evidence deserves any credence or not
would always depend on the facts and circumstances of each case." The Court further
observed..... " the fact remains that these eyewitnesses were seriously injured and
they could have easily seen the faces of the persons assaulting them and their
appearance and identity would well remain imprinted in their minds especially when
they were assaulted in broad day light." In these circumstances, conviction of the
accused was upheld on the basis of solitary evidence of identification by a witness for
the first time in court."
11. In Mahavir's case (supra), the Supreme Court has, while dealing with this aspect of the matter,
observed as under:
"12. It is trite to say that the substantive evidence is the evidence of identification in Court. Apart
from the clear provisions of Section 9 of the Evidence Act, the position in law is well settled by a
catena of decisions of this Court. The facts, which establish the identity of the accused persons, are
relevant under Section 9 of the Evidence Act. As a general rule, the substantive evidence of a witness
is the statement made in Court. The evidence of mere identification of the accused person at the trial
for the first time is from its very nature inherently of a weak character. The purpose of prior test
identification, therefore, is to test and strengthen the trustworthiness of that evidence. It is
accordingly considered a safe rule of prudence to generally look for corroboration of the sworn
testimony of witnesses in Court as to the identity of the accused who are strangers to them, in the
form of earlier identification proceedings. This rule of prudence, however, is subject to exceptions,
when, for example, the Court is impressed by a particular witness on whose testimony it can safely
rely, without such or other corroboration. The identification parades belong to the stage of
investigation, and there is no provision in the Code which obliges the investigating agency to hold or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184135301/ 5
Bachan Singh (Age 37 Years) vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 20 October, 2023
confers a right upon the accused to claim, a test identification parade. They do not constitute
substantive evidence and these parades are essentially governed by Section 162 of the Code. Failure
to hold a test identification parade would not make inadmissible the evidence of identification in
Court. The weight to be attached to such identification should be a matter for the Courts of fact. In
appropriate cases it may accept the evidence of identification even without insisting on
corroboration. (See Kanta Prashad v. Delhi Administration (AIR 1958 SC 350), Vaikuntam
Chandrappa and others v. State of Andhra Pradesh (AIR 1960 SC 1340), Budhsen and another v.
State of U.P. (AIR 1970 SC 1321) and Rameshwar Singh v. State of Jammu and Kashmir (AIR 1972
SC 102)."
12. From the foregoing analysis of law on the subject, it becomes clear that it is a rule of prudence to
generally look for corroboration of the sworn testimony of a witness in court as to identity of the
accused, who is stranger to him in the form of identification proceedings. It also becomes clear that
the evidence relating to test identification is corroborative in nature whereas the evidence of the
witness relating to identification of accused in court is a substantive piece of evidence. It is also
manifest that failure to hold a test identification parade would not make inadmissible the evidence
of identification in court. In appropriate cases, the court may accept the evidence of identification
even without insisting on corroboration.
13. In light of aforesaid legal position, let us know advert to the facts of the present case. It is not in
dispute that the accused /petitioner was unknown to the prosecution witnesses. It is also not in
dispute that no test identification parade of the petitioner has taken place during the investigation of
the case. The question that arises for consideration is whether the evidence relating to the identity of
the petitioner/accused in the form of his dock identification by the prosecution witnesses at the time
when they deposed in court without any corroboration in the form of evidence as to test
identification is sufficient to prove the identity of the accused/petitioner.
14. If we have a look at the statement of the star eye witness, PW Jasmeet Kour, the daughter in law
of the deceased, who accompanied her at the time of the accident when the deceased was crossing
the road, she has categorically stated that she identified the accused present in court. In her cross
examination, she has stated that after the accident, she caught hold of the petitioner/accused
brought him down from the Metadoor and slapped him. The defence has not cross examined the
witness so far as her statement regarding identity of the accused is concerned. Not even a suggestion
has been put by the defence that the accused was not driving the vehicle in question at the relevant
time. Another witness PW Vishnesh Kumar has also identified the accused at the time of making his
statement in the court. This witness has also not been cross examined by the defence on this aspect
of the matter. The only question that has been put to the witness in the cross examination in this
regard is whether he had seen the accused prior to the occurrence to which, he replied that he had
not seen him prior to the occurrence and that he saw him for the first time on the date of the
occurrence and thereafter, in the court. PW Bhopinder Singh another eye witness, who as per his
version, was also present at the place of occurrence, has also identified the accused as the person
who was driving the offending vehicle. He has in his cross examination stated that prior to the
occurrence also, he has seen the accused on a number of occasions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184135301/ 6
Bachan Singh (Age 37 Years) vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 20 October, 2023
15. From the aforesaid nature of evidence on record, it is clear that all the eye witnesses to the
occurrence have identified the accused in the court while making their statements. While PW
Jasmeet Kour and Vishnesh Kumar had no previous acquaintance with the petitioner, however, PW
Bhopinder Singh has stated that even prior to the occurrence, he had seen the petitioner a number
of times. It is also clear that the defence has not cross examined these witnesses in respect of their
statements regarding identity of the accused nor the defence has put any suggestion to the witnesses
to the effect that the accused was driving the vehicle in question at the relevant time.
16. Apart from the above, the petitioner/accused while making his statement under section 342
Cr.P.C. and explaining the incriminating evidence as regards the fact that he was driving the vehicle
in question at the relevant time has simply stated that the witnesses have deposed falsely. He has
not specifically taken a stand in his statement that he was not driving the offending vehicle at the
relevant time. Therefore, the statements of prosecution witnesses about the identity of the
petitioner/accused cannot be termed as unreliable in the absence of evidence relating to test
identification particularly when the accident had taken place in broad day light at about 11 AM and
the prosecution witnesses had full opportunity to see the accused.
17. According to PW Jasmeet Kour, she even brought down the petitioner from the Metadoor and
then slapped him. Therefore, her statement in the facts and circumstances about the identity of the
petitioner even in the absence of corroboration by way of evidence of test identification, cannot be
doubted. She being close relative of the deceased would not have falsely implicated the petitioner as
she was not having any reason to do so. Because of close relationship of the deceased, PW Jasmeet
Kour would be the most interested person to implicate the real culprit. Therefore, her evidence as
regards identity of the accused even without any corroboration deserves to be accepted. Keeping in
view the special circumstances attending the instant case as have been discussed hereinbefore, the
statements of prosecution witnesses as regards identity of the petitioner/accused even in the
absence of the test identification deserves to be accepted and no interference to the conclusions
drawn by the courts below in this regard is warranted in exercise of revisional jurisdiction.
18. The other contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner is with regard to the non
examination of the Investigating Officer. It has been contended by the learned counsel for the
petitioner that due to non examination of the Investigating Officer, a grave prejudice has been
caused to the petitioner inasmuch as he was deprived of the opportunity to effectively cross examine
the witnesses and to bring out contradictions. In this regard, the learned counsel for the petitioner
has relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Jamuna Choudhary vs State of
Bihar, (1974) 3 SCC 774 and the judgment of the High Court of Mysore in the case of J K Devaiya vs
State of Coorg, AIR 1956 Mysore 51.
19. First of all, it has to be noted that although it is desirable for the prosecution to examine the
Investigating Officer, yet non examination of the Investigating Officer does not in every case create
dent in the prosecution case. The Supreme Court in the case of Behari Prasad vs State of Bihar,
(1996) 2 SCC 317 held that for non examination of the Investigating Officer, the prosecution case
need not fail and it would not be correct to contend that if the Investigating Officer is not examined,
the entire case would fall to the ground as the accused were deprived of the opportunity to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184135301/ 7
Bachan Singh (Age 37 Years) vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir on 20 October, 2023
effectively to cross examine the witnesses and bring out contradictions. It was held that the case of
prejudice likely to be suffered must depend upon the facts of each case and no universal strait jacket
formula should be laid down that non examination of the Investigating Officer per se vitiates the
criminal trial.
20. In the case of Ambika Prasad vs State of Bihar AIR 2000 SC 718, it was held by the Supreme
Court that non examination of the Investigating Officer could not be a ground for disbelieving eye
witnesses. Again in the case of Behadur Naik vs State of Bihar, AIR 2000 SC 1582, it was held by the
Supreme Court that non examination of an Investigating Officer was of no consequence when it
could not be shown as to what prejudice had been caused to the accused by such non examination.
Similar view has been taken by the Supreme Court in the case Ram Ghulam Choudhary vs State of
Bihar AIR 2011 SC 2842.
21. Coming to the facts of the instant case, it is true that the prosecution has not examined the
Investigating Officer but it is also a fact that none of the prosecution witnesses including the eye
witnesses to the occurrence have been confronted with their previous statements made during the
investigation of the case nor any contradiction has been brought forth during their cross
examination. Therefore, non examination of the Investigating Officer in the instant case, would have
no effect on the prosecution case. An adverse inference could have been drawn against the
prosecution only if contradictions would have been brought forth during the cross examination of
the prosecution witnesses and for their proof by examination of the Investigating Officer. Since no
contradictions with the previous statements of the prosecution witnesses have been brought forth,
therefore, non examination of the Investigating Officer in the circumstances of the case is of no
consequence and it has not caused any prejudice to the petitioner/accused. The statements of the
eye witnesses to the occurrence in the circumstances of the case cannot be disbelieved only because
the Investigating Officer has not been examined. The contention of the petitioner is, therefore,
without any merit.
22. For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any illegality or irregularity having been committed by
the trial or the appellate court, while passing the impugned judgment of conviction and sentence
against the petitioner. Therefore, there is no ground to interfere in the judgments passed by the
courts below.
23. Accordingly, the revision petition is dismissed. The petitioner is directed to surrender before the
trial court within a period of 15 days from today, whereafter, the trial court shall send him to jail for
serving the balance sentence. In case, the petitioner does not surrender before the trial court within
the aforesaid period, the trial court shall take all necessary steps for execution of the sentence in
accordance with law.
24. A copy of this order be sent to the trial court as well as to the appellate court.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 20.10.2023 Rakesh Whether the order is speaking: Yes Whether
the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/184135301/ 8
