Balaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 July, 2019
Balaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 July, 2019
-1-
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH: BENCH AT
INDORE
S.B: HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE S.K.AWASTHI
CRIMINAL APPEAL No.553/2014
BALARAM S/O SALIGRAM DHAKAD & ONE ANOTHER
Vs.
STATE OF M.P
Shri Kshitij Vyas, Advocate for the appellants.
Shri Gaurav Verma, Public Prosecutor for the
respondent/State.
JUDGMENT
(Delivered on 27.07.2019) Appellants/accused have preferred this appeal under section 374 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short 'the Code') against the judgment dated 05.03.2014
passed by Additional Special Judge (NDPS Act), Garoth, district Mandsaur in Special Sessions Trial
No.21/2010 whereby the appellants have been convicted for the offence under section 8/18(b) of the
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (for short 'the NDPS Act') and sentenced to
undergo 10 years RI with fine of Rs.1.00 lakh each with further default stipulation.
2. Prosecution story in short was that on 26.03.2010 upon receiving a secret information that two
persons carrying opium are going on a motorcycle from Garoth to Ujjain through Boliya, the Station
House Officer, Garoth Sunil Khemriya intercepted the motorcycle and briefed them about the secret
information. During search, a total quantity of 3 kg. 50 gm. opium was recovered from the joint
possession of the appellants which was kept in a bag. After completion of necessary formalities,
Police arrested the appellants and registered FIR bearing crime No.95/2010 under section 8/18 of
the NDPS Act. After due investigation, charge sheet was filed.
3. Appellants/accused were charged for the offence under section 8/18(b) of the NDPS Act. They
abjured their guilt and took the plea that they have been falsely implicated in the crime. During trial,
prosecution examined as many as 15 witnesses and exhibited 31 documents in order to bring home
the charges against the appellants/accused. The appellants/accused have not examined any witness
in their defence.
4. Trial Court on appreciation of evidence adduced by the parties pronounced the judgment on
05.03.2014 and concluded that the appellants are liable to be convicted for the commission of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130426029/ 1
Balaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 July, 2019
aforesaid offence and sentenced them as stated herein above.
5. Learned counsel for the appellants has submitted that the prosecution has failed to establish its
case beyond reasonable doubt. It is also submitted that the mandatory provisions of section 42(2),
50, 52-A & 57 of the NDPS Act were not properly complied with and the trial Court has committed
grave error in recording conviction against the appellants. Thus, the impugned judgment is liable to
be set aside.
6. On the other hand, it is submitted by the learned Public Prosecutor that the trial Court on due
appreciation of evidence has recorded the conviction against the appellants and there is no merits in
the appeal filed by the appellants, hence the appeal deserves to be dismissed.
7. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
8. The point for determination is whether the conviction and sentence recorded by the trial Court is
contrary to the law and facts of the case.
9. As regards conviction recorded against the appellants under section 8/18(b) of the NDPS Act,
learned counsel for the appellants during the course of arguments has candidly conceded that from
the evidence led by the prosecution, it is quite clear that Police after duly complying the procedural
safeguards provided under the NDPS Act recovered the contraband opium from the possession of
the appellants, thus, rendering made liable under section 8/18(b) of the NDPS Act.
10. On an independent scrutiny of evidence, this Court does not find any infirmity in the conclusion
arrived at by the trial Court with regard to guilt of the appellants inasmuch as due consideration of
the depositions of the prosecution witnesses and various documents exhibited was made during
trial. It is beyond reasonable doubt that appellants were found in possession of the contraband and
that the same was recovered from them after duly complying with all the procedural safeguards
provided under the NDPS Act. Hence, in the considered opinion of this Court, trial Court has not
committed any error of law or facts in holding the appellants guilty for the offence under section
8/18(b) of the Act. Thus, no interference is called for in the findings of conviction recorded by the
trial Court.
11. So far as the question of sentence is concerned, the appellants have already completed more than
9 years and 3 months in custody. Considering the fact that minimum sentence of 10 years is
stipulated under section 8/18(b) of the NDPS Act, therefore, the jail sentence awarded to the
appellants for the aforesaid offence cannot be reduced. So far as the fine amount is concerned, the
appellants are directed to pay Rs.1.00 lakh each which is minimum prescribed for the aforesaid
offence and in default they are directed to suffer six months jail sentence. A prayer is made for
reduction of the aforesaid default sentence. Reliance in this connection is placed on the judgment of
the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Shantilal vs. State of M.P reported in (2007) 11 SCC 243.
Considering the case of Shantilal (supra) in which the Hon'ble Apex Court after considering the
provisions of sections 63 to 70 of IPC, section 30 of the Cr.P.C and relying upon various precedents
of Hon'ble the Apex Court and High Courts and referring the commentary of Ratanlal and Dhirajlal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130426029/ 2
Balaram vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 July, 2019
observed in para-39 as under:
"We are mindful and conscious that the present case is under the NDPS Act. Section
18 quoted above provides penalty for certain offences in relation to opium poppy and
opium. Minimum fine contemplated by the said provision is rupees one lakh ("fine
which shall not be less than one lakh rupees"). It is also true that the appellant has
been ordered to undergo substantive sentence of rigorous imprisonment for ten years
which is minimum. It is equally true that maximum sentence imposable on the
appellant is twenty years. The learned counsel for the State again is right in
submitting that Clause(b) of sub-section (1) of Section 30 CrPC authorises the court
to award imprisonment in default of payment of fine up to one-fourth term of
imprisonment which the court is competent to inflict as punishment for the offence.
But considering the circumstances placed before us on behalf of the appellant
accused that he is very poor;he is merely a carrier; he has to maintain his family;it
was his first offence; because of his poverty, he could not pay the heavy amount of
fine (rupees one lakh) and if he is ordered to remain in jail even after the period of
substantive sentence is over only because of his inability to pay fine, serious prejudice
his family members who are innocent. We are, therefore, of the view that though an
amount of payment of fine of rupees one lakh which is minimum as specified in
Section 18 of the Act cannot be reduced in view of the legislative mandate, ends of
justice would be met if we retain that part of the direction, but order that in default of
payment of fine of rupees one lakh, the appellant shall undergo rigorous
imprisonment for six months instead of three years as ordered by the trial court and
confirmed by the High Court."
12. In view of the principles laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court, this Court hereby reduces the
custodial sentence in default of payment of fine from six months RI to five months RI.
13. Resultantly, the present appeal is allowed in part. The conviction and sentence passed against
the appellants are hereby affirmed. However, while affirming the fine amount of Rs.1.00 lakh each,
the default sentence in payment of fine amount is reduced from six months RI to five months RI.
After completion of the sentence, the appellants shall be released forthwith unless required to be
detained in any other case.
14. A copy of this judgment be sent to the trial Court along with record for information and
compliance.
C.c as per rules.
(S.K.AWASTHI) JUDGE hk/ Date: 2019.07.31 16:21:04 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130426029/ 3
