Banke vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
Banke vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
Author: Ashutosh Srivastava
Bench: Ashutosh Srivastava
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:87387
Court No. - 68
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 9230 of 2025
Applicant :- Banke
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Mayank Bhushan Nath Tripathi
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Ashutosh Srivastava,J.
1. Heard Sri Mayank Bhushan Nath Tripathi, learned counsel for the applicant, Shri Shashank
Singh, Advocate, holding brief of learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the record of the case.
2. The present bail application under Section 483 BNSS has been filed on behalf of applicant, Banke,
with a prayer to release him on bail in Case Crime No. 502 of 2024, under Section 8/20 of Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985, Police Station- Akbarpur, District- Kanpur Nagar.
3. Learned counsel for the applicant has contended that as per prosecution version 4 Kg. of Charas is
alleged to have been recovered from the possession of the applicant. As per prosecution story, the
alleged incident took place on 26.10.2024 while Sub Inspector Sri Dev Narayan Dwivedi of police
station Akbarpur, District Kanpur Nagar was on duty, he received an information from the informer
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104336518/ 1
Banke vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
that one person is coming from Durwasha Ashram on Motorcycle with Charas. After receiving the
alleged information, S.I. Braj Kishor along with S.I. Abhishek Singh Chauhan and constable
Sarvendra Singh raided at village Banspurwa corssing Etawah near Kanpur Highway. After some
time, the applicant came by motorcycle and the police personnel stopped the motorcycle and caught
the applicant, and during search, the applicant stated that he is having 4 kg. of charas in his bag and
when the bag of the applicant was opened in which 8 packets of Charas wraped with yellow
polythene and also Rs. 210/- and one mobile were recovered from the possession of the applicant. In
fact no such recovery was effected from the applicant. It is further submitted that since such
recovery is not supported by independent witness, possibility of his false implication in the crime
cannot be ruled out. It is next contended that in the present case the prosecution has failed to follow
strictly the provisions as contained in the N.D.P.S. Act. It is also argued that the applicant is
absolutely innocent and has been falsely implicated in the present crime with a view to cause
unnecessary harassment and victimize him. The applicant, who is in jail since 26.10.2024 having no
criminal history to his credit, deserves to be released on bail. In case the applicant is released on bail
he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
4. Per contra learned A.G.A. has opposed the bail prayer of the applicant by contending that the
innocence of the applicant cannot be adjudged at pre trial stage who is involved in supplying
contraband, therefore, the applicant does not deserve any indulgence. In case the applicant is
released on bail he will again indulge in similar activity.
5. I have considered the rival submissions advanced by learned counsel for the parties and perused
the material available on record.
6. It is evident that during search contraband was alleged to be recovered from the conscious
possession of the applicant, which is more than commercial quantity.
7. So far as the contention of learned counsel for the applicant that the arresting officials did not
comply with the mandatory provisions of search and seizure of narcotics substance as per the
provisions of the NDPS Act is concerned, the Division Bench of Hon'ble the Apex Court in Criminal
Appeal No. 5544 of 2024 (Special Leave Petition (Crl.) No. 12120 of 2024) Narcotics Control Bureau
versus Kasif, decided on 20.12.2024 has held that sub-section (2) of Section 52A lays down the
procedure as contemplated in sub-section (1) thereof, and any lapse or delayed compliance thereof
would be merely a procedural irregularity which would neither entitle the accused to be released on
bail nor would vitiate the trial on that ground alone. The relevant portion of the aforesaid judgment
is as under:-
"39. The upshot of the above discussion may be summarized as under:
(i) The provisions of NDPS Act are required to be interpreted keeping in mind the
scheme, object and purpose of the Act; as also the impact on the society as a whole. It
has to be interpreted literally and not liberally, which may ultimately frustrate the
object, purpose and Preamble of the Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104336518/ 2
Banke vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
(ii) While considering the application for bail, the Court must bear in mind the
provisions of Section 37 of the NDPS Act which are mandatory in nature. Recording
of findings as mandated in Section 37 is sine qua non is known for granting bail to
the accused involved in the offences under the NDPS Act.
(iii) The purpose of insertion of Section 52A laying down the procedure for disposal
of seized Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances, was to ensure the early
disposal of the seized contraband drugs and substances. It was inserted in 1989 as
one of the measures to implement and to give effect to the International Conventions
on the Narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
(iv) Sub-section (2) of Section 52A lays down the procedure as contemplated in
sub-section (1) thereof, and any lapse or delayed compliance thereof would be merely
a procedural irregularity which would neither entitle the accused to be released on
bail nor would vitiate the trial on that ground alone.
(v) Any procedural irregularity or illegality found to have been committed in
conducting the search and seizure during the course of investigation or thereafter,
would by itself not make the entire evidence collected during the course of
investigation, inadmissible. The Court would have to consider all the circumstances
and find out whether any serious prejudice has been caused to the accused.
(vi) Any lapse or delay in compliance of Section 52A by itself would neither vitiate the
trial nor would entitle the accused to be released on bail. The Court will have to
consider other circumstances and the other primary evidence collected during the
course of investigation, as also the statutory presumption permissible under Section
54 of the NDPS Act."
8. In the light of the facts and circumstances of the present case, it would be inappropriate to discuss
the evidence in depth at this stage because it is likely to influence the trial of the accused. But, from
the perusal of the evidences, collected during investigation so far, prima facie, the involvement of
the accused in the present case cannot be ruled out. No reason is found to falsely implicate the
applicant/accused. Therefore, there is no good ground to release the applicant-accused on bail at
this stage. All the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the applicant pertain to the merits of
the case and the same cannot be considered while considering application for grant of bail. This
court is unable to form an opinion at this stage that the accused has not committed an offence.
9. In the ultimate conclusion, considering the facts and circumstances of the case, gravity of the
offence, severity of punishment, in my opinion, no case for bail is made out. Accordingly, the bail
application is hereby rejected.
10. It is clarified that the observations made regarding the bail application is limited to the decision
of the bail application and any observations made herein shall not effect the trial of the case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104336518/ 3
Banke vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
Order Date :- 1.5.2025 v.k.updh.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104336518/ 4
