Bank Of Baroda vs The State Of Karnataka on 6 January, 2023
Bank Of Baroda vs The State Of Karnataka on 6 January, 2023
Author: M.Nagaprasanna
Bench: M.Nagaprasanna
-1-
WP No. 6327 of 2022
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 6TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2023
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE M.NAGAPRASANNA
WRIT PETITION NO. 6327 OF 2022 (GM-RES)
BETWEEN:
1. BANK OF BARODA
(ERSTWHILE VIJAYA BANK)
A BODY CORPORATE CONSTITUTED BY
AND UNDER THE BANKING
COMPANIES (ACQUISITION AND
TRANSFER OF UNDERTAKINGS)
ACT, 1970, HAVING HEAD OFFICE
SITUATED AT BARODA BHAVAN
Digitally signed by
PADMAVATHI B K R C DUTT ROAD
Location: HIGH ALKAPURI VADODARA
COURT OF
KARNATAKA GUJARATH STATE
CORPORATE OFFICE AT
MUMBAI AND BRNACH OFFICE
AT MSRS NAGAR
BENGALURU 560 076
KARNATAKA
REPRESENTED BY ITS CHIEF MANAGER.
2. MR. SRINIDHI KASTURI
S/O KASTURI RANGACHAR
AGED ABOUT 41 YEARS
RESIDING AT NO.309
R.V.LAKSHMANA VILAS
2ND MAIN, 2ND CROSS
RAMANJANEYA NAGAR
-2-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104550951/ 1
Bank Of Baroda vs The State Of Karnataka on 6 January, 2023
WP No. 6327 of 2022
CHIKKALASANDRA, SUBRAMANYAPURA
BENGALURU - 560 061.
...PETITIONERS
(BY SRI.N.N.DAMODAR., ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. THE STATE OF KARNATAKA
REVENUE DEPARTMENT
MULTI STORIED BUILDING
DR.AMBEDKAR VEEDHI
BENGALURU 560 001
BY ITS SECRETARY.
2. THE DISTRICT REGISTRAR
JAYANAGAR DISTRICT
OFFICE AT NO.623, OLD NO.622
10TH 'C' MAIN ROAD
4TH BLOCK, JAYANAGAR
BENGALURU - 560 011.
3. THE SUB REGISTRAR
J.P.NAGAR
OFFICE AT NO.8, AMEET ARCADE
ANJANAPURA MAIN ROAD
AMRUTH NAGAR
ANJANDARI LAYOUT
KONANAKUNTE, BENGALURU - 560 062.
4. MRS. JYOTHI R.K
AGED ABOUT 42 YEARS
W/O MR.VENKATESH.
5. MR.VENKATESH
S/O SRI NARASIMHAIAH
-3-
WP No. 6327 of 2022
BOTH ARE RESIDING AT
NO.1643 -2, 40TH 'A' CROSS
ANUGRAHA LAYOUT
BTM LAYOUT 2ND STAGE
NEAR PRESIDENCY SCHOOL
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104550951/ 2
Bank Of Baroda vs The State Of Karnataka on 6 January, 2023
BENGALURU - 560 076.
6. SRI VENU GOPAL C.,
AGED ABOUT 47 YEARS
S/O GANGA NAIDU
R/AT FLAT NO.204
SRI VANDANA ORCHID, LAKSHMI STREET
1ST MAIN, NEAR T.R.HOSPITAL
KOTHANUR DINNE MAIN ROAD
J.P.NAGAR, VII PHASE
BENGALURU - 560 078.
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI.B.V.KRISHNA, AGA R1 TO R3;
SRI T.N.GOPALA GOWDA, ADVCOATE FOR R6
R4 AND R5 ARE SERVED)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226
AND 227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO
DIRECTION IN THE NATURE OF MANDAMUS TO THE R-2 AND 3
TO REGISTER THE SALE CERTIFICATE DTD. 29.11.2021
ISSUED BY THE P-1 BANK IN FAVOUR OF P-2 (ANNX-H) BY
TAKING REQUISITE STAMP DUTY AND REGISTRATION
CHARGES.
THIS WRIT PETITION, COMING ON FOR PRELIMINARY
HEARING IN 'B' GROUP, THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE
FOLLOWING:
-4-
WP No. 6327 of 2022
ORDER
The petitioners are before this Court seeking the following prayers:
"a) Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus to the Respondent
No.2 and 3 to register the Sale Certificate dated 29.11.2021 issued by the Petitioner
No.1 Bank in favour of Petitioner No.2 (Annexure-H) by taking requisite Stamp Duty
and Registration charges.
b) Issue any other writ, order or direction as this Hon'ble Court deems fit in the
circumstances of the case in the interest of justice and equity."
2. Heard Sri.N.N.Damodar, learned counsel appearing for petitioners, Sri.B.V.Krishna, learned
Additional Government Advocate appearing for respondents 1 to 3 and Sri.T.N.Gopalagowda,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104550951/ 3
Bank Of Baroda vs The State Of Karnataka on 6 January, 2023
learned counsel appearing for respondent No.6.
3. The issue in the lis lies in a narrow compass.
Respondent No.4 being the proprietor of one M/s.Balaji Glass and Plywood along with her husband
respondent No.5 ('Borrowers' for short) seek certain finances from the petitioner-Bank of Baroda
('Bank' for short). The borrowers default in payment. The Bank institutes proceedings under the
Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security Interest Act,
2002 ('SARFAESI Act' for short) after having declared the loan of borrowers to be a non-
performing asset. After such declaration, it transpires that the 6th respondent files a civil suit in
O.S.No.4338 of 2020 in which the borrowers are the defendants and the concerned Court passes an
order directing the borrowers not to alienate the property.
4. The issue now would be whether the Bank who is the secured creditor could initiate proceedings
under the SARFAESI Act to redeem its secured credit i.e., the property that is in mortgage or will
have to await the decision of the Civil Court in which admittedly the Bank is not a party. Therefore,
the issue that is to be considered is, whether the order of injunction of the Civil Court granted in
favour of an agreement holder (plaintiff), against the borrowers would operate as an embargo upon
the Bank to take the proceedings under the SARFAESI Act to its logical end.
5. The issue need not detain this Court for long or delve deep into the matter, as the Division bench
of the High Court of Punjab and Haryana while answering a similar issue in the case of
ALLAHABAD BANK V. DISTRICT MAGISTRATE, LUDHIANA1 has held as follows:
"ISSUE NO.2 [16] The next issue which comes up for consideration is whether the
petitioner bank secured creditor would be bound by an order passed by a Civil Court
in a lis inter se between parties pertaining to the secured asset, not having impleaded
the secured creditor? Learned State Counsel has argued that even though the bank is
not a party in the said civil suits, but since the Court has restrained interference in
the possession of the plaintiff therein, therefore taking over physical possession at the
instance of the bank would amount to infringement of the interim stay orders. In
other words, the argument is that the interim stay order in favor of the plaintiff would
bind even the bank even if it is not a party to the civil suit.
[17] We do not find merit in the aforesaid argument. It has been noticed above, that
admittedly in none of the two civil suits, the bank is a party defendant. The first civil
suit is filed by a plaintiff tenant and the relief so claimed is also restricted therein to
the defendant landlord and not against the bank. Not only thus, the interim order
dined 13.07.2018 clarifies that the said injunction would not be applicable to third
parties which are not impleaded in the said civil suit. The relevant portion of the
order dated 13.07.2018 is extracted as under-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104550951/ 4
Bank Of Baroda vs The State Of Karnataka on 6 January, 2023
CM No.3178-CWP of 2021 in CWP No.4916 of 2020 disposed on 06.09.2021 "8.
Before parting with this under, it is hereby made clear that due compliance of Order
39 Rule CPC be made forthwith and copy of this order also given for effecting service
upon the defendant on filing of PF, RC and copies of documents immediately, failing
which, this order shall cease to have its effect. it is further made clear that nothing
contained herein shall be construed so as to effect the rights of other parties, who are
not formally arrayed as a party in the present suit."
[Emphasis supplied) It is thus more than clear, that the Civil Court in its order has clearly restricted
the applicability of the interim protection only to the parties to the said suit. Since the bank is not a
party to the said suit as yet and there is no specific restraint order against the bank, the said order,
could not have been treated to have restrained respondents Nos.1 to 3 or the bank to take physical
possession of the secured asset, as none of them have been restrained by virtue of the aforesaid
order.
[18] Even otherwise, it is well settled that any order passed by the Civil Court, would bind only
those, who are arrayed as a party in the said civil suit Rights of a third party who is not a party to the
civil suit cannot be said be adversely effected by an order passed by the civil Court in such a suit,
unless specifically impleaded in a representative capacity. Hon'ble Supreme Court in Bengal Ambuja
Housing Development Ltd. V/s Promila Sanfui 2016 (1) SCC 743 held in Para 18 and 19 as under:
"18. Further, in the instant case the under of temporary injunction dated 03.07.2006
was purportedly granted by consent is also not sustainable in law The question of
consent be given in either the appellant Housing Board or the predecessors in
interest who ore its vendors did not arise as they were not parties to the said suit. It is
a well settled principle of law that either temporary or permanent injunction can be
granted only against the parties to a suit. Further the purported consent order in
terms of Order XXXIX of the Code of Civil Procedure is only binding as against the
parties to the suit. In such a case, the order of the Subordinate Judge to grant police
protection against the appellant Housing Board which is enjoying the property is
erroneous in law and is liable to be set aside.
19. The original owner in the instant case, late Gangadas Pal was an intermediary in
khas possession of the land in question in terms of Section 6 of the West Bengal
Estates Acquisition Act, 1953. Thus, the learned Subordinate Judge did not have the
jurisdiction to entertain any suit with respect to the said property, in light of the
provision of Section 57B (2)(a), (b) and (c) of the West Bengal Estates Acquisition
Act, 1953, which states as under:
"578. Bar to jurisdiction of Civil Court in respect of certain matters-
Xxxxx (2) No Civil Court shall entertain any suit or application concerning any land
or any estate, or any right in such estate, if it relates to...
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104550951/ 5
Bank Of Baroda vs The State Of Karnataka on 6 January, 2023
a. alteration of any entry in the record-of- rights finally published, revised, made, corrected or
modified under any of the provisions of Chapter V. b. a dispute involving determination of the
question, either expressly or by implication, whether a raiyat, or an intermediary, is or is not entitled
to retain under the provisions of this Act such land or estate or right in such estate, as the case may
be, or c. any matter which under any of the provisions of this Act is to be, or has already been,
enquired into, decided, dealt with or determined by the State Government or any authority specified
therein."
In view of the fact that the right, title and interest upon the disputed property has been settled in
favour of the vendors of the appellant Housing Board, who are the legal heirs of the late Gangadas
Pal, who was an intermediary of the land in question in terms of Section 6 of the West Bengal
Estates Acquisition Act, 1953, adding of the property in question to the suit schedule property in
dispute cannot be the subject matter of partition in view of the express provisions of the West
Bengal Estates Acquisition Act, 1953 which excludes the jurisdiction of the civil Court in respect of
any rights in such estate as entry in record of rights is published. In the instant case, the names of
the heirs of late Gangadas Pal were included in the record of rights in pursuance of the order passed
in the Writ Petitions in connection with the Big Raiyat Case No. 5 of 1967, which order was affirmed
by this Court in the case of Sulekha Pal, referred to supra.
[Emphasis supplied) It thus clear that an order passed in a civil dispute would hind only those who
are impleaded in the suit. The argument of the learned counsel for the applicants / respondent Nos.
1 and 3, that the civil court order would still bind the bank even if it is not a party to the suit,
therefore cannot sustain.
[19] Still further, we find that the instant issue is squarely covered in favor of non-applicant /
petitioner
- 10 -
Bank by a Division Bench judgment of this Court in the case of Punjab and Sind Bank Vs District
Magistrate Mohali bearing CWP No. 13068 of 2014 decided on 22.12.2014. In the cited case, the
bank was denied assistance to take physical possession of a secured asset under Section 14 of the
Securitisation Act, 2002 by the District Magistrate on the ground that a civil suit has been filed by
an occupant of a part of the secured asset, and the Civil Court has granted interim stay against the
defendant/landlord. Consequently, the District Magistrate contended that the tenant cannot be
evicted even though the bank may not have been a party in the said civil suit. While rejecting the
argument of the respondent (District Magistrate), the Division Bench held as under:
"We find that the following three questions are required to be adjudicated upon:
(1) What is the effect of the order of status quo granted by the Civil Judge (Junior
Division), Mohali on 15.04.2013 in a civil suit tilted "M/s Eclat Institute of
Hospitality Management & another Vs. Hotel Ashiana & others for permanent
injunction restraining the defendants from interfering in the peaceful running of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104550951/ 6
Bank Of Baroda vs The State Of Karnataka on 6 January, 2023
plaintiff institute in the premises of Hotel Mare Royale. The order dated 15.04.2013
read as under:
"Counsel for the plaintiff suffered a statement that plain shall not make fresh
admission in the garb of the stay order and if any admission is made, it shall not be
utilized to agitate grant of interim injunction. Now to come up for filing written
statement on 29.04.2013, in the meantime, the parties shall maintain status quo ante
regarding the possession over the suit property at the time of filing of suit."
(2) What is the effect of attachment proceedings initiated by the Tax Recovery Officer pursuant to
demands of Rs.1,62,92,047/- in terms of the order of the Settlement Commission?
- 11 -
(3) Whether the affidavit in support of application under Section 14 of the SARFAESI Act is a forged
and fabricated document?
Having heard learned counsel for the parties at length, we find that the interim order passed by the
Civil Court on 15.04.2013 relates to running of the plaintiff - M/s Eclat Institute of Hospitality
Management in the premises of the Hotel Marc Royale. The stand of the borrower is that the said
Institute was given permission to run hospitality management on leave and license basis in
pursuance of Memorandum of Arrangement dated 04.06.2008. The plaintiff - Institute in the said
suit has claimed limited relief against forcible dispossession in respect of premises in its possession
for carrying on the Hospitality Management Institute. The Bank is not a party to such suit. The
order of status quo passed in the said suit does not affect the rights of the mortgagee to take
possession of the property mortgage. The rights of the person in possession is subject to the rights of
the owner to be adjudicated upon in accordance with law. But the said order of status quo cannot be
made a shield to deny the right of recovery of possession to the Bank being a secured creditor.
Therefore, the order of status quo has been wrongly made basis by the Additional District
Magistrate to deny the right of possession to the Bank. The Bank is entitled to the possession of the
mortgaged property subject to the rights of the plaintiff in the suit.
Xxxxxx xxxxxx Reliance of Mr. Ratta on a judgment of Gujarat High Court in Manjudevi R. Somani
Vs. Union of India decided on 25.11.2013 is not tenable. In the said case, the borrower challenged an
order passed in the proceedings under Section 14 of the SARFAESI Act. It was found that the Chief
- 12 -
Metropolitan Magistrate or Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate have not been authorized to
exercise the powers conferred under Section 14 of the Act. Thus, we find that the dues of the Income
Tax Department, in these circumstances, will have preference amongst only the unsecured creditors,
but the Bank as a secured creditor has a priority over the assets of the borrower."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104550951/ 7
Bank Of Baroda vs The State Of Karnataka on 6 January, 2023
[Emphasis supplied] [20] While applying the aforesaid principles to the facts of the present case, it
is clear that since the petitioner bank is not a party to either of the civil suits which have been
referred to by respondents Nos. 1 and 3, the interim orders passed therein would not effect the
rights of the petitioner. In view of conspicuous absence of the bank in the civil suit, the Civil Court in
both the above referred matters shall be construed to be adjudicating the dispute involved between
the two private parties in suit and not with respect to the entitlement of the petitioner-secured
creditor to enforce the secured asset, even though the suit may involve rights upon
secured/mortgaged asset.
[21] Apart from having examined broad legal principles, it would now be relevant to deal with the
respective orders passed in each of the two civil suits, which are being treated as legal impediment
by the Applicant/ Respondent No. 1 to 3 to deny assistance to the petitioner bank under Section 14
of the Act, 2002. The first civil suit, is filed by the plaintiff claiming itself to be a tenant in the
secured asset. In our view the same cannot be treated to be a legal impediment for the secured
creditor to enforce it claim, for the following reasons:-
(i) The relief claimed in the suit is only against the defendant/landlord and no relief
has been claimed by the plaintiff therein against the petitioner bank.
- 13 -
(ii) Secured Creditor - Petitioner Bank is not a party to the civil suit and hence no order can
adversely effect its rights.
(iii) There is no prayer for seeking an injunction against the secured creditor by the plaintiff / tenant
for enforcement of security interest (nor such a prayer could be maintainable before the Civil Court).
(iv) If the plaintiff / tenant would have been aggrieved of the action of the secured creditor/bank to
take physical possession. the remedy was to approach the DRT under Section 17(4-A) of the Act,
2002.
[22] As regards the second civil suit is concerned, we find that the order of attachment before
judgment passed under Order 38 Rule 5 CPC, would also not effect the rights of the secured
creditor/petitioner to take physical possession for the following reasons:
(i) Firstly, in terms of Section at of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 undisputedly
attachment vide order dated: 03.09.2019, is subsequent to the mortgage already
having been created upon the secured asset in favor of the secured creditor and hence
cannot have preference over the prior charge of mortgage in favor of the secured
creditor [see para 27.5 of Kamla Engg & Steel Industries V/s. Punjab National Bank
2020 (4) PLR 669].
(ii) Secondly, an act of attachment amounts to creation of an unsecured charge which
is always subject to charges already created prior in time, especially a prior secured
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104550951/ 8
Bank Of Baroda vs The State Of Karnataka on 6 January, 2023
charge upon a property.
(iii) Thirdly, the effect of attachment is only to create a charge in order to restrain the
owner from dealing with the property and hence cannot in any way be equated with
an injunction against a secured creditor (who even otherwise
- 14 -
is not a party defendant in the civil suit) to enforce a security already created in its favor.
(iv) Fourthly, as noticed above, keeping in view the jurisdiction of the Civil Court as discussed above,
proceedings before civil Court cannot be treated to be an adjudication of the rights of the secured
creditor, for which aggrieved party is to approach the DRT.
(V) Even otherwise, it is not understandable as to how property/secured asset concededly owned by
Sh. Anuj Kapoor (guarantor in Securitisation proceedings) could be got attached for the dues
recoverable from the defendant No. 1 company M/s Creative Yarn Pvt. Ltd. which a separate juristic
person.
[23] Further, since the scope of adjudication before the Civil Court would not involve determination
of any right of a secured creditor on account of lack of jurisdiction in view of Section 17 read with
Section 34 of the Act, 2002, no order passed by the Civil Court could be construed to be a restraint
order on the secured creditor to enforce us security under the provisions of the Securitisation Act,
2002. This is subject to an exception that unless the secured creditor is specifically impleaded as a
party defendant and an interim order is passed specifically restraining the secured creditor to
enforce the security interest. We hasten to add, that the maintainability of such suit, would still have
to be tested on the principles as noticed above.
[24] For the reasons stated aforesaid, we thus hold, that none of the two orders passed by the Ld.
Civil Court i.e. dated 13.07.2018/07.11.2019 and 03.09.2019 passed in "Nalanda Woolens Ltd. Vis
Anuj Kapoor" and "Nalanda Spinners Ltd. V/S Creative Yarn Pvt. Ltd.", respectively could have been
treated to have restrained the petitioner bank or Respondent No. 1 or 3 to enforce the secured assets
under the provisions of the Securitisation Act, 2002."
- 15 -
The issue before the Division Bench was identical to the issue in the case at hand. The Civil Court
therein has granted certain orders which came in the way of the Bank enforcing their secured assets.
The Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana High Court has answered the issue in favour of the Bank
holding that the order passed by the Civil Court in which the Bank was not a party will not come in
the way of the Bank exercising its right under the Act.
6. The issue in the case at hand is, when the Bank sought to register the property which was subject
matter of auction, before the jurisdictional sub-registrar in favour of the 2nd petitioner, it is turned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104550951/ 9
Bank Of Baroda vs The State Of Karnataka on 6 January, 2023
down on the ground that the Civil Court has granted an order of injunction directing the defendants
therein ie., the borrowers herein, not to alienate the property.
The issue being answered by the Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana Court, to which I am in
respectful agreement of, I deem it appropriate to pass the following:
- 16 -
ORDER
(i) Writ Petition is allowed.
(ii) Mandamus issues to the 3rd respondent Sub-
Registrar to register the documents that is brought before it by the 1st petitioner-Bank, in
accordance with law.
Sd/-
JUDGE BKP
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/104550951/ 10
