Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 11.10.2023
Pronounced on : 20.10.2023
CM (M) No. 193/2023
1. Bansi Lal, age 75 years, S/o .....Petitioners/Appellants
Fajan Ram, R/o Barnai, Tehsil
and District, Jammu.
Through: Mr. R. S. Thakur, Sr. Advocate with
R.
Mr. Vasharan Thakur, Advocate
Vs
1. Hans Raj, S/o Malooka Ram
2. Naveen Kumar S/o Babu Ram
3. Om Parkash, S/o Malooka Ram
4. Vikas Pankaj, S/o Hans Raj
-All residents of Barnai, Tehsil and
District Jammu.
..... Respondents
Through: Mr. Parveen Kapahi, Advocate
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1) The petitioner has challenged order dated 22.02.2023 passed by the learned 2nd Additional
Munsiff, Jammu (hereinafter to be referred as "the trial court"), whereby in a suit for permanent
prohibitory injunction filed by him against the respondents, the learned trial court has dismissed
the application of the petitioner for grant of temporary injunction. Challenge has also been thrown
to order dated 15.09.2023 passed by the learned Principal District Judge, Jammu (hereinafter to be
referred as "the appellate court"), whereby appeal filed against the aforesaid order passed by the
trial court, has been dismissed.
2) It appears that the petitioner/plaintiff has filed a suit for permanent prohibitory injunction
restraining the respondents/defendants from dealing in any manner or interfering in his possession
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192734968/ 1
Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
over the land measuring 1 kanal 8 ½ marlas, comprised in khasra No. 427, situated at Barnai
Jammu, which according to the plaintiff, is underneath his residential house, kitchen garden and
compound. Alongwith the suit, the plaintiff also filed an application for grant of temporary
injunction.
3) As per case of the plaintiff, he is owner in possession of land measuring 1 kanal 8 ½ marlas falling
under khasra No.427, situated at Barnai Jammu, as the same has devolved upon him from his
ancestors. It has been pleaded by the plaintiff that his residential house is situated on the aforesaid
land and there is a kitchen garden and compound appurtenant to the said house. There is a road
alongside the suit property measuring 136'-9"
X 12'-2", which belongs to the plaintiff but the same has been left for passage to the
land of the defendants, who have otherwise no access. It has also been pleaded that
the plaintiff is in settled possession of the land in question for the last three decades
and the defendants have no right, title or interest in the said land.
4) It has been alleged in the plaint that the defendants are trying to interfere in the
plaintiff's possession over the suit land and Tehsildar Jammu North while acting on
an application of the defendants, passed an order on 13.11.2019, whereby Naib
Tehsildar, Muthi was directed to demarcate the land. This, according to the plaintiff,
has given a handle to the defendants to play mischief on spot. An application was
made by the plaintiff to the Tehsildar North, Jammu on 20.08.2020, whereby actual
facts were brought to the notice of the said authority and a request was made for
recalling of order dated 13.11.2019 but the Tehsildar did not consider the said
application of the plaintiff. It has also been pleaded by the plaintiff that the
defendants in connivance with the revenue officials are trying to interfere in the suit
land.
5) The respondents/defendants contested the suit by filing their written statement. It
has been pleaded by the defendants that land comprised in khasra No. 427 min,
situated at Barnai Jammu does not belong to the plaintiff. According to the
defendants, the land belonging to the plaintiff is comprised in khasra No. 413,
situated at Barnai Jammu. It has been further pleaded that the defendants
approached Tehsildar North Jammu for delivery of possession of the land measuring
8.5 marlas comprised in khasra No. 427 situated at Barnai, Jammu and the
Tehsildar, after holding an inquiry and seeking report from the concerned Patwari,
reported that the predecessor-in-
interest of the defendants was owner of the suit property and after his death, mutation of
inheritance bearing No. 1268 Jeem has been attested in favour of the defendants. It is pleaded that
the defendants became owner of the land measuring 3 kanals and 2.5 marlas under khasra No. 427,
whereas on spot they are in possession of only 2 kanals and 10 marlas of land. Thus, leaving a deficit
of 12.5 marlas of land, out of which the defendants are stated to have surrendered 4 marlas of land
for use of common pathway, to be utilized by both the parties, whereas rest of the land 8.5 marlas
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192734968/ 2
Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
has been encroached upon by the plaintiff and one Vijay Kumar.
6) It has been pleaded by the defendants that during demarcation proceedings, it was admitted by
the plaintiff that in case the land in question is found in his occupation, he is ready to hand over the
same to the defendants and accordingly, the application for demarcation was disposed of by the
Tehsildar North Jammu on 13.11.2019 directing the field staff to demarcate the land. It has further
been pleaded by the defendants that the plaintiff has nothing to do with the suit land and that there
is no material on record to suggest that he is the owner of the land in question. According to the
defendants, the plaintiff is an illegal occupant of the land in question, as such, no injunction can be
granted in his favour.
7) The learned trial court on the basis of the pleadings and documents on record observed that the
plaintiff has failed to prima facie show that he has a right as an owner to be in possession of land
comprised in khasra No. 427, situated at Barnai, Jammu. On this basis, the trial court has refused to
pass a temporary injunction in favour of the plaintiff. Aggrieved by this order, the petitioner filed a
Civil Miscellaneous Appeal before the Court of learned Principal District Judge, Jammu, who vide
impugned judgment dated 15.09.2023 dismissed the appeal of the petitioner. The learned Appellate
Court while passing the impugned order observed that prima facie the material available on record
goes on to show that the plaintiff has not been able to carve out a strong case for grant of interim
injunction because plaintiff's possession on the face of record is that of an un-authorized occupant,
which cannot be protected.
8) The petitioner has challenged the impugned orders passed by the Courts below on the ground
that as per the own admission of the defendants the plaintiff is in possession of land measuring 8.5
marlas comprised in khasra No. 427 and as such, his possession was required to be protected till the
rights of the parties would have been decided by the trial court after trial of the case. It has been
contended that the possession of the plaintiff over the suit property could not have been termed
unauthorized without determination of his right to possess the land in question, particularly when
the plaintiff has clearly pleaded that he is in possession of the said land as an owner having devolved
upon him from his ancestors. It has been contended that the petitioner is in settled possession of the
suit land for the past several decades, as such, he is entitled to grant of injunction even against the
true owner. Reliance in this regard has been placed on the judgments of the Supreme Court in the
case Krishna Ram Mahale (dead) vs. Mrs. Shobha Ventat Rao, AIR 1989 SC 2097 and Ram Rattan
and Ors. vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, 1997 SCC (1) 188.
9) I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case including the
impugned order passed by the trial court and the appellate court.
10) Both the Courts below have come to the conclusion that the plaintiff has been unable to carve
out a prima facie case in his favour. The question in the circumstances of the case that falls for
determination is as to whether prima facie findings of both the Courts below on this aspect of the
matter are so perverse in nature that would warrant interference of this Court in its supervisory
jurisdiction.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192734968/ 3
Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
11) While passing an order of interim injunction, the Court is required to meticulously analyse the
pleadings and the documents filed by the parties. The Supreme Court has, in the case of Maria
Margarida Sequeria Fernandes and others v Erasmo Jack de Sequeria (Dead) through LRs, (2012) 5
SCC 3070 while emphasizing the importance of pleadings and discussing the classes of possession,
observed as under:
"53. Pleadings are the foundation of litigation. In pleadings, only the necessary and
relevant material must be included and unnecessary and irrelevant material must be
excluded. Pleadings are given utmost importance in similar systems of adjudication,
such as, the United Kingdom and the United States of America.
54. In the United Kingdom, after the Woolf Report, Civil Procedure Rules, 1998 were
enacted. Rule 3.4(2) has some relevance and the same is reproduced as under:
(2) The Court may strike out a statement of case if it appears to the Court -
(a) that the statement of case discloses no reasonable grounds for bringing or
defending the claim;
(b) that the statement of case is an abuse of the Court's process or is otherwise likely
to obstruct the just disposal of the proceedings; or
(c) that there has been a failure to comply with a rule, practice direction or Court
order.
55. In so far as denials are concerned, Rule 16.5 provides that where the defendant denies an
allegation, he must state his reasons for doing so, and if he intends to put forward a different version
of events from that given by the plaintiff, he must state his own version.
56. The various practice directions and prescribed forms give an indication of the particulars
required. In fact, the 1998 Rules go further and provide for summary judgment. Rule 24.2 of the
Civil Procedure Rules, 1998 reads as under:
24.2 The Court may give summary judgment against a claimant or Defendant on the
whole of a claim or on a particular issue if-
(a) it considers that-
(i) that claimant has no real prospect of succeeding on the claim or issue; or
(ii) that defendant has no real prospect of successfully defending the claim or issue;
and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192734968/ 4
Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
(b) there is no other compelling reason why the case or issue should be disposed of at
a trial.
57. After enactment of the Civil Procedure Rules 1998, much greater emphasis is given on pleadings
in the United Kingdom. Similarly, in the United States of America, much greater emphasis is given
on pleadings, particularly after two well known decisions of the US Supreme Court, viz., Bell Atlantic
Corporation et al. v. William Twombly [550 U.S. 544, 127 S.Ct. 1955] and John. D. Ashcroft, Former
Attorney General, et al. v. Javaid Iqbal et al. [556 U.S. 662, 129 S.Ct.1937].
58. In Bell Atlantic (supra), the Court has observed that factual allegations must be enough to raise a
right to relief above the speculative level. The pleadings must contain something more than a
statement of facts that merely creates a suspicion of a legally cognizable right of action.
59. In Ashcroft (supra) the majority Judges of the U. S. Supreme Court observed as under:
"Threadbare recitals of the elements of a cause of action, supported by mere
conclusory statements, do not suffice. Although for the purposes of a motion to
dismiss we must take all of the factual allegations in the complaint as a true, we are
not bound to accept as true a legal conclusion couched as a factual allegation ... ... ...
only a complaint that states a plausible claim for relief survives a motion to dismiss."
60. The aforementioned two decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court re-emphasized and reiterated the
importance of pleadings.
61. In civil cases, pleadings are extremely important for ascertaining the title and possession of the
property in question.
62. Possession is an incidence of ownership and can be transferred by the owner of an immovable
property to another such as in a mortgage or lease. A licensee holds possession on behalf of the
owner.
63. Possession is important when there are no title documents and other relevant records before the
Court, but, once the documents and records of title come before the Court, it is the title which has to
be looked at first and due weightage be given to it. Possession cannot be considered in vacuum.
64. There is a presumption that possession of a person, other than the owner, if at all it is to be
called possession, is permissive on behalf of the title-holder. Further, possession of the past is one
thing, and the right to remain or continue in future is another thing. It is the latter which is usually
more in controversy than the former, and it is the latter which has seen much abuse and misuse
before the Courts.
65. A suit can be filed by the title holder for recovery of possession or it can be one for ejectment of
an ex-lessee or for mandatory injunction requiring a person to remove himself or it can be a suit
under Section 6 of the Specific Relief Act to recover possession.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192734968/ 5
Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
66. A title suit for possession has two parts - first, adjudication of title, and second, adjudication of
possession. If the title dispute is removed and the title is established in one or the other, then, in
effect, it becomes a suit for ejectment where the defendant must plead and prove why he must not
be ejected.
67. In an action for recovery of possession of immovable property, or for protecting possession
thereof, upon the legal title to the property being established, the possession or occupation of the
property by a person other than the holder of the legal title will be presumed to have been under and
in subordination to the legal title, and it will be for the person resisting a claim for recovery of
possession or claiming a right to continue in possession, to establish that he has such a right. To put
it differently, wherever pleadings and documents establish title to a particular property and
possession is in question, it will be for the person in possession to give sufficiently detailed
pleadings, particulars and documents to support his claim in order to continue in possession.
68. In order to do justice, it is necessary to direct the parties to give all details of pleadings with
particulars. Once the title is prima facie established, it is for the person who is resisting the title
holder's claim to possession to plead with sufficient particularity on the basis of his claim to remain
in possession and place before the Court all such documents as in the ordinary course of human
affairs are expected to be there. Only if the pleadings are sufficient, would an issue be struck and the
matter sent to trial, where the onus will be on him to prove the averred facts and documents.
69. The person averring a right to continue in possession shall, as far as possible, give a detailed
particularized specific pleading along with documents to support his claim and details of subsequent
conduct which establish his possession.
70. It would be imperative that one who claims possession must give all such details as enumerated
hereunder. They are only illustrative and not exhaustive.
(a) who is or are the owner or owners of the property;
(b) title of the property;
(c) who is in possession of the title documents
(d) identity of the claimant or claimants to possession;
(e) the date of entry into possession;
(f) how he came into possession - whether he purchased the property or inherited or got the same in
gift or by any other method;
(g) in case he purchased the property, what is the consideration; if he has taken it on rent, how
much is the rent, license fee or lease amount;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192734968/ 6
Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
(h) If taken on rent, license fee or lease-then insist on rent deed, license deed or lease deed;
(i) who are the persons in possession/occupation or otherwise living with him, in what capacity; as
family members, friends or servants etc.;
(j) subsequent conduct, i.e., any event which might have extinguished his entitlement to possession
or caused shift therein; and
(k) basis of his claim that not to deliver possession but continue in possession.
71. Apart from these pleadings, the Court must insist on documentary proof in support of the
pleadings. All those documents would be relevant which come into existence after the transfer of
title or possession or the encumbrance as is claimed. While dealing with the civil suits, at the
threshold, the Court must carefully and critically examine pleadings and documents.
72. The Court will examine the pleadings for specificity as also the supporting material for
sufficiency and then pass appropriate orders.
73. Discovery and production of documents and answers to interrogatories, together with an
approach of considering what in ordinary course of human affairs is more likely to have been the
probability, will prevent many a false claims or defences from sailing beyond the stage for issues.
74. If the pleadings do not give sufficient details, they will not raise an issue, and the Court can reject
the claim or pass a decree on admission.
75. On vague pleadings, no issue arises. Only when he so establishes, does the question of framing
an issue arise. Framing of issues is an extremely important stage in a civil trial. Judges are expected
to carefully examine the pleadings and documents before framing of issues in a given case.
76. In pleadings, whenever a person claims right to continue in possession of another property, it
becomes necessary for him to plead with specificity about who was the owner, on what date did he
enter into possession, in what capacity and in what manner did he conduct his relationship with the
owner over the years till the date of suit. He must also give details on what basis he is claiming a
right to continue in possession. Until the pleadings raise a sufficient case, they will not constitute
sufficient claim of defence.
77. Dr. Arun Mohan in his classic treatise on "Justice, Courts and Delays" has dealt with these
fundamental principles of law exhaustively."
12) From the afore-quoted observations of the Supreme Court, it is clear that the pleadings and
documents filed by the parties play a vital role in determination of the fate of an application for
grant of interim relief and for deciding the question of possession of the suit property. The Court has
also drawn a distinction between different classes of possession and it has been laid down that one
who claims possession has to give all the relevant details and he has to disclose the basis of his claim
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192734968/ 7
Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
to continue in possession.
13) In light of the aforesaid legal position, let us now have a look at the pleadings of the parties and
the documents placed on record by them before the trial court. The plaintiff claims that he is owner
in possession of the suit land i.e. land measuring 1 kanal 8 ½ marlas in khasra No. 427, situated at
Barnai Jammu. In this regard, he is relying upon mutation No. 2397, khasra girdawari of Rabi 1971
and site plan of his house. So far as mutation No. 2397 is concerned, a perusal of the extracts of the
mutation placed on record by the plaintiff shows that the same does not pertains to khasra No. 427,
it pertain to several other khasra numbers. Copy of khasra girdawari placed on record by the
plaintiff also does not pertain to land under khasra No. 427, but it pertains to the land under khasra
No. 711/413. The site plan placed on record by the plaintiff pertains to construction of his house on
khasra No. 711/413 at Lower Barnai Jammu. Even the site plan does not pertain to the land under
khasra No. 427, which is subject matter of the suit. Thus, the plaintiff has not placed on record even
a single document that would go on to support his right of possession over the suit land.
14) As against this, the defendants have placed on record copies of khasra girdawaries for kharief
2017, Rabi 2018 and kharief 2021, which show that they are in possession of the suit land. The
defendants have also placed on record copy of mutation dated 12.02.2014, which shows that the
land in question has been mutated in the name of defendants. The defendants have further placed
on record copy of report of the concerned Patwari, which also goes on to indicate that the
defendants are owner of the land measuring 3 kanals 2 ½ marlas in khasra No. 427, out of which,
they are in possession of 2 kanals and 10 marlas, whereas 4 marlas of land has been surrendered by
them for pathway. The report further indicates that the plaintiff is in unauthorised occupation of 8.5
marlas of land under the same khasra number. Thus, the stand taken by the defendants in their
pleadings is clearly substantiated by the documents placed on record by them.
15) It has been contended by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the plaintiff that as per own
admission of the defendants, the plaintiff is in possession of 8.5 marlas of the suit land. Therefore,
his possession was required to be protected by the trial court till the rights of the parties are
determined upon trial of the case.
16) It is true that the defendants have admitted that the plaintiff is in possession of 8.5 marlas of suit
land but in order to defend his possession, it was incumbent upon the plaintiff to support his right to
remain in possession with pleadings substantiated by the relevant documents. This was obligatory
for the plaintiff in view of the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in the case Maria Margarida
Sequeria Fernandes and others v Erasmo Jack de Sequeria (Dead) (supra). In the instant case, as
already stated, the plaintiff has miserably failed to produce even a single document in support of his
claim of right to possess the property in question. In the face of the pleadings and documents placed
on record by the defendants, prima facie, it appears that the plaintiff does have any right to possess
the property in question. In these circumstances, the learned Appellate Court has rightly observed
that it was incumbent upon the plaintiff to seek an appropriate relief in the suit so as to remove the
cloud upon his right to possess the property in question. A suit for injunction simpliciter prima facie
was not be the proper approach for the plaintiff to adopt.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192734968/ 8
Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
17) So far as judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Krishna Ram Mahale (dead) vs. Mrs.
Shobha Ventat Rao (supra) is concerned, the ratio laid down in the said case cannot be made
applicable to the instant case because in the said case, the entry of the trespasser in the suit property
was legal at the initial stage, which after the expiry of the licence, had become unauthorised but in
the instant case, very entry of the plaintiff in the suit property appears to be illegal. Thus, the Courts
below have rightly concluded that possession of the plaintiff over the suit property is unauthorised
in nature which cannot be protected.
18) Apart from the above, the Supreme Court in the case of Shalini Shyam Shetty and another vs
Rajendra Shankar Patil 2010 (8) SCC 329 has emphatically laid down that power of
superintendence conferred under Article 227 of the Constitution ought to be exercised most
sparingly and only in appropriate cases in order to keep the subordinate courts within the bounds of
their authority and not for correcting mere errors of facts or of law. The Court further laid down that
power superintendence is not to be exercised unless there has been an (a) unwarranted assumption
of jurisdiction, not vested in Court (b) gross abuse of jurisdiction (c) an unjustifiable refusal to
exercise jurisdiction vested in Courts. It was further laid down that it is only if there is a flagrant
abuse of the elementary principles of justice or a manifest error of law patent on the face of the
record or an outrageous miscarriage of justice, that power of superintendence can be exercised. The
Supreme Court after discussing its previous judgments on the issue formulated the following
principles on the exercise of High Court's jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution:
"(a) A petition under Article 226 of the Constitution is different from a petition under
Article 227. The mode of exercise of power by High Court under these two Articles is
also different.
(b) In any event, a petition under Article 227 cannot be called a writ petition. The
history of the conferment of writ jurisdiction on High Courts is substantially different
from the history of conferment of the power of Superintendence on the High Courts
under Article 227 and have been discussed above.
(c) High Courts cannot, on the drop of a hat, in exercise of its power of
superintendence under Article 227 of the Constitution, interfere with the orders of
tribunals or Courts inferior to it. Nor can it, in exercise of this power, act as a Court of
appeal over the orders of Court or tribunal subordinate to it. In cases where an
alternative statutory mode of redressal has been provided, that would also operate as
a restrain on the exercise of this power by the High Court.
(d) The parameters of interference by High Courts in exercise of its power of
superintendence have been repeatedly laid down by this Court. In this regard the
High Court must be guided by the principles laid down by the Constitution Bench of
this Court in Waryam Singh (supra) and the principles in Waryam Singh (supra) have
been repeatedly followed by subsequent Constitution Benches and various other
decisions of this Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192734968/ 9
Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
(e) According to the ratio in Waryam Singh (supra), followed in subsequent cases, the
High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction of superintendence can interfere in order
only to keep the tribunals and Courts subordinate to it, `within the bounds of their
authority'.
(f) In order to ensure that law is followed by such tribunals and Courts by exercising
jurisdiction which is vested in them and by not declining to exercise the jurisdiction
which is vested in them.
(g) Apart from the situations pointed in (e) and (f), High Court can interfere in
exercise of its power of superintendence when there has been a patent perversity in
the orders of tribunals and Courts subordinate to it or where there has been a gross
and manifest failure of justice or the basic principles of natural justice have been
flouted.
(h) In exercise of its power of superintendence High Court cannot interfere to correct
mere errors of law or fact or just because another view than the one taken by the
tribunals or Courts subordinate to it, is a possible view. In other words the
jurisdiction has to be very sparingly exercised.
(i) High Court's power of superintendence under Article 227 cannot be curtailed by
any statute. It has been declared a part of the basic structure of the Constitution by
the Constitution Bench of this Court in the case of L. Chandra Kumar vs. Union of
India & others, reported in (1997) 3 SCC 261 and therefore abridgement by a
Constitutional amendment is also very doubtful.
(j) It may be true that a statutory amendment of a rather cognate provision, like
Section 115 of the Civil Procedure Code by the Civil Procedure Code (Amendment)
Act, 1999 does not and cannot cut down the ambit of High Court's power under
Article
227. At the same time, it must be remembered that such statutory amendment does
not correspondingly expand the High Court's jurisdiction of superintendence under
Article 227.
(k) The power is discretionary and has to be exercised on equitable principle. In an
appropriate case, the power can be exercised suo motu.
(l) On a proper appreciation of the wide and unfettered power of the High Court
under Article 227, it transpires that the main object of this Article is to keep strict
administrative and judicial control by the High Court on the administration of justice
within its territory.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192734968/ 10
Bansi Lal vs Hans Raj on 20 October, 2023
(m) The object of superintendence, both administrative and judicial, is to maintain
efficiency, smooth and orderly functioning of the entire machinery of justice in such a
way as it does not bring it into any disrepute. The power of interference under this
Article is to be kept to the minimum to ensure that the wheel of justice does not come
to a halt and the fountain of justice remains pure and unpolluted in order to maintain
public confidence in the functioning of the tribunals and Courts subordinate to High
Court.
(n) This reserve and exceptional power of judicial intervention is not to be exercised
just for grant of relief in individual cases but should be directed for promotion of
public confidence in the administration of justice in the larger public interest whereas
Article 226 is meant for protection of individual grievance. Therefore, the power
under Article 227 may be unfettered but its exercise is subject to high degree of
judicial discipline pointed out above.
(o) An improper and a frequent exercise of this power will be counter-productive and
will divest this extraordinary power of its strength and vitality."
19) From the foregoing analysis of law on the subject, it is clear that it is only in cases where there
has been gross and manifest failure of justice or basic principle of natural justice have been flouted
that resort to power of superintendence can be taken by the High Court. In the instant case, as
already stated neither the trial court nor the appellate court has committed any error, much less a
gross or a patent error, which has resulted in failure of justice. Therefore, there is no scope for
interference in the orders passed by the Courts below.
20) Viewed thus, there is no merit in this petition. The same is dismissed accordingly.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 20.10.2023 Karam Chand/Secy Whether the order is speaking:
Yes/No Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/192734968/ 11
