Barath S P vs State Of Karnataka on 24 March, 2022
Barath S P vs State Of Karnataka on 24 March, 2022
Author: M. Nagaprasanna
Bench: M. Nagaprasanna
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 24TH DAY OF MARCH, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA
CRIMINAL PETITION No.1757 OF 2022
BETWEEN:
BARATH S.P.,
S/O PARSWANATH S.V.,
AGED ABOUT 26 YEARS,
RESIDING AT NO.137 E
MAHAVEER ROAD
SALIGRAMA, K.R. NAGARA TALUK
MYSURU - 570 023.
... PETITIONER
(BY SRI SANTHOSH B., ADVOCATE (PHYSICAL HEARING))
AND:
1. STATE OF KARNATAKA
BY VIDYARANYAPURAM P.S.,
MYSURU - 570 023
(REPRESENTED BY LEARNED
STATE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
HIGH COURT BUILDING - 560 001)
2. RAJU G.C.,
AGED MAJOR
POLICE INSPECTOR
HTPW, CCB WING
MYSURU - 570 023.
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SMT.YASHODHA K.P.,HCGP (PHYSICAL HEARING))
THIS CRIMINAL PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION 482
OF CR.P.C., PRAYING TO QUASH THE ENTIRE PROCEEDINGS IN
C.C.NO.109/2018 ON THE FILE OF THE HONBLE 2nd JMFC AT
MYSURU WHICH IS ARISING OUT OF CR.NO.93/2015 OF
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116210459/ 1
Barath S P vs State Of Karnataka on 24 March, 2022
VIDYARANAYAPURAM POLICE STATION, MYSURU FOR OFFENCE
P/U/S.370-3 OF IPC AND U/S. 3, 4, 5 AND 6 OF IMMORAL
TRAFFIC PREVENTION ACT, 1956, AS AN ABUSE OF PROCESS
OF LAW.
THIS CRIMINAL PETITION COMING ON FOR ADMISSION
THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:
ORDER
The petitioner calls in question proceedings in C.C.No.109 of 2018 pending before the JMFC (II
Court), Mysuru arising out of Crime No.93 of 2015 registered for offences punishable under Section
370(3) of the Indian Penal Code ('IPC' for short) and Sections 3 to 6 of the Immoral Traffic
(Prevention Act), 1956 ('the Act' for short).
2. Heard Sri B.Santhosh, learned counsel for the petitioner and Smt. K.P.Yashoda, learned High
Court Government Pleader for respondent Nos.1 and 2.
3. Brief facts leading to the filing of the present petition, as borne out from the pleadings, are as
follows:-
The Police on 24-09-2015 conduct a search on premises No.630, 'C' Block,
Mahadevapura coming under the jurisdiction of Vidyaranyapuram Police, Mysore
where brothel business was being run. During the search, the petitioner was also
apprehended and a criminal case against the petitioner and other accused is
registered in Crime No.93 of 2015 for offences punishable under Section 370(3) of
the IPC and Sections 3 to 6 of the Act. Police, after investigation, have filed a charge
sheet in the matter and the case is now numbered as C.C.No.109 of 2018 for the
aforesaid offences on the learned Magistrate taking cognizance of the offences against
the petitioner and others on 30-01-2018. Challenging the said proceedings, the
petitioner is before this Court in the subject petition.
4. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that accused 1, 2 and 3 were alleged to
be running a brothel and making profits. The petitioner is only a customer who had visited the
brothel at the time when the search was conducted. Therefore, continuance of proceedings against
the petitioner would be contrary to law and consequently abuse of the process of law.
5. On the other hand, the learned High Court Government Pleader would vehemently refute the
submission that the petitioner has visited the brothel house as a customer and contends that he is
involved in the business of skin trade and, therefore, he should not be let off from facing trial.
6. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions made by the respective learned counsel
and perused the material on record.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116210459/ 2
Barath S P vs State Of Karnataka on 24 March, 2022
7. The afore-narrated facts are not in dispute. The proceedings against the accused are pending
consideration in the aforesaid C.C.No.109 of 2018 where the petitioner is accused No.4. The
petitioner is arrayed as accused for the reason that he was caught as a customer in the brothel when
the search or raid took place on 24-09-2015 and the proceedings are instituted for offences
punishable under Sections 3 to 6 of the Act and Section 370(3) of the IPC. It is germane to notice
Sections 3 to 6 of the Act and they read as follows:
"3. Punishment for keeping a brothel or allowing premises to be used as a
brothel.--(1) Any person who keeps or manages, or acts or assists in the keeping or
management of, a brothel shall be punishable on first conviction with rigorous
imprisonment for a term of not less than one year and not more than three years and
also with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and in the event of a second
or subsequent conviction, with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not less than two
years and not more than five years and also with fine which may extend to two
thousand rupees.
(2) Any person who--
(a) being the tenant, lessee, occupier or person in charge of any premises, uses, or
knowingly allows any other person to use, such premises or any part thereof as a
brothel, or
(b) being the owner, lessor or landlord of any premises or the agent of such owner,
lessor or landlord, lets the same or any part thereof with the knowledge that the same
or any part thereof is intended to be used as a brothel, or is willfully a party to the use
of such premises or any part thereof as a brothel, shall be punishable on first
conviction with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years and with
fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and in the event of a second or
subsequent conviction, with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to
five years and also with fine.
2A. For the purposes of sub-section (2), it shall be presumed, until the contrary is proved, that any
person referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of that sub-section, is knowingly allowing the premises
or any part thereof to be used as a brothel or, as the case may be, has knowledge that the premises or
any part thereof are being used as a brothel, if, -
(a) a report is published in a newspaper having circulation in the area in which such
person resides to the effect that the premises or any part thereof have been found to
be used for prostitution as a result of a search made under this Act; or
(b) a copy of the list of all things found during the search referred to in clause (a) is
given to such person.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116210459/ 3
Barath S P vs State Of Karnataka on 24 March, 2022
(3) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force,
on conviction of any person referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of sub-section (2) of
any offence under that sub-section in respect of any premises or any part thereof, any
lease or agreement under which such premises have been leased out or are held or
occupied at the time of the commission of the offence, shall become void and
inoperative with effect from the date of the said conviction.
4. Punishment for living on the earnings of prostitution.--(1) Any person over the age of eighteen
years who knowingly lives, wholly or in part, on the earnings of the prostitution of any other person
shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine which
may extend to one thousand rupees, or with both and where such earnings relate to the prostitution
of a child or a minor, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years
and not more than ten years.
(2) Where any person over the age of eighteen years is proved--
(a) to be living with, or to be habitually in the company of, a prostitute; or
(b) to have exercised control, direction or influence over the movements of a prostitute in such a
manner as to show that such person is aiding, abetting or compelling her prostitution; or
(c) to be acting as a tout or pimp on behalf of a prostitute, it shall be presumed, until the contrary is
proved, that such person is knowingly living on the earnings of prostitution of another person within
the meaning of sub-section (1).
5. Procuring, inducing or taking person for the sake of prostitution.--(1) any person who--
(a) procures or attempts to procure a person, whether with or without his consent, for the purpose
of prostitution; or
(b) induces a person to go from any place, with the intent that he may for the purpose of prostitution
become the inmate of, or frequent, a brothel; or
(c) takes or attempts to take a person, or causes a person to be taken, from one place to another with
a view to his carrying on, or being brought up to carry on prostitution; or
(d) causes or induces a person to carry on prostitution;
shall be punishable on conviction with rigorous imprisonment for a term of not less than three years
and not more than seven years and also with fine which may extend to two thousand rupees and if
any offence under this sub-section is committed against the will of any person, the punishment of
imprisonment for a term of seven years shall extend to imprisonment for a term of fourteen years:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116210459/ 4
Barath S P vs State Of Karnataka on 24 March, 2022
Provided that if the person in respect of whom an offence committed under this
sub-section,--
(i) is a child, the punishment provided under this sub-section shall extend to rigorous
imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years but may extend to life; and
(ii) is a minor, the punishment provided under this sub-section shall extend to
rigorous imprisonment for a term of not less than seven years and not more than
fourteen years;
(3) An offence under this section shall be triable--
(a) in the place from which a person is procured, induced to go, taken or caused to be
taken or from which an attempt to procure or take such person is made; or
(b) in the place to which he may have gone as a result of the inducement or to which
he is taken or caused to be taken or an attempt to take him is made.
6. Detaining a person in premises where prostitution is carried on.--(1) Any person who detains any
other person, whether with or without his consent,--
(a) in any brothel, or
(b) in or upon any premises with intent that such person may have sexual intercourse with a person
who is not the spouse of such person, shall be punishable on conviction, with imprisonment of
either description for a term which shall not be less than seven years but which may be for life or for
a term which may extend to ten years and shall also be liable to fine:
Provided that the court may, for adequate and special reasons to be mentioned in the
judgment, impose a sentence of imprisonment for a term of less than seven years.
(2) Where any person is found with a child in a brothel, it shall be presumed, unless
the contrary is proved, that he has committed an offence under sub-section (1).
(2A) Where a child or minor found in a brothel, is, on medical examination, detected
to have been sexually abused, it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that
the child or minor has been detained for purposes of prostitution or, as the case may
be, has been sexually exploited for commercial purposes.
(3) A person shall be presumed to detain a woman or girl in a brothel or in or upon
any premises for the purpose of sexual intercourse with a man other than her lawful
husband, if such person, with intent to compel or induce her to remain there,--
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116210459/ 5
Barath S P vs State Of Karnataka on 24 March, 2022
(a) withholds from her any jewellery, wearing apparel, money or other property
belonging to her, or
(b) threatens her with legal proceedings if she takes away with her any jewellery,
wearing apparel, money or other property lent or supplied to her by or by the
direction of such person.
(4) Notwithstanding any law to the contrary, no suit, prosecution or other legal
proceeding shall lie against such woman or girl at the instance of the person by whom
she has been detained, for the recovery of any jewellery, wearing apparel or other
property alleged to have been lent or supplied to or for such woman or girl or to have
been pledged by such woman or girl or for the recovery of any money alleged to be
payable by such woman or girl."
None of the provisions get attracted against a customer as he neither keeps a brothel or allows the
premises to be used as brothel as obtaining under Section 3 of the Act; he does not live on the
earnings of the prostitution as obtaining under Section 4 of the Act; he cannot be alleged of
procuring, inducing or taking a person for the sake of prostitution; he cannot also be alleged of
detaining a person in the premises where prostitution is carried on. The allegation against the
petitioner is the ones punishable under the aforesaid provisions, which are on the face of it, is
inapplicable to the case at hand.
8. The other offence alleged against the petitioner is the one punishable under Section 370 of the
IPC. Section 370 of the IPC reads as follows:
"370. Trafficking of person: (1) Whoever, for the purpose of exploitation, (a) recruits,
(b) transports, (c) harbours, (d) transfers, or (e) receives, a person or persons, by--
First.--using threats, or Secondly.--using force, or any other form of coercion, or
Thirdly.--by abduction, or Fourthly.--by practising fraud, or deception, or Fifthly.--by
abuse of power, or Sixthly.--by inducement, including the giving or receiving of
payments or benefits, in order to achieve the consent of any person having control
over the person recruited, transported, harboured, transferred or received, commits
the offence of trafficking.
Explanation 1.--The expression "exploitation" shall include any act of physical
exploitation or any form of sexual exploitation, slavery or practices similar to slavery,
servitude, or the forced removal of organs.
Explanation 2.--The consent of the victim is immaterial in determination of the
offence of trafficking.
(2) Whoever commits the offence of trafficking shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than seven years, but which may
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116210459/ 6
Barath S P vs State Of Karnataka on 24 March, 2022
extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine.
(3) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one person, it shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten
years but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(4) Where the offence involves the trafficking of a minor, it shall be punishable with
rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than ten years, but which
may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine.
(5) Where the offence involves the trafficking of more than one minor, it shall be
punishable with rigorous imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than
fourteen years, but which may extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(6) If a person is convicted of the offence of trafficking of minor on more than one
occasion, then such person shall be punished with imprisonment for life, which shall
mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's natural life, and shall also be
liable to fine.
(7) When a public servant or a police officer is involved in the trafficking of any
person then, such public servant or police officer shall be punished with
imprisonment for life, which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that
person's natural life, and shall also be liable to fine."
Section 370 of the IPC deals with offences punishable for buying or disposing any person as a slave,
which is not the allegation and the incident would not link the petitioner to the said offences.
Therefore, on both these counts the proceedings are rendered unsustainable.
9. For the aforesaid reasons, the following:
ORDER
(i) Criminal Petition is allowed.
(ii) The proceedings in C.C.No.109 of 2018 pending before the JMFC (II Court),
Mysuru, stand quashed.
Sd/-
JUDGE bkp CT:MJ
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116210459/ 7
