Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CR No. 33/2013(O&M)
Reserved on 01.09.2023
Pronounced on 10.11.2023
Bashir Ahmed Bhat, Age 72 years .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
S/o. Abdul Rehman Bhat, R/o.
Ward No. 10, Rajouri.
Through: Mr. U. K. Jalali, Sr.Advocate with
Ms. Shivani Jalali, Adv.
Vs
1. Bilal Ahmed ..... Respondent(s)
2. Farooq Ahmed
3. Ayaz Ahmed
4. Mohd. Naheem
5. Abdul Gafoor
Sons of Lt. Manzoor Ahmed
Residents of Thanamandi, District
Rajouri
6. Nazira Begum W/o. Late Manzoor
Ahmed Residents of Thanamandi,
District Rajouri
Through: Mr. Gagan Basotra, Sr. Adv. with
Mr. Sahil Gupta, Adv.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. "As long back as in 1872 (when the CPC of 1859 was in operation), it was observed by the Privy
Council that, "the difficulties of a litigant in India begin when he has obtained a decree". The
situation, we are afraid, is no better even today. These observations have been made by the Hon(cid:128)ble
Supreme Court of India in the year 2023 in case titled "Pradeed Mehra v. Harijivan J. Mehta", 2023
INSC 958. In the present case, the petitioner, who at the time of filing of this petition was 72 years of
age (as mentioned in the petition), started his litigious journey in the year 1997 when he was 56
years of age but has not been able to taste the fruits of the decree earned by him in the year 2003
and upheld by the 1st Appellate Court as well as by this Court, till date when he has attained the age
of 82 years.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5915363/ 1
Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
2. The petitioner had filed a suit for recovery of possession of one single storeyed shop situated at
Village Thanamandi, which as per the case set up by the petitioner had been illegally occupied by the
respondents. It was pleaded in the plaint by the petitioner that he had constructed a shop measuring
16(cid:128)x11(cid:128) on the part of the land measuring one marla comprising survey No. 113 min, situated at
village, Thanamandi, which was purchased by him from one Sohan Lal by virtue of a sale deed dated
08.08.1996. The petitioner had earlier filed a suit for permanent prohibitory injunction against the
respondents but during the pendency of the said suit, the respondents forcibly occupied the shop
and placed the shutter on the shop. The petitioner thereafter withdrew the suit as the same had been
rendered infructuous.
3. The respondents objected to the suit preferred by the petitioner by filing a written statement,
thereby pleading that Sohan Lal had no right or concern with the land comprising survey No. 113
min, measuring 01 kanal,l5 marlas and the whole of the land had been in possession of respondent
Nos. 1 and 2 since 1969-70 by virtue of an affidavit and agreement to sell dated 29.06.1976 executed
by the original owner of the land, namely, Vishwa Nath.
4. After the trial of the suit, the learned Sub Judge, Rajouri (hereinafter to be referred as the „Trial
Court(cid:128)) decreed the suit vide decree dated 30.09.2003 in favour of the plaintiff, petitioner herein.
The decree was assailed by the respondent Nos. 1and 2 by way of an appeal before the learned
Principal District Judge, Rajouri (hereinafter to be referred as the „1st Appellate Court(cid:128)) and the 1st
Appellate Court vide its judgment dated 20.04.2009 dismissed the said Civil 1st Appeal. It needs to
be mentioned here that while the appeal was pending before the learned 1stAppellate Court, an
application was filed by the respondent Nos. 1 & 2/appellants therein under Order 41 Rule 27 of the
Code of Civil Procedure (CPC) for placing on record the report of the Commissioner that the shop
was constructed over the land comprising survey No. 168/383 and not survey No. 113 min and the
said application was dismissed by the learned 1st Appellate Court. Thereafter, the respondent Nos. 1
and 2 preferred the Civil 2nd Appeal and that too was dismissed by this Court vide its judgment
dated 17.11.2009.
5. The petitioner filed a petition for execution of the decree dated 30.09.2003 passed by the learned
trial court but the same was dismissed by the learned JMIC (Munsiff), Thanamandi (hereinafter
referred to as „the Executing Court(cid:128)) vide its order dated 20.03.2013 on the ground that the
description/schedule of the shop existing on spot did not tally fully with the schedule mentioned in
the plaint, as it tallied only on two sides i.e. western and northern side of the shop, which was
identified by the petitioner.
6. The petitioner has filed the present petition thereby impugning the order dated 20.03.2013
passed by the learned Executing Court on the grounds that in the order impugned, the learned
Executing Court has laid much emphasis by pointing out some differences qua the exact description
and location of the property, but oblivious to the fact that at the time of filing of the suit, there was a
big chunk of open space around the suit property mainly occupied by the judgment debtors, which
position was changed by subsequent developments in the surrounding areas of the suit shop. It is
also urged that the respondents had repeatedly raised the issue that the suit shop actually fell in
survey No. 383/168 instead of khasra No. 113 min, but the respondents could not succeed before the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5915363/ 2
Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
1stAppellate Court as well as the 2nd Appellate Court. It is also stated that the Executing Court is
absolutely wrong in appointing the Commissioner for spot verification, particularly when the
Executing Court has no power to upset the findings of all the Courts and the Executing Court ought
to have remained confined to its jurisdiction without stretching too far the observations made by
this Court in its order dated 03.09.2011 in the revision petition, as this Court had only observed that
the execution should be done strictly in accordance with the description given in the plaint.
7. Mr. U. K. Jalali, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner has vehemently argued that
the order impugned has been wrongly passed by the learned Executing Court, more particularly
when the respondents before the trial court in their written statement had specifically stated that the
petitioner had no concern with the land comprising survey No. 113 min and the land measuring 1
kanal and 5 marlas is in possession of respondent Nos. 1 and 2 pursuant to the agreement to sell
dated 29.06.1976 and it were the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 who had constructed the shop. Mr. Jalali
further contended that there was no dispute in respect of the location of the property as the
respondents filed the written statement in respect of the shop claimed to have been owned by the
petitioner and constructed by him and when the suit was decreed, for the first time the respondent
Nos. 1 and 2 sought to raise the dispute in respect of the survey numbers before the 1st Appellate
Court by seeking permission to place on record the report of the Commissioner but their prayer was
not acceded to and rejected. He has further submitted that this Court while dismissing the appeal
preferred by the respondent Nos. 1 & 2, had taken note of the defence raised by the respondents in
their written- statement and had returned a finding that the contention of the respondents that they
were in possession of 1 kanal and 5 marlas of land was not supported by any document. He further
argued that with the passage of time, certain changes took place in the surroundings of the suit shop
and the learned Executing Court could not have rejected the execution petition filed by the
petitioner only on the ground that on two sides, the description of the suit shop as mentioned in the
plaint did not tally with the position existing on spot. Learned senior counsel for the petitioner has
relied upon the judgments of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in Satyawati v Rajinder Singh and anr,
(2013) 9 SCC 491, Ravinder Kaur v Ashok Kumar (2003) 8 SCC 289 and Narinder Singh and others
v Kishan Singh (D) th. LRs and others, AIR 2002 SC, 2603.
8. Per contra, Mr. Gagan Basotra, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents has
vehemently argued that the suit shop did not exist on the land comprising survey No. 113 min of
Village Thanamandi, but over the land comprising survey No. 383/168 and further that the
description of the suit shop as mentioned in the plaint did not tally with the position existing on
spot, as such, the order impugned passed by the learned Executing Court does not suffer from any
illegality or infirmity. He further argued that factual findings have been returned by the learned
Executing Court and the same cannot be disturbed while adjudicating the revision petition. Learned
senior counsel has relied upon the judgments of the Supreme Court in Addissery Raghavan v
Cheruvalath Krishnadasan, (2020) 6 SCC 275, Rahul S. Shah v Jinendra Kumar Gandhi and others,
(2021) 6 SCC 418 and Shafiqur Rehman Khan and another v Smt. Mohd. Jahan Begum and others,
(1982) 2 SCC 456.
9. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the Executing Court as also the
record of the Trial Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5915363/ 3
Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
10. The record divulges that the warrant of possession of the shop was issued but the same could not
be executed, as it was found that the shop did not fall within survey No. 113 min. On 22.02.2011, the
warrant of possession of the suit shop was issued to the Reader of the District Court for execution
with the assistance of Assistant Commissioner (Revenue), SDPO and SHO Thanamandi. The
Assistant Commissioner (Revenue) vide his report dated 23.03.2011 stated that the shop was
existing in survey Nos. 383 &168 min and not in survey No. 113 min, as such, the warrant could not
be executed. Thereafter, fresh warrant was issued on 18.08.2011 by directing the office to mention
proper boundaries of the suit shop and a perusal of the report dated 05.09.2011 submitted by the
Assistant Commissioner (Rev), Rajouri reveals that the shop was existing in survey No. 383 (State
land) and 168 (road) but the boundaries of the property in the plaint tallied with the location of the
shop on spot. The reference to the order dated 03.09.2011 passed by this Court was also made in the
said report.
11. It needs to be noted here that the respondents had filed a revision petition and the same was
disposed of by this Court vide order dated 03.09.2011, thereby directing that the warrant of
possession be executed strictly in terms of the plaint. Assistant Commissioner (Rev), Rajouri sought
further directions from the Executing Court in light of the order passed by this Court. Thereafter,
pursuant to directions of this Court vide order dated 03.09.2011, fresh warrant for execution of
decree was issued on 21.11.2012. A report was submitted by the Nazir that the description of the
shop on spot did not tally with description of the suit shop as mentioned in the plaint.
12. A perusal of the record of the Executing Court further reveals that the Executing Court being
confronted with the contradictions in the reports submitted by the Assistant Commissioner
Revenue, Rajouri, Reader of the District Court, Rajouri and Nazir directed the Tehsildar
Thanamandi to constitute a team of officers/officials of the Revenue Department under his
supervision and conduct the demarcation of the decreed shop as per the position existing on
06.11.1997 i.e. the date of filing of the suit and the present position supported by the revenue record.
13. The Commissioner conducted the demarcation and prepared the dasti khaka (site plan) and
thereafter submitted a report No. OQ/574 dated 04.02.2013 along with revenue record i.e. khasra
girdhawari of kharif for the year 1997 and 2012. The learned Executing Court after comparing the
description of the surroundings of the shop as mentioned in the plaint and with the description of
the surroundings of the shop as mentioned in the report dated 04.02.2013 returned the finding that
the description of the surroundings of the shop as mentioned in the plaint tallied only on two sides
i.e. western and northern sides of the shop existing on the spot and dismissed the execution petition
by placing reliance upon the directions issued by this Court while disposing the revision petition
vide order dated 03.09 2011.
14. The only issue arising for the determination by this Court is as to whether the learned Executing
Court has wrongly exercised the jurisdiction vested in it for the purpose of executing a decree by
refusing to execute the decree on the ground that the description of the shop existing on the spot
tallied only with the two sides of the description of the shop as mentioned in the plaint.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5915363/ 4
Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
15. Before this Court proceeds ahead to consider the above mentioned issue, it needs to be noted
that the controversy sought to be settled by the Executing Court subsequently, was in fact invited by
the Executing Court itself by confusing itself with the various reports from the Assistant
Commissioner (Rev), Rajouri, Nazir of its own court and Reader of the District Court Rajouri. Once
the report dated 05.09.2011 was submitted by the Assistant Commissioner (Rev) Rajouri that the
boundaries of the suit property tallied with spot position, the learned Executing Court ought to have
directed the concerned officer to execute the decree but it appears that the learned Executing Court
in compliance to the order dated 03.09.2011 directed the execution of decree strictly in terms of the
order dated 03.09.2011. It needs to be noted that in the objections to the execution petition filed by
the respondents, it was only stated by them that there is a lot of variation in the description in the
suit property, whereas the fact remains that in the written statement filed by the respondents before
the learned trial court no such objections qua the location as well as identification of the suit were
raised by the respondents and rather it was the positive case of the respondents that they had
constructed the suit shop on the land comprising survey No. 113 min at village Thanamandi,
obtained by them by virtue of agreement to sell dated 29.06.1976 from Vishwanath. The
defendants/respondents contested the suit all along till the same was decreed by the learned trial
court. Before the 1stAppellate court, an application under Order 41 Rule 27 of the CPC was also filed
by the respondents that the suit shop was constructed in survey No. 383/168 and not in survey No.
113 min in village Thanamandi, a stand contrary to the pleadings in the written statement. The
contention of the respondents was rejected by the 1stAppellate Court with observation that it was an
afterthought. The respondents initially laid their claim that they had constructed the shop on survey
No. 113 min, which the respondents could not establish by any cogent evidence. The description of
the suit shop has been mentioned in the plaint and the respondents never ever disputed the location
as well description of the suit shop either before the Trial Court or the Appellate Courts. In Ravinder
Kaur v. Ashok Kumar, (2003) 8 SCC 289, the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court has held as under:
20. This opinion of the High Court, in our considered view, is wholly erroneous for
more than one reason. The objection that the learned Judge referred to in the
impugned order raised by the respondent herein was in regard to the correctness of
the site plan. As noted earlier, this very issue was specifically raised in the original
ejectment proceedings and was held against the respondents based mainly on the
admission of the first respondent which we have already extracted hereinabove. At
the cost of repetition, we must restate that this question of identity of the property
was never again raised in the appeal before the Appellate Authority, in the revision
before the revisional authority, namely, the High Court or in the SLP before this
Court. In such circumstances, we fail to understand how this very issue can be
reagitated in the execution proceeding by the tenants. It is also to be noticed that the
executing court has rightly observed that reopening of this issue would amount to
asking that court to go behind the decree which is impermissible in law. We must
note, this finding of the executing court is not even noticed by the High Court in the
impugned order. The High Court also did not take into consideration the reasoning of
the Coordinate Bench of the same High Court in the dismissal order made in CRP No.
5175 of 2002 on 29-10-2002 which while rejecting the similar contention of the
respondents had specifically observed that the attempt of the tenants was with a view
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5915363/ 5
Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
to delay their ejectment. In such a factual background, we think the impugned
judgment is wholly erroneous having no legal or factual basis to sustain it. We also
must notice that the High Court in the impugned order has made an observation
which in effect, in our opinion, makes the execution proceedings liable to be
dismissed. The said observation is as follows:
"In the present case, it is proved on the record that the shop regarding which the
decree-holder was seeking possession during execution proceedings was not the one
regarding which the ejectment order had been passed by the Rent Controller. Neither
the description had tallied nor the boundaries tallied."
(emphasis added)
16. The Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Satyawati v Rajinder Singh and anr, (2013) 9
SCC 491, has held as under:
"8. Looking to the facts of the case, in our opinion, the High Court was not right while
confirming the order passed by the Executing Court for the reason that the Executing
Court had taken into account certain other reports for the purpose of rejecting the
execution proceedings and for coming to the conclusion that the decree was not
executable.
9. Looking to the facts of the case and upon hearing the learned counsel, we are of the
view that the order passed by the Executing Court dated 16th March, 2009, which has
been confirmed by the High Court is not correct for the reason that the Executing
Court ought not to have considered other factors and facts which were not forming
part of the judgment and the decree passed in favour of the appellant- plaintiff. Once
the decree was made in favour of the appellant- plaintiff, in pursuance of the
judgment dated 19th January, 1996 delivered by the District Judge Faridabad, in our
opinion, the Executing Court should not have looked into other reports which had
been submitted to it afterwards."
(emphasis added)
17. The Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court of India in the case of Narinder Singh and others v Kishan Singh
(D) th. LRs and others, AIR 2002 SC, 2603, has held as under:
"14 We have perused relevant records. We have also considered the contentions
raised by learned senior counsel appearing for both the parties. The Executing Court
has given clear and cogent reasons for not accepting the objections taken by the
appellants in the petition filed under section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure. Even
so, we have perused the relevant documents on record to satisfy ourselves that there
is no erroneous statement of fact in the order passed by the Executing Court. We are
satisfied that the order does not suffer from any such error. We are also satisfied that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5915363/ 6
Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
the approach of the Executing Court in the matter is legal and proper. It is clear to us
that the judgment-debtors are making a last ditch effort to prevent the
decree-holders from getting full benefit of the decree passed in their favour. As noted
earlier the plea that Karam Singh had no liability to pay any part of the mortgage debt
and his property having been released from the mortgage in 1956 could not be a part
of the suit property in the present case, was neither taken at trial of the suit nor
before the Court in the final decree proceeding. Though in the order passed on the
petition filed under Order 34 Rule 8 read with Section 151 of the CPC to make the
decree final the fact that Sarbans Singh was declared an insolvent person in the
proceeding under the Provincial Insolvency Act was noted, no plea that the
preliminary decree did not cover the land of Karam Singh or his share in the suit land
appears to have been taken. In the facts and circumstances, the Executing Court
rightly rejected the objections raised by the appellants against execution of the
decree. The High Court was, therefore, justified in declining to interfere with the
order of the Executing Court."
18. The description of the suit shop as pleaded in the plaint, is as under:
North-Shops of Nazir Ahmed Ganai, South-land of Manzoor Ahmed, father of
respondent Nos. 1 to 5 and husband of respondent No. 6 under the occupation of
GREF Department East- Land of Manzoor Ahmed under the occupation of GREF
Department West- Road, Rajouri-Thanamandi to Bafliaz.
19. In the report dated 04.02.2013 relied upon by the learned Executing Court, the description of the
shop on spot has been mentioned as under:
North-shop of Gafoor Ahmed Ganai South-Path/Road leading to Police Station,
Thanamandi, East-Vacant land measuring 3ft. x 6 ft. owned by State.
West-Road Thanamandi to Poonch.
20. If the description of the shop as mentioned in the plaint is compared with the description of the
shop as mentioned in report dated 04.02.2013, it is found that the description of the suit shop as
well as shop existing on spot is same, as was initially mentioned by the Assistant Commissioner
(Rev), Rajouri in its report dated 05.09.2011. So far as eastern side is concerned, vacant land has
been mentioned in both the plaint and report dated 04.02.2013 but in the plaint, the vacant land has
been shown to be that of Manzoor Ahmed under the possession of GREF, whereas in the report
dated 04.02.2013, the vacant land has been reflected as owned by the State. Thus, it is evident that
the vacant land is mentioned on the eastern side of the property as described in the plaint as well as
in the report. Similarly, on the southern side in the plaint, the vacant land of Manzoor Ahmed has
been mentioned whereas in the report dated 04.02.2013, path/road leading to Police Station,
Thanamandi has been mentioned. It is nowhere mentioned in the report dated 04.02.2013 as to
whether the path or road is existing on the State land or has been constructed on the private land.
Even otherwise, it is not at all relevant once the property was capable of identification on spot in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5915363/ 7
Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
light of description mentioned in the plaint and in fact, was rightly identified by the Assistant
Commissioner (Rev) in its report dated 05.09.2011, when no objection in respect of the location as
well as identification of the suit property was raised by the respondents in the written statement.
The Executing Court was only concerned in respect of the identification of the property and once the
northern and western side of the suit property tallied with the position existing on spot even as per
the findings of the Executing Court, more particularly in view of the existence of the shop of one
Nasir Ahmed Ganai, it could not have been held by the learned Executing Court that the description
of the suit shop did not tally with the position existing on spot.
It assumes significance as identification of the property was never disputed by the respondents in
any court.
21. In Pradeep Mehra Vs. Harijivan J. Jethvan Jetjwa, 2023 INSC 958, it has been observed as
under:
11. The multiple stages a civil suit invariably has to go through before it reaches
finality, is to ensure that any error in law is cured by the higher court. The appellate
court, the second appellate court and the revisional court do not have the same
powers, as the powers of the executing court, which are extremely limited. This was
explained by this Court in Dhurandhar Prasad Singh v. Jai Prakash University,
(2001) 6 SCC 534, in para 24, it had stated thus:
"24. .......... The exercise of powers under Section 47 of the Code is microscopic and
lies in a very narrow inspection hole. Thus, it is plain that executing court can allow
objection under Section 47 of the Code to the executability of the decree if it is found
that the same is void ab initio and a nullity, apart from the ground that the decree is
not capable of execution under law either because the same was passed in ignorance
of such a provision of law or the law was promulgated making a decree inexecutable
after its passing."
13. The reality is that pure civil matters take a long time to be decided, and regretfully it does not
end with a decision, as execution of a decree is an entirely new phase in the long life of a civil
litigation. The inordinate delay, which is universally caused throughout India in the execution of a
decree, has been a cause of concern with this Court for several years-----.
(emphasis added)
22. The observation of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in Rahul S. Shah v Jinendra Kumar Gandhi and
others, (2021) 6 SCC 418, holds good in the instant case also and the same are reproduced as under:
"24. In respect of execution of a decree, Section 47 of CPC contemplates adjudication
of limited nature of issues relating to execution i.e., discharge or satisfaction of the
decree and is aligned with the consequential provisions of Order XXI. Section 47 is
intended to prevent multiplicity of suits. It simply lays down the procedure and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5915363/ 8
Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
form whereby the court reaches a decision. For the applicability of the section, two
essential requisites have to be kept in mind. Firstly, the question must be the one
arising between the parties and secondly, the dispute relates to the execution,
discharge or satisfaction of the decree. Thus, the objective of Section 47 is to prevent
unwanted litigation and dispose of all objections as expeditiously as possible.
25. These provisions contemplate that for execution of decrees, Executing Court must
not go beyond the decree. However, there is steady rise of proceedings akin to a
re-trial at the time of execution causing failure of realisation of fruits of decree and
relief which the party seeks from the courts despite there being adecree in their
favour. Experience has shown that various objections are filed before the Executing
Court and the decree holder is deprived of the fruits of the litigation and the
judgment debtor, in abuse of process of law, is allowed to benefit from the subject
matter which he is otherwise not entitled to.
26. The general practice prevailing in the subordinate courts is that invariably in all
execution applications, the Courts first issue show cause notice asking the judgment
debtor as to why the decree should not be executed as is given under Order XXI Rule
22 for certain class of cases. However, this is often misconstrued as the beginning of a
new trial. For example, the judgement debtor sometimes misuses the provisions of
Order XXI Rule 2 and Order XXI Rule 11 to set up an oral plea, which invariably
leaves no option with the Court but to record oral evidence which may be frivolous.
This drags the execution proceedings indefinitely."
(emphasis added)
23. It appears that the learned Executing Court got swayed by the observation made by this Court
while disposing of the revision petition vide order dated 03.09.2011 that the warrant of possession
be executed strictly in terms of the plaint. This approach of the learned Executing Court cannot be
countenanced, more particularly when the suit property was properly described by the petitioner in
the plaint and the description/identification of the property was not disputed by the respondents.
With the passage of time, the surroundings of the suit property may change but once the description
of the property was sufficient for its identification, the learned Executing Court could not have
rejected the execution petition by observing that on two sides, description of the said property did
not tally with the position existing on sport, more particularly when there was vacant land on
eastern side and on the southern side, though the pathway was shown on the Southern side. It
would be apt to take note of the observations made by the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court in "Ravinder Kaur v.
Ashok Kumar", (2003) 8 SCC 289, which are extracted as under:
22. All these facts apart, we notice that nowhere in the petition the respondent
tenants claim to be in possession of any shop other than Shop No. 3 in regard to
which they have suffered an eviction order. It is not their case that they are also in
possession of some other property in regard to which there is no eviction order but
the landlord is trying to take possession in these execution proceedings. We have
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5915363/ 9
Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
specifically asked the learned counsel appearing for the respondents that apart from
Shop No. 3 belonging to the appellant, are the respondents in possession of any part
of the property bearing No. EK 172/2 situated at Chowk Panjeer, Jalandhar. The
learned counsel was not able to give any satisfactory reply to our question which
would only mean that the respondents are not in possession of any other property
other than Shop No. 3 leased out to them in the abovementioned property belonging
to the appellant. That is also why they prayed for restoration of possession.
Therefore, raising a dispute in regard to the description or identity of the suit
schedule property or a dispute in regard to the boundary of the suit schedule property
is only a bogey to delay the eviction by the abuse of the process of court. Courts of law
should be careful enough to see through such diabolical plans of the
judgment-debtors to deny the decree-holders the fruits of the decree obtained by
them. These type of errors on the part of the judicial forums only encourage frivolous
and cantankerous litigations causing law's delay and bringing bad name to the
judicial system.
(emphasis added)
24. It was urged by the learned Senior Counsel for the respondents that the finding on fact has been
recorded by the Executing Court, therefore, the same cannot be re-appreciated by this Court in a
revision petition. This contention of the learned Senior Counsel deserves to be rejected because
whole of the controversy was created by the Executing Court itself and then only, it proceeded to
determine the same. Though the judgment of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court of India in "Kishore
Kumar Khaitan v. Praveen Kumar Singh", (2006) 3 SCC 312, pertains to the scope of the jurisdiction
of the High Court under article 227 of the Constitution of India to interfere with the finding of the
fact recorded by the court subject to its supervisory jurisdiction but the observations are relevant in
the instant case as well, which are as under:
"13. The jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution may be restrictive in the
sense that it is to be invoked only to correct errors of jurisdiction. But when a court
asks itself a wrong question or approaches the question in an improper manner, even
if it comes to a finding of fact, the said finding of fact cannot be said to be one
rendered with jurisdiction and it will still be amenable to correction at the hands of
the High Court under Article 227 of the Constitution. The failure to render the
necessary findings to support its order would also be a jurisdictional error liable to
correction. Here the jurisdiction to grant an interim mandatory injunction could be
exercised on entering a finding that on the day the order for maintaining the status
quo was passed, the plaintiff was in possession and a day after the interim order was
passed, he was in fact dispossessed. The interim direction to maintain status quo was
an ex parte order. From the order of the Additional District Court it is not possible to
come to the conclusion that on a proper advertence to the relevant materials, prima
facie clear findings had been rendered by that court on these aspects. The prima facie
infirmities attached to the letter said to create the tenancy cannot also be ignored,
since that transaction is the foundation of the plaintiff's claim of possession."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5915363/ 10
Bashir Ahmed Bhat vs Bilal Ahmed on 10 November, 2023
(emphasis added)
25. In view of all what has been said and discussed above, this Court is of the considered view that
the order dated 20.03.2013 passed in File No. 01/Execution titled "Bashir Ahmed Bhat v. Bilal
Ahmed & Ors" is not sustainable in the eyes of law and is, accordingly, set aside. Learned Executing
Court is directed to execute the decree in respect of the suit shop which is fully described in the
plaint and identifiable on spot. The matter is remanded back. Parties shall appear before the learned
Executing Court on 01.12.2023.
26. The revision petition is disposed of accordingly.
27. Record of the Trial Court as well as Executing Court be sent back forthwith.
(Rajnesh Oswal) Judge JAMMU 10.11.2023 Rakesh PS Whether the order is speaking: Yes Whether
the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5915363/ 11
