Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K
Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
...
CRA no.19/2014
Reserved on: 08.05.2025
Pronounced on: 21 .08.2025
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh age 65 years S/o Ghulam Mohammad Sheikh R/o
Zadipora Kulgam presently lodged in Central Jail Srinagar
.......Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr I. Sofi, Advocate
Versus
State of J&K through VOK Srinagar
......Respondent(s)
Through: Mr Mohsin S. Qadiri, Sr. AAG
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. This criminal appeal is directed against judgement of conviction and order of sentence dated 20th
October 2014, passed by court of Additional Special Judge, Anticorruption, Kashmir, Srinagar in
File no.65/B-166/B titled as State v. Bashir Ahmad Sheikh, in connection with case FIR no.25/2006
police station VOK and for setting-aside the same.
2. I have heard learned counsel for parties. I have gone through Trial Court record, impugned
judgement, and considered the matter.
3. Facts, as is the prosecution story, are necessary to be sketched out. It had been on 30th June
2006, when one Mudasir Ahmad Wani S/o Mohd Jabbar Wani R/o Mirhama (complainant)
approached Vigilance Organisation Kashmir (VOK) with a written complaint. He stated in his Page 1
complaint that he was running a commission-based centre at Mirhama and distributing ration
among people of the area on behalf of CA&PD Department and at the end of the month he was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 1
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
required to deposit the statement in the office of Supervisor, Mirhama Circle. He visited the office of
Supervisor concerned, Bashir Ahmad Sheikh, appellant herein, but he refused to accept his
statement and made a demand of Rs.1000/- as bribe, which he arranged. He requested initiation of
legal action against appellant. Upon receipt of complaint, case FIR no.25/2006 was registered on
30th June 2006 by respondent-VOK.
Investigation was started. A team of officers of VOK was constituted to lay a trap and services of an
official from Social Welfare Department were requisitioned. Mohammad Ashraf Bhat, Orderly, was
deputed, who was associated with the proceedings as an independent witness. In the course of
investigation, complainant produced Rs.1000/- consisting of ten currency notes of one hundred
rupees denomination each which he intended to pay as illegal gratification to accused/appellant on
his demand. The currency notes produced by complainant taken and treated with phenolphthalein
power and returned to the complainant with an advice to pay the same to accused on his demand.
During pre-trap proceedings demonstration was conducted and the solution so obtained was
preserved. The relevant demonstration memo was prepared in presence of witnesses who signed it
thereby authenticating its correctness. Thereafter Constable Abdul Rashid who had treated the
currency notes with phenolphthalein power and conducted pre-trap demonstration was
disassociated from the trap team.
The trap team accompanied by complainant, Mudasir Ahmad Wani, Page 2 and an independent
witness, Mohammad Ashraf Bhat, proceeded to the spot, i.e., office of Supervisor, CAPD, Mirhama
Circle, Kulgam, where the bribe was to be paid to accused/appellant. The complainant and
independent witness went inside the office building and approached appellant. The complainant
produced monthly statement and appellant accepted it. According to prosecution, accused/appellant
demand and accepted Rs.1000/- as illegal gratification and kept it on the table and put a paper sheet
over it. The independent witness, Mohammad Ashraf Bhat, heard conversation of complainant and
accused/appellant and also witnessed transaction of bribe between them and a pre-arranged signal
was flashed by independent witness to other members of trap team who immediately rushed to the
spot and tainted amount of Rs.1000/- was recovered from table exclusively in use of accused in
presence of trap-team. Handwash of accused/appellant taken in sodium carbonate solution tested
positive and solution so obtained was sealed and seized.
During investigation, site plan of scene of occurrence was prepared. Statements of witnesses
conversant with facts of the case were recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. It came to limelight during
investigation that dealership for ration sale centre, Mirhama Circle, on commission basis was given
to complainant in terms of Order no.1067 DCA&PDK of 2005 dated 16th June 2005 by Assistant
Director (Planning) and monthly sale statement submitted by complainant was also seized as
documentary evidence in the course of investigation and established that there was a definite
occasion for accused/appellant to demand and accept illegal gratification of Rs.1000/- from
complainant Page 3 which he demanded and accepted and was recovered from his possession in the
course of trap laid on 30th June 2006. According to prosecution, accused/appellant by acting in
aforesaid manner and abusing his official position committed offences punishable under Section
5(1)(d) read with Section 5(2) of J&K P.C. Act, 2006, and Section 161 RPC. Investigation culminated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 2
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
in presentation of charge-
sheet against appellant for which necessary sanction was accorded vide Order no.89-GAD(Vig) of
2006 dated 15th December 2006.
4. The Trial Court vide order dated 25th April 2007 framed charge against accused/appellant, to
which he pleaded not guilty, thus, prosecution was directed to adduce evidence in support of its
case. Prosecution adduced twelve witnesses. The resume of the statement of witnesses produced by
prosecution is given as under:
(a) PW-1, Mudasir Ahmad Wani, who is also complainant, in his statement recorded
by Trial Court on 23rd July 2007 stated that when he went to the office of CA&PD to
submit monthly statement, accused refused to accept his statement and demanded a
bribe of Rs.1000/-. He, however, refused to pay bribe. Then he approached VOK with
a complaint. He admitted contents of seizure memo. He admitted prosecution story.
He admits seizure of money from accused. According to witness, the handwash was
conducted.
In cross-examination witness has stated that complaint has been scribed by him and was written by
him at his home. The witness upon being asked to read contents of EXPW-1, read the same, wherein
it has been mentioned that at the end of every month commission @ 10% was to be given along with
the statement as bribe and that the accused used to demand bribe from him @ 10%. The witness has
stated that prior to the said date he had been depositing the statement with the accused at the end of
respective months but at that time the accused neither demanded bribe from Page 4 him nor he
made any such payment. The witness has stated that he could not recollect as to on how many
occasions he deposited the monthly statement with the accused and that he had been in the said
business for last one year and thereafter stated that he presented the statement before accused on a
couple of occasions. It has been however stated by the witness that since the statement used to be
deposited on the 30th of every month, as such he had gone to the office of the accused on 30th June
2006. It has further been stated by him that he could not recollect as to whether search of the
members of the trap team had been conducted or not, nor as to whether the hands of any other
person besides him and the independent witness were washed in the office of the VOK and he could
not recollect who treated the currency notes with phenolphthalein powder. It has been stated that
when the accused was trapped at that time ten to twenty persons were present and the post trap
proceedings took place in their presence, but their names could not be recollected by him. At the
time VOK officials entered into the room upon receiving the pre-fixed signal, the bribe amount was
in the hand of the accused while his hand was upon the table. He has stated that it is a fact that the
solution in the bottle is of light pink colour as compared to the solution in the bottle. It has been
stated by the witness that he could not recollect as to whether he saw that person giving the signal
upon which the other members of the trap team entered into the office room of the accused and it
would be wrong to state that when bribe amount was recovered it had been kept underneath a sheet
of paper while in fact the bribe amount was in the hand of the accused which fell from his hand upon
the table. The witness has stated that his statement under Section 161 Cr. P.C. has been recorded by
the VOK officials. The witness has further stated that as reflected in his statement under section 161
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 3
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
Cr.P.C. that the accused held the money in his hand and told him that if he wanted, he could keep it
but instead of returning the money to him placed it upon the table and kept a sheet of paper over it,
is not correct as he had never made Page 5 such a statement. The time when they left the office of
the accused after completion of the proceedings could not be recollected by him.
(b) PW-2 Mohd Ashraf Bhat (independent witness, the then Orderly, Directorate of Social Welfare
Department), recorded by the court on 02.04.2009, in his statement stated that on 30th June 2006
he was posted in the directorate of Social Welfare as an Orderly and was directed by his higher
officers to attend office of VOK and accordingly he went to the office of the VOK where he met an
Inspector with whom a boy was sitting and he was told that the boy had filed a complaint in
connection with which they had to go somewhere. The complainant produced Rs.1000/- before
Inspector and Inspector handed over the amount to another person Abdul Rashid who treated the
currency notes with powder and handed over the said notes which comprised of ten notes of one
hundred rupee denomination each to the Inspector and the relevant memos were prepared.
Thereafter, a pre-trap demonstration was conducted and pre-trap solution so obtained was sealed.
The witness has admitted the contents of the seizure memo and identified his signature upon it.
Also, the contents of Fardi Hawalgi have been admitted by witness to be true and correct and
identified his signature upon it. Also, the contents of Fardi-Hawalgi have been admitted by witness
to be true and correct and identified his signature upon it. He has identified the currency notes to be
the same as had been produced by the fu complainant in the office of VOK. The witness has
admitted the contents of pre-trap demonstration memo as true and correct and identified his
signature and also identified the bottle containing the solution. The witness has stated that
thereafter they left for spot and complainant as also officials of VOK accompanied him. He had no
knowledge as to where they had to go and upon reaching Mirhama Kulgam, they were told to come
out of the vehicle and that he was directed to accompany complainant. The complainant went inside
the office of Food and Supplies Mirhama and he accompanied the complainant and they entered
into the office room of the accused/Supervisor where many people were sitting and Page 6 the
accused was also inside the room. The witness has stated that he got seated upon one of the chairs
and the complainant was also there. Thereafter, the complainant produced some statements before
the accused, Bashir Ahmad, who marked the statement and told him to hand them over to some
Clerk and after the statement came back from the Clerk, the complainant handed over Rs.1000/- to
the accused. The accused asked the complainant reason for payment of money upon which the
complainant told him to keep the money but the accused refused to take the same. Thereafter,
accused kept it on the table and accused was holding a paper in his hand which he was reading and
said paper was placed by accused upon bribe amount. The witness has stated that there after he gave
a signal towards the other members of the team who were waiting outside and they immediately
entered into the room and held the accused. The accused was asked about the bribe amount who
told them that the money was lying upon the table. Thereafter, the seizure memo prepared. The
personal search of the accused was conducted. In cross-examination, witness has stated that the
trap team was headed by an Inspector who effected the arrest of the accused. The said officer did not
show on spot any order by virtue of which he had been authorized to arrest the accused nor has any
such order been shown to him in the court. The witness has stated that prior to being associated as a
member of the trap team in the instant case, he has participated in like matters and has been
associated as an independent witness a number of times. The witness has stated that on account of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 4
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
his experience he could state that the colour of the hand wash of the complainant is of dark pink
colour, whereas the colour of the hand wash of the accused is of lighter hue and it is due to slips
affixed upon the bottle that he could identify the solution as hand wash of the complainant. The
witness has stated that in his examination-in-chief he could identify the bottles since Prosecuting
Officer told him as to which bottle pertained to demonstration No.1 and which bottle pertained to
demonstration No.2. He has stated that he could not himself read out as to what was written upon
the slips Page 7 affixed upon the bottles containing the solution. The witness has however stated that
three or four officials of the VOK besides the complainant and he himself comprised the trap party.
It has been stated by him that it is a fact that when the complainant paid the money to accused, the
accused refused to accept the same resulting in some tussle between the duo and the complainant
was holding the money in his hands and the accused was trying to ward off the hands of the
complainant away from him. He has stated that he could not recollect as to whether the paper which
was kept on the currency notes by the accused seized or not. The seal used upon the bottles during
the proceedings was handed over to him. In a query raised by the court, the witness has stated that
during the pre-trap demonstration solution obtained was sealed in a bottle, but no slip was affixed
upon it which would bear his signature and had the Investigating Officer written pre-trap solution
upon the bottle for identification purposes and obtained his signature upon it, in that eventuality, he
would have identified the bottle and in like manner during post-trap demonstration I/O did not affix
any slip upon the bottle. In re-examination, the witness has stated that he has no knowledge as to
what conversation took-place between the accused and the complainant when the money was being
handed over by the complainant to the accused and it could also be inferred that the amount might
have appeared to the accused to be meager for acceptance. The witness has stated that he however
did not hear anything being spoken by the accused, whereby he would have said that the amount
was meagre.
(c) PW-3 Firdous Ahmad Khan (the then Inspector VOK), in his deposition on 7th of June, 2011
stated that he was posted in the VOK on 30.06.2006 and on the said date the complainant filed an
application before SSP VOK (ABP) Wing; that he was running a Fair Price Shop and at the end of
every month a statement was required to be submitted in the office of Supervisor CA&Pb Circle
Mirhama, Kulgam after which ration for the coming month was issued by the department for sale,
but the Supervisor concerned had Page 8 demanded an amount of Rs.1,000/- from him and that he
wanted initiation of legal action against the said Supervisor. Upon this, an FIR was registered and
trap-team constituted and the investigation was entrusted to Inspector Qazi Mehmood and the
witness has stated that besides him other officials of the VOK were included in the team other than
an independent witness Mohd Ashraf Bhat, who was an employee of Social Welfare Department.
The complainant produced an amount of Rs.1000/- which currency notes were treated with
phenolphalein power by inspector Abdul Rashid and the currency notes were seized and thereafter
returned to the complainant and Fardi-Zabti was prepared. The witness has admitted the contents
of the same as true and correct and also identified his signature upon it. Also the currency notes
marked as Mark-i/B to Mark-1/K have been identified by him. The contents of the Fardi-Hawalgi
EXPW1/2 have been admitted by the witness to be true and correct and has identified his signature
thereupon. Pre- trap demonstration was conducted and the pre-trap solution so obtained was sealed
in a bottle. The said bottle upon being seen has been identified by the witness. The witness admitted
the contents of pre-trap demonstration memo and identified his signature upon it. It has been stated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 5
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
that thereafter the trap team proceeded towards spot and the vehicle was stopped at some distance
from the office of CA&PD and the complainant accompanied by the independent witness were sent
to the office of the Supervisor concerned and the complainant was directed by the I/O to pay the
bribe amount to the accused upon his demand, which amount had been handed over to him in the
office of VOK. While the complainant and the independent witness entered into the office of
Supervisor, the other members of the trap team remained outside and after sometime the
independent witness came near the door of the office room and gave a signal towards other
members of the trap team and immediately the members of the trap team entered into the office
room of the accused where the complainant signaled towards the accused Bashir Ahmad Sheikh who
was directed by Ct. Zamir Ahmad to raise his Page 9 hands and held him by his wrists. The I/O
questioned the accused Supervisor as regards the bribe amount who by gestures said that the money
was lying on the table underneath a paper which was seized by the I.O. on spot. The independent
witness tallied the numbers of seized currency notes and found them to be the same as had been
produced by the complainant in the office of VOK and the grain bag statement which had been
produced by complainant before Supervisor Bashir Ahamd Sheikh was seized from another Clerk,
Irshad Ahmad Malik, who was the Depot Assistant. The contents of EXPW-1/4, EXPW-1/7,
EXPW-1/5, EXPW-1/6 & Ext.P4 have been admitted by the witness as true and correct and
identified his signatures upon the said memos. The witness has also identified monthly grain bag
statement pertaining to the month of June 2006. In cross-examination, the witness has stated that
he had previously been associated as a member of trap team some two to four times and in the
instant case when he took part in the proceedings as a member of the trap team, he had full
knowledge of the measures to be adopted. The witness has stated that his statement U/S 161 Cr.P.C.
was recorded on 30th of June, 2006. The witness has further stated that in his statement U/S 161
Cr.P.C. it has been stated by him that upon the acceptance of the money by the alleged accused, the
independent witness Mohd Ashraf Bhat gave a pre- fixed signal towards the other members of the
team upon which all other members of the team, one after the other entered into the office room of
the Supervisor concerned and upon instance of complainant, the accused was held by his wrists and
bribe amount of Rs. 1000/- was recovered from the accused by the I.O. and the relevant memo
prepared and the recovered amount was found to be the some as had been handed over to the
complainant in the office of VOK. A demonstration was conducted by Ct. Zamir Ahmad. It has been
stated by the witness that he deposed before the court, that upon being questioned by the I/O as
regards the bribe amount, the accused pointed towards the table implying that the tainted amount
was upon the some underneath a sheet of paper, but the said fact has Page 10 not been stated by him
in his statement, recorded U/S 161 Cr. P. C. It has been stated by the witness that when his
statement U/S 161 Cr.P.C was recorded before IO, he did not state before him that it was upon the
questioning of the accused and upon his instance that the bribe amount was recovered from the
table underneath a sheet of paper. He has stated that eth statement as deposed by him before the
court was correct. It has been stated that the bribe amount was recovered from the table at the
instance of the accused and seized but the paper which was covering the currency notes was not
seized. However, the IO did not prepare Fardi-Inkishaf (Disclosure-Memo). The witness has stated
that in the recovery memo, it has not been mentioned therein that the bribe amount was recovered
and seized upon the disclosure of the accused and when he signed the said memo, he did not tell IO
that there was no mention of disclosure of accused therein. The witness has stated that disclosure
memo was not prepared, as occurrence and recovery of the trap amount took place within a short
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 6
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
duration and the accused was also present on spot and had not gone anywhere. Further stated, that
it was a fact that the accused neither demanded the bribe in his presence from the complainant nor
was the same accepted by the accused in his presence.
(d) PW-4 Showket Ahmad Pandit, Constable VOK (ABP) Wing), whose statement was recorded on
9th February, 2009, stated that on 30th June, 2006 he was posted in the VOK in ABP Wing as a
Constable and on the said date a trap team was constituted and he was also included as a member in
the said team and Inspector Qazi Mehmood was entrusted with the investigation of the case and an
independent witness was also associated with the trap proceedings. It has been stated that the
complainant produced Rs. 1000/- before the I/O which amount was seized and the said seizure
memo EXPW- 1/1 has been admitted by the witness to bear true contents and has identified his
signature upon it. The said notes were treated with phenolphthalein powder by Inspector Abdul
Rashid and handed back to the complainant and a handing over memo prepared, Page 11 contents of
the same have been admitted by the witness to be true and correct. Pre-trap demonstration was
conducted and solution so obtained was sealed in a bottle and seized pre-trap demonstration memo
was prepared and the same was admitted by the witness to bear true contents identifying his
signature upon it as also identified the bottle containing the pre-trap solution. The witness has
stated that thereafter they left for Kulgam and went to the office of the Supervisor CA&PD and the
complainant accompanied by the independent witness entered into the office room of the accused
while other members of the trap team remained outside and after some time the independent
witness came out and gave a pre-fixed signal towards the other members of the team, who
immediately entered into the room and held the accused by his wrists. The bribe amount was not
recovered from the pockets of the accused, but from the table and seizure memo with regard to the
recovered currency notes was prepared. Thereafter, the post-trap demonstration was conducted and
upon the hand wash of the accused the colour of the solution slightly changed to red and the said
solution was sealed in a bottle and seized. The contents of the post trap demonstration memo have
been admitted by the witness to be true and correct, identifying his signature upon the same.
Personal search of the accused was conducted and a memo prepared, contents whereof have been
admitted by the witness to be true and correct and identified his signature upon it. The witness has
stated that the monthly grain bag statement was seized from the office of Supervisor and a seizure
memo EXPW-1/7 prepare contents of the same have been admitted by the witness to be true and
correct identifying his signature upon it.
In cross-examination the witness has stated that phenolphthalein powder was applied upon the
currency notes by Ct. Abdul Iashid bar, and thereafter the complainant counted the notes and kept
them in his pocket and accordingly a pre-trap hand wash of the complainant was conducted. He has
stated that it is upon the basis of the seals affixed upon the bottles containing the pre-trap and post
Page 12 trap solutions that he had been able to identify them as they were affixed upon them in his
presence, but as to who affixed the seals upon the bottles could not be recollected by him. The
witness has stated that at the time when the seals were affixed, he did not put his signature or any
mark of identification upon them, nor was any such mark put upon them by the independent
witness in his presence. The seal upon the pre-trap solution was affixed upon the bottle by Ct. Abdul
Rashid, while the seal upon the bottle containing the post- trap solution was affixed by Ct. Zamir
Ahmad which seal was in the form of a key. The witness has stated that the bottle contains a red-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 7
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
coloured solution, while the bottle is of a lighter hue. The witness has stated that the accused neither
demanded bribe in his presence nor accepted the some in front of him. The kit containing sodium
carbonate etc. was being held by Ct. Zamir Ahmad. Upon receiving pre-fixed signal, it was the IO
who first entered into the office room of the accused and independent witness also returned back
into the room after the signal was flashed, along with other members of the team. The witness has
stated that when he entered into the room Ct. Zamir Ahmad, I/O and some five to eight officials of
the department concerned were in the room and the witness has stated that when he entered he saw
the accused had raised his hands and Ct. Zamir Ahmad was holding the hands of the accused and
thereafter he also held the hands of the accused and saw the tainted amount upon the table and after
seizure of the bribe amount, the personal search of the accused was conducted and it is not a fact
that in the first instance search of the accused was conducted and when the bribe amount was not
recovered from him, thereafter the money was recovered from the table. The personal search of the
accused was conducted by the I/O and Ct. Zamir Ahmad and the complainant was also present
there. Some five to eight persons were already inside the office who also witnessed the proceedings.
The members of the team remained inside the office room of the accused for around one and a half
hour and the persons who were present therein were witnessing the entire proceedings. The bribe
amount was lying upon the table and some Page 13 files were also lying upon the table. The witness
has stated that he did not see any file lying on the tainted amount nor anything upon it and when he
entered into the room, complainant was standing near the table and he could not recollect as to on
which side of the table the amount was lying. The table was in front of the accused and on the right
and left side people were sitting.
(e) PW-5 Abdul Rashid, SGCt. VOK (ABP Wing), in his statement recorded on 10th of June, 2010
stated that on 30.06.2006 he was posted in VOK as a Constable in the AP Wing and on the said date
the SSP VOK constituted a trap team in connection with the case FIR No. 25/06 wherein, he was
inducted as a member and Inspector Qazi Mehmood was entrusted investigation of the case and the
services of an independent witness Mohd Ashraf Bhat had also been obtained. The witness has
stated that in the office of SSP, the complainant was also present whose name later came to be
known as Mudasir Ahmad Wani. The complainant produced ten currency notes of one hundred
rupee denomination each before the I.O. who prepared a seizure-memo and recorded the numbers
of the currency notes therein. The said seizure memo EXPW-1/1 has been admitted by the witness to
bear true contents and the witness has also identified his signature upon it. The witness has stated
that as per the instructions of the I.O., sprinkled phenolphthalein powder upon currency notes and
handed over the currency notes to the complainant with the direction to pay the money to the
accused upon his demand and Fardi-Hawalgi was prepared by the IO in this regard. The contents of
said memo have been admitted by the witness to be correct and identified his signature upon it. A
pre-trap demonstration was conducted and the solution was sealed in a bottle. The pre-trap
demonstration memo EXPW-1/3 has been admitted by the witness to bear true contents and has
also identified his signature upon it and the bottle containing the pre-trap solution marked as
Mark-1/E has also been identified by him. The witness has identified the currency notes. He has
stated that thereafter the team left for spot Page 14 and that he did not accompany them. Further,
that he got his statement recorded before the IO.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 8
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
In cross-examination, witness has stated that documents upon which he identified his signature
were prepared by Inspector Qazi Mehmood. The witness has stated in his statement u/s 161 Cr.P.C
he had mentioned that the IO directed him to wash his hands with soap and thereafter he prepared
the solution. The witness has stated that his statement under section 161 Cr. P.C. was recorded by
IO, Inspector Qazi Mehmood. It has been stated that in his statement under section 161 Cr.P.C. it
has not been reflected that he washed his hands with soap prior to preparing the solution. The
witness has stated that trap-team was constituted by the SSP concerned.
(f) PW-6 Zamir Ahmad Wagay, SGCt. VOK, whose statement was recorded on 22.11.2011, deposed
that on 30th June, 2006 he was posted in VOK when a trap team was constituted which included
Inspector Firdous Ahmad Khan, Inspector Qazi Mehmood, Ct. Abdul Rashid, Ct. Showkat Ahmad
and the independent witness Mohd Ashraf who was an employee of the Social Welfare Department
for the purpose of laying a trap in the instant case. The witness has stated that all the members
assembled in the office of the inspector, Qazi Mehmood and one more person was present there who
was not known to him and that Inspector Qazi Mehmood told him that some employee was
demanding a bribe from him. The witness has stated that they proceeded towards Kulgam and
reached Mirhama village and the independent witness was directed to keep a close eye and to
over-hear the conversation as might take place on spot and to give a pre-fixed signal upon the
acceptance of the bribe money by the accused. The complainant entered inside the office room of the
accused while the independent witness remained near the door of the said room and as soon as the
independent witness gave a prefixed signal, the witness has stated that he immediately entered
inside the room and caught hold of the accused by his wrists and thereafter other members of the
team entered inside the room and searched for the tainted amount which was found lying upon the
Page 15 table in front of the accused and on the said bribe amount a sheet of paper was lying. The
personal search of accused was also conducted. The contents of recovery memo have been admitted
by the witness to be true and correct. The currency notes have been identified by the witness to be
the same as had been seized from the table of the accused and were lying underneath a sheet of
paper and had been seized on spot. Thereafter, the post trap demonstration was conducted in the
office room of the accused and the hand wash of the accused tested positive. The said solution was
sealed in a bottle. The bottle containing the solution has been identified by the witness. The witness
has stated that it is a fact that impression of the seal used is taken upon the demonstration memo
and if it is given on Superdnama, its impression is also recorded on the said Superdnama but in the
instant case the impression of the seal which was used was neither taken upon EXPW-1/5 nor on
Ext.P4. The key used for the purpose was of medium size, but could not recollect as to what was
written upon it. The witness has stated that he had no knowledge as to what transpired inside the
office room of the accused prior to receiving prefixed signal and that the accused neither demanded
bribe from the complainant nor accepted the some in his presence. The paper which was lying upon
the currency notes on the table of the accused was not seized, He has stated that he could not say as
to why he had not been kept a witness to the pre-trap proceedings. It has been stated that it is a fact
that the paper under which the tainted amount was recovered would have also borne traces of
phenolphthalein powder and also finger prints of the person who kept it there.
(g) PW-7 Irshad Ahmad Malik (the then Depot Assistant CA&PD Mirhama), in his statement,
deposed that on 30.06.2006, he was posted in the office of Supervisor CA&PD Mirhama as Depot
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 9
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
Assistant and the dealers were required to deposit their monthly grain bag statements in the said
office at the end of every month which reflected the quantity of rice, sugar etc. distributed during the
month as also the balance left over and in case the said statement Page 16 was not deposited their
license would get suspended. He has stated that when the occurrence took place the accused was
functioning as the Supervisor and the VOK officials entered into the office of the Supervisor. The
witness has stated that when he entered the room at that time accused/Store-keeper, Mudasir
Ahmad (complainant), Nazir Ahmad Gartie (Store-keeper) Mirhama, Chowkidar Mohd Shaban and
Abdul Rehman Sheikh (Store-keeper) as also Ghulam Nabi, were present. Mudasir Ahmad was
running a Fair Price Shop in Mirhama and was required to submit his monthly grain bag statement
before accused. The witness has stated that he saw one of VOK officials entering the room who was
told by Mudasir Ahmad that accused was demanding money from him and signaled towards
accused and at that time an amount of Rs. 1000/- was lying upon the table. That he heard the
accused telling Mudasir Ahmad to pick up the money, but that was so when VOK officials entered
into the room. Thereafter, VOK officials picked the money from the table and seized the amount in
his presence and no other proceeding took place. However, VOK officials brought water in a glass
and mixed some powder in it and some two to three persons including him, Ghulam Nabi and an
official of the VOK were made to wash their hands, but the colour of the solution did not change.
Thereafter, the handwash of accused in the same solution was conducted upon which colour of the
solution changed into pink. The witness has also identified the bottle containing the solution
marked as Mark- 1/L. Further stated that the grain bag statement was seized on spot and seizure
memo prepared.
In cross-examination, the witness has stated that as a Clerk in the said office he used to check the
grain bag statement and the said statements used to remain in his custody. When grain bag
statements were given to him, he used to check the some and after being checked by him the
statements were sent to the office of the Assistant Director and no receipt was issued upon receiving
the grain bag statement. The accused was functioning as Supervisor and it is a fact that when he
used to check grain bag statements, thereafter Page 17 he used to present it before the Supervisor
and the accused in his capacity as a Supervisor signed the same and forwarded it to the Assistant
Director CA&PFD. The witness has stated that the grain bag statement first used to come before
Supervisor who after marking it, sent it to him for being checked. It has been stated by the witness
that whatever proceedings took place in the room before him, VOK officials prepared documents
thereto and he put his signatures upon those documents and other than that no other proceeding
took place. The witness has denied contents of demonstration memo. He has stated that VOK
officials recorded his statement on spot. The witness has stated that in his statement under section
161 Cr.P.C a mention has been made about handwash of Mohd Ashraf Bhat and accused, but no
mention has been made about his hand wash and at the time when handwash was conducted,
Chowkidar Mohd Ramzan Bhat and two other persons were also present in the room. In the first
instance, Mudasir Ahmad and another civilian entered into the office room of the accused and after
that he entered into the room of the accused and after that he entered into the room and thereafter
the VOK officials entered into the room of the accused and after that he entered into the room and
thereafter the VOK officials entered into the room, while Chowkidar Mohd Shaban etc. were already
present inside the room. It has been stated by the witness that when he entered into the room,
Mudasir Ahmad Wani had already entered therein and as to what events took place before he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 10
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
entered there, was not known to him and as such he had no knowledge as to when Mudasir Ahamd
Wani produced the grain bag statement before the Supervisor.
(h) PW-8 Reyaz Ahmad Wani (the then Assistant Director CA&PD Anantnag, in his statement
recorded on 21.04.2010 has stated that he was posted as the Assistant Director CA&PED Anantnag
on 15th of July, 2006 and that the accused is known to him since he was posted as the Supervisor
Mirhama Kulgam. The contents of Ext.P8 have been admitted by the witness to be true and correct,
which communication bears No.1808 dated 15.07.2006. The ration tickets Page 18 pertaining
AAY/APL and are given to the concerned Supervisor for distribution among the people. The accused
was provided approximately 3500/: ration tickets in the month of June 2006. The contents of
Ext.P8/1 have been admitted by the witness to be true and correct and identified his signature upon
it. The witness has identified the photocopy of the order dated 24.02.2006 marked as Mark-'R' and
admitted that same has been attested by him and has identified his signature Ext.P8/2 upon it and
the accused as per the said order is figuring at S. No.4. By virtue of said order the accused has been
posted at Mirhama. The witness has identified the photostat copy of the license of Mudasir Ahmad
Wani and same stands attested by him.
In cross-examination the witness has stated that he did not himself perused the record. He has
stated that in his statement recorded by the IO the number and date of the communication Ext.P8
was not recorded, however, the details were given though not recorded fully and as mentioned in the
statement that the accused had deposited Rs, 14,485/- on 24.07.2006, the amount stood collected
on account of sale of ration tickets and had been deposited against some head. More-over when
ration tickets are issued receipts are obtained by the Supervisor from various Store-keepers and
until the Store-keeper obtains the price of the ration tickets from the people and hands it over to the
Supervisor, till then the Supervisor cannot deposit the money. Further, that he cannot state whether
as mentioned in the communication Ext.P8 dated 15.07.2006 that an amount of Rs.33,000/- was
outstanding against the accused, had in fact been received by the accused from the concerned
Storekeepers and had no knowledge about the same at the time the communication was made.
In re-examination, witness has stated that it was after issuance of the letter accused deposited
Rs.14,400/- in Treasury on 24.07.2006. Further he stated that he could not say anything about the
record by virtue of which he had written in the letter Ext.P8 that the accused Page 19 had an amount
of Rs. 33,000/- outstanding, nor about the record whereby the accused had deposited Rs.14,400.
(i) PW-9 Shabir Ahmad Yeswi (the Scientific Officer, FSL Srinagar), in his statement recorded on
12th April, 2012 has stated that on 31st of July, 2006 he received two sealed bottles in his office for
chemical examination from the office of VOK and that he examined the some upon which he
formulated his opinion. The expert opinion given by him was sent to the VOK. The said report has
been stated by the witness to bear true contents and he has identified his signature upon it. The
witness has stated that after conducting examination of chemical in solution, the solution as again
resealed in the bottles and bottles, which bottles have been identified by witness.
In cross-examination, witness has stated that due to number affixed upon the bottles i.e. 485 dated
04.07.2006 in the FSL and by virtue of the seal affixed by the FSL upon them, he could identify the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 11
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
bottles in court. The letter Ext.P9 makes a mention of a letter of the SSP VOK dated 04.07.2006, but
another letter from the office of Executive Magistrate was received, mention of which has not been
mode in Ext.P9. The witness has stated that though para-No.1 of Ext.P9 mentions three intact seals
being affixed, but the impression of the said seals was not placed upon Ext.P9. The witness has
stated that the number recorded upon the bottles i.e. 485 has not been mentioned in the report and
the impression of the seal which was used at the time of resealing of bottles has neither been taken
upon the report Ext.P9 nor upon the letter marked as Mark-SA. The witness has stated that it is a
fact that at the time of conducting of chemical examination when the bottles were resealed colour of
the solution as existed on date was not mentioned in the report, nor in the letter marked as
Mark-SA. The witness has stated that he could not recollect after how long the chemical
examination was conducted in the FSL when the bottles were received but the examination was
conducted between 04.07.2006 to 31.07.2006. For conducting the chemical examination samples
were obtained from Page 20 the bottles and remaining solution in the bottles were resealed but
exhibits were not placed upon the bottles. However, record of the same lies in their office in Legal
Section. The witness has stated that he had forgotten to put the exhibits upon the bottles and that in
the report it has not been mentioned that upon the solution being examined sodium carbonate was
detected therein, but that phenolphthalein powder was found in the said solution.
(j) PW-10 Ghulam Hassan Bhat (the then SSP VOK), recorded on 22nd January 2012 has stated that
on 30th June 2006, he was also functioning as SHO P/S VOK and FIR in the instant case was
registered by him and the investigation of the case was handed over to Inspector Qazi Mehmood.
The witness has identified his endorsement upon the application of the complainant bearing his
signature. The witness has stated that the challan comprising of three leaves was compiled after
necessary sanction was obtained. In cross-examination, witness has stated that he had
communicated to the Central Office as regards grant of sanction and that challan was prepared on
the basis of investigation conducted.
(k) PW-11, N.D. Wani (the then SSP VOK) stated that he was posted as SSP VOK on 30.06.2006 and
in connection with the instant FIR no.25/06, he issued two orders which are on record of the file. He
states that likewise another order dated 3.06.2006 was issued by him.
In cross-examination, witness has stated that it is a fact that in the communication exhibited as
Ext.P11/4, the colour of solution in bottles marked as HW-1, HW-2 has not been mentioned. The
authorization by Executive Magistrate mentioned in Ext.P11/4 was not seen by him in the court. The
witness stated that in the letter exhibited as Ext.P11/1 beneath the number of the letter, the dote
bears over-writing and the said letter was issued before proceeding on spot and at that time it was
not known as to whether the accused would be trapped or not and it has not been specifically
mentioned in the order that the accused be arrested upon being trapped. The witness has stated that
it is a fact that Ghulam Hassan Bhat was Page 21 functioning as the SHO P/S VOK. The witness has
stated that upon receipt of the written complaint he himself entrusted the investigation of the case
to Inspector Qazi Mehmood. Further that he saw photocopy of letter of authority issued by
Executive Magistrate to Director FSL.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 12
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
(l) PW-12, Qazi Syed Mehmood, IO, the then Inspector, VOK, has stated that on 30.06.2006, the
investigation of the case FIR no.25/2006 P/S VOK was entrusted to him. During investigation he
questioned the complainant in light of his complaint, upon which FIR had been registered, which
revealed that the complainant Mudasir Ahmad Wani had been running a commission-based Centre
on behalf of the CA&PD at Mirhama, Kulgam and at the end of the month a monthly statement used
to be submitted to the Supervisor concerned and for receipt of which the Supervisor Bashir Ahmad
Sheikh had demanded an amount of Rs. 1000/- from him, upon which he filed a complaint with the
P/S VOK and sought legal action against the accused. A trap team was constituted by the SSP (ABP)
and the services of an independent witness were requisitioned and associated with the trap team as
such. The complainant produced an amount of Rs. 1000/- which was seized and a seizure-memo
EXPW- 1/1 prepared, contents of which have been admitted by the witness as true and correct, as
also identified his signature upon it. The witness has also admitted the contents of the handing over
memo EXPW-1/2 and the pre-trap demonstration memo EXPW-1/3 as true and correct and
identified his signatures upon said memos. The complainant was directed to hand over the notes to
the accused only upon his demand. Thereafter the members of the team except Ct. Abdul Rashid
accompanied by the complainant proceeded towards the office of the Supervisor CA&PD Circle
Mirhama, Kulgam and upon reaching there the complainant accompanied by the independent
witness were sent to the said office of the accused Supervisor and the other members of the team
walked at some distance and Ct. Zamir Ahmad was placed nearby the office of the Supervisor
concerned and was nominated as the shadow witness.
Page 22 The complainant accompanied by the independent witness entered into the office room of
the Supervisor concerned and after sometime the independent. witness gave a pre-fixed signal
towards the other members of the team while he came out of the room of accused and other
members of the team immediately entered into the office room of the Supervisor CA&PD Circle
Mirhama, Kulgqm where f at the instance of the independent witness and the complainant, the
accused Bashir Ahmad was directed to raise his hands. A demonstration was conducted and in the
solution of water and sodium carbonate handwash of the independent witness was conducted in the
first instance upon which the colour of the solution remained unchanged and thereafter in the some
solution hand wash of the accused was conducted which tested positive and the post- trap
demonstration memo EXPW-1/5 prepared, contents whereof have been admitted by the witness as
true and correct and identified his signature upon it. The witness has stated that upon the disclosure
of the accused Bashir Ahmad Sheikh the tainted amount of Rs.1000/- was recovered from his table
which was seized on spot and seizure memo prepared. The witness has admitted the contents of the
recovery memo EXPW-1/4 as true and correct and identified his signature upon it. Also contents of
seizure memo pertaining to monthly grain bag statement EXPW-1/7 and memo pertaining to the
personal search of the accused EXPW-1/6 have been admitted by the witness to be true and correct
and identified his signatures upon the said memos. The witness has also identified the contents of
the site plan Ext.P12 to be true and correct and identified his signature upon it. During
investigation, statements of the witness were recorded and pre-tap and post trap solutions were sent
to the FSL, Srinagar, for chemical examination and report obtained. Also the service particulars of
accused, Bashir Ahmad Sheikh, were obtained. He states that during investigation it was established
that the accused in his capacity as Supervisor CA&PD Mirhama Circle, Kulgam demanded an illegal
gratification of Rs. 1000/- from the complainant for receiving his monthly grain bag statement and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 13
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
Page 23 thereby committed the offence u/S 5(2) P.C. Act and Section 161 R.P.C. and accordingly the
challan was compiled and submitted to the higher authorities for obtaining the requisite sanction
from the government and upon receiving the sanction challan has been produced in court.
In cross-examination, witness has stated that he had been posted in VOK for quite some time and
had full knowledge about the trap cases and that he fully recollected the events and proceedings
which took place on the day of occurrence. That when the case was entrusted to him for
investigation, he held the rank of an Inspector and when the investigation of the case was completed
by him at that time also, he held the same rank. He has stated that it is a fact that an officer of the
rank of an Inspector under Section 5 P.C. Act, cannot effect arrest. The witness has stated that he
had been authorized by N.D. Wani in this regard. It has been stated that in a trap case neither IO
nor any other officer of VOK knows as to whether the trap would be successful or not. He states that
order, Ext.P11/1 was provided to him by SSP (ABP) before they left for spot and as per the said order
the name of the accused had been mentioned prior to the proceeding on spot authorizing him to
effect his arrest and when the said order was handed over to him he was not in know of the fact as to
whether Bashir Ahmad Sheikh would be trapped or not. The witness has stated that in his
examination-in- chief he did not mention that accused after keeping bribe amount on the table
placed a sheet of paper upon it. The said paper underneath which the accused kept the bribe amount
was not seized as it was not considered necessary. He has stated that when he entered into room, the
bribe amount was not covered by any paper and prior to him Constable Zamir Ahmad went inside
the office room of accused to whom accused said that the bribe amount was lying on the table and as
per Zamir Ahmad paper had been placed upon the bribe amount which was removed by Constable
Zamior Ahmad. The witness has stated that the accused did not point towards bribe amount in his
presence and when he entered into the room, the bribe Page 24 amount was seized from the table
upon the instance of accused on the basis of statement of Constable Zamir Ahmad and as the
complainant and independent witness narrated so. The witness upon being question as to whether
at the time of preparing seizure memo, it was in his knowledge as per investigation that the bribe
amount was being seized from table upon identification of accused, the witness has replied in
affirmative and stated that it was well within his knowledge that the bribe amount was lying on the
table of the accused which was before one and all present and the accused had been seen keeping the
bribe amount on the table by the complainant as well as independent witness and as such he did not
consider it necessary to mention it in the seizure memo that tainted amount was seized upon
identification of accused and it has come in the statements of the witnesses that the accused was
fully in know about the bribe amount being kept on the table. The witness has stated that he
deposed about the recovery of bribe amount at the instance of accused as same came out as the crux
of investigation. The witness stated that in his presence neither accused accepted money nor made
any such demand nor did he see accused placing bribe amount upon table and it is a fact that no
other trap member besides complainant and independent witness had witnessed the demand for
bribe being made by accused or its acceptance by him or bribe amount being kept upon table after
its acceptance by accused.
5. After recording statement of prosecution witnesses, accused/ appellant was explained evidence on
record against him in terms of Section 342 Cr.P.C. He maintained that he neither demanded nor
accepted any bribe from complainant. He stated that in fact complainant came to his office room
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 14
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
with his grain bag statement and shook hands with him and placed the grain bag statement upon his
table, which resulted in some scuffle between him and complainant and in the meantime some
officials entered into his office room and seized the money which had been Page 25 concealed under
the grain bag statement which was lying on the table.
He also stated that complainant was running a sale centre of CA&PD in Mirhama Circle, Kulgam
and was indulging in black marketing of rice etc. and upon his raising objection, complainant lodged
a false case against him in VOK. Accused/ appellant in his defence produced three witnesses. Trial
Court by impugned judgement
6. To challenge impugned conviction and sentence, it is being averred that respondents have
concocted a false and frivolous case against appellant as regards demand of Rs.1000/- from
complainant to accept monthly statement of distribution of ration among people of the aera. He
neither demanded bribe nor accepted it and in fact on presentation of statement by complainant he
as usual initiated it and returned it to complainant for onward necessary action at the end of
concerned clerk as is evident from the record. Allegations levelled against appellant by prosecution
and complainant are not based on reality and entire case set up against him was concocted and
manipulation to cause harm to him and spoil his future. Prosecution is stated to have failed to
establish guilt against appellant that too beyond reasonable doubt. There has been lot of
contradiction on material facts which have not been appreciated by Trial Court. Independent
witness has himself stated that complainant of his own thrusted bribe amount to appellant which
appellant refused to accept and resisted and threw it back but Trial Court has not appreciated the
said statement of independent.
7. Learned counsel for appellant would contend that the Trial Court has not appreciated the fact that
prosecution has failed to establish at trial the guilt of accused/appellant inasmuch as there was no
question of Page 26 demanding bribe from complainant as it was in fact complainant who
approached office of appellant with his grain bag statement and shook hands with him and placed
his grain bag statement upon the table, which resulted in some argument between appellant and
complainant and in the meantime officials of VOK entered into room and seized the money
concealed under the grain bag statement and with regard to which appellant had no knowledge till
the same was seized. Learned counsel for appellant also claims that the tainted currency notes were
taken out by complainant himself out of his own packet and placed those notes on the table and
shook hands with appellant and therefore appellant came in contact with phenolphthalein powder.
According to learned counsel, prosecution case is full of contradictions. He has invited attention of
this Court to independent prosecution witness-2, namely, Mohd Ashraf Bhat, who was then Orderly
in Directorate of Social Welfare Department, whose statement was recorded by Trial Court on 2nd
April 2009. During cross examination he stated that the trap team was headed by an Inspector who
effected the arrest of the accused. The said officer did not show on spot any order by virtue of which
he had been authorized to arrest the accused nor has any such order been shown to him in the court.
The witness has stated that prior to being associated as a member of the trap team in the instant
case, he has participated in like matters and has been associated as an independent witness a
number of times. The witness has stated that on account of his experience he could state that the
colour of the hand wash of the complainant is of dark pink colour, whereas the colour of the hand
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 15
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
wash of the accused is of lighter hue and it is due to slips affixed Page 27 upon the bottle that he
could identify the solution as hand wash of the complainant. The witness has stated that in his
examination-in-chief he could identify the bottles since Prosecuting Officer told him as to which
bottle pertained to demonstration No.1 and which bottle pertained to demonstration No.2. He has
stated that he could not himself read out as to what was written upon the slips affixed upon the
bottles containing the solution. The witness has however stated that three or four officials of the
VOK besides the complainant and he himself comprised the trap party. It has been stated by him
that it is a fact that when the complainant paid the money to accused, the accused refused to accept
the same resulting in some tussle between the duo and the complainant was holding the money in
his hands and the accused was trying to ward off the hands of the complainant away from him.
According to learned counsel for appellant, there is absence of demand and acceptance of bribe on
the part of accused/appellant.
8. From the statement of independent witness of prosecution, it is vividly evident that there had
been no evidence of both demand and/or acceptance of bribe by accused/appellant. It is not enough
to simply prove a public official misused their authority; there should be concrete proof that public
official solicited or received something of value in exchange for an official act. The Prevention of
Corruption Act (PC Act) requires proof that a public servant demanded and accepted the bribe.
9. In the present case from the materials produced before the Trial Court there is nothing to indicate
that a demand or acceptance of bribe by appellant which would clearly infer that there is no question
of any proof being provided, on that aspect, at the trial. In this context, I have Page 28 to look at the
Constitution Bench decision in Neeraj Dutta v. State (NCT of Delhi) (2012) 4 SCC 731. Paragraph 88
thereof reads as under:
"88. What emerges from the aforesaid discussion is summarised as under:
88.1. (a) Proof of demand and acceptance of illegal gratification by a public servant as
a fact in issue by the prosecution is a sine qua non in order to establish the guilt of the
accused public servant under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act.
88.2. (b) In order to bring home the guilt of the accused, the prosecution has to first
prove the demand of illegal gratification and the subsequent acceptance as a matter
of fact. This fact in issue can be proved either by direct evidence which can be in the
nature of oral evidence or documentary evidence.
88.3. (c) Further, the fact in issue, namely, the proof of demand and acceptance of
illegal gratification can also be proved by circumstantial evidence in the absence of
direct oral and documentary evidence.
88.4. (d) In order to prove the fact in issue, namely, the demand and acceptance of
illegal gratification by the public servant, the following aspects have to be borne in
mind:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 16
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
(i) if there is an offer to pay by the bribe-giver without there being any demand from
the public servant and the latter simply accepts the offer and receives the illegal
gratification, it is a case of acceptance as per Section 7 of the Act. In such a case, there
need not be a prior demand by the public servant.
(ii) On the other hand, if the public servant makes a demand and the bribe-giver
accepts the demand and tenders the demanded gratification which in turn is received
by the public servant, it is a case of obtainment. In the case of obtainment, the prior
demand for illegal gratification emanates from the public servant. This is an offence
under Sections 13(1)
(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act.
(iii) In both cases of (i) and (ii) above, the offer by the bribe-giver and the demand by
the public servant respectively have to be proved by the prosecution as a fact in issue.
In other words, mere acceptance or receipt of an illegal gratification without anything
more would not make it an offence under Section 7 or Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii),
respectively of the Act. Therefore, under Section 7 of the Act, in order to bring home
the offence, there must be an offer which emanates from the bribe-giver which is
accepted by the public servant which would make it an offence. Similarly, a prior
demand by the public servant when accepted by the bribegiver and in turn there is a
payment made which Page 29 is received by the public servant, would be an offence
of obtainment under Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act.
88.5. (e) The presumption of fact with regard to the demand and acceptance or obtainment of an
illegal gratification may be made by a court of law by way of an inference only when the foundational
facts have been proved by relevant oral and documentary evidence and not in the absence thereof.
On the basis of the material on record, the court has the discretion to raise a presumption of fact
while considering whether the fact of demand has been proved by the prosecution or not. Of course,
a presumption of fact is subject to rebuttal by the accused and in the absence of rebuttal
presumption stands. 88.6. (f) In the event the complainant turns "hostile", or has died or is
unavailable to let in his evidence during trial, demand of illegal gratification can be proved by letting
in the evidence of any other witness who can again let in evidence, either orally or by documentary
evidence or the prosecution can prove the case by circumstantial evidence. The trial does not abate
nor does it result in an order of acquittal of the accused public servant.
88.7. (g) Insofar as Section 7 of the Act is concerned, on the proof of the facts in issue, Section 20
mandates the court to raise a presumption that the illegal gratification was for the purpose of a
motive or reward as mentioned in the said Section. The said presumption has to be raised by the
court as a legal presumption or a presumption in law. Of course, the said presumption is also subject
to rebuttal. Section 20 does not apply to Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act. 88.8. (h) We clarify
that the presumption in law under Section 20 of the Act is distinct from presumption of fact referred
to above in sub-para 88.5 (e), above, as the former is a mandatory presumption while the latter is
discretionary in nature."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 17
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
10. The Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court has held that the proof of demand or an offer and
acceptance of illegal gratification by a public servant is a fact in issue in the criminal proceeding and
is a sine qua non to establish the guilt of accused public servant under PC Act.
Unless proof is offered to the satisfaction of the court that there is a demand and acceptance of
illegal gratification, the presumption would not arise. The presumption under the Act cannot arise
on the mere allegation of a demand and acceptance of illegal gratification as rightly Page 30 pointed
out by appellant. The question of presumption does not arise in the present case where the Trial
Court has merely examined the complainant and also summoned the witnesses, the officers/officials
of the trap team and investigation team for the purpose of recording their statements; even the
independent witness produced and examined by prosecution does not corroborate prosecution
story.
11. Perusal of impugned judgement reveals that Trial Court has observed that appellant demanded
and accepted the bribe, whereas, as a matter of fact, independent witness adduced and examined by
prosecution has stated contrary to it. From his statement, it is in unequivocal terms evident that
appellant did neither make any demand nor did he accept the bribe. It is also evident from the
statement of independent prosecution witness that alleged bribe amount was not recovered from
possession of appellant inasmuch as the amount was lying on the table as is stated by independent
witness of prosecution as well.
12. The Trial Court has ignored the fact from the statement of independent witness of prosecution
that there was no demand or acceptance of bribe by accused/ appellant inasmuch as the Trial court
has misdirected itself in going through the statement of independent witness of prosecution;
even official witnesses of prosecution have not been able to prove and establish demand and
acceptance of bribe by appellant.
13. In B. Jayaraj v. State of Andhra Pradesh, 2014 (13) SCC 55, it was said by the Supreme Court that
is a settled position in law that demand of illegal gratification is sine qua non to constitute the
offence as contemplated under Prevention of Corruption Act and mere recovery of currency notes
cannot constitute the offence thereunder unless it is Page 31 proved beyond all reasonable doubt
that accused voluntarily accepted the money knowing it to be a bribe. The proof of demand of illegal
gratification, thus, is the gravamen of the offence under the provision of P. C. Act and in absence
thereof, unmistakably the charge therefor, would fail.
14. The above position has also been laid down in several judgements of the Supreme Court.
Reference in this regard is made to C.M. Sharma v.
State of A.P. 2010 (15) SCC 1; C. M. Girish Babu v. CBI, 2009 (3) SCC 779. It is likewise well settled
that mere recovery by itself cannot prove the charge of prosecution against accused. [See: N.
Vijaykumar v. State of Tamil Nadu, AIR 2021 SC 766]. In the aforesaid matters, it has been
reiterated that to prove the charge, it has to be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the accused
voluntarily accepted money knowing it to be bribe. Absence of proof of demand for illegal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 18
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
gratification and mere possession or recovery of currency notes is not sufficient to constitute such
offence. In the abovesaid judgments it has also been held that even the presumption can be drawn
only after demand for and acceptance of illegal gratification is proved. It is also fairly well settled
that initial presumption of innocence in the criminal jurisprudence gets doubled by acquittal
recorded by the trial court.
15. Before recording conviction under the provisions of the Prevention of Corruption Act, the courts
have to take utmost care in scanning the evidence. Once conviction is recorded under the provisions
of Prevention of Corruption Act, it casts a social stigma on the person in the society apart from
serious consequences on the service rendered.
Page 32
16. The Supreme Court, in the case of K. Shanthamma v. State of Telangana, AIR 2022 SC 1134, has
held as follows:
"10. We have given careful consideration to the submissions. We have perused the
depositions of the prosecution witnesses. The offence under Section 7 of the PC Act
relating to public servants taking bribe requires a demand of illegal gratification and
the acceptance thereof. The proof of demand of bribe by a public servant and its
acceptance by him is sine qua non for establishing the offence under Section 7 of the
PC Act."
17. In P. Satyanarayana Murthy v. State of A.P., (2015) 10 SCC 152, the Supreme Court has
summarised the well- settled law on the subject in para 23 which reads thus:
"23. The proof of demand of illegal gratification, thus, is the gravamen of the offence
under Sections 7 and 13 (1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act and in absence thereof,
unmistakably the charge therefor, would fail.
Mere acceptance of any amount allegedly by way of illegal gratification or recovery
thereof, dehors the proof of demand, ipso facto, would thus not be sufficient to bring
home the charge under these two sections of the Act. As a corollary, failure of the
prosecution to prove the demand for illegal gratification would be fatal and mere
recovery of the amount from the person accused of the offence under Section 7 or 13
of the Act would not entail his conviction thereunder."
18. In A. Subair v. State of Kerala, (2009) 6 SCC 587 , the Supreme Court while dwelling on the
purport of the statutory prescription of Section 7 and 13 (1)(d) of the P.C. Act ruled that the
prosecution has to prove the charge thereunder beyond reasonable doubt like any other criminal
offence and that the accused should be considered to be innocent till it is established otherwise by
proper proof of demand and acceptance of illegal gratification, which are vital ingredients necessary
to be proved to record a conviction.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 19
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
19. In State of Kerala and another v. C. P. Rao, (2011) 6 SCC 450 , the Supreme Court reiterating its
earlier dictum, vis--vis the same offences, held that mere recovery by itself, would not prove the
charge Page 33 against the accused and in absence of any evidence to prove payment of bribe or to
show that the accused had voluntarily accepted the money knowing it to be bribe, conviction cannot
be sustained.
20. In the present case, independent witness of prosecution did not support prosecution case insofar
as demand by accused is concerned. Even in his examination in chief deposition, he has stated that
complainant handed over Rs.1000/- to accused but accused asked complainant reason for payment
of money, upon which complainant told him to keep money but accused refused to take the same.
The said independent witness has also stated that he gave a signal to other members of the team
who were waiting outside and they immediately entered into the room and held the accused. The
accused was asked about bribe amount who told them that money was lying upon the table. On his
cross-
examination, independent witness of prosecution has stated that it is a fact that when complainant
paid money to accused, the accused refused to accept the same resulting in some tussle between duo
and that complainant was holding money in his hands and accused was trying to ward-off the hands
of complainant away from him.
21. The other witnesses adduced and examined by prosecution are official witnesses and they had
not been present when complainant is alleged to have tried to give money to accused and they
entered the room only after they were given signal. In such situation, the Trial Court is not correct to
hold that demand allegedly made by accused has been proved. The only other material available is
the recovery of the tainted currency notes not from the possession of the accused but from the table.
Thus, there is no proof of demand to bring home the offence Page 34 punishable under the
provisions of the P.C. Act. The above also will be conclusive insofar as the offence under Section
5(1)(d) read with Section 5(2) of J&K P.C. Act, 2006, is concerned as in absence of any proof of
demand for illegal gratification, the use of corrupt or illegal means or abuse of position as a public
servant to obtain any valuable thing or pecuniary advantage cannot be held to be established.
22. In any event, it is only on proof of acceptance of illegal gratification that presumption can be
drawn that such gratification was received for doing or forbearing to do any official act. Proof of
acceptance of illegal gratification can follow only if there is proof of demand. As the same is lacking
in the present case, the primary facts on the basis of which the legal presumption can be drawn are
wholly absent. In view of the contradictions noticed above in the depositions of key witnesses
examined on behalf of prosecution, I am of the view that the demand for and acceptance of bribe
amount by appellant is not proved beyond reasonable doubt.
23. Having regard to such evidence on record, the acquittal of accused/ appellant is a possible view,
as such, the judgment of the Trial Court is fit to be set aside.
24. In reiteration of the golden principle which runs through the web of administration of justice in
criminal cases, the Supreme Court in Sujit Biswas v. State of Assam (2013) 12 SCC 406, has held
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 20
Bashir Ahmad Sheikh Age 65 Years S/O ... vs State Of J&K Through Vok Srinagar on 21 August, 2025
that suspicion, however grave, cannot take the place of proof and the prosecution cannot afford to
rest its case in the realm of "may be" true but has to upgrade it in the domain of "must be" true in
order to steer clear of any possible surmise or conjecture. It was held, that the Court must ensure
Page 35 that miscarriage of justice is avoided and if in the facts and circumstances, two views are
plausible, then the benefit of doubt must be given to the accused.
25. The materials on record when judged on the touch stone of the legal principles adumbrated
hereinabove, leave no manner of doubt that prosecution, in the instant case, has failed to prove
unequivocally, demand of illegal gratification and, thus, I am constrained to hold that it would be
wholly unsafe to sustain the conviction of the appellant under Section 5(1)(d) read with Section 5(2)
of the J&K Prevention of Corruption Act, 2006 Svt and Section 161 RPC as well.
26. In the result, appeal succeeds. Impugned judgment and order dated 20th October 2014, of the
court of Additional Special Judge, Anticorruption, Kashmir, Srinagar is set-aside. Appellant is on
bail. His bail bond stands discharged.
27. Trial record be sent back.
(Vinod Chatterji Koul) Judge Srinagar 21.08.2025 Ajaz Ahmad, Secretary Whether approved for
reporting? Yes/No. Page 36
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101162262/ 21
