Benia Been Aged 36 Years S/O Noor Baksh vs Union Territory Of J&K on 15 September, 2023
Benia Been Aged 36 Years S/O Noor Baksh vs Union Territory
Of J&K on 15 September, 2023
Sr. No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
Bail App No. 199/2023
Reserved on: 13.09.2023
Pronounced on: 15.09.2023
1. Benia Been aged 36 years S/O Noor Baksh, .....Petitioner(s)
R/O Village Balli Nalah Tehsil & District
Udhampur.
2. Faqir Ali aged 37 years, S/O Hussain Ali,
R/O Village Kheri, Shajalta, Tehsil and
District, Udhampur.
3. Roshan Din aged 66 years S/O Ismayal,
R/O Village Balli Nallah, Tehsil and
District Udhampur.
Through :- Mrs. Zainab Shamas Watali, Advocate
v/s
Union Territory of J&K .....Respondent(s)
Through SHO Police Station,
Udhampur.
Through :- Mr. Dewakar Sharma, Dy AG
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Petitioners facing trial in a case arising out of FIR No. 69/2021 registered at Police Station,
Udhampur before the Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge, Udhampur and having been
charge-sheeted for the commission of offence punishable under Section 376-D IPC on 17.08.2021
and on rejection of their application for grant of bail by the trial Court vide order dated 11.07.2023,
have moved this application for grant of bail before this Court.
2. It has been pleaded that the prosecution evidence has been completed, the accused have also been
examined in terms of Section 313 CrPC and asked to enter upon their defence; that the medical
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61117047/ 1
Benia Been Aged 36 Years S/O Noor Baksh vs Union Territory Of J&K on 15 September, 2023
evidence produced by the prosecution totally falsifies the prosecution story and the version of the
complainant/prosecutrix; that there are major contradictions/improvements in the prosecution
evidence recorded before the trial Court; that one of the petitioner, namely, Roshan Din is more
than 66 years of age having his right arm amputated about eight years ago, as such, the accusation
that he was holding arms of prosecutrix is not possible to be believed by his such handicap; that the
petitioners had been made to suffer incarceration for the last more than two years though they were
innocent and had not committed any offence; that the petitioners have been falsely implicated due
to enmity between the families on account of the fact that the sister of the accused/petitioner No.1
had filed a report in the Police Station against her husband Mohd Mushtaq, who happens to be the
brother of prosecutrix herein, as such, the case had been managed to settle scores with the
petitioners. The petitioners have placed on record copies of the charge- sheet, statements of the
witnesses recorded during trial and the medical certificate with regard to the examination of the
prosecutrix. Finally, it was prayed that the applicants be admitted to bail.
3. Pursuant to notice, respondent has filed objections to the application asserting therein that the
petitioners had been accused and charge-sheeted for the charge of gang rape of a rustic woman of a
village and that during the trial, the prosecution has examined almost all the witnesses who have
supported the prosecution case, making incriminating statements against all the petitioners to have
committed gang rape with the prosecutrix. It has been pleaded that the petitioners are accused of an
offence which is grave in nature and in view of the evidence led by the prosecution against them, the
petitioners are not entitled to be admitted to bail as the trial court has recently rejected their plea for
grant of bail and finally it was prayed that the application be rejected.
4. Learned counsel for the petitioners argued that as per FIR, the date of occurrence has been shown
as 5th February 2021 at 6 am, the complainant was stated to have approached a local Police Station
on 6 th February 2021, SSP Udhampur on 8th February 2021 and thereafter filed a complaint before
the Court on 11th February 2021 and produced the copy of the order of the Court at Police Station on
18th February 2021. She has argued that the complainant who is shown to rustic woman has stated
in her statement that she had gone to the Police Station on 6th February 2021 after one day to the
occurrence alone though her brother is stated to have been present at the place and time of the
occurrence. She has further argued that after obtaining order on the complaint on 11th February
2021, it was produced at Police Station by the complainant on her own on 18th February 2021
whereon the case was registered vide FIR No. 69/2021 at Police Station Udhampur for the
commission of offences punishable under sections 376- D, 457 IPC. She has further argued that no
independent witness was cited by the prosecution though the occurrence was stated to have taken
place in the middle of the village at a time when the villagers are available at their houses. She has
drawn the attention of this Court to the statements of the complainant/prosecutrix as well as the
only eye witness PW-Mohd Mushtaq, brother of the complainant and has argued that the statements
of both these witnesses do not inspire confidence so as to record conviction of the
petitioner/accused; that the petitioners are entitled to their personal liberty in view of Article 21 of
the Constitution of India as they have been suffering incarceration for the last more than two years
without any fault on their behalf as they have not committed any offence. It was finally prayed that
the petitioners be admitted to bail. In support of her arguments, learned counsel for the petitioners
has placed reliance on the judgments of the Apex Court as well as the other High Courts of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61117047/ 2
Benia Been Aged 36 Years S/O Noor Baksh vs Union Territory Of J&K on 15 September, 2023
Country in cases titled "Satender Kumar Antil vs Central Bureau of Investigation & Anr.", reported
in AIR 2022 SC 3386, "Sakindar Yadav vs State of Bihar", reported in Manu/BH/0787/2023 &
"Kamaljeet Singh vs State of Himachal Pradesh".
5. On the other hand, learned Dy AG, ex adverso, argued that the petitioners have been
charge-sheeted for a grave offence under section 376-D IPC (gang rape) which on conviction shall
entail a rigorous imprisonment of not less than 20 years which may extend to life imprisonment. He
has further argued that the prosecution evidence has been completed and case is now posted for
recording evidence in defence which is to be produced by the petitioners before the trial Court and
since the trial of their case is likely to complete soon, there is no occasion for them to seek grant of
bail at this stage. He has further argued that the merits of the case cannot be discussed while
deciding bail application and prayed that the application be dismissed.
6. Section 376-D IPC of which the petitioners/accused have been charge-
sheeted is extracted as under for ready reference:
376-D.Gang Rape.-Where a woman is raped by one or more persons constituting a
group or acting in furtherance of a common intention, each of those persons shall be
deemed to have committed the offence of rape and shall be punished with rigorous
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than twenty years, but which may
extend to life which shall mean imprisonment for the remainder of that person's
natural life, and with fine:
Provided that such fine shall be just and reasonable to meet the medical expenses and
rehabilitation of the victim.
7. Prosecution has completed its evidence before the trial Court and the accused/applicants have
also been examined in terms of Section 342 CrPC and have been asked to enter upon their defence.
The star witnesses of the prosecution are the prosecutrix and her brother PW Mohd Mushtaq, both
these witnesses during trial had been declared as hostile by the prosecution though it is not
appropriate for this court while deciding the bail application to go into the merits of the evidence,
however, for the limited purpose of the grant of bail, sifting of evidence is to some extent permissible
in the interest of justice. Without minute appreciation of the statements of both these witnesses, it
appears from their statements that the complainant and the applicants/accused had a family discard
due to the dispute between PW- Mohd Mushtaq brother of the complainant/prosecutrix with his
wife, who happens to be from the family of the applicants. The charge against the applicants is that
on 5th February 2021 at 6 O'clock in the morning, all the three accused went to the house of
complainant/prosecutrix, who assaulted her and one of the accused/applicants Benia Been had
penetrated his penis into the mouth of the prosecutrix while the other accused/applicants were
holding the prosecutrix from her hands and legs. The accused/petitioners who are in different age
group from the age of 36 to 66 years have been accused of having assaulted the prosecutrix and also
threshed her presumably to take revenge of the divorce of his wife by PW-Mushtaq Ahmed who is
brother of the complainant/prosecutrix as happened to be from the family of accused/petitioners.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61117047/ 3
Benia Been Aged 36 Years S/O Noor Baksh vs Union Territory Of J&K on 15 September, 2023
8. The Hon'ble Apex Court in a case titled "Dataram Singh vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr, reported
as 2018(3) SCC 22" has held that a fundamental postulate of criminal jurisprudence is the
presumption of innocence, meaning thereby that a person is believed to be innocent until found
guilty.
9. Needless to say object of the bail is to secure the attendance of the accused in the trial and the
proper test to be applied in the solution of the question whether bail should be granted or refused is
whether it is probable that the party will appear to take his trial. Otherwise, bail is not to be withheld
as a punishment. Otherwise also, normal rule is of bail and not jail. Court has to keep in mind
nature of accusations, nature of evidence in support thereof, severity of the punishment which
conviction will entail, character of the accused, circumstances which are peculiar to the accused
involved in that crime.
10. The Apex Court in "Sanjay Chandra vs Central Bureau of Investigation, reported as (2012)1 SCC
49", had observed that deprivation of liberty must be considered a punishment unless it is required
to ensure that an accused person would stand his trial when called upon and that the courts owe
more than verbal respect to the principle that punishment begins after conviction and that every
man is deemed to be innocent until duly tried and found guilty. It was underlined that the object of
bail is neither punitive nor preventive. This Court sounded a caveat that any imprisonment before
conviction has a substantial punitive content and it would be improper for any court to refuse bail as
a mark of disapproval of a conduct whether an accused has been convicted for it or not or to refuse
bail to an unconvicted person for the purpose of giving him a taste of imprisonment as a lesson. It
was enunciated that since the jurisdiction to grant bail to an accused pending trial or in appeal
against conviction is discretionary in nature, it has to be exercised with care and caution by
balancing the valuable right of liberty of an individual and the interest of the society in general. It
was elucidated that the seriousness of the charge, is no doubt one of the relevant considerations
while examining the application of bail but it was not only the test or the factor and that grant or
denial of such privilege, is regulated to a large extent by the facts and circumstances of each
particular case. That detention in custody of under-trial prisoners for an indefinite period would
amount to violation of Article 21 of the Constitution was highlighted.
11. The petitioners/accused have been facing incarceration for the last more than two years and are
not charge-sheeted for the commission of any offence which is either punishable with death
sentence or in the alternative life imprisonment, therefore, there is no statutory Bar to the grant of
bail to them. During trial, the prosecution evidence has already been completed wherein prosecution
as well as sole eye witness, have been declared hostile and cross-examined by the prosecution itself
credibility of their depositions and false implication requires to be assessed in the backdrop of the
aforestated circumstances. No apprehension can be entertained to take a view that the accused on
grant of bail may tamper with the prosecution evidence in any manner. The accused, in the
considered opinion of this court, are entitled to be admitted to bail in this case, having regard to the
facts and circumstances of the case.
12. For the foregoing reasons, observations made hereinabove, Bail Application is allowed and the
petitioners/accused are ordered to be admitted to bail on furnishing personal bonds to the tune of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61117047/ 4
Benia Been Aged 36 Years S/O Noor Baksh vs Union Territory Of J&K on 15 September, 2023
Rs.50,000/- each to be attested by the Superintendent of the jail concerned and two sureties in the
like amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court, subject to the condition that the
accused/petitioners shall appear on each and every date of hearing to face trial before the Court,
without any fail. Any deviation of this condition would entail consideration of cancellation of the
bail by the Trial Court.
13. Bail application is, accordingly, disposed of.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge JAMMU 15.09.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes Whether the
order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61117047/ 5
