Bhairab Kumar Biswal vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... Opp. ... on 5 May, 2023
Bhairab Kumar Biswal vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... Opp.
... on 5 May, 2023
Author: Sashikanta Mishra
Bench: Sashikanta Mishra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No. 29642 of 2019
Applications under Articles 226 & 227 of Constitution of
India.
---------------
Bhairab Kumar Biswal ...... Petitioner
-Versus-
State of Odisha and others ....... Opp. Parties
Advocate(s) appeared in this case:-
_______________________________________________________
For Petitioner : Mr. B.N. Parida, S.B. Satapathy
& K.K. Panda, Advocates
For Opp. Parties : Mr. P.K. Panda,
[Standing Counsel for S & ME
Department]
CORAM:
JUSTICE SASHIKANTA MISHRA
JUDGMENT
5th May, 2023 SASHIKANTA MISHRA, J.
The petitioner was appointed as an Asst. Teacher in Badmal Upper Primary School of Rairakhol
Blok in the district of Sambalpur and accordingly he joined on 10.09.1957. He was promoted to the
post of Head Pandit and joined his promotional post on 01.04.1961 in Satsama Upper Primary
School. Both the Schools were aided Schools. He was selected to undergo Teacher's Training for two
years by the BDO, Rairakhol vide his Office order dated 21.07.1973 and he was relieved from service
on 26.07.1973 for such purpose. The petitioner claims that prior to his relief from the School, he was
suffering from fever from 21.07.1973 to 25.07.1973. Therefore, he submitted a representation on
26.07.1973 to the Sub-Inspector of Schools, Rairkhol to grant casual leave for the aforesaid period.
But the said representation was not considered. Thereafter, due to continuation of his ailment he
remained in hospital for treatment till 30.09.1980. After being cured of his illness he submitted his
joining report on 01.10.1980 before the District Inspector of Schools, Sambalpur-1 along with
medical certificate, but was not allowed to join. The school was taken over by the Government on
26.09.1989. In the meantime, the petitioner attained the age of superannuation from service on
30.06.1999. He submitted his pension papers in the office of the erstwhile D.I. of Schools,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34546609/ 1
Bhairab Kumar Biswal vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... Opp. ... on 5 May, 2023
Sambalpur-1 for release of the pension as he had completed 15 years of service. But the pensionary
benefit was not released. It is his case that he had remained on leave on account of his illness
submitting proper application to the authority. During the period from 1973- 1980 he neither
resigned from service nor was retrenched/terminated by the authority. No disciplinary action was
also taken against him for his long absence. On such facts the petitioner claims to be entitled to
pension and other retiral benefits as he has completed the minimum qualifying service of ten years.
But ultimately, nothing was done for which he approached this Court in W.P.(C) No 10066 of 2008.
By order dated 25.03.2009, this Court directed the District Inspector of Schools to dispose of the
representation of the petitioner within four weeks. Pursuant to such order, the Block Education
Officer rejected the claim of the petitioner for pension. The petitioner has therefore approached this
Court seeking the following prayer:-
"In the facts and circumstances, the humble petitioner fervently prays this Hon'ble
Court to be graciously pleased to issue notice to the Opp.Parties, call for records and
after hearing the Counsel of parties, issue a writ in the nature of Mandamus or any
othe appropriate writ quashing impugned order No. 908 dtd.04.09.2017 under
Annexure-1 and directing to the Opp.parties to regularize the period of absence of the
petitioner i.e. from 21.06.1973 to 30.06.1999 treating the same as duty period in
absence of initiation of disciplinary proceeding and release pension and pensionary
benefits under the Odisha Aided Educational Institutions (Non- Government Fully
aided Primary School Teachers) Retirement benefits Rules, 1986 and OCS Pension
Rules, 1992 taking together his service in aided and Govt. Schools within a stipulated
period with 18% interest from the date of due and litigation charges as deems fit and
proper;
And/or pass such other order or direction as deems fit and proper in the interest of
justice; And for this act of your kindness, the humble petitioner shall as in duty
bound, ever pray."
2. Counter affidavit has been filed by the Block Education Officer, Rairakhol (Opp. Party No.4). The
stand of the opposite party as revealed from the counter is that as per the service particulars of the
petitioner available from his service book, he continued in service from 10.09.1957 to 26.07.1973
and thereafter did not join in his duties. It is further submitted that the Odisha Aided Educational
Institutions (Non-Government Fully Aided Primary School Teacher) Retirement Benefit Rules, 1981
came into force w.e.f. 1st day of April, 1982. The period of service of the petitioner from 10.09.1957
to 31.03.1973 cannot be considered under the said Rules.
3. The petitioner has filed a rejoinder refuting the averments of the counter. He states that he
submitted joining report on 01.10.1980 before the erstwhile D.I. of Schools, Sambalpur-1 but was
not allowed to join and while awaiting joining report he attained the age of superannuation on
30.06.1999 and after the date of retirement he approached the B.D.O. for returning his service book
and thereafter submitted pension papers. He further states that since the School was taken over by
the Government from 05.02.1989, which is before the date of his superannuation, he is entitled to
pension and pensionary benefits.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34546609/ 2
Bhairab Kumar Biswal vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... Opp. ... on 5 May, 2023
4. Heard Mr. B.N. Parida, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. P.K. Panda, learned Standing
Counsel for the School and Mass Education Department.
5. Mr. Parida would argue that the petitioner, having admittedly worked for more than ten years
uninterruptedly is entitled to pension as per Rule 8 (2)(a) of the Orissa Aided Educational
Institutions' Employees Retirement Benefit Rules, 1981 (in short '1981 Rules'). He further submits
that the petitioner was prevented from joining his services. Neither any Disciplinary Proceeding was
initiated against him nor any show cause notice was served upon him. Therefore, the authorities
cannot deprive him from pension and other retirement benefits as they had not taken recourse to
Rule 72(2) of the Orissa Service Code.
In support of his contentions as above, Mr. Parida has referred to some decisions of this Court,
namely, Karunakar Behera vs. State Orissa, reported in 2017 (1) OLR 615 and Kishore Das vs. State
of Orissa, reported in 105 (2008) CLT 309.
6. Mr. P.K.Panda, on the other hand, argued that the undisputed facts of the case would clearly show
that the petitioner had voluntarily abandoned his service at the relevant time. If he was prevented
from joining his duties he could have raised grievance before the competent authority at the relevant
time but he chose to sleep over the matter and only because the school was taken over by the
Government, he decided to stake his claim for pension and other benefits for obvious reasons.
7. From the rival pleadings and contentions noted above, it is evident that the following issues fall
for determination in the present case;
I. Whether in the facts and circumstances of the case, the petitioner can be said to have voluntarily
abandoned his service with effect from 26.07.1973.
II. Whether the petitioner is entitled to pension and other retiral benefits.
8. Before proceeding to answer the questions as referred above it would be apposite to refer to the
law relating to abandonment of service. The expression 'abandonment of service' has not been
defined in any of the relevant statutes. In this context, the observations of the Supreme Court of
India in the case of G.T. Lad vs. Chemical and Fibers of India Limited, reported in (1979) I SCC 590
are noteworthy.
"In the Act, we do not find any definition of the expression 'abandonment of service'.
In the absence of any clue as to the meaning of the said expression, we have to
depend on meaning assigned to it in the dictionary of English language. In the
unabridged edition of the Random House Dictionary, the word 'abandon' has been
explained as meaning 'to leave completely and finally; for- sake utterly; to relinquish,
renounce; to give up all concern in something'. According to the Dictionary of English
Law by Earl Jowitt (1959 edition) 'abandonment' means 'relinquishment of an
interest or claim'. According to Blacks Law Dictionary 'abandonment' when used in
relation to an office means 'voluntary relinquishment. It must be total and under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34546609/ 3
Bhairab Kumar Biswal vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... Opp. ... on 5 May, 2023
such circumstances as clearly to indicate an absolute relinquishment. The failure to
perform the duties pertaining to the office must be with actual or imputed intention,
on the part of the officer to abandon and relinquish the office. The intention may be
inferred from the acts and conduct of the party, and is a question of fact. Temporary
absence is not ordinarily sufficient to constitute an abandonment of office'.
From the connotations reproduced above it clearly follows that to constitute
abandonment, there must be total or complete giving up of duties so as to indicate an
intention not to resume the same. In Buckingham Co. v. Venkatiah & Ors. it was
observed by this Court that under common law an inference that an employee has
abandoned or relinquished service is not easily drawn unless from the length of
absence and from other surrounding circumstances an inference to that effect can be
legitimately drawn and it can be assumed that the employee intended to abandon
service. Abandonment or relinquishment of service is always a question of intention,
and normally, such an intention cannot be attributed to an employee without
adequate evidence in that behalf. Thus, whether there has been a voluntary
abandonment of service or not is a question of fact which has to be determined in the
light of the surrounding circumstances of each case."
Thus, the question of voluntary abandonment of service on the part of an employee is essentially a
question of fact to be determined from the surrounding circumstances of each case.
9. There is no dispute that the petitioner joined in service on 10.09.1957 in Badmal U.P. School from
where he was transferred to Satsama U.P. School on 01.04.1961. He served in the school till
26.07.1973. Both the schools were aided educational institutions at the relevant time being governed
by private management. The petitioner claims to have suffered from illness for which he submitted
leave application along with medical prescriptions. However, not a scrap of paper has been
produced by him before this Court or referred to in any of the documents enclosed to the writ
petition in support of such claim. He claims to have submitted his joining report to the District
Inspector of Schools, Sambalpur along with Medical Certificate but the same was not accepted. It
goes without saying that refusal of employment amounts to termination of service which the
petitioner could have challenged before the competent authority but he did not do so. This is a
significant omission on his part which strongly suggests that he was no longer interested in
continuing in service as otherwise there was no reason for him not to approach the appropriate
forum against the refusal of employment by the management.
10. The petitioner has claimed that he was suffering from illness and was under treatment but as
already observed, not a scrap of paper was produced in support thereof. All these facts cumulatively
taken can only suggest that he had no interest or intention to continue in service. Moreover, he not
having challenged the so-called refusal of employment by the Management on 01.10.1980, must be
deemed to have been terminated from service from that date. Therefore, by the time the School was
taken over by the Government, i.e. on 05.09.1989, he was no longer an employee of the School so as
to be covered by the provisions of 1981 Rules.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34546609/ 4
Bhairab Kumar Biswal vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... Opp. ... on 5 May, 2023
11. Such being the factual position it is entirely inequitable on the part of the petitioner to invoke the
provision under Rule 72 (2) of the Odisha Service Code. The said rule reads as under:-
"(2) Where a Government servant does not resume duty after remaining on leave for
a continuous period of five years, or where a government servant after the expiry of
his leave remains absent from duty otherwise than on foreign service or on account of
suspensions, for any period which together with the period of the leave granted to
him exceeds five years, he shall unless Government in view of the exceptional
circumstances of the case otherwise determine, be removed from service after
following the procedure laid down in the Odisha Civil Services (Classifications,
Control and Appeal) Rules, 1962."
12. The said Rule would arise only when a Government servant does not resume duty after
remaining on leave for continuous period for five years. In the instant case, there is not a shred of
evidence to show that the petitioner had either applied for or was granted leave. Thus, reference to
Rule 72 (2) of the Odisha Service Code is fallacious.
13. As regards the case laws relied upon by the petitioner, this Court finds that in the case of
Karunakar Behera (supra) the leave period was regularized by the authority by directing the
concerned Headmaster to draw the leave salary of the petitioner. The concerned employee
thereafter remained on unauthorized leave for which this Court referred to the provision under Rule
72 of the Code. In the case of Kishore Das (supra), the petitioner's wife had approached this Court in
a writ petition claiming family pension etc., which was disposed of directing the Inspector of Schools
to verify the relevant records and to pass necessary order with regard to payment of the petitioner's
dues. The petitioner thereafter submitted all relevant documents before the Inspector of Schools
who verified the same and recommended her case to the Director, Elementary Education for
sanction of the dues and to move the Government for regularization of the leave period of her
deceased husband. No such exercise was done in the present case.
Thus, the cases relied upon by the petitioner can be easily distinguished from the facts of the present
case.
14. From the foregoing discussion, therefore, this Court is of the considered view that the petitioner
had voluntarily abandoned his service for reasons best known to him. Moreover, his claim of having
made attempts to re- join employment after recovery from his purported illness also appears to be
far-fetched to be believed and in any case, is by itself a matter to be held against him for not having
raised any grievance before the appropriate authority for as long as 17 years.
15. In view of the findings as above, the question of the petitioner being entitled to pension and
other retiral benefits does not arise.
16. For the foregoing reasons therefore, this Court finds no merit in the writ petition, which is
therefore, dismissed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34546609/ 5
Bhairab Kumar Biswal vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... Opp. ... on 5 May, 2023
.................................
Sashikanta Mishra,
Judge
Orissa High Court, Cuttack,
The 5th May, 2023/ A.K. Rana, P.A.
AJAYA AJAYA KUMAR RANA
KUMAR RANA Date: 2023.05.05
16:55:09 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34546609/ 6
