Bharosi Lal Age 41 Years S/O Ram Saroop ... vs Union Of India Through Secretary ... on 29 May, 2023
Bharosi Lal Age 41 Years S/O Ram Saroop ... vs Union Of India
Through Secretary ... on 29 May, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
Sr.No. 2
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU `
SWP No. 2449/2012
Reserved on:27.03.2023
Pronounced on:29.05.2023
Bharosi Lal age 41 years s/o Ram Saroop Jogi R/O .....Petitioner(s)
Village Chhonkar Wara Kalan Tehsil Wair District
Bharatpur State Rajasthan (pin 321407).
Through:- Sh. R.K. Bhatia, Advocate.
V/S
1. Union of India through Secretary Ministry of ......Respondent(s)
Home Affairs Govt. of India North Block New
Delhi (pin 110001);
2. Director General Indo-Tibetan Boarder Police
Force CGO Complex Lodhi Road New Delhi
(pin 110003);
3. Deputy Inspector General ITBP Tigri Camp
Sangam Vihar New Delhi;
4. Commandant 22BN ITPB Tigri Camp Sangam
Vihar New Delhi.
Through:-Sh. Vishal Sharma, DSGI with
Sh. Eishaan Didhichi, CGSC.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN LAL , JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Petitioner a citizen of India and entitled to the protection of all his fundamental, constitutional
and statutory rights enshrined in the Constitution of India was enrolled into the Indo-Tibetan
Boarder Police (ITPB) on 29-11-1996, and while posted at Sheesh Mehal (Glass House) post near
Jawhar Tunnel Qazigund he is alleged to have molested a women and is indicted in FIR No. 158 of
2000 for commission of offences punishable under sections 354/376/511 of RPC. Petitioner was
tried under ITBP Force Act and was dismissed from his services on 06-10-2000 by an order issued
by respondent No.4. By the medium of instant writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India r/w Section 103 of the Constitution of J&K, petitioner has prayed for the following reliefs:-
(a) Writ of Certiorari for quashing:-
(i) Proceedings of Summary Force Court;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181657448/ 1
Bharosi Lal Age 41 Years S/O Ram Saroop ... vs Union Of India Through Secretary ... on 29 May, 2023
(ii) Order of dismissal from services dated 06-10-2000 issued by the respondent
No.4 and
(iii) Order dated 22-04-2001 issued by respondent No.3.
(b) Writ of mandamus commanding respondents to reinstate petitioner into service
with all consequential/monetary and service benefits.
2. Petitioner has averred in his writ petition that FIR No. 158 of 2000 u/ss 354/376/511 of RPC was
registered against him at police station Qazigund for the allegations to have molested a civil women
which charge sheet was pending trial in the court of Sessions Judge Kulgam. It is stated, that
without waiting for final outcome of the above FIR, respondent No.4 directed for "recording of
evidence" against the petitioner. In pursuant to the statement of petitioner recorded on 28.09.2000
wherein petitioner denied all the allegations, statement of petitioner was recorded by ROE without
first cautioning in that he is not bound to make statement as required under rule 50(3) of ITBP
Force Rules 1994, even then petitioner pleaded innocence before the ROE. Prior to the passing of
order of recording of evidence, respondent no.4 was bound to hear the charge as provided in Rule 45
but the Commanding Officer did not hear the charge, hearing of the charge by Commanding Officer
can be dispensed with under rule 45(2) if charge against the officer or subordinate officer is of
serious nature, but respondent no.4 could not dispose with hearing of charge against the petitioner
who was only constable, Rule 44 r/w 45 of ITBP Force Rules were not followed by the respondents.
3. Vide office memorandum dated 30-09-2000 petitioner was erroneously charge sheeted u/ss
26&43 of ITPB Force Act 1992 for unbecoming conduct and violation of good order and discipline,
whereas, allegations against petitioner were of molesting a civil women and therefore charge u/s 49
of ITPB Act r/w Section 354/376/511 RPC was required to be framed and not for violation of good
order and discipline, the framing of erroneous charge sheet has caused prejudice to the petitioner.
4. Respondent No.4 convened Summary Force Court (SFC) in which petitioner is said to have
pleaded guilty, petitioner had never pleaded guilty and his statement was not recorded by SFC, had
petitioner pleaded guilty his statement in verbatim was required to be recorded by the SFC, even
signatures of petitioner in token of having made statement were not taken by SFC, petitioner was
never produced before the SFC and only paper trial was conducted, there was no occasion for
pleading guilty by the petitioner who had denied all the charges and in such eventuality Summary
Force Court (SFC) was required to advise the accused not to plead guilty but in the proceedings of
SFC it is not mentioned that petitioner was even advised not to plead guilty, thereby, Rule 143(2) of
ITBP Rules has been seriously violated by respondent No.4 who dismissed the petitioner from
services vide order No. 22 Bn ITBP/Estt.- 2/SFC/2000-110 dated 06-10-2000 on the ground, that
petitioner has been found guilty of charges.
5. Petitioner moved applications to respondents 3&4 for supplying the proceedings of SFC,
respondent No.3 vide order dated 22-04-2001 rejected the statutory petition of the petitioner on the
ground that petitioner had admitted both the charges before SFC. Therefore, petitioner made
representation to respondent No.2 (DG ITBP) who also rejected the representation of petitioner on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181657448/ 2
Bharosi Lal Age 41 Years S/O Ram Saroop ... vs Union Of India Through Secretary ... on 29 May, 2023
27-12- 2001 on the ground, that as per Section 131 r/w Rule 168 petitioner can only submit one
petition. The copies of SFC were supplied to the petitioner vide letter dated 14.09.2001 after about 1
year of the order of dismissal dated 06.10.2000, had the proceedings been supplied earlier,
petitioner could have been in a position to make effective representation to respondent no.3, the
delay in supplying the proceedings has caused serious prejudice to the petitioner in making effective
statutory petition.
6. Respondent No.4 (Commandant 22 Bn. ITBP) has filed objections to the writ petition contending
therein, that the petitioner has not come to the court with clean hands, has misstated and
misrepresented the facts, petition suffers from delay & latches as the same has been filed after 12
years and deserves to be dismissed. It is contended, that petitioner while performing the sentry duty
at Sheesh Mehal (Glass House) post Qazigund J&K molested Ms. Naseema w/o Rehmat Ullah Kahn,
the said act of petitioner was offence under ITBP Force Rules Act 1992, petitioner was required to be
dealt immediately otherwise it would have affected the image of ITBP in the eyes of general public,
petitioner was dealt under the provisions of ITBP Act and rules, he was heard by the Commandant
and record of evidence against him vide order dated 19-09-2020, considering the record of evidence
petitioner was tried by SFC, on arraignment to the charges he pleaded guilty, provisions of Rule 143
of ITBPF Rules 1994(General plea "Guilty" or "Not Guilty") was also complied with, petitioner was
found guilty of the charges and punishment was passed accordingly. It is further contended, that
petitioner was heard under Rule 45 of ITBPF Rules, he was tried for offences u/s 26 & 43 of ITBPF
Rules of the Act, petitioner is facing trial in Civil offences punishable u/s 354/376/511 RPC pending
trial in civil court, so rightly the authorities have not issued charge sheet to the petitioner for the
said offences, procedure was adopted strictly as per rule and no illegality has been conducted in the
proceedings. It is contended, that petitioner pleaded guilty to the charges and was tried by SFC who
is a Commandant and constitutes court, petitioner was given opportunity but he denied for
application of any friend, but despite that Inspr./GD Tashi Tundup Negi was detailed as friend of
the accused by the court as per provisions of ITBPF Act & Rules, since petitioner has pleaded guilty
to the charges there were no requirement of examining the lady as such, disciplinary proceedings
were instituted against the petitioner who was heard by respondent No.4, record of evidence was
ordered against him vide order dated 29-09-2000, on pleading voluntarily guilty, provisions of Rule
143 of ITBPF Rules 1994 were complied with, petitioner was found guilty and awarded sentences of
dismissal for services on 06.10.2000.
7. Petitioner has filed rejoinder affidavit on 27.03.2018 stating therein, that Article 20 of the
Constitution of India has been violated, he was tried by the SFC for molestation of a civil woman and
punished with dismissal form services and on the same charge he was tried by Principal Sessions
Judge Kulgam and acquitted of all the charges on 27-06-2014, therefore, petitioner could not be
prosecuted and punished for the same offence more than once. It is submitted, that petitioner was
not tried in accordance with ITBP Act and Rules, it was incumbent upon respondent No.4 to make a
reference to the officer deputed to convene Petty Force Court for the trial of alleged officer as
provided u/s 6(2) of ITBP Act 1992, there was no grave reason for immediate action, even no reason
has been assigned by respondent No.4 for not making reference to the officer empowered to convene
Petty Force Court as such proceedings conducted by respondent No.4 is vitiated. It is contended,
that petitioner has not made any confessional statement before the officer who recorded the Record
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181657448/ 3
Bharosi Lal Age 41 Years S/O Ram Saroop ... vs Union Of India Through Secretary ... on 29 May, 2023
of Evidence as such the Summary Force Court was required not to accept the alleged plea of guilty as
provided under Rule 143 of the ITBP Rules. It is submitted that Section 26 of the ITBP Act was not
applicable to petitioner, section 26 deals with unbecoming conduct of an officer or subordinate
officer, petitioner was a constable and not an officer or subordinate officer as defined u/s 2(s) and 2
(v) of the ITBP Act 1992, petitioner was placed under suspension on the ground that a case
regarding misbehavior (attempt to rape) with one lady while on duty is under investigation,
petitioner has not pleaded guilty before the Summary Force Court and no signatures of petitioner in
support of plea of guilty was obtained, that the allegations of attempt to rape was a civil offence
punishable u/s 49 of the ITBP Act, respondent No.4 was required to make a reference to the officer
empowered to convene a Petty Force Court before holding of trial by the Summary Force Court as
required u/s 86(20 of the ITBP Act, no adherence to the section 86(2) of the ITBP Act vitiate all the
proceedings.
8. Sh. R.K. Bhatia Ld. Counsel for petitioner, has sought quashing of proceedings of Summary Court
Force coupled with order of dismissal of service of the petitioner dated 06-10-2000 issued by
respondent No.4 & order dated 22-04- 2001 issued by respondent No.3, by vehemently canvassing
arguments, that Rule 45 of ITBP Rules has been violated by respondent No.4 as prior to recording of
evidence respondent No.4 (Commandant of the petitioner) was required to hear the petitioner on
charge; as per Rule 50(3) of ITBP Rules petitioner was required to be cautioned before making
statement but there is nothing on record to show that any such warning was ever give to petitioner,
moreso, there is noting on record to indicate that petitioner was granted any opportunity to lead
defense evidence during the recording of evidence; Rule 50(9) of ITBP Rules has been violated as no
certificate has been issued by the officer who recorded the evidence regarding correctness of
"recording of evidence". It is argued, that Rule 142 of ITBP Rules has been violated as the certificate
at the bottom of proceedings of Summary Force Court does not show that anyone has explained to
the petitioner the general effect of plea of guilty; Rule 143(2) of ITBP Rules has been violated by
respondent No.4 because it is nowhere mentioned in the proceedings of SFC that petitioner was ever
advised to withdraw or not plead guilty. It is moreso argued, that if an accused person pleads
"guilty" that plea shall be recorded as finding of the court, but before it is recorded, the court shall
ascertain that the accused understands the nature of charge to which he has pleaded guilty and shall
inform him of general effect of that plead and in particular of the meaning of the charge to which he
has pleaded guilty and shall advise him to withdraw the plea if it appears from the summary of
evidence (if any) or otherwise that the accused ought to plead not guilty. It is argued, that pleading
of guilty means an admission of an accused having committed offence for which he is charged, the
plea shall be recorded as the finding of the court in the words used by accused or nearly as possible
in the words used by accused, such a recording will enable the party seeking justice to know whether
higher authorities or the confirming authority to determine whether the plea recorded really amount
to admission of guilt, the requirement of recording a plea as stated above is mandatory and violation
thereof vitiates the trial. To support his arguments, Ld. Counsel for petitioner has relied upon the
judgments reported in, (i) 1991 KLJ 513 [ Union of India & Ors Vs Ex- Havildar Clerk Prithal Singh
& Ors], (ii) 1992 (1) GauLR 445 [Sadacharan K and 18 Others--Petitioners Versus Union of India
and Others--Respondents] & (iii) RLW 1997(2) Raj 1209 [Ex-Sepoy Chander Singh--Appellants Vs.
Union of India(UOI) and Ors--Respondents] .
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181657448/ 4
Bharosi Lal Age 41 Years S/O Ram Saroop ... vs Union Of India Through Secretary ... on 29 May, 2023
9. Ld. Counsel for respondents has supported the proceedings of Summary Force Court and order of
dismissal of petitioner dated 06-10-2000 by strenuously portraying arguments, that petitioner has
not come to the court with clean hands, has misstated and misrepresented the facts, there is a delay
of 12 years in filing the petition, allegations against petitioner are in regard to molestation of women
namely Ms. Naseema for which petitioner was tried by SFC on the charges for offences u/ss 26 r/w
43 of ITBPF Rules wherein petitioner pleaded guilty, moreso, Rule 143 of ITBP Rules has been
compiled with as petitioner has been held guilty to the charges and was accordingly punished which
led to his dismissal from services on 06-10-2001.
10. I have heard Ld. Counsel for the parties and perused the record before me. Sh. R.K. Bhatia Ld.
Counsel for petitioner has contended, that petitioner never pleaded guilty to the charges, petitioner
was never informed about the nature of charge to which he was required to plead guilty, there was
no occasion for pleading guilty as the petitioner has denied all the charges and in such eventuality
Summary Force Court (SFC) was required to advise petitioner/accused not to plead guilty, however
in the proceedings of SFC it is not mentioned that petitioner was ever advised not to plead guilty,
therefore, Rule 143(2) of ITBP Rules have been seriously violated for which the punishment of
dismissal of the petitioner requires to be set aside. Sh. Vishal Sharma Ld. DSGI for respondents per
contra has argued, that petitioner has pleaded guilty to the charges and provisions of Rule 143 of
ITBPF Rules 1994 was complied with, petitioner was tried by SFC for offences u/s 26 & 43 of ITBP
Rules as he was facing trial in civil offences punishable u/s 354/376/511 RPC, since petitioner has
pleaded guilty to the charges there was no requirement of examining the lady (victim), record of
evidence was order against the petitioner and on pleading voluntarily guilty provision of Rule 143 of
ITBP F Rules of 1994 was complied with, petitioner was found guilty and accordingly awarded
dismissal from services on 06-10-2000.
11. It will be my endeavor to appreciate the judgments relied upon by Ld. Counsel for petitioner to
ascertain the procedure for recording "plea of guilty of accused" and whether such proceedings of
rule position is mandatory in nature or not?
In 1991 KLJ 513 [Union of India & Ors Vs Ex-Havildar Clerk Prithpal Singh & Ors] relied by Ld.
Counsel for petitioner, J&K High Court while quashing the proceeding of Summary Court Marshal
and appreciating Rule 115(2) of Army Rules whereby respondent Ex-Havildar Clerk Prithpal Singh
of J&K Light Infantry Regiment at Srinagar was tried on 3 charges, reduced in rank and was
dismissed from services on May 2, 1983 and observing that Rule 115 (2) of Army Rules dealing with
procedure for recording plea of guilty of accused is mandatory in nature, in head note of the case law
and in para 8 of the judgment held as under:-
Army Rules--Rule 115(2)--Procedure for recording „plea of guilt of the accused.
Whether mandatory in nature or not? Held--Mandatory in nature.
At the time of recording the „plea of guilt(cid:129) of the accused in Summary Trial as well as
the accused should be necessarily informed of the nature of charges leveled against
him and the court should ascertain that the accused has understood the nature of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181657448/ 5
Bharosi Lal Age 41 Years S/O Ram Saroop ... vs Union Of India Through Secretary ... on 29 May, 2023
charge to which he pleaded guilty and shall inform him of the general effect of that
plea and in particular of the meaning of the charge to which he pleads guilty. The
court should further require to advise the accused to withdraw that plea if it appears
from summary of evidence or otherwise that the accused ought to the plead not
guilty.--Non fulfillment of such a procedure violates and said rule and vitiates the
trial as the rule is mandatory in nature.
8. The other point which has been made basis for quashing the sentence awarded to
respondent-accused relates to clause (2) of rule 115. Under this mandatory provision
the court is required to ascertain before it records plea of guilt of the accused, as to
whether the accused understands the nature of charge to which he has pleaded guilty
and shall inform him of the general effect of that plea and in particular of the
meaning of charge to which he has pleaded guilty. The court is further required under
the provision of law to advise the accused to withdraw that plea if it appears from
summary of evidence or otherwise that the accused ought to plead not guilty. How to
follow this procedure is the main crux of the question involved in this case. Rule 125
provides that the court shall date and sign the sentence and such signatures shall
authenticate whole of the proceedings. It comes out from this rule that the signing of
the proceedings by the court shall amount to authentication of the same. We may
take it that the signatures of the accused are not required even after recording plea of
guilt but as a matter of caution same should be taken. But in order to come to a
finding as to whether compliance of Sub-Rule 2 of Rule 125 has been made there
should have been some certificate of the court to the effect or at least some minutes
pointing out that fulfillment of the procedure. Nothing is coming out from record in
this effect. It is certainly a violation of the above said rule. Respondent accused is
clamoring from the very beginning regarding holding of a fair trial in his case and he
has also taken a specific stand that he never pleaded guilty. He addressed so many
communications to the court as well as to the authorities for providing him friend of
the accused of his choice and other facilities for the trial and in such circumstances
recording of plea of guilty by the court without strictly following rule 115 is to be
viewed with suspicion. However on record there are signatures of the
respondent-accused showing that he willingly pleaded guilty.
In 1992 (1) GauLR 445 [Sadacharan K and 18 Others--Petitioners Versus Union of India and
Others--Respondents] relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner, Division Bench of Gauhati High Court
while appreciating Rule 115 of Army Rules 1984 and observing that the Army Court is required to
record the plea of guilt of accused in the words or as nearly as possible in the words used by accused
which Rule is mandatory in nature and violation thereof vitiates the trial, conviction and penalty, in
paras 6, 8,9,11 of the judgment held as under:-
(6.) Under sub-rule (1) of rule 115 of the Army Rules, 1984, for short, 'the Rules'
provides: "The accused person's plea-'Guilty' or 'Not guilty' (or if he refused to plead,
or does not plead intelligibly either one or the other, a plea of 'Not guilty')-shall be
recorded on each charge". (emphasis added), Sub rule (2) of rule 115 provides, inter
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181657448/ 6
Bharosi Lal Age 41 Years S/O Ram Saroop ... vs Union Of India Through Secretary ... on 29 May, 2023
alia, that, if an accused person pleads 'Guilty', that plea shall be recorded as the
finding of the Court. (8.) Pleading of 'guilty' means an admission of an accused
having committed the offence with which he is charged. Under section 115(2) the plea
of guilty shall be recorded as the finding of the Court. The use of expression 'does not
plead intelligibly' in rule 115(1) indicates that the plea must be clear and
unambiguous. Whether the plea is clear and unambiguous, or, whether the accused
pleads or does not plead intelligibly, will depend on the words used by the accused. A
mere entering or recording the word 'guilty' may mean Court's own conclusion or
interpretation. Therefore, the clause "if the accused pleads guilty, the plea shall be
recorded as the finding of the Court"
means that the Court shall record the plea in the words used by the accused, or, the
Court shall record the plea as nearly as possible in the words used by the accused.
Such a recording will enable the party seeking justice to know as well as the higher
authority or the confirming authority to determine whether the plea recorded really
amounts to an admission of guilt.
(9.) Coming to the cases on hand, it appears that the accused persons pleaded guilty,
but the Court has not recorded the plea in the words, or, as nearly as possible in the
words, used by the accused. Therefore, there was procedural impropriety. The
requirement of recording of the plea as stated above is mandatory & the violation of it
will vitiate the trial, conviction or penalty. The view taken by us finds support from a
decision of the Supreme Court in Mahanta Kaushalya Das Vs. State of Madras, AIR
1966 SC 22 .
(11.) For the forgoing reasons, the trial, conviction and sentences are set aside. The
cases are sent back to the summary court martial for disposal of the matter afresh in
the light of the observations made above.
In RLW 1997(2) Raj 1209 [Ex-Sepoy Chander Singh--Appellants Vs. Union of
India(UOI) and Ors--Respondents] relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner, High Court
of Rajasthan while observing that Army Rules 34,36&115(2) are mandatory in nature
and non-observance thereof vitiates the trial in paras 14,18,25 of the judgment held
as under:-
14. From the above narration of facts, the first question which arises for
determination is whether under Rule 4(1) of the Army Rules, the mandatory
requirement of warning of holding the trial after a notice of 96 hours had been
complied with or not or whether any notification had been issued under Section 9 of
the Army Act for declaring this unit to be a unit "On Active Service".
18. The provisions of this Rule have salutary effect. The accused is to be told the consequence of the
fact if he pleads "guilty". It is mandatory on the part of Commanding Officer before he records the
plea of "guilty" to ascertain that accused understands the nature of the charge to which he pleaded
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181657448/ 7
Bharosi Lal Age 41 Years S/O Ram Saroop ... vs Union Of India Through Secretary ... on 29 May, 2023
guilty and it is also obligatory on the part of Commanding Officer/Court to inform him of the
general effect of that plea and in particular of the meaning of the charge to which he has pleaded
guilty and of the difference in procedure which will be made by his pleading of guilty and shall
advise him to withdraw that plea if it appears from the summary of evidence or otherwise that the
accused ought to plead not guilty. To support the proposition, counsel for the petitioner relies on
1989 (3) SLR, 405 (Uma Shanker Pathak v. Union of India (All.)) wherein the Division Bench had
held as under:
10. The provision embodies a wholesome provision which is clearly designed to
ensure that an accused person should be fully forewarned about the implications of
the charge and the effect of pleading guilty.
The procedure prescribed for the trial of the cases where the accused pleads guilty is radically
different from that prescribed for trial of cases where the accused pleads "not guilty". The procedure
in cases where the plea is of "not guilty" is far more elaborate than in cases where the accused pleads
"guilty". This is apparent from a comparison of the procedure laid down for these two classes of
cases. It is in order to save simple, unsuspecting and ignorant accused person from the effect of
pleading guilty to the charge without being fully conscious of the nature thereof and the implications
and general effect of that plea, that the framers of the rule have insisted that the court must
ascertain that the accused fully under stands the nature of the charge and the implications of
pleadings guilty to the same."
12. The proceedings extracted above do not, in our opinion, fulfil the requirement of the law. A bald
certificate by the Commanding Officer that "the provisions Army Rule 115(2) are here complied
with" is not enough. As the note quoted above and underlined by us would bear what is expected of
the court where the accused pleads guilty to any charge is that the record of proceedings itself must
explicitly state that the court had fully explained to the accused the nature and the meaning of the
charge arid made him aware of the difference in procedure. The instructions to the court printed on
the proforma quoted in Annex. 1 (copy of the impugned order stating that "question to the accused
and his answers both will be recorded verbatim as far as possible "make this amply clear.
25. For the reasons and in view of the above discussion, that a definite prejudice had been caused in
non-observing the mandatory provisions of the Army Rules which were of mandatory nature. For
the reasons mentioned, as the writ petition is to be allowed, therefore, there is no necessity to go
into the other grounds of attack made by the petitioner in writ petition, writ petition is allowed and
the impugned order of punishment and proceedings of summary court martial trial dated 17.9.90
(Annex. 4) punishing the petitioner for 6 months rigorous imprisonment and dismissing him from
service is set aside. The petitioner has already suffered the imprisonment for six months for which
no monetary compensation shall be adequate. However, in the circumstances, he is entitled to costs
of petition which is assessed as Rs. 10,000/-. The petitioner who was working as a cook, shall be
entitled to all benefits including reinstatement in service, which shall be made to him within 2
months from the date of receipt of certified copy of this order. The writ petition is allowed as
observed above.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181657448/ 8
Bharosi Lal Age 41 Years S/O Ram Saroop ... vs Union Of India Through Secretary ... on 29 May, 2023
Ratios of the judgments of "Prithpal Singh", "Sadacharan K" & "Chander Singh's" cases (Supra)
relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner, make the legal proposition manifestly clear, "that Army Rules
are mandatory in nature, Army Court shall record the plea in the words used by the accused or
nearly as possible in the words used by the accused, the requirement of recording of the plea is
mandatory and violation of it will vitiate the trial, conviction or penalty, the accused is to be told the
consequence of the fact if he pleads "guilty", court shall advise the accused to withdraw that plea if it
appears from the summary of evidence or otherwise that the accused ought to plead not guilty".
While applying the ratios of the judgments (Supra) to the facts of the case in hand, the foresaid
Army Rules when read in conjunction with the ITBP Rules aforesaid, it can be safely held, that the
ITBP Rules viz; Rule 45, Rule 50(3), Rule 50(9), Rule 142 & 143 etc. are also mandatory in nature
and violation thereof vitiate the trial, conviction and penalty imposed upon the accused/employee.
Annexure-A to the petition in the case in hand, is copy of the statement of petitioner wherein
nowhere the petitioner has pleaded guilty. Annexure-B to the petition is the copy of office
memorandum which show that on 30-09-2000 petitioner was informed by respondent No.4 Sh.
J.V.S. Choudhary Commandant 22nd BN. ITBPF THQ c/o 56 APO about the framing of charge
when petitioner was posted at duty at Shishmehal Post (Qazigund) and he molested a civil women,
and Summary Force Court proceedings were initiated against the petitioner who was asked to give
the list of witnesses in his defense. It is apt to mention here, that on 29-09-2000 petitioner was
charged for on two counts viz; Charge-1 .... ITBP Act 1992 r/w Section 26, that on 28.09.2000
petitioner while on ROP duty with L.M.G. at Shishmehal (Glass House) molested a civil women
namely Naseema which act of petitioner amounted to unbecoming conduct being member of force
and Charge-2... ITPB Act 1992 R/w Section 43 regarding violation of good order and discipline.
Annexure-D (pages 19 to 23) of the petition are copies of the proceedings conducted by Summary
Force Court (SFC) wherein at page 20 the plea of guilt of petitioner/accused has been recorded and
it has been shown that petitioner has pleaded guilty to the charges u/s 26 and 43 of ITBPF Act 1992.
Rule 45 of ITBPF Rules has been violated by respondent No.4 as prior to recording of evidence
respondent No.4 has not heard the petitioner on the charge. Rule 50(3) ITBPF Rules has also been
violated as there is nothing on record to show that petitioner was cautioned before making the
statement or any warning was given to him. Rule 50(9) of ITBPF Rules has been violated as no
certificate has been issued by the officer who recorded the evidence regarding the correctness of
recording of evidence. It is apt to reiterate here, that record reveals that there is no certificate
appended at the bottom of proceedings of Summary Force Court (SFC) that anyone has explained to
the petitioner the general effect of plea of guilty. Vide Rule 143(2) of ITBPF Rules, the Court of
respondent No.4 was further required under this provision of law to advise petitioner/accused to
withdraw that plea of guilt if it had appeared to respondent No.4 from summary of evidence
recorded that petitioner/accused ought to plead not guilty. Page 21 of the petition relates to the
proceedings of plea of guilty. Rule 143 of ITBPF Rule relates to plea of "Guilty "or "Not Guilty".
Sub-Rule 2 of Rule 143 mandates that the court shall ascertain that accused understands the nature
of charge to which he has pleaded guilty and shall also inform him effect of that plea and meaning of
the charge. In the case in hand, nothing has been placed on record that court of respondent no.4 has
ascertained from petitioner/accused that whether he understands the nature of charge to which he
has pleaded guilty and even the petitioner has not been informed regarding the effect of such plea of
guilty and meaning of the charge. Moreso, record further demonstrates, that respondent No.4 has
not advised the petitioner that he ought not to have pleaded guilty. Furthermore, it has not come on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181657448/ 9
Bharosi Lal Age 41 Years S/O Ram Saroop ... vs Union Of India Through Secretary ... on 29 May, 2023
record that the plea of guilty of petitioner/accused has been recorded by respondent No.4 in the
words used by the petitioner or as nearly as possible in the words used by him. Therefore, there has
been procedural impropriety. The requirement of recording of the plea of guilt as stated above is
mandatory in nature and violation of it has vitiated the trial and penalty imposed by respondent
No.4 upon petitioner/accused. It is unambiguously reiterated here, that petitioner/accused who was
facing criminal charges in the court of Ld. Pr. Session Judge Kulgam in aforesaid FIR No. 156/2000
of Police Station Qazigund for alleged commission of offences u/ss 376/354/511 RPC registered by
the complainant namely Naseema Akhter for which petitioner was charged u/s 26 & 43 of ITBP Act
1992 and dismissed from services on 06-10-2000, has been acquitted of the charges by the trial
court vide its judgment dated 17.06.2014 r/w order dated 13-10-2014.
12. For the foregoing reasons, and in view of the above discussion, a definite prejudice has been
caused to the petitioner and the conclusion is therefore inevitable, that since there has been no
compliance of the mandatory provisions of ITBPF Rules aforesaid, the trial of petitioner alongwith
the whole proceedings of Summary Force Court (SFC) conducted by respondent No.4 stand vitiated.
For the reasons aforesaid, writ petition stands allowed. Accordingly, by a writ of certiorari the
proceedings of Summary Force Court (SFC) as well as order of dismissal of the petitioner from
services dated 06-10- 2000 issued by respondent No.4 and order dated 22-04-2001 issued by
respondent No.3 stand quashed. Further by a writ of mandamus, the respondents are commanded
to reinstate the petitioner into service forthwith on providing copy of the judgment. Petitioner shall
be entitled notional benefits to his service from the date of his dismissal from services till his
acquittal dated 17-06-2014 (r/w order dated 13-10-2014), and thereafter, shall also be entitled to all
the consequential monetary and service benefits.
13. Disposed off accordingly.
Srinagar: (Mohan Lal)
29.05.2023 Judge
Issaq
Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181657448/ 10
