Bharat Bhushan (Dead) vs State Of J&K on 18 May, 2023
Bharat Bhushan (Dead) vs State Of J&K on 18 May, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND
LADAKH AT JAMMU
Cr. Appeal No. 6/2011
Reserved on: 11.05.2023
Pronounced on: 18 .05.2023
Bharat Bhushan (dead)
through his wife sheela Devi
...appellants
Through: - Mr.Kuldip Singh Parihar
Advocate.
Vs.
State of J&K
Through: - Ms Monika Kohli Sr. AAG
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1 This appeal is directed against judgment dated 21.02.2011 passed by the learned Special Judge,
Anti Corruption, Jammu (hereinafter referred to as the 'trial Court') whereby the appellant has been
convicted of offences under Section 5(2) read with Section 5(1)(d) of J&K Prevention of Corruption
Act and Section 161 of RPC. Vide the impugned judgment, the appellant has been sentenced to
undergo imprisonment for a period of two years and to pay a fine of Rs.5000/- for offences under
Sections 5(2) read with 5(1)(d) of PC Act. For offence under Section 161 RPC, the appellant has been
sentenced to imprisonment for a period of two years and to pay a fine of Rs.5000. In default of
payment of fine, the appellant has been directed to undergo a further imprisonment of one month.
Both the sentences have been directed to run concurrently.
2 The facts giving rise to filing of the instant appeal are that the complainant PW Kulwant Singh
approached Vigilance Organization Jammu with a written complaint alleging therein that he has
been falsely implicated in a criminal case bearing FIR No. 56/2006 registered with Police Station,
Bus Stand Jammu and on 14.11.2006, when he got the bail order from the learned CJM Jammu, he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39794526/ 1
Bharat Bhushan (Dead) vs State Of J&K on 18 May, 2023
handed over the same to the appellant/accused who was posted as Assistant Sub Inspector of Police
at Police Station Bus Stand, Jammu at the relevant time. It was further alleged in the complaint that
the appellant/accused was annoyed on going through the bail order and he demanded an illegal
gratification of Rs.5000/- from the complainant. It was also alleged that, on 19.11.2006, he was
again called by the complainant to the Police Station and the demand of illegal gratification of
Rs.5000/- was repeated. The complainant is stated to have settled the amount of bribe at Rs.5000
with the appellant/accused, whereafter, he lodged a complaint EXP-KS before SSP Vigilance
Organization Jammu on 20.11.2006. On the basis of the aforesaid complaint, FIR No. 27/2006
came to be registered by the Police Station Vigilance Organization, Jammu, whereafer, on the same
day, a trap was laid by the sleuths of Vigilance Organization who were accompanied by independent
witnesses and the complainant. As per case of the prosecution, the appellant/accused was caught
read handed while demanding and accepting an illegal gratification of Rs.5000 from the
complainant. The tainted money is stated to have been recovered from the possession of the
appellant/accused. After investigation of the case, the aforesaid offences were found established
against the appellant/accused and charge-sheet was laid before the trial Court. 3 The charges for the
aforesaid offences were framed against the appellant/accused and his plea was recorded. The
appellant/accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried. Accordingly, the prosecution was
directed to examine witnesses in support of the charges. The prosecution examined as many as 15
witnesses in support of its case. Afer completion of prosecution evidence, incriminating
circumstances appearing in the prosecution evidence were put to the appellant/accused and his
statement under Section 342 of J&K Cr.PC was recorded. The appellant/accused entered upon his
defence and examined as many as 11 witnesses in defence. The learned trial Court, after hearing the
prosecution and the defence, came to the conclusion that charges against the appellant/accused are
established and, accordingly, the impugned judgment/order of conviction and sentence came to be
passed.
4 It is pertinent to mention here that, during pendency of the appeal, the appellant passed away and
in his place, wife of the appellant Sheela Devi filed an application seeking permission to prosecute
the appeal. The application was allowed by this Court in terms of order dated 31.01.2019 and the
applicant Sheela Devi was permitted to prosecute the appeal.
5 The appellant has challenged the impugned judgment/order of conviction and sentence on the
ground that while passing the said judgment, the learned trial Court has not properly appreciated
the evidence on record. It has been contended that the initial demand of bribe has not been proved
by the prosecution and this aspect of the matter has not been appreciated by the trial Court. It has
been further submitted that PW Pardeep Kumar Sharma had, in his statement, confirmed the fact
that the complainant had not cooperated with the Investigating Agency and that there was no
demand of bribe made by the appellant/accused from the complainant. It has been also contended
that the learned trial Court has fallen into error by relying upon the statement of the complainant
who was a history sheeter. It has been contended that the demand at the time of trap has not been
proved by the prosecution as there are material contradictions in the statements of complainant, the
shadow witness and the independent witnesses which have been overlooked by the trial Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39794526/ 2
Bharat Bhushan (Dead) vs State Of J&K on 18 May, 2023
6 I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the impugned judgment, the grounds of
appeal and the record of the trial Court.
7 Before coming to the grounds of challenge urged by the learned counsel appearing for the
appellant, it would be apt to notice the legal position as regards the ingredients which are necessary
to be established for proving an offence under Sections 5(1)(d) read with Section 5(2) of the PC Act
and Section 161 of RPC. In order to bring home the guilt of the accused in such cases, the
prosecution has to establish, with cogent and convincing evidence, the following ingredients:
(i) Initial demand of illegal gratification by accused from the complainant;
(ii) Demand and voluntary acceptance of tainted money/bribe by the accused from
the complainant at the time of trap proceedings.
(iii) Recovery of tainted money from the accused;
8 When the aforesaid three ingredients are established against an accused, a legal presumption in
terms of Section 4 of the J&K PC Act arises that the accused has obtained tainted money as a motive
or reward for doing or forbearing to do an official act or for showing or forbearing to show, in the
exercise of his official functions, favour or disfavor, and the burden shifts upon the accused to rebut
this presumption.
9 The Supreme Court in the case of Banarsi Dass v. State of Haryana, (2010) 4 SCC 450, has held
that to constitute an offence under Section 161 IPC, it is necessary for the prosecution to prove that
there was demand of money and the same was voluntarily accepted by the accused. It has been
further held that in terms of Section 5(1)(d) of the PC Act, the demand and acceptance of money for
doing a favour in discharge of his official duties is sine qua non to the conviction of the accused. The
demand and acceptance of the illegal gratification by the accused has to be proved and established
by substantive evidence. These principles have been reiterated by this Court in the case of
Mohammad Ashraf Wani v. State of J&K (Criminal Appeal No.09/2017 decided on 22.03.2018).
10 In the light of foregoing legal position, let us now test the merits of the grounds urged by the
appellant on the touchstone of the evidence led by the prosecution in the instant case. 11 So far as
the initial demand of illegal gratification by the appellant from the complainant is concerned, it has
been contended by the appellant that there are contradictions in the evidence on record on this
aspect of the matter, particularly regarding the date of initial demand. Regarding this aspect of the
matter, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant/accused has not brought to the notice of this
Court any material contradiction in the statements of the complainant and other witnesses. In the
grounds of appeal, it has been submitted that PW Pardeep Kumar Sharma, SHO Police Station Bus
Stand time has stated that the appellant did not demand any bribe from the complainant. The
appellant has relied upon this assertion of the witness to show that the initial demand of bribe has
not been proved. 12 As per the prosecution case, PW Pardeep Kumar Sharma is not a witness to the
initial demand. The witness was heading the Police Station where the appellant was posted and he
had entrusted the investigation of the case against the complainant to the appellant. It is but natural
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39794526/ 3
Bharat Bhushan (Dead) vs State Of J&K on 18 May, 2023
that the witness PW Pardeep Kumar Sharma would be reluctant to depose about the demand of
bribe by his subordinate police officer. In any case, the demand of bribe is generally made secretly
and not in view and presence of others, therefore, if the demand of bribe has not been made by the
appellant from the complainant in presence of PW Pardeep Kumar Sharma, who was his superior
officer, it does not mean that initial demand of bribe has not been proved, particularly when the
complainant has, in his statement, sufficiently proved the said fact. There may have been minor
contradictions with regard to the dates on which the initial demand of bribe was made by the
appellant, but the same are not of such a nature as would discredit the statement of the complainant
in this regard. The learned trial Court has rightly brushed aside these minor contradictions in the
evidence led by the prosecution. 13 The other aspect of the matter which the prosecution was
obliged to prove beyond reasonable doubt is the demand of bribe by the appellant from the
complainant during the trap proceedings. On this aspect of the matter, the learned counsel
appearing for the appellant has laid much stress on the fact that the shadow witness PW Karanjit
Singh has in his statement deposed that he did not hear the appellant demanding bribe from the
complainant.
14 If we have a look at the statement of shadow witness PW Karnjit Singh, it is true that he has
stated that, at the time of trap proceedings, he did not hear the appellant demanding bribe from the
complainant, but he has, at the same time, stated that, though he was with the complainant, but the
appellant along with the complainant proceeded to another chair that was about 10/12 yards away
from him and he could see the complainant taking out tainted money from his pocket and handing
over the same to the appellant who kept it on a file. The witness denied the suggestion that the
complainant forcibly handed over the tainted money to the appellant and he further denied the
suggestion that the tainted money fell on the ground. He explained that the appellant kept the
tainted money in his pocket. Because the witness was present at some distance away from the
complainant and the appellant, as such, he could not have been in a position to hear the
conversation between the two.
15 The complainant PW Kulwant Singh has given vivid details about the manner in which he handed
over the tainted money to the appellant. He has stated that the appellant demanded a sum of
Rs.5000 from him at the time of the trap proceedings and when he tried to bargain with the
appellant, the appellant did not relent, whereafter he took out the tainted money of Rs.5000 from
his pocket and the appellant, after counting the same, kept it in the right pocket of his pent. In his
cross examination, he denied the suggestion that the appellant threw away the tainted money. PW
Ravel Singh, a member of the trap team has, during his cross examination, denied that the appellant
had thrown away the tainted money on floor. Similar denials have been made by the complainant
and the shadow witness PW Karanjit Singh. PW Ashok Kumar has also denied that the appellant
had thrown away the tainted money on floor.
16 From the foregoing evidence on record, it is clear that the prosecution has, with cogent and
convincing evidence, proved that during trap proceedings, the appellant demanded illegal
gratification from the complainant pursuant whereto the complainant handed over the tainted
currency notes to him. Merely because the shadow witness could not hear the conversation
regarding demand of bribe money between the complainant and the appellant in view of the fact
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39794526/ 4
Bharat Bhushan (Dead) vs State Of J&K on 18 May, 2023
that he was about 10/12 yards away from him at the relevant time, it cannot be stated that there was
no demand made by the appellant particularly when the statement of the complainant in this regard
has not been shaken during his cross examination. The defence put forward by the appellant in his
statement under Section 342 of J&K Cr.PC by stating that the money was thrust in his pocket and
that he threw away the said money, has not been proved from the evidence on record. Instead, the
prosecution witnesses have been consistent in their statements that the appellant did accept the
tainted money from the complainant and put it in the right pocket of his pent. Therefore, the
prosecution has been able to prove beyond reasonable doubt that, during the trap proceedings
pursuant to the demand made by the appellant from the complainant, he accepted the tainted
money from the complainant.
17 That takes us to the aspect of recovery of the tainted money. The witness to the recovery is PW
Yash Pal, the independent witness. He has in his statement deposed that he was instructed by the
Dy.SP to conduct search of the appellant. He has further stated that he conducted the search of right
pocket of the pent of the appellant and recovered the tainted currency notes and he tallied their
numbers with the numbers which they had noted on slips during the pre-trap proceedings. In his
cross examination, he has stated that no other article was found in the pocket of the appellant except
the bribe money. The other members of the trap team have also stated that the tainted money was
recovered from the right side pocket of pent of the appellant during the trap proceedings. The
complainant and the shadow witness have also corroborated this aspect of the matter. Thus, the
prosecution has been able to prove the recovery of tainted money from the possession of the
appellant in terms of the recovery memo EXP-RS. 18 Learned counsel appearing for the appellant
has strenuously argued that, as per the evidence on record, particularly the statement of the
complainant PW Kulwant Singh, the appellant before accepting the tainted money counted the
same, but, according to the contents of seizure memo EXP-KJS, the left hand wash of the appellant
did not turn pink, meaning thereby that tainted notes had not come into contact with left hand of
the appellant. The learned counsel has contended that it is not possible to count money with one
hand and if the prosecution evidence is to be believed, then the tainted money must have come in
contact with the left hand of the appellant, but, because the evidence on record suggests otherwise,
as such, the statements of prosecution witnesses in this regard get falsified. Learned counsel for the
appellant has submitted that the defence of the appellant that once money was thrust into his pocket
by the complainant, he immediately threw it out with his right hand without counting it, appears to
be plausible, as such, the defence of the appellant needs to be accepted.
19 The argument of learned counsel for the appellants appears to be attractive at first blush, but the
same when analyzed in the light of the facts proved on record, does not appear to have any force. It
is true that the complainant has in his statement deposed that the appellant did count the tainted
money which he handed over to him, but then, it is not impossible or improbable to count the
currency notes with one hand without using the other hand. There is overwhelming evidence on
record in the shape of statement of the complainant and the shadow witness to show that the
appellant did accept the tainted money without any resistance from him. The suggestions put by
learned defence counsel during trial of the case, to the prosecution witnesses, to the contrary, have
been denied by them and in fact the members of the trap team have clearly denied the suggestion
that the appellant threw the tainted money on ground. In the face of this evidence on record, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39794526/ 5
Bharat Bhushan (Dead) vs State Of J&K on 18 May, 2023
explanation tendered by the learned counsel for the appellant that the fact that the left hand of the
appellant did not come into contact with the tainted money, shows that he did not accept the money
from the complainant, cannot be accepted. The argument is, therefore, bound to be rejected.
20 From the foregoing analysis of evidence on record, it is clear that prosecution has been able to
prove the initial demand of illegal gratification by the appellant from the complaint, the demand and
voluntary acceptance of tainted money/bribe by the appellant from the complainant at the time of
trap proceedings as also the recovery of tainted money from the appellant. Once these ingredients
are established against the appellant, a legal presumption in terms of section 4 of the J&K PC Act
arises that the appellant has obtained tainted money as a motive or reward for doing or forbearing
to do an official act or for showing or for forbearing to show, in the exercise of his official functions,
favour or disfavor. Thus, the burden shifts upon the appellant to rebut this presumption.
21 It has been proved from the evidence on record that the appellant was investigating the case
registered against the complainant and, as such, he had opportunity and occasion to demand bribe
or illegal gratification from him for extending favour to him or forbear from showing disfavor to
him. It has alsoo come in the evidence on record that the appellant had threatened the complainant
that in case he would not meet his illegal demand, he would be initiating steps for cancellation of his
bail. Therefore, it was for the appellant to rebut the presumption that had arisen against him in
terms of section 4 of the J&K PC Act. There is nothing in the evidence led by the appellant in defence
that would rebut this presumption. The defence projected by the appellant in his statement recorded
under section 342 Cr.PC has not been established from the evidence on record. Therefore, the
prosecution has succeeded in establishing the charges against the appellant beyond any reasonable
doubt.
22 In view of what has been discussed hereinbefore, there is hardly any ground to interfere with the
well reasoned and lucid judgment passed by the learned trial Court. The same does not call for
interference by this Court. The appeal, therefore, fails and is dismissed accordingly.
Record of the trial Court along with a copy of this judgment be sent back.
(Sanjay Dhar) Judge Jammu 18 .05.2023 "Sanjeev, PS"
Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39794526/ 6
