Bharat Singh Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 February, 2019
Bharat Singh Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13
February, 2019
The High Court of Madhya Pradesh: Jabalpur
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Single Bench: Hon'ble Shri Justice Vishnu Pratap Singh Chauhan
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Cr.R. No. 258-2019
Bharat Singh Yadav
Vs.
State of Madhya Pradesh
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shri Kamlesh Singh Rajput, learned counsel for the applicant.
Shri Santosh Yadav, Panel Lawyer for the
respondent/State.
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
ORDER
(Passed on 13.02.2019) This Criminal Revision filed by the applicant under Section 397/01 of the
Cr.P.C. being aggrieved by the judgment and order dated 10.01.2019 passed in Criminal Appeal
No.301/2014 by the Additional Session Judge, Sehora, District Jabalpur, whereby learned appellate
Court affirmed the judgment passed by the JMFC in Criminal Case No.1545/2012 and convicted the
applicant for the offence punishable under Section 304-A of IPC and convert the sentence passed by
the JMFC for that offence from one year six months R.I. into one year R.I. and maintained the fine
amount.
2. In short, the prosecution story is that on the date of incident i.e. 10.09.2012, the appellant was
driven Auto Bearing No. MP20R3267 rashly and negligently. The deceased Dharmendra Singh and
witness Chatrapal Singh (PW-1), Jaypal Singh Thakur and Deepu Patel (PW-3) were sitting inside
the Auto. The applicant driving vehicle rashly and negligently, on account of that Dharmendra Singh
fell down from the Auto, sustained injury and, thereafter he succumbed to injuries. On the basis of
FIR in Crime No.938/2012 offence under Section 304-A has been registered against the applicant
and after investigation charge-sheet has been filed before JMFC. The trial Court framed charges
against applicant. The applicant abjured the guilt. Prosecution recorded the statement of witnesses.
In the examination of the accused, the applicant denied all the incriminating circumstances comes
against him and pleaded that he has falsely been implicated, however, did not produce any evidence
in his favour. Learned JMFC after hearing both the parties, delivered a judgment on 30.09.2014,
thereby convicted the applicant for the offence punishable under Section 304-A of IPC and
sentenced him to undergo one year six months R.I. alongwith fine of Rs. 500/- in default to undergo
further 10 days R.I. Additional.
3. Being aggrieved by that judgment of conviction and order of sentence, the applicant preferred an
appeal before the Additional Session Judge, Sehora, Jabalpur, Register as Cr.A. No.301/2014. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22806806/ 1
Bharat Singh Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 February, 2019
Appellate Court after hearing both the parties delivered the judgment on 30.09.2014 and affirmed
the conviction under Section 304-A of IPC, reducing the imprisonment from one year six months to
one year and remaining sentence not interfered with.
4. Being aggrieved by that order and judgment dated 30.09.2014, the applicant has preferred this
revision on the ground that learned trial Court as well as Appellate Court have not appreciated the
evidence properly. There was no witness to support the prosecution case. In spite of that the
applicant has been convicted for the offence punishable under section 304-A of IPC causing gross in
justice to the applicant. The man who fell down was in intoxicated state and due to imbalance, he
automatically fell down, there was no fault of the applicant, therefore, prays for setting aside the
conviction and sentenced passed by both the Courts below.
5. Learned Government Advocate has submitted that the learned trial Court as well as the Appellate
Court have appreciated the evidence in proper perspective. There was strong evidence against the
applicant to implicate in this offence. Eye witnesses categorically stated that at the time of accident,
the applicant was driven vehicle, therefore, prays for dismissal of this revision.
6. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of both the Courts below.
7. As per statement of Omkar Singh, A.S.I.. (PW-4), Jaypal Singh lodged a report in the Police
Station Sehora, Chowki Gosalpur, alleging therein that the Auto bearing No. M.P.20 R 627 was
driven by the applicant. Accident happened between the village Sehora and Pali in which
Dharmendra Singh sustained grievous injuries. Police registered Crime No. 348/2012 and it was
found that Dharmendra Singh succumbed to that injuries, registered a case under Section 304- A of
IPC, prepared a spot map at the instance of Jaipal Singh. Body of the Jaipal Singh sent for the
postmortem. Dr. Deepa Shiv Das (PW-5) performed the autopsy and opined that Dharmendra Singh
died, due to the haemorrhage and shock caused by the fatal injuries. This clearly goes to show that
the Dharmendra Singh was died due to fatal injury caused in accident.
8. Eye witness Chatpal Singh (PW-1) clearly stated that Auto was driven by the applicant and he was
driving Auto in high speed but this witness also stated in his examination-in-chief that Auto was
driven rightly, however, on the breaker Auto jumped and Dharmendra Singh fell down from the
Auto and sustained injuries. He was shifted to Gosalpur Hospital where he was declared brought
dead. He stated the number of Auto as MP20R 3267. The said witness was declared hostile by the
prosecution and on asking question, he admitted that the applicant was driven Auto negligently on
that account accident happened but in cross-examination stated no doubt Auto was in high speed
but it has rightly driven and in para-4 admitted that there was no negligence on the part of the
applicant. In his statement, he also admitted that on the place of the accident there was so many
turns on the road, when Dharmendra fell down from the Auto then this witness came to know that
Dharmendra had fallen down.
9. Another witness Jaipal Singh Thakur (PW-2) stated that he was siting in the Auto, Auto was
running in high speed and as applicant turn the Auto suddenly and Dharmendra Singh fell down
and the wheel of the Auto run over the body of the Dharmendra Singh. But in para-2 he specifically
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22806806/ 2
Bharat Singh Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 February, 2019
stated that he could not say that to whom mistake this accident happened. This witness in
cross-examination in para-5 admitted that during accident Auto did not turn turtle, only
Dharmendra Singh fell down from this Auto and in para-6 he admitted that they all were gossiping
and Dharmendra slip from the Auto and fell down. He also admitted that when Dharmendra fell
down, Auto stopped immediately after running only 10 feets. In para 7 he admitted that it is right if
Dharmendra caught hold Auto this accident would not happened.
10. Deepu Patel (PW-3) stated in his examination-in-Chief that when Dharmendra existed his
mouth for spitting, in the same time Auto took a turn and he fell down. He presumed the speed of
Auto 30- 40 Km and he also stated that when Dharmendra fell down, after that Auto stopped
immediately and took Dharmendra on the same Auto to hospital. He stated that Auto was driven by
the applicant but it is in average speed.
10. After considering the statement of all three witnesses, it is found that the deceased Dharmendra
was sit along with Chatrapal Singh (PW-1), Jaipal Singh Thakur (PW-2) and Deepu Patel (PW-3).
The road on which Auto was runing, was having so many turns. Dharmendra was sitting and
gossiping with other witnesses when he existed his mouth to spit, at the same time Auto took turn
and he fell down. No doubt, the driver of the Auto could not guess this accident, Auto was driven in
high speed but not negligently as state by the witness in-chief as well as in cross-examination. Until
and unless there is a negligence driving is proved, the main ingriedients of the offence under Section
304-A of IPC could not be proved
11. In totality of the consideration of the witnesses, this Court is of the view that both the Courts on
the basis of the statement of witnesses that the applicant was driven the Auto and during driving the
accident happened, convicted the applicant for the offence under Section 304-A of IPC but
negligence and rashness of the driving of the applicant has not been proved on the basis of the
statement. In that way, this Court finds that the prosecution failed to prove that at the time of the
accident, the applicant was driven the Auto rashly and negligently on account of that accident
happened. In the case of Mohammad Aynuddin @ Miyam Vs. State of Andra Pradesh (2000 AIR
(SC), 2511), Hon'ble Apex Court has held that when the victim fell down on account of his own
negligence, driver of the vehicle could not be held negligence of that accident. In that case, the Apex
Court specifically mentioned that "Merely because a passenger fell down from the bus while
boarding the bus no presumption of negligence can be drawn against the driver of the bus". In the
case in hand, the applicant was driven the Auto the deceased was sitting with the other witnesses
and gossiping and he try to spit out side the Auto, the Auto took turn, he fell down, he was not aware
of that fact. In this way, the negligence of the applicant could not be presumed and prosecution
failed to prove that the applicant was negligent for rashly driving the Auto. Resultantly, accident not
happened due to negligent and rashly driving of the applicant. The main allegation of the offence
has not been proved by the prosecution, both the Courts below erred in convicting the applicant for
the offence punishable under Section 304-A of IPC.
12. Accordingly, this revision succeeds and the same is allowed. The judgment of conviction and
sentenced passed by the Courts below is hereby set aside. Applicant is acquitted for the charge. If he
is in jail, not required any criminal case, he be released forthwith.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22806806/ 3
Bharat Singh Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 February, 2019
(Vishnu Pratap Singh Chauhan) JUDGE Tabish Date: 2019.02.14 12:04:56 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/22806806/ 4
