Bheru Singh vs The State Of M.P. on 17 October, 2019
Bheru Singh vs The State Of M.P. on 17 October, 2019
Author: Sunil Kumar Awasthi
Bench: Sunil Kumar Awasthi
1
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Criminal Appeal No.716/1999
(Bheru Singh and others Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh)
Shri Vivek Singh, learned counsel for the appellant.
Shri Gaurav Verma, learned Public Prosecutor for the
respondent/State.
JUDGMENT
( 17/10/2019) This appeal is directed against the judgment dated 29.05.1999 passed by Additional
Sessions Judge,Sonkatch, District Dewas in Session Trial No.215/1996 by which the appellants have
been convicted for the offence punishable under Section 148, 324/149 of I.P.C. and sentenced to
undergo 2 years R.I. for each offence. (2). The prosecution story is in short that on 02.09.1996 at
about 10.30 am one Prem Singh lodged FIR (Ex.P-1) alleging that today at 09:00 am he was cutting
gross in his field called Bhamrabala at the same time accused Bheru equipped with lathi, Meharban
and Harisingh having Farsi, Jwala Singh with Axe, Mansingh having Darata alongwith Amarsingh
came linhay (medh) of his field and objected him that this is their linhay, therefore, do not cut the
gross from here. Premsingh stated that this linhay came within the boundary of his field, therefore,
he has every right to cut the gross from the medh. After hearing this, Amar Singh abused him and
threatened that if he will continue to cut the gross then he will kill him. Thereafter, Bherusingh gave
a blow of lathi on the left elbow of Premsingh and Meharban Singh gave a blow of Farsi on his head.
Harisingh with intent to cause his death assaulted him by Farsi due to which he sustained injury on
left side of his skull. Premsingh shouted for help, then Anarsingh, Moharsingh,Ajabsingh and
Mangilal rushed to save him. Thereafter Jubalsingh gave a blow of Axe on the back of Anarsingh,
Mansingh gave a blow of Darata in the skull of Manoharsingh. Mangilal assaulted Mansingh by
Darata. When Premsingh tried to escape from the spot, then Amarsingh caught hold him and told
that he will kill him. Meanwhile Kamalsingh, Bhadarsingh, Devkaran and other villagers came to the
spot and they pacified the parties. After registering the FIR, police sent the injured persons to
hospital for medical examination. Police visited the spot and prepared spot map. Recorded the
statement of the witnesses. Accused persons were arrested and various articles were seized . After
completion of the investigation, charge-sheet was filed before the Court of Judicial Magistrate,
Sonkatch, who committed the case to the Sessions Court, finally it was transferred to the court of
Additional Sessions Judge, Sonkatch, Dewas for trial. (3). The trial court framed the charges against
the appellants for the offence punishable under Section 147, 148, 294, 307/149 324/149 of I.P.C. The
appellants abjured their guilt and they took a plea that they are innocent and they assaulted on the
complainant party in right to their private defence,however they have not examined any witnesses in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89184285/ 1
Bheru Singh vs The State Of M.P. on 17 October, 2019
their defence.
(4). The Trial court considering the evidence led by the prosecution came to the conclusion that the
charges leveled against the accused persons of the offence punishable under Section 294 and
307/149 of I.P.C. were not proved and therefore, recorded their acquittal for the aforesaid offence.
The trial court, however, found that there was evidence against appellants and convicted them for
the offence under Sections 148, 324/149 of I.P.C. and sentenced them as mentioned in para 1 of the
judgment.
(5). Learned counsel for the appellants have submitted that the trial court has not properly
appreciated the evidence and ignored the material, omissions and contradictions in the statement of
proseuction witnesses. The trial court was wrong in believing the prosecution witnesses and not
considering the facts that on the basis of same set of evidence one accused Amar Singh was
acquitted, the trial court committed error in convicting the appellants on the basis of same evidence.
The appellants are facing trial since 1996 and some accused person have already been remained in
custody for considerable period, therefore, their sentence be reduced for a period as they have
already undergone.
(6). On the other hand, learned public prosecutor for the respondent/State has opposed the prayer
made by the appellant and submitted that prosecution has succeeded to establish the presence of the
appellants on the place of occurrence and their participation in the crime, therefore, conviction
recorded by the trial court is justified and may be upheld by dismissing the appeal. (7). Having
heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the records. It appears that in the course of trial
the prosecution has examined 19 witnesses. Premsingh (PW-1) injured and informant of the case.
Narbat Singh (PW-2), Mangilal (PW-3), Dilip Singh (PW-
4), Bhadar Singh (PW-10), Devkaran (PW-13) and Kamal Singh (PW-16), who are the eye witnesses
of the incident. Anar Singh (PW-5), Ajab Singh (PW-11) and Manohar Singh (PW-12). Dr. Sunil
Kumar Tiwari (PW-19) who medically examined the informant and other injured persons. Sub
Inspector J.S. Pawar (PW-18) Investigation Officer of the case.
(8). Bhagwan Singh (PW-6), Bonda Ji (PW-7), Narayan S/o Bherusingh (PW-8), Narayan S/o Devaji
(PW-9), Rugnath Singh (PW-14) and Tej Singh (PW-15) are the witnesses of seizure memo and all
these witness have turned hostile.
(9). After going through the evidence, it appears that the informant (PW-1) has fully supported the
case and stated that accused persons Meharban Singh gave a blow of Farsi. Bherusingh hit on his
left shoulder by lohngi and Hari Singh gave a blow on his head. Accused Mansingh assaulted
Manohar Singh by Darata and Hari Singh gave a blow of Farsi. As a result , they sustained injury.
Narbat Singh (PW-2), Mangilal (PW-3), Dilip Singh (PW-4), Anarsingh (PW-5), Bhadar singh
(PW-10), Ajab Singh (PW-11), Manoharsingh (PW-
12) also supported the testimony of PW-1 and stated that when the altercation was started with
regard to cutting of gross from the hinlay of the field between the complainant Prem Singh and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89184285/ 2
Bheru Singh vs The State Of M.P. on 17 October, 2019
accused persons, then they reached on the spot to save the complainant but accused persons also
assaulted Ajabsingh, Mangilal and Parwat Singh.
(10). The complainant and other injured persons were examined by the Dr. Sunil Kumar Tiwari
(PW-19) on the same date, who deposed in the court and proved the injuries and gave report
Ex.P-26 to P-31. He found the following injuries on the body of the injured;
(a). Ajab Singh S/o Narayan Singh (I). Incised wound 1 cm x ½ cm deep on occipital region, clotted
blood was present.
(II). Incised wound 1 cm x ½ cm on right side of face AP direction skin deep 3 cm below to right eye,
clotted blood was present. (III) Abrasion 1/c cm x ½ cm on surface of right index finger. (IV)
Abrasion 3 cm x ½ cm right forearm, lower ¼ redness in colour, bleeding present.
(IV). Bruce 2.5 cm x 2 cm on back between T2 - L4 vertebral redness in colour.
(IV). Bruce 1.5 cm x 2 cm right side of the back across which level between T-3 to T-12 vertebral
redness in colour.
Injury No.1 and 2 caused by sharp object whereas injuries No.3, 4, 5 and 6 were caused by hard and
blunt object, the age of the injuries of 24 hours from the time of the examination.
(b). Anar Singh S/0 Narbat Singh
(I). Incised wound 4 cm x ½ cm muscle deep on left side of back
and lumber direction of the injury 4 cm away from the middle arm. Clotted blood was present. This
injury was caused by sharp object within 24 yours from the examination.
(c) Manohar Singh S/o Devi Singh (I) Incised wound 2 ½ cm x ½ cm deep on right parietal region
clotted blood was present.
(II). Lacerated wound 3 cm x ½ cm bonny on para occiptal region clotted blood was present.
(III) Abrasion 1 cm x ½ cm on frontoparietal region. (IV) Bruce 10 cm x 1 cm on right arm with
redness. (V) Bruce 6 cm x 2 cm on right forearm with redness. (VI). Bruce 6 cm x 2 cm on right
scapular region with redness. All the injures were caused by hard and blunt objection within 24
hours. Injuries No. 4, 5 and 6 are simple in nature. The injured was referred for X-ray examination
of injury No. 1, 2 and 3.
(d) Mangilal S/o Narayan Singh (I). Lacerated wound 1 cm x ½ cm on right para occipital region
clotted blood was present.
(II). Bruce 3 cm x 2 cm on left scapular region with redness. (III). Bruce 3 cm x 2 cm on right side of
the back towards T-4 vertebral level and 3 cm away from middle arm.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89184285/ 3
Bheru Singh vs The State Of M.P. on 17 October, 2019
All these injures were caused by hard and blunt object within a period of 24 hours. All injures are
simple in nature. Injured was referred for X-ray of injury No.1.
(e) Premsingh S/o Devi Singh (I). Incised wound 3 cm x ½ cm bone deep on parietal region, blood
was present.
(II). Incised wound 7 cm x ½ cm bone deep in middle line of the occipital region.
(III). Lacerated wound 2 cm x ½ cm muscle deep on left parietal region.
(IV) Bruce 6 cm x ½ cm in left shoulder with redness. (V). Bruce 8 cm x 2 cm on left scapular region
with redness. (VI). Bruce 6 cm x 2 cm dorsal aspects of forearm 15 cm below of eyebrow with
redness .
(VII). The injured was complaining pain on right thigh but no external injury was found.
The injury No.1 and 2 were caused by sharp object within a period of 24 hours whereas other injures
sustained by hard and blunt object. The injury No. 4, 5 and 6 were simple in nature. The injured was
referred to District Hospital Dewas for X-ray of injury No. 1, 2 and
3. (11). The prosecution has proved that the injuries were caused to the complainant Premsingh,
Ajabsingh, Anarsingh, Manoharsingh and Mangilal , but it appears that all the injures were found
simple in nature.
(12). Though there are contradictions in the statement of the witnesses however, they are
categorically supported the case of the prosecution narrating in detail as to the manner in which the
victims were assaulted. Further the medical report given by Dr. Sunil Kumar Tiwari (PW-19)
confirms the injuries caused to the victims to be of simple in nature.
(13).Now the next question to be considered by this Court is whether the statements of the
eye-witnesses are not believable looking to the fact that on the basis of their statement Amar Singh
has been acquitted by the trial court. It is the settled principle of law that the Court while
appreciating the statement of eye-witnesses tries to separate the grain from the chaff and the
statement of the witnesses cannot be thrown out only on the ground that they had stated wrong facts
with regard to other accused persons whereas their statement regarding involvement of a particular
accused is found proved. (14). It is trite law that in India theory of "falsus in uno falsus in omnibus"
is not applicable and the Court is duty bound to extract the truth from the statements of the
eye-witnesses. Only on the basis of some contradictions or omissions in the statements, with regard
to some accused, the whole statements cannot be thrown out. For this, reliance may be placed on the
decision of the Apex Court in the case of Laxman and others vs. The State of Maharashtra, reported
in AIR 1974 SC 308; wherein it has been held as under:-
"We never know whether we remember, perceive, or imagine".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89184285/ 4
Bheru Singh vs The State Of M.P. on 17 October, 2019
Witnesses cannot, therefore, be branded as liars in toto and their testimony rejected outright even if
parts of their statements are demonstrably incorrect or doubtful. The astute judge can separate the
grains of acceptable truth from the chaff of exaggerations and improbabilities which cannot be safely
or prudently accepted and acted upon. It is sound common sense to refuse to apply mechanically, in
assessing the worth of necessarily imperfect human testimony, the maxim: "falsus in uno falsus in
ommibus". (15). In view of the aforesaid, I am of the considered view that the prosecution has
successfully proved the fact that the accused persons constituted unlawful assembly and in
furtherance of common object of the said assembly they assaulted the complainant/ injured persons
by deadly weapons due to which they sustained injuries, therefore, trial court has rightly convicted
the accused persons for the offence under Section 148 and 324/149 of I.P.C. However, it appears
that appellant are facing trial since 1996 and they are not having any criminal antecedents,
therefore, looking to the facts and circumstances of the case and injuries sustained to the injured
persons, the sentence awarded by the trial court to the appellants for the offence under Section 148
and 324/149 of I.P.C. is reduced from 2 years R.I. to 6 months R.I. and fine amount of Rs.5,000/- is
imposed to each appellants, in default of payment of fine to further undergo 6 month's R.I. (16). The
appellants are on bail. Their bail bonds are cancelled and they are directed to surrender before the
trial Court forthwith to serve the sentence imposed upon them. Registry is directed to arrange for
issuance of supersession warrant so that appellants may be sent to the custody for serving their
remaining jail sentence.
A copy of the judgment be sent to the trial Court along with record for information and compliance.
Certified copy as per Rules.
(S. K. Awasthi) Judge praveen Date: 2019.10.18 11:22:04 -12'00'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89184285/ 5
