Bhuvnesh Kumar vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 March, 2025
Bhuvnesh Kumar vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 March,
2025
Author: Ajay Bhanot
Bench: Ajay Bhanot
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
Neutral Citation No.-2025:AHC:29447
Court No. - 5
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 19549 of 2024
Petitioner :- Bhuvnesh Kumar
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 5 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Rang Nath Pandey,Vidyapati Tripathi
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Harsh Vardhan Gupta,Rang Nath Pandey
Hon'ble Ajay Bhanot,J.
1. Shri Anoop Kumar Chaubey, learned counsel holding brief of Shri Rang Nath Pandey, learned
counsel appears for the petitioner. Learned Standing Counsel appears for the respondents No.1, 4
and 5. Shri Rajesh Kumar Yadav, learned counsel appears for the respondent No.6.
2. The petitioner has assailed the appointment of one Abhimanyu who is serving as toll clerk in the
respondent-corporation.
3. The employees of the Nagar Palika are governed by the service rules holding the field. The action
against the employees has to be taken by the disciplinary authority as per law. The petitioner is
neither an employee of the Nagar Palika Parishad, Bahjoi, District-Sambhal, nor the disciplinary
authority of the said Abhimanyu.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144415297/ 1
Bhuvnesh Kumar vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 March, 2025
4. The appointments of employees of the respondent-Nagar Palika Parishad, Bahjoi,
District-Sambhal are made in light of specific statutory provisions by competent statutory
authorities. The procedure laid out under the statutory scheme ensures transparency in the process
and fairness in appointments. The competent authorities under the law can also take appropriate
action for deviation made in the process of appointments. The petitioner does not figure anywhere
in the aforesaid statutory lineup of authorities charged with the duties of making the appointments
or examining of their validity thereof.
5. Admittedly, the petitioner is not connected with the process of appointments. The petitioner has
not established his locus standi to challenge the appointments made in the Nagar Palika Parishad,
Bahjoi, District-Sambhal.
6. The service conditions of government servants are governed and regulated by service rules
holding the field. The service rules are framed under Article 309 of the Constitution of India and
other provisions of law. The service rules of employees ensure that there is transparency in the
functioning of the government departments and accountability in the conduct of government
officials. The service rules also insulate the government employees from extraneous influences and
pressure which may impede faithful discharge of government duties. The service rules are bulwark
of independence of government servants and enable them to function without fear of any outside
interference.
7. Entertaining complaints from the outsiders who are busybodies and interlopers will have far
reaching consequences on the functioning of government. Such action will adversely impact the
morale of the government servants and will be detrimental to the efficiency of the Government.
Persons who set up complaints with malafide motives of harassing and blackmailing government
servant have to be deterred and the Government employees should be safeguarded. Manner of
discharge of duties by public servants are wholly beyond the scope of the rights of such
complainants and entirely in the prerogative of the State Government.
8. Further it is settled law that public interest litigation is not maintainable in service matters. It
would be apposite to fortify the narrative with cases in point.
9. This Court in Sriram Prasad and another Vs. State of U.P. and others1 relied on good authority to
uphold the distinction between an aggrieved party and an annoyed party held as under:
"13. In the case of R. v. London Country Keepers of the peace of Justice, (1890) 25
Qbd 357, the Court held:
"A person who cannot succeed in getting a conviction against another may be
annoyed by the said findings. He may also feel that what he thought to be a breach of
law was wrongly held to be not a breach of law by the Magistrate. He thus may be
said to be a person annoyed but not a person aggrieved, entitle to prefer an appeal
against such order."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144415297/ 2
Bhuvnesh Kumar vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 March, 2025
10. The existence of a right in favour of an aggrieved party furnishes the locus standi to maintain a
writ petition as held in Vinoy Kumar Vs. State of U.P. and others2 thus:
"2. Generally speaking, a person shall have no locus standi to file a writ petition if he
is not personally affected by the impugned order or his fundamental rights have
neither been directly or substantially invaded nor is there any imminent danger of
such rights being invaded or his acquired interests have been violated ignoring the
applicable rules. The relief under Article 226 of the constitution is based on the
existence of a right in favour of the person invoking the jurisdiction. The exception to
the general rule is only in cases where the writ applied for is a writ of habeas -corpus
or quo warranto or filed in public interest. It is a matter of prudence, that the court
confines the exercise of writ jurisdiction to cases where legal wrong or legal injuries
caused to a particular person or his fundamental rights are violated, and not to
entertain cases of individual wrong or injury at the instance of third party where
there is an effective legal aid organisation which can take care of such cases. Even in
cases filed in public interest, the court can exercise the writ jurisdiction at the
instance of a third party only when it is shown that the legal wrong or legal injury or
illegal burden is threatened and such person or determined class of persons is, by
reason or poverty, helplessness or disability or socially or economically disadvantages
position, unable to approach the court for relief."
11. Similarly in Ayaaubkhan Noorkhan Pathan Vs. State of Maharashtra and others3, the Supreme
Court emphasized that existence of enforceable rights of aggrieved parties form the pre-condition to
invoke the extraordinary jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India vested in this
Court:
"9. It is a settled legal proposition that a stranger cannot be permitted to meddle in
any proceeding, unless he satisfies the authority/court, that he falls within the
category of aggrieved persons. Only a person who has suffered, or suffers from legal
injury can challenge the act/action/order, etc. in a court of law. A writ petition under
Article 226 of the Constitution is maintainable either for the purpose of enforcing a
statutory or legal right, or when there is a complaint by the appellant that there has
been a breach of statutory duty on the part of the authorities. Therefore, there must
be a judicially enforceable right available for enforcement, on the basis of which writ
jurisdiction is resorted to. The Court can, of course, enforce the performance of a
statutory duty by a public body, using its writ jurisdiction at the behest of a person,
provided that such person satisfies the Court that he has a legal right to insist on such
performance. The existence of such right is a condition precedent for invoking the
writ jurisdiction of the courts. It is implicit in the exercise of such extraordinary
jurisdiction that the relief prayed for must be one to enforce a legal right. In fact, the
existence of such right, is the foundation of the exercise of the said jurisdiction by the
Court. The legal right that can be enforced must ordinarily be the right of the
appellant himself, who complains of infraction of such right and approaches the
Court for relief as regards the same. [Vide State of Orissa v. Madan Gopal Rungta
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144415297/ 3
Bhuvnesh Kumar vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 March, 2025
[AIR 1952 SC 12] , Saghir Ahmad v. State of U.P. [AIR 1954 SC 728] , Calcutta Gas
Co. (Proprietary) Ltd. v. State of W.B. [AIR 1962 SC 1044] , Rajendra Singh v. State of
M.P. [(1996) 5 SCC 460 : AIR 1996 SC 2736] and Tamilnad Mercantile Bank
Shareholders Welfare Assn. (2) v. S.C. Sekar [(2009) 2 SCC 784].]
10. A "legal right", means an entitlement arising out of legal rules. Thus, it may be
defined as an advantage, or a benefit conferred upon a person by the rule of law. The
expression, "person aggrieved" does not include a person who suffers from a
psychological or an imaginary injury; a person aggrieved must, therefore, necessarily
be one whose right or interest has been adversely affected or jeopardised. (Vide
Shanti Kumar R. Canji v. Home Insurance Co. of New York [(1974) 2 SCC 387 : AIR
1974 SC 1719] and State of Rajasthan v. Union of India [(1977) 3 SCC 592 : AIR 1977
SC 1361] .)
11. In Anand Sharadchandra Oka v. University of Mumbai [(2008) 5 SCC 217 : AIR
2008 SC 1289] , a similar view was taken by this Court, observing that, if a person
claiming relief is not eligible as per requirement, then he cannot be said to be a
person aggrieved regarding the election or the selection of other persons."
12. The scope of Public Interest Litigations in service matters was elucidated by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Duryodhan Sahu (Dr.) v. Jitendra Kumar Mishra4 held thus:
"18. The constitution of Administrative Tribunals was necessitated because of the
large pendency of cases relating to service matters in various courts in the country. It
was expected that the setting up of Administrative Tribunals to deal exclusively in
service matters would go a long way in not only reducing the burden of the courts but
also provide to the persons covered by the Tribunals speedy relief in respect of their
grievances. The basic idea as evident from the various provisions of the Act is that the
Tribunal should quickly redress the grievances in relation to service matters. The
definition of 'service matters' found in Section 3(q) shows that in relation to a person,
the expression means all service matters relating to the conditions of his service. The
significance of the word 'his' cannot be ignored. Section 3(b) defines the word
"application" as an application made under Section 19. The latter section refers to
"person aggrieved". In order to bring a matter before the Tribunal, an application has
to be made and the same can be made only by a person aggrieved by any order
pertaining to any matter within the jurisdiction of the Tribunal. We have already seen
that the word "order" has been defined in the explanation to sub-section (1) of
Section 19 so that all matters referred to in Section 3(q) as service matters could be
brought before the Tribunal. If in that context Sections 14 and 15 are read, there is no
doubt that a total stranger to the service concerned cannot make an application
before the Tribunal. If public interest litigations at the instance of strangers are
allowed to be entertained by the Tribunal, the very object of speedy disposal of
service matters would get defeated."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144415297/ 4
Bhuvnesh Kumar vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 March, 2025
13. The consequences of entertaining Public Interest Litigations in service matters were examined by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ashok Kumar Pandey v. State of West Bengal5. Public Interest
Litigations in service matters were restricted in the following terms:
"16. As noted supra, a time has come to weed out the petitions, which though titled as
public interest litigations are in essence something else. It is shocking to note that
courts are flooded with a large number of so-called public interest litigations where
even a minuscule percentage can legitimately be called public interest litigations.
Though the parameters of public interest litigation have been indicated by this Court
in a large number of cases, yet unmindful of the real intentions and objectives, courts
are entertaining such petitions and wasting valuable judicial time which, as noted
above, could be otherwise utilized for disposal of genuine cases. Though in
Duryodhan Sahu (Dr) v. Jitendra Kumar Mishra [(1998) 7 SCC 273 : 1998 SCC (L&S)
1802 : AIR 1999 SC 114] this Court held that in service matters PILs should not be
entertained, the inflow of so-called PILs involving service matters continues
unabated in the courts and strangely are entertained. The least the High Courts could
do is to throw them out on the basis of the said decision. The other interesting aspect
is that in the PILs, official documents are being annexed without even indicating as to
how the petitioner came to possess them. In one case, it was noticed that an
interesting answer was given as to its possession. It was stated that a packet was lying
on the road and when out of curiosity the petitioner opened it, he found copies of the
official documents. Whenever such frivolous pleas are taken to explain possession,
the courts should do well not only to dismiss the petitions but also to impose
exemplary costs. It would be desirable for the courts to filter out the frivolous
petitions and dismiss them with costs as aforestated so that the message goes in the
right direction that petitions filed with oblique motive do not have the approval of the
courts."
14. The law laid down by the Constitutional Courts does not permit initiation of adversarial litigation
in service matters at the instance of a stranger or a busybody. The petitioner was required to satisfy
that he is an aggrieved party. The nature of legal rights sought to be enforced do not bring the
petitioner in the definition of a person aggrieved. The petitioner does not have the locus standi to
maintain the writ petition. Further the petitioner cannot canvass any public interest in this writ
petition, in light of the restrictions imposed by judicial authorities discussed earlier.
15. Litigation cannot be a sport for the mischievous and courts are not the play field for interlopers.
16. The writ petition has been actuated by malafides and is an abuse of the process of the Court. The
petitioner is a busybody who simply wants to harass and blackmail the said Abhimanyu.
17. In this wake, cost of Rs.50,000/- is imposed upon the petitioner to discourage his conduct. The
District Magistrate, Sambhal shall recover the said amount from the petitioner as arrears of land
revenue within a period of two months and submit a report before the Chief Judicial Magistrate. The
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sambhal shall ensure that the costs are recovered and paid to the District
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144415297/ 5
Bhuvnesh Kumar vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 3 March, 2025
Mediation Centre, Sambhal for the harassment which has been caused.
18. Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sambhal to file a compliance report before the Registrar
General of this Court immediately thereafter.
19. Office to send a copy of this order to Chief Judicial Magistrate, Sambhal and District Magistrate,
Sambhal for compliance.
20. The writ petition is dismissed.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Ashish Tripathi
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144415297/ 6
