Biswajit Panigrahi vs State Of Odisha & Others .... Opp. ... on 19 May, 2023
Biswajit Panigrahi vs State Of Odisha & Others .... Opp. ... on 19
May, 2023
Author: A.K. Mohapatra
Bench: A.K. Mohapatra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.27484 of 2022
An application under Article 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
Biswajit Panigrahi .... Petitioner
-versus-
State of Odisha & others .... Opp. Parties
For Petitioner M/s. S.K. Sarangi and
A.K. Nayak, Advocate
For Opposite Parties : :
Mr. Saswat Das,
Addl. Govt. Advocate
CORAM:
JUSTICE A.K. MOHAPATRA
_____________________________________________________
Date of hearing : 21.03.2023 | Date of Judgment:19.05.2023
_______________________________________________________
A.K. Mohapatra, J. :
The above noted Writ Petition has been filed by the Petitioner assailing the order of dismissal dated
27.05.2021 under Annexure-7 as well as order dated 20.09.2021 under Annexure-8 converting the
order of dismissal to one of compulsory retirement from service by the appellate authority. Further,
a prayer has also been made to provide an opportunity of hearing before passing any final order
against the Petitioner in District Proceeding No.31 of 2020.
2. The factual background of the preset case in brief is that the Petitioner joined in Police service on
12.12.1991. While discharging his duties, the Petitioner was promoted to the post of A.S.I. of Police.
When the Petitioner was posted at // 2 // Jharsuguda, on the basis of m allegation, Jharsuguda
District Proceeding No.16 of 2016 was initiated against him for violation of norms and conditions
contained in Rule 3(b) of Odisha Government Servant's Conduct Rule, 1959. However, the
proceeding was concluded finding the Petitioner guilty of misconduct and black marks were
awarded vide order dated 05.11.2020.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127885632/ 1
Biswajit Panigrahi vs State Of Odisha & Others .... Opp. ... on 19 May, 2023
3. Prior to the aforesaid Jharsuguda District Proceeding No.16 of 2016 the Petitioner was being
proceeded against another Jharsuguda Proceeding No.12 of 2015 on the allegation of negligence and
dereliction in his duty. The aforesaid Jharsuguda District Proceeding No.12 of 2015 was terminated
by holding the Petitioner guilty of dereliction in duty and accordingly awarded punishment of
withholding of increment for a period of six months without cumulative effect equivalent to one
black mark vide order dated 04.04.2018.
4. Similarly while the Petitioner was posted at Kisinda Police Station, Sambalpur on some allegation
Sambalpur District Proceeding No.11 dated 12.07.2019 was initiated against the Petitioner.
Eventually the Petitioner was found guilty of the charges alleged against him and accordingly he was
awarded with punishment of one black mark with the suspension period to be treated as such vide
order dated 05.11.2020.
5. While the matter stood thus on 04.04.2018 another order was passed by the Superintendent of
Police, Jharsuguda in Distict Proceeding No.13 of 2015 on the allegation that he had managed to
refer a case directly to the V.S.S.Medical College & Hospital, Burla instead of District H.Qrs
Hospital, // 3 // Jharsuguda. Accordingly, he was also found guilty by the Superintendent of Police,
Jharsuguda and a punishment of withholding of increment of six months without cumulative effect
equivalent tone black mark was imposed on the Petitioner.
6. While the Petitioner was posted at Kisinda Police Station, another proceeding was initiated
against him on the allegation of demanding money from the complainant to resolve a pending
dispute. After enquiry the Petitioner was also found guilty in the said District Proceeding and was
awarded one black mark vide order dated 19.03.2020 as a result the order dated 19.03.2020 reveals
that the total black mark came to six as against the Petitioner.
7. On perusal of the Writ Petition, it was also observed that while the Petitioner was posted at
Jharsuguda Outpost, near Gandhi Chowk an allegation was made that he fell down from the
motorcycle due to excess consumption of alcohol. After due enquiry, the Petitioner was awarded
with two black marks vide order dated 10.09.2020. As such the total black marks against the
Petitioner came to eight. Finally, while the Petitioner was facing a proceeding, Sambalpur Police
H.Qrs directed to proceed to Dhenkanal for law and order duty in connection with Gaja Laxmi Puja.
However, the Petitioner willfully challenged the said order stating that he is not getting his salary.
Thus, treating the same as disobedience, the Petitioner once again awarded one black mark taking
his total black mark nine vide order dated 15.09.2020 with accumulation of nine black mark to his
discredit, the Petitioner was proceeded against in Sambalpur District Proceeding No.31 of 2020. The
// 4 // said District Proceeding was terminated with the recommendation of the Superintendent of
Police, Sambalpur to one punishment of dismissal from service vide order dated 05.11.2020.
8. During the pendency of Sambalpur District Proceeding No.31 of 2020, the Petitioner was issued
with a second show cause notice for imposition of punishment. However, the Petitioner sought for
15 days time for filing of show cause. The Disciplinary Authority rejected the prayer of the Petitioner
and without considering the views/stand of the Petitioner to the second show cause notice, the
proceeding was disposed of imposing the punishment of dismissal from service. Such imposition of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127885632/ 2
Biswajit Panigrahi vs State Of Odisha & Others .... Opp. ... on 19 May, 2023
dismissal from service was affirmed by the Superintendent of Police vide order dated 27.05.2021.
9. Being aggrieved by the order passed by the Disciplinary Authority in Sambalpur district
Proceeding No.31 of 2020 the Petitioner preferred an appeal before the I.G. of Prisons and the
appellate authority after considering the case of the Petitioner, converted the punishment of
dismissal from service to one of compulsory retirement from service.
10. It has also been pleaded in the Writ Petition that the Sambalpur District Proceeding No.31 dated
05.11.020 was initiated on the ground that the Petitioner has accumulated nine black marks and
accordingly, he is liable to be dismissed from service. Pursuant to such allegation the enquiry was
held. However, from the enquiry report it would reveal that the order which was passed against the
Petitioner was washed out by virtue of the fact that the award of black mark was not permanent in
nature, rather was conditional to the extent that // 5 // the punishment of withholding of increment
for a period of six months without cumulative effect which is equivalent to one black mark.
Similarly, punishments were imposed in Jharsuguda District Proceeding Nos. 12 of 2015 and 13 of
2015. Thus, on expiry of six months from the date of imposition of such punishment i.e. 04.04.2018.
Both the black marks awarded against the Petitioner have lost their relevance and not to be taken
into consideration while initiating the proceeding No.31 of 05.11.2020. Therefore, it has been stated
in the Writ Petition that the initiation of Sambalpur District Proceeding No.31 of 2020 is
unsustainable in law and as consequence thereof, the order of punishment of dismissal from service
is completely arbitrary, erroneous and illegal as at the time of proceeding No.31 of 2020 was
initiated, the Petitioner had effectively 7 (seven) black marks against him. In such view of the matter
the imposition of penalty of dismissal from service is unsustainable in law in view of the provisions
contained in Odisha Police Rule 834 and 835.
11. On the contrary, a Counter Affidavit has been filed on behalf of the State-Opposite Parties. At the
outset, the Opposite Parties have denied every averments and contentions of the Petitioner in the
Writ Petition and they have also questioned the maintainability of the Writ Petition. In the Counter
Affidavit, it has been stated that in view of the provisions contained in P.M.Rule-836, whenever any
members of the Police service below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police, have been
awarded nine black marks, proceeding shall be drawn up against him to impose a punishment like
reduction in rank or compulsory retirement or removal/dismissal from service.
// 6 // Accordingly, it was submitted that in obedience to the aforesaid Rule and since the Petitioner
has nine black marks to his discredit, Sambalpur District Proceeding No.31 of 2020 was rightly and
legally initiated against the Petitioner.
12. It has also been contended in the Counter Affidavit that after acquiring six black marks to his
discredit, the Petitioner was given a warning vide letter dated 19.03.2020 to the extent that on his
earning three more black marks, he shall be dismissed as per PMR Rule 837. It has also been stated
that after acquiring nine black marks with the termination of Sambalpur Distric10t Proceeding No.1
dated 23.01.2020 the total number of black mark earned by the Petitioner went up to nine.
Accordingly, Sambalpur Proceeding No.31 of 2020 was initiated against the Petitioner. It has also
been stated in the Counter Affidavit, that a due enquiry was conducted by the Enquiry Officer,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127885632/ 3
Biswajit Panigrahi vs State Of Odisha & Others .... Opp. ... on 19 May, 2023
namely Amaresh Panda, the then Additional S.P., Sambalpur. After completion of enquiry, the
Enquiry Officer submitted his finding holding that the Petitioner is guilty of the charges. Thereafter,
after observance of the principle of natural justice, the Petitioner was awarded with punishment of
dismissal from service vide order dated 27.05.2021. As such, it has been stated that there is no
irregularities in counting of black marks. In support of their contentions that the Petitioner has
acquired nine black marks the opposite Parties have annexed the punishment order under
Annexure-A/3 to G/3.
13. It has also been stated in the Counter Affidavit that black marks are permanently on record and
shall be taken into consideration in deciding the nature and extent of subsequent // 7 //
punishment as contemplated in PMR 837(1). Further, by referring to PMR-837(2), it has been stated
in the Counter Affidavit that the order awarding black marks shall specify the number of black
marks outstanding against the delinquent and when the imposition of two more black marks may
result in reduction in rank of compulsory retirement or removal or dismissal or one more black
mark may result in his reduction in rank or loss of increment under those Rules, the order shall
contain one warning to that effect.
14. The Counter Affidavit further reveals that the Petitioner was given due warning as per PMR-837
vide letter dated 19.03.2020 which was received and acknowledged by the Petitioner on
20.03.2020, but he failed to mend his attitude and further displayed his indiscipline attitude. It has
also been stated that the Petitioner did not prefer any appeal regarding violation of PMR- 834 and
835 nor did he approach the competent authority in this regard. It has also been stated that the
black marks are permanent in nature and shall remain in service record permanently till the same is
set aside by the appellate authority.
15. With regard to observance of the principle of natural justice, it has been stated in the Counter
Affidavit that the Enquiry Officer while conducting enquiry in the Sambalpur district Proceeding
No.31 of 2020 has given adequate opportunity to the Petitioner to defend himself. Further, the
Petitioner has been given two show cause notices to explain his position. So far as second show
cause notice is concerned, it has been stated in the Counter affidavit that the Petitioner asked for
some time which was rejected as the ground taken in the // 8 // time petition was not logical.
Accordingly, the Petitioner was awarded the punishment of dismissal from service for his grave
misconduct and unsatisfactory work. However, on an appeal filed by the Petitioner, the punishment
of dismissal from service has been converted to one of compulsory retirement from service by the
appellate authority. It has also been stated that although the Petitioner challenged the Jharsuguda
District Proceeding No.04 of 2016, Sambalpur District Proceeding No.11 of 2019 Prog. No.12 of 2019
and Prog. No.01 of 2020 by preferring an appeal before the appellate authority. However, the
appellate authority has rejected the appeal on the ground that the same are devoid of merit. In such
view of the matter, it has been pleaded by the Opposite Parties that the Writ Petition is devoid of
merit and accordingly the same should be dismissed.
16. Heard Mr.S.K.Sarangi, learned senior Advocate for the Petitioner as well Sri Das, learned
Additional Government Advocate. Perused the pleadings of the parties as well as the documents
annexed to the Writ Petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127885632/ 4
Biswajit Panigrahi vs State Of Odisha & Others .... Opp. ... on 19 May, 2023
17. Mr.S.K.Sarangi, learned senior counsel appearing for the Petitioner at the outset submitted that
in view of the provisions contained in Rule-836 of the Police Manual accumulation of nine black
marks shall entail reduction in rank or compulsory retirement or removed or dismissal. The same
also provides that whenever any member of the Police below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of
Police, has been awarded nine black marks, proceeding shall be drawn up against him with a view to
awarding any of the above punishments. By referring to the aforesaid Rule-836, it is further
contended by // 9 // the learned counsel for the Petitioner that the Petitioner has been awarded
nine back marks, however two black marks had already been washed out after lapse of six months
from the date of passing of the orders on 04.04.2018. Therefore, Mr.Sarangi, learned senior counsel
for the Petitioner contended that in effect only seven black marks are left out against the Petitioner.
In such view of the matter, learned senior counsel appearing for the Petitioner submitted that
drawing proceeding bearing Sambalpur District Proceeding No.31 of 2020 on the basis of Rule-836
is illegal and arbitrary.
18. In course of his argument, learned senior counsel appearing for the Petitioner referring to the
order of the learned Orissa Administrative Tribunal dated 18.05.2012 in Sankarsan
Dalai-Vs.-Director General of Police, Odisha and others in O.A.No.2723(C) of 2008 submitted
before this Court that the Full Bench of the Tribunal was required to interpret the Rule- 835(1)
which does not have the effect after expiry of period for which the reduction or forfeiture or
withholding of increment has been imposed In such case the black mark shall not remain
permanently under Rule 837(1). Further, it has been held that the black mark shall remain
permanently under Rule 837 if the same is awarded separately as punishment provided in Clause
(f) of Rue 824. The aforesaid order of the learned Tribunal dated 18.05.2012 in O.A.No.2733(C) of
2008 was challenged before this Court in W.P.(C) No.13624 of 2014 by the State. A Division bench
of this Court vide order dated 01.03.2017 dismissed the Writ Petition and the order passed by the
learned Tribunal referred to herein above was affirmed.
// 10 //
19. While dismissing the Writ Petition preferred by the State-Opposite Parties, A division Bench of
this Court has observed that pursuant to the pursuant to the divergent orders passed in different
Original Applications, the matter was referred to the larger Bench of the Orissa Administrative
Tribunal in O.A.No.2723 (C) of 2008 to answer the reference " as to whether in case of penalty of
reduction, ,forfeiture or withholding of increments having value of black mark as prescribed in
Rule-835 of Orissa Police Rules shall remain permanently in accordance with Rule 837(1) or shall
cease after expiry of period of reduction, forfeiture or withholding of increments."
The Division Bench of this Court while considering the aforesaid issue has also taken note of the
observation of the Tribunal to the effect that black mark value which is in Rule 835(1) does not have
effect after expiry of period for which the reduction, forfeiture or withholding of increment has been
imposed. In such case, the black mark shall not remain permanently under Rule 837(1). Further the
black mark shall be permanently under Rule 837 if it is awarded separately as punishment
prescribed in clause (f) of Rule-824..
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127885632/ 5
Biswajit Panigrahi vs State Of Odisha & Others .... Opp. ... on 19 May, 2023
The order dated 01.03.2017 passed in W.P(C) No.13624 of 2014 was assailed before the Hon'ble
Supreme Court by filing SLP Diary No.23651 of 2018 by the State- Opposite Parties vide order dated
13.09.2019 the aforesaid SLP was dismissed on the ground of delay. Thus, the order passed by the
learned Tribunal has attained finality in the meantime.
// 11 //
20. To analyze the provisions contained in Rules 834, 835 836 and 837 the same has been quoted
herein below:
834.(a) Imposition of black marks: Black marks may be awarded alone or in addition
to other punishments enumerated alone or in addition to other punishment
enumerated in Rule 824 except dismissal or removal, to al officers of and below the
rank of Inspector No more than one black mark shall be awarded or any one offence
except when moral turpitude can reasonably be inferred.
(b) Three black marks shall ordinarily entail reduction or forfeiture or withholding of an increment,
the period of which shall be specified in the order and, after the period is over the officer will be
restored to his former position. Such reduction or forfeiture or withholding of increment shall not
carry any black mark value.
(c) It shall be left to the discretion of the Officer awarding the third black mark to waive the penalty
noted in Clause (b) in exercising this option, he shall consider-
i) The officers for which the previous back marks were awarded.
ii) The length of time that has elapsed since they were awarded,
iii) Any good service the defaulter may have to his credit.
835. (i) Effect of black marks:- A reduction or forfeiture or withholding of increment for specific
offence shall carry the following black mark value Black marks A reduction etc. up to six months 1
Ditto for longer than twelve months 3
836. Effect of nine black marks - Nine black marks shall entail reduction in rank or compulsory
retirement or removed or dismissal. Whenever any Member of the Police below the rank of Deputy
Superintendent of Police, has been awarded nine black marks, proceedings shall be drawn up
against him with a view to awarding any of the above punishments.
// 12 //
837.(1) General Rules as to black marks - (1) Black marks shall remain permanently on record and
be taken into consideration in deciding the nature and extent of subsequent punishments:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127885632/ 6
Biswajit Panigrahi vs State Of Odisha & Others .... Opp. ... on 19 May, 2023
Provided that the due allowances shall be made for good service marks and any other
recognition of good work on record in the delinquent's favour.
(2) The order awarding black marks shall specify the number of black marks
outstanding against the delinquent, and when the imposition of two more blank
marks may result in reduction in rank or compulsory retirement or removal or
dismissal, or one more black mark may result in his reduction in rank or loss of
increment under these rules, the order shall contain a warning to that effect."
21. A perusal of the aforesaid Rule Chapter XXV of Orissa Police Rule deals with punishments so far
Rule 824 is concerned. The same provides for punishment that can be inflicted in a Disciplinary
Proceeding on a police Officer below the rank of Deputy Superintendent of Police. Clause(f) of Rule
824 provides black mark or marks is a majour punishment. Further, such major punishment and
censure shall be entered in the Service Book and other minor punishment may be entered if the
officer awarding punishment so directs. Similarly Rule 834 provides imposition of black mark. Rule
834(a) enumerates that the black marks may be awarded alone or in addition to other punishments
enumerated in Rule 824 except dismissal or removal. Such provision qualifies by the condition that
no more than one black mark shall be awarded or any one offence except when moral turpitude can
reasonably be inferred. Clause(b) of Rule 834 provides three black marks shall ordinarily entail
reduction or forfeiture or withholding of an increment. The period of which shall be specified in
order and if the period is over the answer will be restored to his former // 13 // position. Such
reduction, forfeiture or withholding of increment shall not carry any black mark value Clause(c) of
Rule 834 further provides that it is left to the discretion of the officer awarding the third black mark
to waive the penalty referred to in Clause(b) in exercise of his option under three contingencies
which have been mentioned in the said sub-clause.
22. On a careful reading of Rule 835 which deals with effect of black marks, it appears that reduction
or forfeiture or withholding of increment for subsequent offence shall carry the following black mark
value.
Black marks Similarly Rule 836 provides for effect of nine black marks. It lays down if a Police
officer acquired nine black marks then proceeding shall be drawn up against him with a view to
award punishment of reduction in rank/compulsory retirement/removal/dismissal from service.
24. Mr.Sarangi, learned counsel for the Petitioner appearing for the Petitioner referring to the order
of the Tribunal in O.A. No.2723(C) of 2008 submitted that on a conjoint reading of Rule 824 and
835 reveals that three black marks shall entail reduction or forfeiture or withholding of an
increment whereas, contrary thereto Rule 835 says that for withholding of increment for 12 months
will carry value of two black marks and more than 12 months will carry value of three black marks.
He further submitted that the note appended to Rule-832 // 14 // provides that in giving effect to an
order of punishment, care must be taken to prevent the officer being doubly punished. Therefore, he
submitted that as provided in Rue-834 that punishment of black mark can be awarded or in
addition to other penalties. Thus, he submitted that withholding of increment for a particular period
having value of black mark, if the black mark would remain as black mark permanently under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127885632/ 7
Biswajit Panigrahi vs State Of Odisha & Others .... Opp. ... on 19 May, 2023
Rule-837, then the same would amount to imposing two punishments (1) withholding of increment
as prescribed punishment under clause (e) of Rule 824 and (ii) black mark prescribed in Clause (f)
of Rule 824. In this context, learned senior counsel further submitted before this Court that at least
in two proceedings i.e. Jharsuguda District Proceeding No.13 of 2015 and Jharsuguda District
Proceeding No.12 of 2015. The punishment awarded vide order dated 04.04.2018 was withholding
of increment for a period of six months without cumulative effect which is equivalent to one black
mark. He further submitted that since the increment has been withheld for a period of six months in
both the proceedings the authorities should not have taken into consideration the punishment,
which is equivalent to one black mark. Accordingly, he further submitted that the imposition of one
black mark which was in aforesaid two proceedings which have been specifically stated in the
punishment would equivalent to the punishment which the Petitioner has already suffered, if given
effect to, would amount to double punishment, so far as the present Petitioner is concerned.
Accordingly, it was contended before this Court that the Petitioner having seven black marks to his
discredit, the // 15 // Sambalpur District Proceeding No.31 of 2020 under Rule 836 is unsustainable
in law.
25. Mr.Sarangi, learned Senior counsel appearing for the Petitioner challenged the impugned order
of dismissal from service which was subsequently modified and converted to one compulsory
retirement by the appellate authority on the ground that the original r of punishment was passed
without following the principle of natural justice. So far the observance of the principle of natural
justice is concerned, it is submitted that in a case where a major punishment is being imposed the
authorities are bound to follow the principle of natural justice, which is otherwise also a mandates of
the Rules. With regard to violation of natural justice, learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted
that the second show cause notice was issued to the petitioner. The Petitioner sought for 15 days
time to submit his reply. However, the Disciplinary Authority rejected the application seeking time
and passed the impugned order. He also assailed the impugned order on the ground that the
punishment imposed under Rule-836 is equally disproportionate which is although Rule 836
provides for punishment for reduction in rank, the Disciplinary Authority imposed the harsh
punishment of dismissal from service. Although the appellate authority subsequently modified the
same and converted it to a compulsory retirement, the same is also disproportionate considering the
serious allegations against the Petitioner. Accordingly, it was prayed that the impugned order under
Annexures-7 and 8 are unsustainable in law and therefore the same should be quashed.
// 16 //
26. Learned Additional Government Advocate per contra, supported the impugned order under
Annexure-7 and 8. It was submitted by the learned Additional Government Advocate that since the
Petitioner had acquired seven black marks, the authorities have rightly initiated a proceeding under
Rule-836 in the shape of Sambalpur District Proceeding No.31 of 2020. Accordingly, by following
the due procedure of law, orders have been passed by the Disciplinary Authority in consonance with
the Orissa Police Rules. Therefore, no fault can be found with the Opposite Parties in passing the
impugned order under Annexure-7 and 8.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127885632/ 8
Biswajit Panigrahi vs State Of Odisha & Others .... Opp. ... on 19 May, 2023
27. In reply to the argument advanced by Mr.Sarangi, learned Senior Counsel for the Petitioner with
regard to double punishment imposed on the Petitioner i.e., stoppage of increment for six months
without cumulative effect in two D.Ps as well as imposition of one black mark, it was submitted that
while imposing such punishment the authorities have acted in terms of the Rule. Since the Rule
provides that imposition of punishment in the shape of reduction etc. to a particular period would
have equivalent to certain number of black marks as has been enumerated in Rule 835, the
authorities while imposing such punishment have taken into consideration the black marks which
are equivalent to such punishment. Accordingly, the total number of black marks have been
calculated and a proceeding shall be initiated under Rule 836 for dismissal of Petitioner from
service. In such view of the matter, learned Additional Government Advocate submitted that the
authorities have not committed any mistake in calculation of nine black marks to initiate a
proceeding under the Rule-836 of the Orissa Police // 17 // Rule against the Petitioner. In such view
of the matter, learned Additional Government Advocate submitted that the Writ Petition is devoid of
merit and accordingly the same should be dismissed.
28. Having heard learned counsel for the respective parties and upon a careful consideration of the
respective pleadings, this Court is of the view that the question that falls for determination in the
present Writ Petition is similar to that one which was being considered by the Tribunal i.e., as to
whether in case of penalty of reduction, forfeiture or withholding of increment having value of black
mark as prescribed in Rule 835 of Orissa Police Rules shall remain permanent in accordance with
Rule 837(1) or shall ceased after penalty of reduction, forfeiture or withholding of increment is
answered to the aforesaid question by the Full Bench of the Orissa Administrative Tribunal having
been confirmed by a Division Bench of this Court and the SLP preferred by the State- Opposite
Parties having been dismissed on the ground of delay, this Court has no hesitation to come to a
conclusion that the finding of the Tribunal that the black mark value contained in Rule 835(1) does
not have effect after expiry of period for which reduction, forfeiture or withholding has been
imposed, has attained finality. On an analysis of legal position, this Court is also of the same view
that has been expressed by the Tribunal which was upheld by the Division Bench of this Court
otherwise in other interpretation of Rule 835 would amount to double punishment for the same
offence which has been prohibited in note appended to Rue-832.
// 18 //
29. Applying the aforesaid legal position to the fact of the present case, this Court on a careful
scrutiny of the orders passed in the District Proceeding Nos.12 of 2015 and 13 of 2015 of Jharsuguda
district by the S.P. of Jharusugda found that punishment of withholding of increment for a period of
six months without cumulative effect equivalent to one black mark has been imposed. Further, the
petitioner having suffered punishment of withholding of increment for a period of six months
without cumulative effect on both the occasions, equivalency thereof of one black mark if taken into
consideration shall amount to imposing double punishment on the Petitioner. Therefore, while
calculating nine black marks for the purpose of Rule 836, the Opposite parties should not have
included the imposition of black marks in District Proceeding No.12 of 2015 and 13 of 2015 of
Jharsuguda district. Moreover, the imposition of black mark it is being a punishment under 824(f),
the same cannot be equated with a punishment under Rule 824(e). So Clause (f) is to be taken into
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127885632/ 9
Biswajit Panigrahi vs State Of Odisha & Others .... Opp. ... on 19 May, 2023
consideration.
30. Since the Petitioner has already suffered the punishment under 824(e) the imposition of
punishment under Clause (f) of Rule 824 would be in addition to the punishment in Clause (e) of
Rule 824. Therefore, this Court is of the considered view that the same would amount to imposing of
double punishment for the self same offence. Accordingly, this Court is of the firm view that the two
black marks should not have been taken into consideration for the purpose of a proceeding under
Rule 836. The argument advanced by the leaned Additional Government Advocate renders contrary
to // 19 // the findings of the Tribunal which was confirmed by a Division Bench of this Court.
Therefore, the contentions raised to the contrary by the learned Additional Government Advocate is
hereby rejected.
31. In view of the aforesaid analysis of law as well as the facts, this Court has no hesitation in holding
that the authorities have committed an error in calculating nine black marks for initiation of a
proceeding against the Petitioner under Rule-836. In fact the Petitioner had accumulated seven
black marks to his discredit. Moreover, this Court is of the view that the authorities have not fully
complied with the principle of natural justice by rejecting the time petition and not allowing the
Petitioner to file reply to the second show cause notice considering the seriousness and gravity of the
punishment, as such the consequential imposition of punishment would not be unsustainable in
law. On both the counts the impugned order under Annexure-7 and 8 are unsustainable in law.
Accordingly, the same are hereby quashed. It is further directed that the Petitioner be reinstated in
service with all consequential and service benefits.
32. Accordingly, the Writ Petition is allowed. There shall no order as to cost.
(A.K. Mohapatra) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack The 19th of May, 2023/ RKS Designation:
Ex-A.R.-cum-Sr. Secretary Location: High Court of Orissa Date: 21-May-2023 10:10:17
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127885632/ 10
