Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
Author: Javed Iqbal Wani
Bench: Javed Iqbal Wani
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRM(M) No. 90/2020
CrlM Nos. 921/2022, 1783/2021 and 210/2020
Reserved on: 27.12.2022
Pronounced on: 10.03.2023
Bopinder Singh Dua.
..... Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Sunil Sethi, Senior Advocate
Mr. Parimoksh Seth, Advocate.
V/s
UT of J&K.
.....Respondent(s)
Through: Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE JAVED IQBAL WANI, JUDGE.
JUDGEMENT
01. In the instant petition filed under section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the petitioner
seeks quashment of FIR No. 25/2019 dated 23rd October 2019 (hereinafter for short the impugned
FIR) registered with Police Station Anti-Corruption Bureau, Jammu (hereinafter for short the ACB)
for commission of offence under Section 5(1)(e) read with Section 5(2) of the Jammu and Kashmir
Prevention of Corruption Act, 2006 (hereinafter for short the Act of 2006), including the
consequent proceedings.
Facts:- Following facts stem out from the petition.
(cid:128) The petitioner is stated to have been borne on the establishment of J&K Small Scale Industries
Development Corporation and after rendering a considerable period of service and obtaining
various promotions, reached to the level of Managing Director of the Corporation in the year 2002
and finally retired upon attaining the age of superannuation in November, 2012.
(cid:128) During the period of his working an FIR no. 10/1997 came to be registered against the petitioner
by the then Vigilance Organization, for allegedly having accumulated assets disproportionate to his
known source of income.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 1
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
(cid:128) The said FIR No. 10/1997 is stated to have been closed after conducting investigation therein "As
Not Proved" followed by filing of " Closure Report" before the Court of Special Judge,
Anti-Corruption, Jammu, and accepted by the said Court on 17.04.2000.
(cid:128) The impugned FIR for commission of offence under Section 5(1)(e) read with section 5(2) of the
Act of 2006, is stated to have been registered against the petitioner after seven years of his
retirement on the similar allegations on which FIR 10/1997 supra was registered.
02. The impugned FIR is being assailed in the instant petition inter alia on the grounds urged in the
petition.
03. Response to the petition has been filed by the respondent wherein, it is being admitted that that
the impugned FIR came to be registered against the petitioner after him having retired as Managing
Director SICOP, for having accumulated huge assets both moveable as well as immovable,
disproportionate to his known sources of income by indulging in corrupt and illegal practice.
It is being stated in the response that as per the details/facts gathered during secret inquiries
conducted, the petitioner was found to have abused and misused his official position, having
invested his ill-gotten money from time to time in various business ventures in his name and in the
name of his family members. The following are the details of alleged moveable and immovable
properties reflected in the response having been found during the said inquiries:
(i) 09 different factories under different name and style established by him and his
family member. Few factories mentioned are M/S Modern Plastics, M/S Neptune
Plastics and Modern Fabrications.
(ii) Large number of goods carrier/trucks purchased by him as well as his family
members.
(iii) A double storey palatial house in Nanak Nagar, Jammu constructed over 2 kanals
of land.
Besides above allegations, it is also being averred that during the course of search conducted while
investigating FIR No. 23/2019 registered with police station Anti-Corruption Bureau, Jammu,
against one Shri Jasvinder Singh Dua (MD Handicrafts Corporation), nephew of the petitioner
herein, having been appointed illegally in SICOP during working of the petitioner therein in the
SICOP, the following valuable assets as well are stated to have been recovered during the said search
from the premises of the petitioner prima facie establishing that the petitioner has resorted to
corrupt and illegal practices, taking advantage of his lucrative posting acquiring huge assets, both
moveable and immovable: -
(a) Golden ornaments total weighing 1.834 kg;
(b) Silver weighing 1.470 kg;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 2
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
(c) Cash amounting Rs. 9,57,400/-
It is being admitted in the response that the FIR No. 10/1997, registered against the petitioner
under the Act of 2006 earlier though came to be closed, yet, the period of service of the petitioner
covered in the said FIR is not subject matter of investigation in the impugned FIR which has been
registered against the petitioner by following due course of law and is based on facts, clearly
attracting the ingredients of the offence/s covered in the impugned FIR.
04. A reply to the aforesaid response of the respondent has been filed by the petitioner by way of
supplementary affidavit having been taken on record by this Court in terms of order dated 17th
February 2022.
05. In the aforesaid supplementary affidavit, it is being averred that the petitioner/deponent
belongs to an affluent business family of Jammu and instead of continuing with his family business,
the petitioner/deponent opted to serve as a public servant and that the family of the
petitioner/deponent in the year 1977, owned as many as eight factories/business concerns, to which
nine additional factories got added up till 1998.
It is further stated that apart from aforesaid factories, the family of the petitioner/deponent have
had transport/truck business as well and both the businesses/factories, stand reflected in the
statement issued by the District Industries Centre, Jammu.
It is further averred that the petitioner/deponent set up one factory under the name and style of
Indo Japan Rubber Industries at Digiana Jammu in the year 1975 before joining government service
and same stands verified by the respondent in the earlier FIR 10/1997 and the said factory used to
be managed by the father and brother of the petitioner/deponent till his retirement and after his
retirement, by the petitioner/deponent himself.
It is further averred in the supplementary affidavit that the petitioner got judicially separated from
his wife in the year 1997 and has been living separately, which fact have had been earlier noticed and
verified by the investigating agency while investigating FIR 10/1997 supra.
It is also averred that the petitioner/deponent is living on the first floor of the residential house
belonging to his wife situated at Nanak Nagar, Jammu, and his wife is living along with her son and
daughter-in-law on the ground floor of the same house and that during searches conducted by the
respondents, nothing came to be recovered from the premises of the petitioner/deponent i.e. the
first floor of the house, however, some cash and jewellery articles were recovered from the ground
floor i.e. the residence of ex-wife of the petitioner, son and daughter-in-law, which articles included
Stri-Dhan (jewellery) of the wife, and the daughter-in-law, which jewellery also had been part of the
jewellery received by the wife of the petitioner/deponent in year 1977 on his marriage and on
different occasions/anniversaries including birth of his son, marriage of his son and birth of his
grandson, comprising of approximately 300 grams of gold, having been verified in the earlier
investigation of FIR 10/1997 supra by the respondents.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 3
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
It is further averred that son of the petitioner/deponent has been carrying on family business and
earning handsomely, reflected and revealed in the Income Tax Returns filed by the son of the
petitioner/ deponent.
It is reiterated in the supplementary affidavit that the respondents registered the impugned FIR
after a gap of seven years from the date of his superannuation and, as such, after his retirement, the
provisions of the Act of 2006 are not either attracted or applicable to him, in that, the petitioner
having been ceased to be a public servant as defined in the Act of 2006.
It is also reiterated that the petitioner/deponent after his retirement, is running his transport
business and is also earning from house rent and is an income tax payee thereof and that insofar as
residential house is concerned, the single storeyed residential house together with land appurtenant
thereto, fell to the share of the petitioner/deponent, upon inheritance after the death of his father in
the year 1991 and that same stands even verified in the closure report of FIR 10/1997 supra. Insofar
as double storeyed residential house situated at Nanak Nagar, Jammu, is concerned, it is stated that
the same came to be acquired by the wife of the petitioner/deponent upon her judicial separation
from the petitioner/ deponent, pursuant to an exchange deed dated 18th of September 1985 and
same as well have had been verified during the course of investigation of FIR No. 10/1997 supra.
06. The respondents have also filed response to the aforesaid supplementary affidavit of the
petitioner, wherein it is being averred that the facts pleaded by the petitioner/ deponent in the
supplementary affidavit could be taken into account during investigation of impugned FIR and that
the FIR 10/1997 supra relates to check period up to the year 1997, whereas the impugned FIR
relates to check period beyond the year 1997.
It is being also averred that the petitioner can be proceeded against under the provisions of Act of
2006, notwithstanding his retirement.
Heard counsel for the parties and perused the records.
07. Mr. Sunil Sethi, the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner reiterated the
contentions raised and the grounds urged in the petition and would contend that the provisions of
the Act of 2006 are not attracted against the petitioner having regard to Sub Section (2)(c) of
Section 2 of the Act of 2006, as the petitioner has admittedly worked in a corporation, established
under an Act and is not liable to be proceeded against, as such, after his retirement.
Mr. Sethi, would further contend that even otherwise as well, the impugned FIR is liable to be
quashed in view of the law laid down by the Apex Court in case titled as "Charansingh v. State of
Maharashtra"
reported in"(2021) 5 SCC 469" as the said FIR came to be registered without holding
of a preliminary inquiry, mandatorily to be conducted in cases of misconduct or of
corrupt practice.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 4
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
Mr. Sethi would further contend that the respondent while registering the impugned
FIR and setting into motion investigation thereof, overlooked the investigation
conducted as also the closure report filed in earlier FIR 10/1997 supra.
According to Mr. Sethi, the respondents have registered the impugned FIR after a
gap of seven years from the date of superannuation of the petitioner and in the
process, have abused their power and process of law, and would therefore seek
quashment of the impugned FIR.
08. On the Contrary, Ms. Monika Kohli, learned Senior Additional Advocate General while opposing
the submissions made by Mr. Sethi would contend that the impugned FIR has been registered
validly and legally against the petitioner and that under and in terms of the Act of 2006, the
petitioner has been validly and lawfully proceeded against for commission of offence covered in the
FIR, notwithstanding his retirement as an employee of the Corporation.
Ms. Kohli, would further contend that the investigation in the impugned FIR in law cannot be
scuttled merely on the basis of contentions raised and the grounds urged by the petitioner in the
petition and instead the petitioner should volunteer to cooperate with the investigation of the case in
order to prove his innocence and to dispel the veracity of the allegations levelled against him. Ms.
Kohli thus would pray for dismissal of the petition.
09. The First issue that emerges for consideration of this Court would be as to whether the
petitioner falls within the ambit and scope of expression "Public Servant" as defined in Sub Section
(2)(c) of Section 2 of the Act of 2006.
To advert to this issue, it becomes imperative to refer to Sub Section (2)(c) supra herein which reads
as follows:
[(2)] For the purpose of this Act the expression "public servant"
means a public servant as defined in Section 21 of the State Ranbir Penal Code and
shall include,-
(a) a person who is or has been a member of either House of State Legislature or a
member (including Minister of State) of the Council of Ministers;
(b) every person who is or has been under the employment of Government whether
on permanent, temporary or work- charge basis;
(c) every officer, servant or member (by whatever name called) of a Corporation or of
a corporate or other body which is established by or under an Act of the State
Legislature or of Parliament in force in the State [(3) Words and expressions used
herein are not defined but defined in the Jammu and Kashmir State Vigilance
Commission Act, 2011, shall have the meanings, respectively, assigned to them in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 5
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
that Act.] A further reference to Section 21(xv) of Ranbir Penal Code, Svt 1989, also
becomes imperative herein which reads as under: -
21. Public Servant.---The word "public servant" denote a person falling under any of
the descriptions hereinafter following, namely :-
First.---Every civil servant of the State.
...................
...................
...................
...................
Fifteenth.--Every officer or servant, and every member (by whatever name called) of
a corporation engaged in trade or industry or of any other autonomous body which is
established by an Act of the State Legislature or of as Government company as
defined in any law for the time being in force in the State;] A combined reading of
Sub Section (2)(c) of the Act of 2006 supra and Section 21 of the Rambir Panel Code
supra would manifestly show that the said sections defines a public servant and
includes therein various categories of persons/officers/servants and members.
Though Clauses (a) & (b) of Sub Section (2) of Section 2 of the Act of 2006 refers to a
person who is or has been and Clause (c) does not provide so is or has been.
It is well established canon of construction that a penal statute should be strictly
construed and cannot be enlarged or extended by intendment, implication or by
equitable consideration meaning thereby that the language in the penal statue cannot
be enlarged beyond the ordinary limit of its terms in order to carry in effect the
general purpose for which statute is enacted.
The Apex court in case titled as "A. R. Antulay vs. R. S. Nayak" reported in AIR 1984
SC 718, has provided that it is well established canon of construction that the Court
should read the Section as it is and cannot rewrite it to suit its convenience, nor does
any canon of construction permit the Court to read the Section in such a manner as to
render it to some extent-otiose.
The Apex Court also in case titled as "R. S. Nayak Vs. A. R. Antulay" reported in 1984
(2) SCC 183, has also provided that the Prevention of Corruption Act was intended to
make effective provision for the prevention of bribe and corruption rampant amongst
the public servant and that it is a social legislation defined to curb illegal activities of
the public servants and is designed to be liberally construed so as to advance its
object.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 6
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
The Apex Court further in case titled as "State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Sh Ram Singh"
reported in 2000 (5) SCC 88, has laid down that the rule of construction is so
universally accepted that it need not be supported by precedents. Adopting this rule
of construction arises upon ambiguity or where two views are possible of a provision,
it would be the duty of the Court to adopt that construction which would advance the
object underlying the Act, to make effective provision for the prevention of bribery
and corruption and at any rate not to defeat it.
In view of the aforesaid principles of law laid down by the Apex Court qua the rules of
interpretation thus, in case a section is susceptible to two interpretations, then the
one that defines cause of the Act is to be preferred and an interpretation that leads to
absurd results has to be avoided in a given case.
10. The petitioner admittedly having been an officer/servant/member of a corporation cannot, in
view of aforesaid position of law qua interpretation of a statute, claim that he cannot be subjected to
the provisions of the Act after his retirement, as the plain reading of Sub Section (2) Clause
(c) supra ex facie suggest that the same is wide enough to include inservice as well as retired
officer/servants/ member, of a corporation as said clause does not make any such distinction.
Furthermore, one has to see the status of the officer/servant/member of a corporation at the time of
the commission of the act complained of, as otherwise any other meaning would result into
absurdity. This proposition also lends support from judgment of the Apex Court though passed in
the context of a sanction required for prosecution of a public servant in cases titled as "Lalu Prasad
alias Lalu Prasad Yadav"
reported in "(2007) 1 Supreme Court Case 49"; "Station House Officer,
CBI/ACB/Bangalors vs B.A. Srinivasan & Anr" reported in "(2002) 2 Supreme Court
Cases 153" and "Kalicharan Mahapatra vs State of Orissa" reported in "(1998) 6
Supreme Court Cases 411" wherein following has been laid down:
"There is no indication anywhere in the above provisions that an offence committed
by a public servant under the Act would vanish off from penal liability at the moment
he demits his office as public servant. His being a public servant is necessary when he
commits the offence in order to make him liable under the Act. He cannot commit
any such offence after he demits his office. If the interpretation now sought to be
placed by the appellant is accepted it would lead to the absurd position that any
public servant could commit the offences under the Act soon before retiring or
demiting his office and thus avert any prosecution for it or that when a public servant
is prosecuted for an offence under the Act he can secure an escape by protracting the
trial till the date of superannuation."
In view of the foregoing analysis, the contention of Mr. Sethi that the petitioner being an
ex-employee of the corporation would not be subject to the provisions of the Act of 2006 under
Clause (c) of Sub Section (2) of Section 2 of the Act of 2006, is misconceived and not acceptable. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 7
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
contention, therefore, is rejected.
11. Before adverting to the issues other than the above involved in the case and before dealing with
the same, the impugned FIR for reference and convenience needs to be extracted and referred
hereunder: -
1. As per reliable inputs and details available in ACB, it has come to fore that the then
MD SICOP, Sh. Bhupinder Singh Dua (now retired) has accumulated huge assets
moveable as well as immovable disproportionate to his known sources of income by
indulging in corrupt and illegal practices.
2. As per details/facts gathered based on secret enquiries, Sh.
Bhupinder Singh Dua by abuse and misuse of his official position has invested his ill-gotten money
from time to time in various business ventures in his name and in the name of his family member.
The details of some of moveable/immovable properties raised by retiree officer are reflected as
under: -
a. 09 different factories under the different me, and style so established by him and
his family members. Few factories mentioned are M/s Modern Plastics, M/s Neptune
Plastics and Modern Fabrications.
b. Large number of goods carrier/trucks purchased by him as well as his family
members.
3. Moreover, the retiree public servant has also raised a double storey palatial house
in Posh Nanak Nagar area over a piece of land measuring 2 kanals approximately
which clearly indicates that the accused is having property disproportionate to his
known sources which has been acquired by him through illegal and corrupt practices
during his service career.
4. During searches conducted at his premises in consequence of FIR No. 23/2019 P/s
ACBJ registered against his nephew Sh.
Jasvinder Singh Dua, (now MD Handicraft Corporation S&E) related to his entry in SICOP illegally
and under patronage of his uncle Sh. Bhupinder Singh Dua who was at that time GM SICOP, the
following valuable assets have been recovered from his premises.
a. Golden ornaments total weighing 1.834 kg.
b. Silver weighing 1.470 kg.
c. Cash amounting Rs. 957400/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 8
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
5. Thus, in consequence of his indulgement in corrupt and illegal practice and having taken
advantages of his lucrative posting, the officer has acquired huge assets, both movable and
immoveable by investing proceedings of his ill-gotten money in such properties. The facts related to
disproportionate assets of the accused disclose commission of criminal misconduct under section 5
(1)(e) J&K PC Svt. 2006 punishable under section 5(2) of the Act. Consequently, a case Fir No.
25/2019 is registered against Bhupinder Siongh Dua S/o S. Puran Singh Dua R/o H.No.20 Sector
No. 2 Nanak Nagar, jammu, then MD Sicop in P/s Anti-Corruption Bureau Jamu and investigation
is entrusted to Dy.SP Davinder Singh of P/S ACBJ.
12. Indisputably, the petitioner previously have had been got implicated in FIR 10/1997 supra
allegedly for having accumulated huge assets disproportionate to his known source of incomes by
indulging in corrupt and illegal practice prior to the registration of impugned FIR, which FIR
admittedly came to be closed after a thorough investigation was conducted therein by the
respondents as "not proved" and consequently a closure report filed thereof accepted by the Court of
Special Judge, Anti- Corruption, Jammu on 17th April 2000.
It is also not in dispute that the petitioner retired from service in the month of November 2012 and
after a considerable period of seven years, impugned FIR came to be registered against the
petitioner during the course of investigation in FIR 23/2019 dated 9th October 2019 along with one
of his relative, namely Jasvinder Singh Dua, alleging to have committed offences under section
5(1)(d), section 5(2) of the Act of 2006 read with section 120- B of RPC, which FIR became subject
matter of two petitions filed under section 561-A Cr.PC 482 Cr.PC one filed by the petitioner and the
other by said Jasvinder Singh Dua, which petitions came to be allowed by this Court on 5th May
2022, quashing the said FIR 23/2019.
13. In the impugned FIR the petitioner is alleged to have committed offence under section 5(1)(e)
read with Section 5(2) of the Act of 2006.
Section 5(1)(e) reads as under: -
5. Criminal misconduct. -- (1) A public servant is said to commit the offence of
criminal misconduct
(e) if he or any person on his behalf is in possession or has, at any time during the
period of his office, been in possession, for which the public servant cannot
satisfactorily account, of pecuniary resources or property disproportionate to his
known sources of income.
Section 5(2) reads as under: -
Any public servant who commits criminal misconduct shall be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than one year but which may extend
to seven years and shall be liable to fine:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 9
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
Provided that the court may, for any special reasons recorded in writing impose a
sentence of imprisonment of less than one year but not less than six months.
What emerges from above is that in order to constitute an offence under Section
5(1)(e) inasmuch as for the purpose of proving the offence on one hand known
sources of income must be ascertained viz-a- viz the possession of property or
resources which were disproportionate to the known sources of income of the public
servant and the inability of the public servant to account for it on the other.
The crux of a charge under Section 5(1)(e) read with Section 5(2) of the Act of 2006 is
that the public servant is in possession of assets which are disproportionate to his
known sources of income for which he cannot satisfactorily account. The word
disproportionate means relatively large or small and a public servant therefore
cannot held to be in possession of disproportionate assets if the assets are not
relatively too large thus, the question as to whether the assets are so disproportionate
as to attract the provisions of the Act of 2006 has to be examined in each case by
reference to the duration of check period and the extent of disproportionate assets.
The onus is upon public servant to satisfactorily account the source of such properties
disproportionate to his known source of income and if the explanation offered by the
accused is plausible satisfactorily explaining the properties acquired by him, the
offences would not be attracted.
14. Reverting back to the case in hand, record tends to show that the broad allegations levelled
against the petitioner in both the FIR 10/1997 supra and the impugned FIR have had been
accumulation of assets in the shape of two houses, fleet of trucks and factories. In the impugned
FIR, however, only gold/silver jewellery and cash belonging to the other family members of the
petitioner have been added upon the seizure of the same from the ground floor of the house of the
petitioner, wherein his wife, son and his daughter-in-law are residing. Insofar as factories are
concerned, investigating agency found eleven factories belonging to relatives of the petitioner and
consequently, submitted the closure report in earlier FIR 10/1997 supra without one being owned by
the petitioner and that in the impugned FIR, nine factories are alleged to be belonging to the
petitioner, when actually and factually, the petitioner owns none.
15. Perusal of the CD file produced by the respondents would reveal that after conducting search of
the premises of the residential house of the petitioner, the respondents claimed to have recovered
golden ornaments etc.
16. Perusal of the CD file further tends to show that in the impugned FIR, the respondents have
included golden/silver jewellery and the amount of cash, having been seized admittedly from the
ground floor of the house of the petitioner, which house stands scrutinized and investigated into by
the respondents in earlier FIR 10/1997. Perusal of the record would further reveal that in earlier FIR
10/1997, the respondents have had brought under investigation the factories belonging to the
relatives of the petitioner and had verified the same, having found none of them belonging to the
petitioner. Although in the impugned FIR, nine factories are alleged to be belonging to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 10
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
petitioner, however, perusal of the CD reveals that they said allegation and assertion has not been
substantiated by the investigating agency. The assertion of the petitioner that there has been a
judicial separation between him and his wife in 1997, has not been disputed or else denied by the
respondents, so is also not being disputed and denied by the respondents that the petitioner is living
separately in the first floor of the house at Nanak Nagar and his wife and children in the ground
floor and that whatever recoveries have been made during investigation had been made from the
ground floor and not from the first floor where the petitioner is living. Perusal of the CD file reveals
that petitioner and his other family members have accounted for the jewellery and cash recovered
appropriately and satisfactorily and owing to that, the respondents, therefore, have failed to make
any headway in the investigation of the case and to substantiate the allegations levelled against the
petitioner much less the offenses alleged to have been committed by him as covered in the
impugned FIR.
CD file would further reveal that ever since the date of undertaking of the investigation and the
initial recoveries made thereof by the respondents during the course of investigation, no headway
has been made in the investigation from initial stage, so much so no incriminating material or
evidence worth the name, has been collected by the investigating agency against the petitioner for
supporting the case set up by the investigating agency, that too in view of the fact that there has been
no stay granted by this Court against conducting of investigation in the impugned FIR.
17. A further perusal of the CD file and material collected thereof would manifestly demonstrate that
it is highly unsafe to make the conviction of the petitioner upon the evidence collected so far by the
investigating agency as the basis of the prosecution case and evidence collected during the course of
investigation renders it highly improbable to have the petitioner charged and convicted for the
offences covered in the impugned FIR. This Court cannot overlook the fact that the respondents in
the earlier FIR 10/1997 and the present impugned FIR, have levelled broad allegations viz-a-viz the
same and similar assets against petitioner as noticed in the preceding paras.
18. This Court cannot also overlook the law laid down by the Apex Court laid down in a recent
judgement passed in case titled as "Charan Singh vs State of Maharashtra" reported in "2021 (V)
SCC 469", wherein it has been held to be permissible and desirable as well to hold an inquiry first in
case where the allegations are of misconduct, of corrupt practice, before registration of an FIR in
order to ascertain as to whether on the basis of material collected during such an enquiry, there is
substance in the allegations levelled. In the instant case, however, the respondents have not
admittedly conducted any preliminary enquiry in line with the principle of law laid down by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the judgment supra but have straightaway proceeded to register the
impugned FIR. Had the respondents followed the mandate of law laid down by the apex court in the
judgment supra, possibly the situation would have been different and the impugned FIR would not
have come into being.
19. The another aspect of the matter as well cannot be ignored by this Court, though having been
noticed in the preceding paras, being registration and closure of earlier FIR 10/1997 supra against
the petitioner under the Act of 2006, as also FIR 23/2019 having been quashed by this Court again
registered under the provisions of Act of 2006. The impugned FIR is 3rd in succession registered by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 11
Bopinder Singh Dua vs Ut Of J&K on 10 March, 2023
the respondent against the petitioner and broadly with the same and similar allegations against the
petitioner. The law is no more res integra that registration of successive FIRs in connection with
same or connected cognizable offenses have been held to be violative of Article 21 of the
Constitution.
20. Insofar as exercise of inherent powers enshrined under Section 482 Cr.P.C is concerned, law is
settled and is no more res-integra that in exercise of the wholesome power vested in the High Courts
under Section 482 Cr.P.C, the High Court is entitled to quash a proceeding, if it comes to the
conclusion that allowing the proceedings to continue would be an abuse of process of the Court or
that the ends of justice require that the proceedings ought to be quashed. The saving of the High
Courts' inherent powers, both in civil and criminal matters, is designed to achieve a solitary public
purpose, which is that the Court proceedings ought not to be permitted to degenerate into a weapon
of harassment or persecution. In a criminal case, the veiled object behind a lame prosecution, the
very nature of the material on which the structure of the prosecution rests and the like would justify
the High Court in quashing the proceedings in the interest of justice. The ends of justice are higher
than the ends of mere law, though justice has got to be administered according to the laws made by
the legislature.
A reference in regard to above to the latest judgment of the Apex Court passed in the case titled as,
"Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors., reported in 2021 SCC Online
SC 315", would be relevant herein.
21. The submissions made by counsel for the respondents inasmuch as judgements cited in support
of the said submissions do not lend any support to the case of the respondent and by no sense of
imagination, can said to be potent enough to dislodge the case set up by the petitioner.
22. For what has been observed considered and analysed hereinabove, the exercise of inherent
jurisdiction enshrined under Section 482 CrPC is held to be warranted. Accordingly, petition is
allowed and impugned FIR is quashed.
23. Petition disposed of on the above terms.
(Javed Iqbal Wani) Judge JAMMU:
10.03.2023 "Hamid"
Whether approved for reporting? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78768974/ 12
