Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
Author: Anshuman
Bench: Anshuman
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
CRIMINAL APPEAL (SJ) No.372 of 2004
======================================================
Brahmdeo Thakur Son of Sukhadeo Thakur, Resident of village- Janakpur,
Ward No.15, P.S. Janakpur, District- Dhanuksha (Nepal)
... ... Appellant/S
Versus
State Of Bihar
... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
Appearance :
For the Appellant/s : Mr. Ashok Kumar Jha, Adv.
Mr. Sumit Jha, Adv.
For the Respondent/s : Mrs. Anita Kumari Singh, APP
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE DR. ANSHUMAN
CAV JUDGMENT
Date : 26-09-2025
Heard Mr. Sumit Jha, learned counsel for the
appellant and Mrs. Anita Kumari Singh, learned APP for the
State.
2. By this appeal, appellant/convicted accused,
Brahmdeo Thakur, is challenging the judgment of conviction
and order of sentence dated 19.04.2004 passed by Sri Ram
Pravesh Sharma, 1st Additional Sessions Judge, Sitamarhi, in
Sessions Trial No.86 of 2002/ 25 of 2002 (arising out of
Sitamarhi Sadar P.S. Case No.284 of 2001, by which the
appellant has been convicted and sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for 7 years under Section 307 of the Indian Penal
Code and further to undergo rigorous imprisonment for 4 years
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 1
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
under sections 3 and 4 of the Explosive Substances Act
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025
2/30
separately.
3. The case of the prosecution, as unfolded by
the First Information Report, may, in brief, be described as
under:
"The informant, namely, Nagendra Chaudhary
(PW-5) has stated that on 07.11.2001 at about 8:30 PM, one
person came to his toddy shop for taking toddy and had taken
three bottles of toddy and after consuming the toddy, he asked
the person to pay the amount, but he gave some amount less
than the price then he demanded more amount and had followed
the accused for rest amount and then came to ring road where
altercation took place. Meanwhile, the said person threw the
bomb with a view to kill him. Fortunately, he managed to escape
and the bomb fell in the nearby pond. Upon raising alarm,
several persons came who over powered the said man
(appellant) and caught him and after search, one live bomb was
recovered from his bag and disclosed his name as Brahmdeo
Thakur (appellant) and in the meantime, the police arrived and
taken him into custody.
4. On the basis of the fardbeyan of Nagendra
Chaudhary (PW-5), Sitamarhi Sadar P.S. Case No.284 of 2001
dated 08.11.2001 was registered under Sections 307 of the
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025
3/30
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 2
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
Indian Penal Code against the sole accused.
5. After investigation, charge-sheet has been
submitted under section 307 of the IPC read with section 3 /4 of
the Explosive Substance Act and thereafter cognizance has also
been taken under the same sections and then committed to the
court of sessions for trial.
6. At the trial, charges, under sections 307 of the
IPC and under sections 3 /4 of the Explosive Substances Act
were framed on 07.09.2002 against sole accused on which he
pleaded no guilty.
7. In support of his case, the prosecution has
examined altogether 7 witnesses, namely, Shyam Narain Prasad
(PW-1), neighbour, Lalbabu Sah (PW-2), seizure list witness,
Mahesh Choudhary (PW-3), his shop is adjacent to the shop of
informant, Yogal Mahto (PW-4), neighbour, Nagendra
Chaudhary, informant (PW-5), shop owner, Chulhai Chaudhary
(PW-6), informant's father, Bachhi Devi (PW-7), Informant's
mother. Out of 7 witnesses, PWs-5, 6 and 7 have been declared
hostile. The accused during his examination under section
313(1)(b) of the Cr.P.C. denied the allegation and on his behalf,
he has not examined any witness. The statement of the all 7
prosecution witnesses are as follows:-
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025
4/30
8. PW-1, neighbour of the informant stated that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 3
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
occurrence took place on 08.11.2001 at 1 AM in the night while
he was sleeping in his house. Upon bomb explosion, he went
there and came to know that at toddy shop of informant, some
persons were taking toddy. When he demanded the price of
toddy, then they started quarrelling on ring bandh. Then
Brahmadeo Thakur (appellant) took out bomb from his jhola
and threw at the informant. By chance, bomb fell into water, but
he was apprehended by the villagers. Then one bomb was
recovered also from his jhola. Subsequently, police arrived and
took him into custody and prepared seizure list of bomb. He also
put out a signature on the seizure list. The witness has identified
his signature which has been marked as Ext.-1. Witness also
identified accused as the person who has apprehended on the
date of occurrence. During cross examination also, witness has
supported the prosecution case and defence has not been able to
dismantle his evidence. In para 5 of his deposition, as he has
stated that bomb was recovered by the villagers in course of
search of the accused. Witness has also stated that prior to the
date of occurrence, he has not seen the accused. That was the
first day when he saw the accused.
9. PW-2, seizure list witness has stated that
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025
5/30
occurrence is of 07.11.2001 of 8:30 PM in the night, he was in
his shop near ring bandh. Upon the sound of explosion, he went
on the bandh. The person who exploded bomb had been over
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 4
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
powered. One bomb was also recovered from his jhola. The
witness identified the accused as the person who was
apprehended on the date of occurrence. The police prepared
seizure list on which he also put his signature. The witness has
identified his signature which has been marked as Ext.1/1.
During cross examination also, the witness has supported the
prosecution case and defence counsel has not been able to
impeach his evidence.
10. PW-3, neighbour, whose shop is adjacent to
the informant's shop, has stated that the occurrence is of
07.11.2001
at 8:30 PM that time he was in his toddy shop.
Accused who was taking toddy in shop of informant, had started quarrelling for demand of price.
Accused went on bandh. He took bomb from his jhola and threw on the informant. Both bomb fell
into water and did not explode. Persons collected assaulted the accused and recovered one bomb
also from his jhola. Police arrived and took out in custody. Witness has identified the accused in the
dock. During cross examination, witness stated that the police arrived at 1 AM. Before that the Patna
High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 persons collected had assaulted the
accused and he has become unconscious. Police recovered one bomb from his possession and
another bomb was recovered from Kumbhi on the next date.
11. PW-4, neighbour, has stated that occurrence is of 07.11.2001 at 8:30 PM in the night. At that
time, he was sleeping in his house after taking meal. He heard hulla of bomb explosion, then he
went there. There he found that there had been quarrel for price of toddy. He has further stated that
accused standing in dock had thrown bomb. Police had taken bomb from his custody and prepared
seizure list. He also put his LTI on the seizure list. During cross examination, the witness had stated
that he did not see anybody throwing bomb. He also did not see assaulting the accused. He also did
not see the occurrence taking place.
12. PW-5, informant of this case, has stated that in his examination chief, he has stated that
occurrence took place 17 months earlier in the night of 8:30 PM. At that time, he was selling toddy
in his shop. One person came at his shop and consumed three bottles of toddy. When he demanded
price of toddy. The said flee away. Then quarrel took place for the price of toddy. The said person
took out bomb from his jhola and threw at him with a view to kill, but the bomb fell in the nearby
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 pond. On hulla persons collected and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 5
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
they caught the accused.
Thereafter, one person informed the police telephonically. Then police arrived and he took person in
custody. Police also recovered one live bomb from jhola of the said person. He has stated that police
recorded his statement and he put his LTI. In para 3 of his deposition, this witness has stated that
the person who is present in the dock, is not the person who consumed toddy and threw bomb at
him. The said person was on fair colour. The witness has been declared hostile and he has been
cross examined by the State counsel. During cross examination by the State, in para-4, this witness
has stated that before the police, he had stated that the person arrested disclosed his name as
Brahmadeo Thakur S/o Surajdeo Thakur, resident of Village-
Janakpur, Ward No.15, P.S.- Janakpur, District- Dhanukha (Nepal). During cross examination by
the defence, the witness has stated that he was not present at the time when the police asked the
name of the person arrested.
13. PW-6, father of the informant, has stated that occurrence took place 17 months ago at 8 PM in
the night. At that time, he was at his house. On hulla, he went in his toddy shop. There his son, the
informant told that one person consumed 3 bottles of toddy and did not pay the price and with
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 a view to kill, threw bomb at him.
This witness has also declined to identify the person in dock as accused. This witness was declared
hostile and cross examined by the State. During cross examination by the State counsel, this witness
has stated that before police, he had stated that on query, the person arrested disclosed his name as
Brahmadeo Thakur, resident of Nepal. During cross examination by defence, this witness has stated
that at the time when he arrived in the shop, the person arrested, had already been taken in custody
by the police to police station.
14. PW-7, informant's mother, has stated that at the time of occurrence, she was at his maike and
she did not make her statement before the police. This witness has also been declared hostile and
has been cross -examined by the State counsel. During cross-examination by the State also, this
witness has repeated the same story and declined to make any statement before the police. During
cross examination by the defence, the witness has stated that she has got no concern with toddy
shop. She is living in the house.
15. The trial Court found the appellant, namely, Brahmdeo Thakur found guilty of the charges under
section 307 of the IPC read with Section 3 /4 of the Explosive Substances Patna High Court CR. APP
(SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 Act. Following his conviction, sentence has been passed against
the convicted accused/appellant as mentioned above.
16. Being aggrieved and dissatisfied by his judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated
19.04.2004 passed by 1st Additional Sessions Judge, Sitamarhi, the convicted accused/appellant has
preferred this appeal.
17. Mr. Sumit Jha, learned counsel for the appellant submits that PW-5 (informant), PW-6
(informant's father) and PW-7 (informant's mother) have turned hostile. They have categorically
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 6
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
stated before the court that the accused in dock was not present who threw bomb. He further
submits that PW-1 (neighbour) has categorically stated the time of occurrence at 1 AM in the night
of 08.11.2001, but other witnesses have stated that the time of occurrence is 8:30 PM. He further
submits that the I.O. has not been examined in the present case due to which the place of occurrence
has not been identified and due to lack of evidence of I.O., there is a great prejudice caused to the
defence.
18. Counsel further submits that the allegation is that the accused/appellant has thrown one bomb
on the informant and one bomb was recovered from his bag, but due to lack of examination of I.O.,
bomb which is alleged to be Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025
explosive, has not been exhibited and hence, the prosecution has failed to substantiate the charges
levelled against the sole accused. As such, the present case is fit case for acquittal.
19. Learned APP appearing on behalf of the State on the other hand submits that the trial court upon
considering the entire evidences and exhibit, has convicted the sole accused and upon consideration
of the entire evidences, he has convicted the accused under section 307 of the IPC read with section
3 /4 of the Explosive Substances Act.
20. Upon consideration of the evidences in which total 7 prosecution witnesses, Exhibit-1 /1,
signature on the seizure list and Exhibit-2 which is FIR, it transpires to this Court that the informant
(PW-5), the toddy shop owner and PW-6, informant's father and PW-7, informant's mother who are
alleged to be the eye witness of the occurrence as the discussion took place between the informant
and the accused/ appellant in his shop, become hostile and they have refused to identify the accused
person, who was present in the court room.
21. In the cross-examination, the informant (PW-5) has categorically adduced that the appellant was
not present at the time when police asked the name of person to arrest. It is important to mention
here that in the present appeal, even the Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004
dt.26-09-2025 informant becomes hostile and with the permission of the court, cross examination
took place in which the informant stated that he was not present at the time when police asked the
name of person to arrest. Similarly, PW-6 and 7 both were declared hostile, but with the permission
of the court, cross-examination has been taken by the State and other witnesses have been denied
that they have made any statement before the police.
22. It also transpires from the record that I.O. has not been examined in the present case. In result,
the bomb which was alleged to be hand over to the I.O. and the report that whether the said
recovered material was actually bomb or otherwise, could not be identified in this case.
23. It also transpires to this court that the prosecution on the seizure list has taken signature of the
witness and marked as Exhibit-1 /1. The said witnesses during his cross-
examination has exhibited his signature and stated that the alleged bomb was recovered by the
villagers and one bomb was fell in water, but no report has come that whether the alleged article is
really a bomb or otherwise. It further transpires that the time of occurrence is also in contradiction
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 7
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
as one witness stated that occurrence took place at 1 AM at night whereas other witnesses stated that
it has been taken place at 8:30 PM. For Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004
dt.26-09-2025 proper appreciation, it is necessary to go through the section 307 of the IPC and
section 3 /4 of the Explosive Substances Act states as follows:-
307. Attempt to murder. -Whoever does any act with such intention or knowledge,
and under such circumstances that, if he by that act caused death, he would be guilty
of murder, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term
which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine; and if hurt is caused to
any person by such act, the offender shall be liable either to [imprisonment for life),
or to such punishment as is hereinbefore mentioned.
Attempts by life-convicts.-[When any person offending under this section is under sentence of
'[imprisonment for life], he may, if hurt is caused, be punished with death.]
3. Punishment for causing explosion likely to endanger life or property.-Any person who unlawfully
and maliciously causes by-
(a) any explosive substance an explosion of a nature likely to endanger life or to cause serious injury
to property shall, whether any injury to person or property has been actually caused or not, be
punished with imprisonment for life, or with rigorous imprisonment of either description which
shall not be less than ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025
(b) any special category explosive substance an explosion of a nature likely to endanger life or to
cause serious injury to property shall, whether any injury to person or property has been actually
caused or not, be punished with death, or rigorous imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to
fine.
4. Punishment for attempt to cause explosion, or for making or keeping explosive with intent to
endanger life or property. -Any person who unlawfully and maliciously -
(a) does any act with intent to cause by an explosive substance or special category explosive
substance, or conspires to cause by an explosive substance or special category explosive substance,
an explosion of a nature likely to endanger life or to cause serious injury to property; or
(b) makes or has in his possession or under his control any explosive substance or special category
explosive substance with intent by means thereof to endanger life, or cause serious injury to
property, or to enable any other person by means thereof to endanger life or cause serious injury to
property in India, shall, whether any explosion does or does not take place and whether any injury
to person or property has been actually caused or not, be punished, -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 8
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
(i) in the case of any explosive Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025
substance, with imprisonment for life, or with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to fine;
(ii) in the case of any special category explosive substance, with rigorous imprisonment for life, or
with rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years, and shall also be liable to
fine.
the ingredient of those offences are well explained under the respective sections. Here in the present
case, the alleged article which was said to be the bomb, neither exhibited nor report of FSL has come
and when the explosive substance is not in existence, then this Court finds that there is no offence
made out under section 3 /4 of the Explosive Substances Act.
Similarly, the best witness is the informant who has been attacked by the accused with a view to kill,
but he himself denied the same and becomes hostile and even in cross-
examination, not supported the prosecution case.
24. As such, with a view to decide that whether the witness who becomes hostile and
cross-examined, shall be relevant for deciding the case or not. This issue has already been decided
by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in case of K.P. Tamilmaran v. State by Deputy Superintendent of
Police reported in 2025 SCC OnLine SC 958. In this case, the Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372
of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has laid down important principles
regarding the evidentiary value of a so-called hostile witness. The relevant paragraphs are as
follows:-
Delay in Trial and evidentiary value of so-called "hostile witness"
15. The long and inordinate delay which has been caused in this case, right from the
lodging of the FIR, speaks volumes about the gross inefficiency at the hands of the
prosecution on the one hand and dilatory tactics employed by the defence on the
other hand, which together led to a slow trial.
16. The second and more crucial aspect is that many of the prosecution witnesses in
this case have turned, what has come to be known as 'hostile'; a fact which has been
strongly pressed by the defence in their favour. The defence would also argue that the
Trial Court and High Court have mainly relied on the testimonies of the family
members of Murugesan, who are interested witnesses.
17. In our opinion, there is no force in these arguments and as will be seen, there was
enough material placed by the prosecution before the Trial Court, which was
sufficient to prove the guilt of the accused, beyond a reasonable doubt.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 9
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
18. When a witness, produced on behalf of prosecution, deposes against the
prosecution version and goes against his/her own Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ)
No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 previously recorded statements, the prosecution can
request the Court to declare such a witness as hostile and seek permission from the
Court to cross-examine its own witness. This is the procedure followed in a Trial, as
we all know. In the present case, there are as many as fifty- one prosecution witnesses
and it is also a fact that many of them have turned hostile by turning against their
earlier statements made before the police under section 161 CrPC, and even before
the Magistrate under section 164 CrPC, in some cases. This phenomenon is not new,
in fact it is sadly a common occurrence in our criminal Courts today, much to the
despair and frustration of the prosecution. This case, therefore, is no exception.
Despite this, however, there are witnesses in the present case, especially PW-1, PW-2,
PW-3, PW-15 and PW-49, whose evidence, in the form of their testimonies before the
Court, is more than sufficient to convict the present appellants. A word here about
the evidentiary value of a so-called hostile witness.
19. The Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter 'Evidence Act') allows a party, with the
leave of the Court, to cross-examine its own witness. Section 154 of the Evidence Act
originally read as follows:
"154. Question by party to his own witness The Court may, in its discretion, permit
the person who calls a Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025
witness to put any questions to him which might be put in cross-examination by the
adverse party."
20. The Calcutta High Court, in Khijiruddin Sonar v. Emperor, 1925 SCC OnLine Cal 259, while
interpreting Section 154 of the Evidence Act, held that "When a witness who has been called by the
prosecution is permitted to be cross-examined on behalf of the prosecution under the provisions of
Section 154 of the Evidence Act, the result of that course being permitted is to discredit that witness
altogether and not merely to get rid of a part of his testimony".
21. But this judgment in Khijiruddin was overruled by a five-Judge bench of the Calcutta High Court
in Praphullakumar Sarkar v. Emperor, 1931 SCC OnLine Cal 7. The High Court was answering a
reference from a Division Bench regarding the specific question of whether the testimony of a
witness, who was cross-examined by the party which produced him/her, should be discarded totally,
partially, or not discarded at all. Chief Justice Rankin, speaking for three other Judges and himself,
answered the reference in the following terms:
"24. In my opinion, the fact that a witness is dealt with under Section 154 of the
Evidence Act, even when under that Section he is "cross-examined" to credit, in no
way warrants a direction to the jury that Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of
2004 dt.26-09-2025 they are bound in law to place no reliance on his evidence, or
that the party who called and cross-examined him can take no advantage from any
part of his evidence. There is, moreover, no rule of law that if a jury thinks that a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 10
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
witness has been discredited on one point they may not give credit to him on another.
The rule of law is that it is for the jury to say.
Of the seven questions stated by the Division Bench I propose that we should answer
four, viz.-
(3) whether the evidence of a witness treated as "hostile" must be rejected in whole or
in part;
(4) whether it must be rejected so far as it is in favour of the party calling the witness;
(5) whether it must be rejected so far as it is in favour of the opposite party.
These three questions I would answer in the negative.
(6) Whether the whole of the evidence so far as it affects both parties favourably or unfavourably,
must go to the jury for what it is worth.
25. To this question, I would be content to answer "yes", ...
22. Justice Buckland, in the above case, in his concurring opinion holds that there is Patna High
Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 no law which states that the evidence of a
witness, who has been cross-examined by its party, should be entirely rejected. In his opinion, it is
for the jury (or the Judge) to form an opinion regarding the value of the testimony of such a witness.
23. All the same, later this Court in Jagir Singh v. State (Delhi), (1975) 3 SCC 562 held to the
contrary and approved the decision of the Calcutta High Court in Khijiruddin. This is what was said
in Jagir Singh by Justice Bhagwati:
"7. Now, it is apparent from the judgment of the High Court that the conviction of the
appellant rested entirely on the evidence of Pritam Singh (P.W. 10) and Sajjan Singh
(P.W. 13). Swaran Singh (P.W.
11) was also examined on behalf of the prosecution but his evidence is of no help to
the prosecution because he went back on the story of the prosecution and was
permitted to be cross-examined on behalf of the prosecution. It is now well settled
that when a witness, who has been called by the prosecution, is permitted to be cross-
examined on behalf of the prosecution, the result of that course being adopted is to discredit that
witness altogether and not merely to get rid of a part of his testimony. See Khijiruddin v.
Emperor...."
24. However, it is to be noted that Jagir Singh does not refer to the five-Judge Bench Patna High
Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 decision of the Calcutta High Court in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 11
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
Praphullakumar Sarkar.
25. But then in a subsequent decision (of which Justice Bhagwati was also a part) i.e., Sat Paul v.
Delhi Administration, (1976) 1 SCC 727, it was held differently. Justice Sarkaria, speaking for the
Bench, clarified the earlier judgment in Jagir Singh, and held that what has been held in Jagir Singh
would only be applicable where a witness through cross-examination by the party which calls it, is
totally discredited. It is only in such a situation that the Court, as matter of prudence, discards
his/her evidence in its entirety.
26. As a general rule, the testimony of a witness who has been cross -examined by the party which
produced him/her will not stand totally discredited, and it is for the Court to consider what value
should be attached to this testimony. After referring to a series of judgments on this point, the Court
in Sat Paul held as follows:
"52. From the above conspectus, it emerges clear that even in a criminal prosecution
when a witness is cross-examined and contradicted with the leave of the court, by the
party calling him, his evidence cannot, as a matter of law, be treated as washed off the
record altogether. It is for the Judge of fact to consider in each case whether as a
result of such cross- examination and contradiction, the witness Patna High Court
CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 stands thoroughly discredited or can
still be believed in regard to a part of his testimony. If the Judge finds that in the
process, the credit of the witness has not been completely shaken, he may, after
reading and considering the evidence of the witness, as a whole, with due caution and
care, accept, in the light of the other evidence on the record, that part of his testimony
which he finds to be creditworthy and act upon it. If in a given case, the whole of the
testimony of the witness is impugned, and in the process, the witness stands squarely
and totally discredited, the Judge should, as matter of prudence, discard his evidence
in toto.
53. It was in the context of such a case, where, as a result of the cross- examination by
the Public, Prosecutor, the prosecution witness concerned stood discredited
altogether, that this Court in Jagir Singh v. State (Delhi Admn.) with the aforesaid
rule of caution - which is not to be treated as a rule of law in mind, said that the
evidence of such a witness is to be rejected en bloc."
(Emphasis Provided)
27. An examination of the cases referred above shows that there can be no doubt about the fact that
the evidence of a witness, who has been cross-examined by the side which Patna High Court CR.
APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 produced him/her, cannot be totally discarded [Also see:
Neeraj Dutta v. State (NCT of Delhi), (2023) 4 SCC 731].
28. It may also be worthwhile to mention here that by the Criminal Law Amendment Act of 2005,
sub-section 2 was added to section 154 of the Evidence Act. The amended section 154 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 12
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
Evidence Act now reads as under:
154. Question by party to his own witness. - (1) The Court may, in its discretion,
permit the person who calls a witness to put any questions to him which might be put
in cross-examination by the adverse party.
(2) Nothing in this section shall disentitle the person so permitted under sub- section (1), to rely on
any part of the evidence of such witness.
(Emphasis Provided)
29. By way of the above amendment, the position which had been reiterated by this Court has now
come in the statute itself.
30. The word 'hostile' or 'hostile witness' has not been used anywhere in the Evidence Act. The logic
behind this exclusion seems to be that the declaration of witness as 'hostile witness' carries a specific
significance under the English law, from where this term has been derived, where liberty is only
granted to a side to cross-examine its own witness when such Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ)
No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 declaration of 'hostility' is made. The position in India is different
and here it is left to the discretion of the Court to allow a party to cross-examine its own witness,
regardless of a declaration of 'hostility'. This has been explained by this Court in Sat Paul:
"38. To steer clear of the controversy over the meaning of the terms "hostile" witness,
"adverse" witness, "unfavourable" witness which had given rise to considerable
difficulty and conflict of opinion in England, the authors of the Indian Evidence Act,
1872 seem to have advisedly avoided the use of any of those terms so that, in India,
the grant of permission to cross-examine his own witness by a party is not
conditional on the witness being declared "adverse" or "hostile".
Whether it be the grant of permission under Section 142 to put leading questions, or the leave under
Section 154 to ask questions which might be put in cross-examination by the adverse party, the
Indian Evidence Act leaves the matter entirely to the discretion of the court (see the observations of
Sir Lawrence Jenkins in Baikuntha Nath v.
Prasannamoyi, [AIR 1922 PC 409: 72 IC 286]). The discretion conferred by Section 154 on the court
is unqualified and untrammelled and is apart from any question Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ)
No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 of "hostility". It is to be liberally exercised whenever the court from
the witnesses demeanour, temper, attitude, bearing, or the tenor and tendency of his answers, or
from a perusal of his previous inconsistent statement, or otherwise, thinks that the grant of such
permission is expedient to extract the truth and to do justice. The grant of such permission does not
amount to an adjudication by the court as to the veracity of the witness. Therefore, in the order
granting such permission, it is preferable to avoid the use of such expressions, such as "declared
hostile", "declared unfavourable", the significance of which is still not free from the historical
cobwebs which, in their wake bring misleading legacy of confusion, and conflict that had so long
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 13
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
vexed the English Courts."
(Emphasis Provided)
31. The phrase 'hostile witness' is commonly, used in criminal jurisprudence and court proceedings.
We too cannot escape the blame of using the term 'hostile witness' in our judgment. We do it for
pragmatic reasons. Some words like 'hostile witness' in this case are now a part of our legal
vocabulary. There is no point in inventing or substituting new words or phrases, at least in the
present case, and we leave that for the future. But what is necessary, however, is to explain the Patna
High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 meaning of the term as it is now to be
understood. The phrase 'hostile witness' has come to be used for a witness who gives a statement
contrary to the story of the side for which he/she is a witness. All the same, because a witness has
supported some, though not all, aspects of a case, it would not automatically mean that this witness
has to be declared 'hostile'. A party can cross-examine its own witness under Section 154 Evidence
Act, even without getting a declaration of 'hostility'. The only restriction to cross-examination under
Section 154 Evidence Act is that the party, who seeks to cross- examine its own witness, must obtain
the leave of the Court. Whether there is a declaration of 'hostility' or not, one thing is clear that
evidence of witness, who has been cross-examined under Section 154 Evidence Act by the party who
called such witness, cannot be washed off entirely and it is for the Court to see what can be retrieved
from such evidence.
32. This can be understood from another aspect. We shall now refer to the definition of the term
'evidence' given under Section 3 of the Evidence Act. It reads as follows:
"Evidence" - "Evidence" means and includes-
(1) all statements which the Court permits or requires to be made before it by
witnesses, in relation to matters of fact under inquiry: such statements are called
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 oral evidence;
(2) all documents including electronic records produced for the inspection of the
Court; such document are called documentary evidence."
(Emphasis Provided)
33. The statements made by a witness in Court, including in cross- examination, either conducted by
the opposite party or by the party who produced the witness, would come under the definition of
'evidence' under Section 3 of the Evidence Act, since this evidence has come before the Court with its
permission. Moreover, there is no specific bar under the Evidence Act which mandates that such
evidence has to be discarded. Thus, it would form part of the entire evidence which the Court can
examine while arriving at its decision, and it is for the Court to determine what value has to be given
to that piece of evidence or how such evidence has to be used in a given case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 14
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
34. Viewed from a different perspective, the rejection of the entire testimony of a prosecution
witness, who has been cross- examined by the prosecution, would not only harm the case of the
prosecution but perhaps also of the defence in a given case. This is because as the law stands today,
the benefit of the testimony of such witness can be taken by both the prosecution and the defence,
allowing them to use it to build their case [See: Paulmeli v. State of T.N., (2014) 13 SCC Patna High
Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025 90, Ramesh Harijan v. State of U.P., (2012) 5
SCC 777]. In any case, ultimately, it will be the cause of justice that will suffer if the testimony of
such witness is totally discarded. It is, therefore, rightly left to the discretion of the Court to test the
evidentiary value of such a testimony.
35. Here, we may also take note of Section 155 of the Evidence Act which allows a party, with
permission of the Court, to impeach the credibility of its own witness as per the procedure laid down
therein.
36. It is though trite and much overstated but the maxim "falsus in uno, falsus in omnibus, is not
applicable to our criminal justice system. It is for the Court to distinguish the wheat from the chaff
while dealing with the depositions of a hostile witness. Courts can rely upon that part of the
deposition of a hostile witness which is corroborated by other evidence on record. This Court in
Bhajju v. State of Madhya Pradesh, (2012) 4 SCC 327 discussed the worth of the evidence of a hostile
witness in the following words:
"36. It is settled law that the evidence of hostile witnesses can also be relied upon by
the prosecution to the extent to which it supports the prosecution version of the
incident. The evidence of such witnesses cannot be treated as washed off the records,
it remains admissible in trial Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004
dt.26-09-2025 and there is no legal bar to base the conviction of the accused upon
such testimony, if corroborated by other reliable evidence..."
If part of the evidence of a hostile witness corroborates with other reliable evidence, then that part of
the evidence is admissible. Once a prosecution witness has been declared hostile and then
cross-examined by the prosecution, then it is for the Court to evaluate the veracity of the testimony.
There can be several reasons for a witness to turn hostile and the court must also look into these
factors while evaluating the evidence given by a hostile witness. It is an uncomfortable reality in our
criminal Courts for a prosecution witness to turn hostile. But then the purpose of a Trial Court is to
go to the truth of the matter. Whatever evidence is there before the Court must be examined, tested,
corroborated (whenever necessary), before a verdict can be finally given.
37. One of the many reasons for witnesses turning hostile is the long delay usually caused in a trial.
This is again unfortunate but true in our country. The present case is no exception. Here, the
incident occurred in the year 2003, the case was committed to Sessions in the year 2010 and charges
were framed as late as in the year 2017, and the judgment was finally pronounced by the Trial Court
on 24.09.2021. It took eighteen years! Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004
dt.26-09-2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 15
Brahmdeo Thakur vs State Of Bihar on 26 September, 2025
38. The role played here by the accused in delaying the trial cannot be discounted, as already stated.
The records also reveal that the depositions of most of the prosecution witnesses were recorded only
towards the end of the year 2017. Moreover, CBI in this case had filed its charge-sheet, inter alia,
against two persons belonging to Dalit community. Although, these two (A-4 and A-9) were finally
acquitted by Trial Court as there was absolutely nothing against them, but in the process,
prosecution had to declare many of its witnesses belonging to the Dalit community as hostile simply
because these witnesses did not depose against A-4 and A-9. It is also clear now, in any case, that
these two were wrongly made accused by the prosecution. All the same, the benefit of such witnesses
turning hostile cannot be given to other accused who were found involved in the offence, on the
overwhelming weight of other evidence.
25. In light of the judgment passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India referenced above in
which it has categorically held that the cross-examination of a hostile has been taken with a
permission of the court, shall be a relevant fact and since denial has come in the cross examination
of the hostile witness who is not someone else, but informant, this Court finds that section 307 of
the IPC has also not made out.
Patna High Court CR. APP (SJ) No.372 of 2004 dt.26-09-2025
26. Hence, this Court is of the view that the judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated
19.04.2004 passed by 1st Additional Sessions Judge, Sitamarhi in Sessions Trial No.86 of 2002/ 25
of 2002 (arising out of Sitamarhi Sadar P.S. Case No.284 of 2001, is hereby set aside. The present
criminal appeal is hereby allowed. The appellant is acquitted of the charge under Sections 307 of the
IPC read with sections 3 /4 of the Explosive Substances Act.
27. The appellant, namely, Brahmdeo Thakur, of Cr. Appeal (SJ) No.372 of 2004, is already on bail,
and having been acquitted under Section 307 of the IPC read with sections 3 /4 of the Explosive
Substances Act, let him be discharged from the liabilities of bail bonds and sureties, if any.
28. Let a copy of this judgment be sent to the concerned Court below along with the LCR.
(Dr. Anshuman, J.) Prakashmani/-
AFR/NAFR NAFR
CAV DATE 23.09.2025
Uploading Date
Transmission Date N/A
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/84649605/ 16
