Brahmananda @ Ankit Kumar Barik vs State Of Odisha ...... Opposite Party on 7 January, 2021
Brahmananda @ Ankit Kumar Barik vs State Of Odisha ......
Opposite Party on 7 January, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2021 ORI 2
Author: B.P.Routray
Bench: B.P.Routray
HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
BLAPL No.5486 of 2020
In the matter of an application under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure.
-------------
Brahmananda @ Ankit Kumar Barik ...... Petitioner
Versus
State of Odisha ...... Opposite party
For Petitioner -- Mr.S.P.Dash, Advocate
For Opp. Party -- Mrs.S.Sahoo, A.S.C.
JUDGMENT
PRESENT:
THE HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE B.P.ROUTRAY
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of Hearing: 25.11.2020 : Date of Judgment:07.01.2021
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
B.P.ROUTRAY. J. The petitioner has prayed to release him on bail in connection with
Keonjhar Sadar P.S.Case No.166 of 2019 corresponding to G.R.Case No.781 of 2019
pending in the court of the learned S.D.J.M., Keonjhar.
The offences alleged in this case are under Sections 468/471/420/34 of the Indian
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58811840/ 1
Brahmananda @ Ankit Kumar Barik vs State Of Odisha ...... Opposite Party on 7 January, 2021
Penal Code on the allegation that the petitioner being the C.E.O. of a company,
named Vatsalya Empire could manage to cheat the innocent villagers in collecting
lakhs of rupees giving false assurance of providing monthly stipend and livestock to
them.
2. It is submitted on behalf of the petitioner that, he has been arrested on 3.7.2019 and in the
meantime twenty-six witnesses have been examined in course of trial. The petitioner thrust upon
the provision of sub-section 6 of Section 437 of the Cr.P.C. by submitting that despite completion of
sixty days from the date of examination of the first witness, the trial is yet to be completed and since
the trial could not be completed within the said period of sixty days, he is bound to be released on
bail, being in custody for the whole period from 3.7.2019 till date.
3. On the contrary, learned counsel for the State submits that the allegations leveled against the
petitioner is relating to misappropriation of lakhs of rupees, which he had collectively taken along
with other accused persons from the innocent villagers with false assurance to them for providing
monthly stipend and goats. It is also submitted by the learned counsel for the State that the
provision contemplated under Section 437(6) of the Cr.P.C. does not lay any mandate in favour of
the accused petitioner for his release on bail in default to complete the trial within the period of sixty
days from the first date of examination of witness. It is also submitted that the mandate of the
legislation is not to release the accused in every case irrespective of the facts considered. Therefore,
the learned court below has rightly rejected the prayer for bail of the petitioner considering the
prevailing situations of continued lockdown.
4. Perusal of case record reveals that the petitioner is inside custody since 3.7.2019 in connection
with the aforesaid case. The petitioner had earlier approached this Court in BLAPL No.6698 of 2019
for his release on bail, which was filed on 31.7.2019 and disposed of by order of this Court on
20.2.2020 rejecting his prayer for bail. But presently the petitioner renews his prayer for bail resting
upon the provision under Section 437(6) of the Cr.P.C.. Though the petitioner has stressed upon the
provision of Section 437(6) of the Cr.P.C., still he did not choose to file the copy of the petition filed
before the learned S.D.J.M., nor the order passed by the learned S.D.J.M. in that regard. The
petitioner only files the copy of the order passed by the Sessions court dated 9.6.2020. The said
order of the learned Addl. Sessions Judge, Keonjhar reveals that the petitioner is inside custody
since 3.7.2019 and the date of examination of first witness is dated 26.7.2019 and the date of
examination of last witness as yet i.e. P.W.6, on 24.2.2020.
5. As the submission of the petitioner is concentrated on the provision under Section 437 (6) of the
Cr.P.C., the focal point for consideration is that, whether the accused has the indefeasible right to be
released on bail under Section 437(6) of the Cr.P.C., in case the trial is not completed within the
period of sixty days as stated therein ?
6. It is relevant to reproduce Section 437(6) of the Cr.P.C here. The said provision reads as follows:
"437. When bail may be taken in case of non-bailable offence.-
xxx xxx xxx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58811840/ 2
Brahmananda @ Ankit Kumar Barik vs State Of Odisha ...... Opposite Party on 7 January, 2021
(6) if, in any case triable by a Magistrate, the trial of a
person accused of any non-bailable offence is not concluded within a period of sixty
days from the first date fixed for taking evidence in the case, such person shall, if he
is in custody during the whole of the said period, be released on bail to the
satisfaction of the Magistrate, unless for reasons to be recorded in writing, the
Magistrate otherwise directs."
7. A careful perusal of the above quoted provision gives an impression of imperative nature of the
said provision with discretion to the court in a case triable by the Magistrate to refuse for bail for the
reasons to be recorded in writing. This provision is seen to be linked with right of speedy trial of the
accused as a part of fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The
last part of the provision speaks that the Court can also reject the prayer for bail, if reasons are
there. This means the provision as a whole is not mandatory but directory in nature, because the
court has the discretion to refuse the bail also. The provision is objected to speed up the trial without
unnecessary delay. It is understood that the trial is to be concluded within a period of sixty days
from the first date fixed for taking the evidence and in case the trial is not completed within the said
period of sixty days, then the accused shall be released on bail provided that there are no reasons to
be recorded for refusal of bail. To read it otherwise, unless the accused is refused to bail for reasons
to be recorded, he should be released on bail.
8. Now the question comes for what reason the bail of the accused is to be refused ?
The first obvious answer is, if the delay is not attributable to the accused. Besides this, the other
reasonable grounds would be, the nature of allegation, the proclivity of the accused to commit crime,
which can be judged from his criminal antecedents, or any other justifiable reason to refuse the bail.
But nothing is there to preclude the accused from his entitlement to apply for bail in case the trial is
not completed within that specified period of sixty days.
9. Therefore, upon thorough analysis of the provision, it can safely be said that the same is not
mandatory, but directory in nature and when the accused applies for grant of bail under Section
437(6) of the Cr.P.C., the court is to consider the nature of allegation, whether the delay is
attributable to the accused, the criminal antecedents of the accused, if any, or any other justifiable
reason to refuse the bail.
10. Now switching back to the facts of the present case, it reveals from the order of the learned Addl.
Sessions Judge that the prayer of the accused to grant him bail has been refused mainly on the
ground of lockdown situation prevailed due to COVID-19 Pandemic. It is seen that the trial could
not be proceeded further after examination of P.W.26 i.e., on 24.2.2020 due to outbreak of novel
Corona virus and the consequent lockdown situation. But what is notable to see is, the prescribed
period of sixty days has already been crossed by 24.2.2020 since the first date of examination of
P.W.1 was 26.7.2019 and the period of sixty days as such completed on 26.9.2019. Thus the reasons
attributed to lockdown situation for COVID-19 does not seem correct prior to 24.2.2020. The
accused-petitioner does not raise any submission to attribute such delay in trial to the prosecution
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58811840/ 3
Brahmananda @ Ankit Kumar Barik vs State Of Odisha ...... Opposite Party on 7 January, 2021
nor do the State counsel submits anything to say the reason of delay in trial attributable to the
defence. Since the petitioner has not produced any material to show the delay on the conduct of
either party, what is inferred from the circumstances that, the delay perhaps due to long list of
witnesses of the prosecution. When twenty six witnesses have been examined between the period
from 26.7.2019 to 24.2.2020, it cannot also be said that the court has not proceeded in examination
of prosecution witnesses without adequate expeditiousness. But one thing is clear that here the
delay is neither attributable to the prosecution nor to the accused nor to the court.
11. From the nature of allegation, it appears that the petitioner has misappropriated lakhs of rupees
from different villagers on false assurance to provide them monthly stipend and goats. There is no
reported criminal antecedent against the petitioner and he is inside custody since 3.7.2019.
12. Thus, considering all such circumstances, in my considered opinion, there is no justifiable reason
to refuse the bail to the petitioner, he is entitled to in terms of the provision contained in Section
437(6) of the Cr.P.C. Accordingly, it is directed to release the petitioner on bail in the aforesaid case
for Rs.30,000/-(thirty thousand) with two sureties each for the like amount to the satisfaction of the
learned S.D.J.M., Keonjhar with further condition that, one of such sureties shall be his relative and
he shall furnish property security free from all encumbrances worth of Rs.5,00,000/-(five lakhs)
and he shall not be involved in any other offence while on bail. It is clarified that the property
security has been conditioned keeping in view the nature of allegations regarding financial fraud.
The BLAPL is disposed of accordingly.
................................
B.P.ROUTRAY. J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 7th January, 2021/CRB
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58811840/ 4
