Brij Kishore Plaiwal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 July, 2017
Brij Kishore Plaiwal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 July,
2017
1
WP. No. 4738/2017
(Braj Kishore Paliwal Vs. State of M.P. and others)
28.07.2017
Shri Vikas Samadhiya, Advocate for the petitioner.
Shri C.R.Roman, Government Advocate for the
respondents-State.
W ith the consent of learned counsel for the parties, the matter is heard finally.
In this petition preferred under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner has challenged
the validity of the order dated 30.6.2017 by which, while working as Assistant Director, Fisheries, he
has been transferred from Shivpuri to Ashoknagar.
The facts, giving rise to filing of the instant petition, in nutshell, are that on 21/12/2009, petitioner
was promoted as Assistant Director, Fisheries and posted at Ashoknagar. Thereafter, on 15/6/2010
he was transferred from Ashoknagar to Sheopur and on 2/9/2013, he was transferred from Sheopur
to Shvipuri. Thereafter, by the impugned order, he has been transferred from Shivpuri to
Ashoknagar.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the impugned transfer is in contravention to the
transfer policy in vogue. It is further submitted that petitioner, being a heart patient, is a resident of
Guna and taking treatment from Bhopal. Therefore, petitioner had applied for online transfer by
filling the order of preference for posting as Guna, Bhopal and Ashoknagar, but leaving the first two
options, he has been transferred to Ashoknagar. It is submitted that petitioner never intended to go
to Ashoknagar, but only in order to submit his form, he had filled the third compulsory option as
Ashoknagar. It is also contended (Braj Kishore Paliwal Vs. State of M.P. and others) that by the
impugned order, petitioner is being posted twice in his career to Ashoknagar which is again in
contravention to clause 8.24 of the transfer policy. It is further submitted that being 59 years of age,
petitioner is about to retire in one year and, as such, he ought to have been posted as per his choice.
W ith the aforesaid submissions, indulgence of this Court is prayed for.
In response, learned Government Advocate submits that the transfer of the petitioner has been done
on his "own expenses" as per his request. It is submitted that when petitioner had filled his third
choice as "Ashoknagar" and he has been transferred to that place, his contention cannot be accepted
that he did not intend to go to Ashoknagar. Moreover, it is submitted that as per clause 8.10 of the
policy, those officers/employees who have one year or less left for retirement shall not ordinarily be
transferred. However, petitioner, being due for retirement on 31/8/18, has more than one year to
superannuate and, therefore, the said clause is not attracted to the fact situation in hand. Further,
under clause 8.12 of the policy, choice transfer is provided to patients suffering from terminal
diseases like cancer, those undertaking dialysis or availing regular check-up after open heart
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130096533/ 1
Brij Kishore Plaiwal vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 28 July, 2017
surgery, on their producing recommendation from the District Medical Board if there is no such
facility at their present place of posting. However, petitioner does not full the criteria as stipulated in
the said clause and, as such, cannot seek advantage thereof. It is further submitted that as per clause
8.24, an officer should not ordinarily posted twice in the same district. The said clause does not
(Braj Kishore Paliwal Vs. State of M.P. and others) carve out a mandatory exception for re-posting at
the same district, though ordinarily the same is discouraged. W ith the aforesaid submissions,
learned Government Advocate contends that prayer of the petitioner does not deserve to be
countenanced.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties, I am of the view that there is substantial force in the
submissions advanced by learned Government Advocate. Moreover, it is well settled in law that
transfer is an incidence of service. W hich employee should be posted where, is a matter for the
appropriate authority to decide. Until and unless the transfer is vitiated by mala fide or is made in
violation of any statutory provisions, the Court cannot interfere with the order of transfer. The
Supreme Court while dealing with the scope of judicial review in the matter of transfer, held that
transfer is an incidence of service and normally should not be interfered with by the Court. If any
administrative guidelines recalling transfer of an employee are violated, at best the same confers the
right on the employee to approach the higher authorities for redressal of his grievance. [ See: Union
of India and Others v. S.L. Abbas, (1993) 4 SCC 357, State Bank of India v. Anjan Sanyal and others,
(2001) 5 SCC 508, Public Services Tribunal Bar Association v. State of U.P. and another, (2003) 4
SCC 104, State of U.P. and Others v. Gobardhan Lal , (2004) 1 SCC 402, R.S. Chaudhary and Others
v. State of M.P. and Others, ILR (2007) MP 1329, Government of Andhra Pradesh v. G. Venkata
(Braj Kishore Paliwal Vs. State of M.P. and others) Ratnam, (2008) 9 SCC 345 and State of Haryana
and Others v. Kashmir Singh and Another, (2010) 13 SCC 306] In the instant case, the petitioner has
been transferred on his own request to Ashoknagar, though the same was his third choice of posting.
As such, he cannot say that he has been arbitrarily transferred. The petitioner has no statutory right
to remain posted at Shivpuri.
For the aforementioned reasons, the writ petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
(S.A. Dharmadhikari)
(and) Judge
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130096533/ 2
