Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6
March, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 PAT 1172, (2019) 2 PAT LJR 395
Author: Rajeev Ranjan Prasad
Bench: Rajeev Ranjan Prasad
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.21476 of 2018
======================================================
Brij Bhushan Prasad Son of Mathura Prasad, Resident of Village and P.O.
Dariyapur, P.S. Naubatpur, District - Patna.
... ... Petitioner
Versus
1. The State Election Commission Panchayat, Sone Bhawan Birchand Patel
Path, Patna through the State Election Commissioner.
2. The Secretary, the State Election Commission (Panchayat), Sone Bhawan
Birchand Patel Path, Patna.
3. The District Magistrate-cum-District Election Officer (Panchayat), Patna,
District - Patna.
4. The Block Development Officer-cum-Returning Officer, Naubatpur Block,
P.S. Naubatpur, District - Patna.
5. Chandeshwar Saw, Son of Late Bakhauri Saw, Resident of Village -
Bichhedl, P.O. Arap, P.S. Naubatpur, District - Patna.
6. Ajibkhan Nat son of Fonu Nat, Resident of Village and P.O. Dariyapur, P.S.
Naubatpur, District - Patna.
7. Akhilesh Kumar Son of Subhash Sah, Resident of Village - Tarwan, P.O.
Arap, P.S. Naubatpur, District - Patna.
8. Abhay Kumar Son of Mahesh Chandra Chakravarti, Resident of Village -
Tarwan, P.O. Arap, P.S. Naubatpur, District - Patna.
9. Arun Kumar Son of Satya Narayan Saw, Resident of Village - Tarwan, P.O.
Arap, P.S. Naubatpur, District - Patna.
10. Tapeshwar Saw Son of Rameshwar Saw, Resident of Village - Dariyapur,
P.O. Chainpur Dariyapur, P.S. Naubatpur, District - Patna.
11. Devfal Saw Son of Rajendra Saw, Resident of Village - Tarwan, P.O.
Arap, P.S. Naubatpur, District Patna.
12. Yogendra Pandit Son of Brij Nandan Pandit, Resident of Village and P.O.
Dariyapur, P.S. Naubatpur, District - Patna.
13. Virendra Saw Son of Surendra Saw, Resident of Village - Tarwan, P.O.
Arap, P.S. Naubatpur, District - Patna.
14. Shankar Saw Son of Ganga Saw, Resident of Village and P.O. Dariyapur,
P.S. Naubatpur, District Patna.
15. Sharda Devi Wife of Bhagwan Mistri, Resident of Village Abgilla, P.O.
Naubatpur, P.S. Naubatpur, District - Patna.
... ... Respondents
======================================================
Appearance :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 1
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
For the Petitioner/s : Mr. S.B.K. Mangalam, Advocate
For the Respondent/s : Mr. Ajay, GA-5
Mr. Pratik Kumar Sinha, AC to GA-5
Mr. Ashish Kumar Lal, AC to GA-5
For the BSEC : Mr. Amit Shrivastava, Advocate
For the Private Respondent : Mr. P.N. Shahi, Sr. Advocate
Mr. Dhirendra Kumar, Advocate
Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019
2/29
Mr. Ashutosh Singh, Advocate
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE RAJEEV RANJAN PRASAD
C.A.V. JUDGMENT
Date : 06-03-2019
This writ application has been preferred seeing the
following reliefs :-
"(I) For issuance of an appropriate writ in the nature of
CERTIORARI for quashing the judgment and order
dated 11.10.2018 passed by the learned Civil Judge,
Junior Division-cum-Election Tribunal, Danapur in
Election Case No. 08 of 2016, whereby and where
under the learned Civil Judge, Junior Division has been
pleased to set aside the election of the petitioner and
after setting aside the election direction has been issued
to the Respondent no.3. for recounting of votes on the
ground that the judgment under challenge is perverse
and ,therefore, wholly unsustainable in law.
(II) For issuance of an appropriate writ in the nature of
MANDAMUS ,commanding and directing the
Respondent Authorities for reinstatement of the writ
petition to the post which he was holding on the date of
the impugned judgment as also for restraining the
Respondent no.3 from any recounting of votes as
directed by the impugned judgment.
(III) For issuance of any other appropriate writ/writs,
order/orders, direction/directions for which the writ
petitioner would be found entitled under the facts and
circumstances of the case."
The petitioner also preferred two interlocutory
application being I.A. No. 9037 of 2018 and I.A. No. 123 of 2019
seeking an interim stay of the judgment and order dated
Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019
3/29
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 2
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
11.10.2018
passed by learned Civil Judge (Junior Division), Danapur in Election Case No. 8 of 2016. I.A. No.
9037 of 2018 was taken up for consideration by this Court on 19.12.2018 when an interim order was
passed as under :-
"In the meantime, even if, recounting, which is in process, is completed, the
concerned authority shall not declare the result."
In view of the aforesaid interim order already available on the record, when this case was taken up
on 21.01.2019 this Court declared that I.A. No. 9037 of 2018 as also I.A. No. 123 of 2019 have lost
there significance.
Mr. S.B.K. Mangalam, learned counsel representing the petitioner has canvassed the following
grounds for setting aside the impugned judgment :-
(i). The impugned judgment suffers from perversity and is without jurisdiction
because it has set aside the election before recording a finding that in fact it is some
other candidate, who had obtained the majority of the valid votes in the election
impugned.
It is perverse also because by the impugned judgment the learned Tribunal has vested the
jurisdiction upon the District Magistrate for recounting of votes for declaration of result and
issuance of certificate.
(ii). The order of recounting cannot be passed on mere asking and on vague allegations made in the
Election Petition. Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019
(iii). Ext. 1 which is said to be the petition filed by the election petitioner before the Returning
Officer for recounting in terms of Rule 79 of Bihar Panchayat Rules, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as
'the Rules, 2006') was admitted with an objection on behalf of the returned candidate (the
petitioner) but the objections were never considered and decided. It is, thus, a case where the
election petitioner had neither followed the mandatory provisions of Rule 79 of the Rules, 2006 nor
there was any explanation in the plaint as to the circumstances under which such petition was not
filed immediately taking objections with regard to counting before the Returning Officer.
It is his submission that the Civil Judge (Junior Division) while exercising his jurisdiction in terms
of the provisions of the Bihar Panchayat Raj Act, 2006 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act of 2006')
is competent to decide an election dispute but while doing so the learned Civil Judge is obliged and
bound to act within the frame work of the limitation prescribed under the statute. Learned counsel
referred the provisions of Sections 139 and 140 of the Act of 2006 to submit that the grounds
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 3
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
provided under those provisions would be the only grounds available to an election petitioner to
challenge the election for a declaration that the election is void. Section 140 of the Act of 2006 Patna
High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 provides the grounds of which the candidate
other than the returned candidate may be declared to have been elected. Under Section 140(1) of the
Act of 2006 it is provided that if any person who has filed an Election Petition has in addition to
calling in question the election of the returned candidate claims a further declaration that he himself
or any other candidate has been duly elected and the prescribed authority is of opinion that in fact
the petitioner or such other candidates received a majority of valid votes, the prescribed authority
shall after declaring the election of the returned candidate to be void declare the petitioner or such
other candidate as the case may be to have been duly elected.
It is submitted that under Section 140 of the Act of 2006, the Election Tribunal has to consider as to
whether in the impugned election any other candidate has received a majority of valid votes,
according to Mr. Mangalam, it is only after recording such a finding to this effect, an Election
Tribunal would be competent to move ahead, set aside the election of returned candidate and
declared any other candidate to have been duly elected, who in the opinion of the Court has received
the majority of the valid votes and this opinion can be formed only after the votes have been
recounted under the supervision of the Court itself.
Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 Assailing the impugned judgment,
learned counsel has drawn the attention of this Court towards third paragraph at Page 86 of the writ
petition which is the impugned judgment of the learned Tribunal wherein the learned Tribunal has
observed that "Thus from the discussions made above, it is clear that the petitioner is not entitled to
the relief for setting aside the election of returned candidate", it is submitted that having said so the
learned Civil Judge could not have in the same breath been pleased to set aside the election of the
writ petitioner as there was no recording of finding that in fact the election petitioner or any other
candidate received a majority of the valid votes.
It is submitted that the direction of the learned Civil Judge to the District Magistrate, Patna to get
the ballot of each Booth for the post of Mukhiya of Dariyapur Panchayat, Patna recounted under his
supervision and declare the result of election and for preparation of final result sheets based upon
counting and issuance of certificate in favour of the returned candidate is an order without
jurisdiction. According to learned counsel, under Section 140 (2) (a) (b) of the Act of 2006, the word
"Prescribed Authority" means an authority appointed under the provisions of the Act or under any
rules or regulation framed thereunder for all any other purposes of the Act.
Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 It is submitted that Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of Jyoti Basu and others vs. Devi Ghoshal and others reported in AIR 1982 SC 983
has held that the election disputes are statutory creations and therefore, those are subject to
statutory limitations and election petition is a communication of common law nor an equity. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the principles of equity would apply in the matters relating to
election disputes. It is said to be special jurisdiction and a special jurisdiction has to be exercised in
accordance with statute creating it.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 4
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
As regards his second submission on the issue of recounting, learned counsel has submitted that the
direction for recounting is also illegal as according to him, since Section 139 of the Act of 2006 is
pari materia to Section 100 of the Representation of People Act, 1951, therefore, following the long
line of judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in relation to the recounting of votes through the
process of Court, the recounting of votes cannot be done on mere asking. Learned counsel submits
that the order of recounting cannot be passed for roving inquiry to fish out materials in support of
the vague allegations made in the Election Petition. He has relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Ramsewak Yadav Vs. Hussain Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of
2018 dt.06-03-2019 Kamil Kidwai and others reported in AIR 1964 SC 1249 (paragraph 7), Dr.
Jagjit Singh Vs. Giani Kartar Singh and Others reported in AIR 1966 SC 773 (paragraph 31) and the
judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Beliram Bhalaik Vs. Jai Beharilal Khachi and
another reported in AIR 1975 SC 283 (paragraph 45 and 46).
Referring to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Bhabhi Vs. Sheo Gobind and
others reported in AIR 1976 SC 2117 learned counsel submits that in this case the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has laid down the six conditions in paragraph 15 of the judgment before a court can order for
inspection of Ballot papers in an Election Petition. To support this ground, learned counsel has also
relied on the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Chanda Singh Vs. Choudhary Shiv
Ram Verma and others reported in AIR 1975 SC 403, Suresh Prasad Yadav Vs. Jai Prakash Mishra
and others reported in AIR 1975 SC 376 and in the case of P.K.K. Shamsudden Vs. K.A.M. Mappillai
Mohindeen and others reported in (1989) 1 SCC 526 (paragraph 13).
Apart from the aforesaid judgments, learned counsel has also referred the judgments of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of M.R. Gopalakrishnan Vs. Thachady Prabhakaran and Patna High
Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 others reported in 1995 Suppl. (2) SCC 101, Vadivelu
Vs. Sundaram and Others reported in (2000) 8 SCC 355, V.S. Achuthanandan Vs. P.J. Francis and
Another reported in (2001) 3 SCC 81, and M. Chinnasamy Vs. K.C. Palanisami and others reported
in 2003 (10) SCALE 103.
Mr. Manglam has further submitted that in relation to the Panchayat Raj Act, 2006 the first matter
which traveled up to the Hon'ble Supreme Court is the case of Chandrika Prasad Yadav Vs. State of
Bihar and others reported in (2004) 6 SCC
331. In this case also the recounting order was passed by learned Election Tribunal and in
recounting of votes by the Election Tribunal by itself, the election petitioner was declared elected.
The Judgment of the learned Munsif was, however, set aside by the Hon'ble High Court vide
judgment and order dated 07.10.2002 passed in C.W.J.C. No. 5004 of 2002. The election petitioner
took the matter in appeal before the Division Bench but the appeal failed. Thereafter, the matter
went to the Hon'ble Supreme Court and the Hon'ble Supreme Court also dismissed the appeal of
election petitioner affirming the judgment of the Hon'ble Single Judge and Division Bench of the
Hon'ble Court. In paragraph 20 of the said judgment, their Lordship of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
were pleased to hold that it is well settled that an order of Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018
dt.06-03-2019 recounting of votes can be passed when the following conditions are fulfilled:- "(i) a
prima-facie case (ii) pleading of material facts stating irregularities in counting of votes (iii) a roving
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 5
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
and fishing inquiry shall not be made while directing recounting of votes and (4) an objection to the
said effect has been taken recourse to."
It is submitted that in the case of Banwari Yadav vs. State of Bihar and others reported in 2007 (4)
PLJR 169 which was also a case of similar to the case of Chandrika Yadav (supra) the Election
Tribunal had passed an order of recounting and after the recounting of votes the Election Tribunal
had declared the election petitioner to have been duly elected. The writ petition was filed by Banwari
Yadav whose election was set aside by the Election Tribunal and the election petitioner was declared
elected. Relying on different judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the Hon'ble Single Judge
vide its judgment in the case of Banwari Yadav (supra) was pleased to allow the writ petition setting
aside the judgment of the learned Election Tribunal even when after counting, the election
petitioner was declared elected. The Judgment of the Hon'ble Single Judge in Banwari Yadav case
(supra) was affirmed by the Division Bench in L.P.A. No. 705 of 2007 (Raj Kishor Shukla Vs.
Banwari Yadav & Ors.) since reported in 2008 (1) PLJR 593.
Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 It is lastly submitted by learned counsel
for the petitioner that the case of the election petitioner in the Election Petition is that his 216 valid
votes were illegally rejected at the time of counting by the Returning Officer on the ground that the
ink was faint by which the votes were polled. In the Election Petition the election petitioner did not
disclose the Booth Number or Table Number whereas his votes were rejected. Regarding objection
being raised at the time of counting, it was the case of the election petitioner that he had filed
petition for recounting before the Returning Officer. The petition for recounting was marked as Ext.
1 with objection. The Returning Officer of the Election was examined as witness No. 2 on behalf of
Respondent no. 13 to 16 of the Election Petition and in her examination-in- chief as also in her
cross-examination she had denied any illegality in counting. With respect to the claim of the election
petitioner that he had filed an application before the Returning Officer, this fact was categorically
denied by her in paragraph 35 and 39 of her cross-examination. No proof was brought on record by
election petitioner that he had filed Ext. 1 before the Returning Officer. Even he had not filed any
petition to call for his petition of recounting from the custody of the District Election Officer. An
objection raised on admission of Ext. 1 was never considered and Patna High Court CWJC No.21476
of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 the learned Civil Judge, Junior Division has relied upon Ext. 1 which
remained in the category of objected documents. It is, thus, submitted that the witnesses examined
on behalf of election petitioner though submitted the Election Petition but no documentary evidence
regarding any illegality in counting of ballot papers was brought on record.
It is submitted that the allegation of the election petitioner that his 216 votes were improperly
rejected was accepted by learned Civil Judge and the order of recounting was passed without their
being any prima-facie consideration on the part of the learned Civil Judge. Learned counsel has
relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Mahanth Ram Prakash Dass
Vs. Ramesh Chandra and others reported in (1999) 9 SCC 420 and the judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Mahendra Pratap versus Krishan Pal and Others reported in (2003) 1
SCC 390. Submission is that the election petitioner had placed reliance on fabricated document in
support of his bald objections and had misled the court for which the petitioner should have been
prosecuted for commission of perjury of the Court by placing a fabricated document in evidence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 6
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 On the aforementioned ground, learned
counsel has submitted that the impugned judgment as a whole is liable to be set aside as there
cannot be a saving of order for recounting, if it is proved that the Tribunal had no jurisdiction to
protect the District Magistrate to declare the result.
On the other hand, Mr. Pushkar Narayan Shahi, learned Senior Counsel representing the contesting
respondents has submitted that the impugned judgment insofar as it directs recounting of votes
does not suffer from any illegality or infirmity, thus, that part of the judgment under challenge is not
required to be interfered with. As regards the declaration setting aside of the election by the
impugned judgment, learned Senior Counsel submits that the election of the returned candidate
could not have been set aside at this stage and to that extent the judgment of the learned Munsif
may be modified. Learned Senior Counsel submits that by virtue of the interim order of the Court
now recounting has taken place in presence of the parties. It is submitted that in the democracy
which we have in our country the will of the people must be will and, therefore, at this stage no
fruitful purpose would be served by setting aside the impugned judgment and remitting the matter
back to the learned Munsif/Election Tribunal. He has relied upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex
Court in the case of Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 Rupadhar Pujari Vs.
Gangadhar Bhatra reported in 2004 (7) SCC 654.
Learned Senior Counsel has submitted that it is, in fact, the end result which matters.
Mr. Ajay, learned counsel representing the State has supported the contention of learned Senior
Counsel representing the private respondents to the extent that once the recounting has taken place,
the results may be allowed to be declared based on such recounting.
Mr. Amit Shrivastava, learned counsel representing the State Election Commission submits that so
far as the legal position is concerned it cannot be denied that the election of the returned candidate
should not have been set aside simultaneously while a direction for recounting of votes was being
issued.
Having heard learned counsel for the parties and upon perusal of the records this Court proceeds to
consider the submissions as under :-
Consideration Having heard learned counsel for the parties and upon perusal of the
records, on facts this Court finds that in the plaint presented before the learned
Election Tribunal, the respondent no.
5 made a statement in paragraph 9 of the plaint that during the Patna High Court
CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 counting it was found that Swastik symbol
pressed with light ink was not being counted in favour of the election petitioner
which was reported to the Returning Officer and the Returning Officer assured that
all the valid votes will be counted but the votes of the petitioner were rejected and
even invalid votes of returned candidate (petitioner) was counted as valid votes. The
election petitioner also made a statement that he immediately made an application
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 7
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
before the Returning officer for recounting of votes because 216 valid votes of the
petitioner were rejected illegally. In this connection, the election petitioner brought
on record the application dated 04.06.2016 which was said to have been submitted
with the Block Election Officer for recounting. This application dated 04.06.2016 was
exhibited as Ext. 1 (with objection). The contention of Mr. Manglam is that no such
application was ever submitted with the Block Election Officer which will be evident
form the deposition of the then Block Election Officer, namely, Varsha Tarvey (
O.P.W. 2) who denied to have received any such application. It is true that Ext. 1 was
marked an exhibit with objection and therefore, before final hearing of the election
petition, the parties were required to be heard as regards the admissibility of Ext. '1'
but what appears to this Court is that so far as Ext. 1 is concerned, the same was
Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 identified as an exhibit
when the election petitioner who was APW 1 deposed and proved his signature on the
application dated 04.06.2016. This Court will have no hesitation in saying that a
mere marking of Exhibit of a document is not a proof of the contents mentioned
therein. It is always open for the contesting party to contend that the contents of the
exhibit so marked at the instance of the other party are still required to be proved in
accordance with law. It is well settled in law that the fact that a document is exhibited
only establishes that it has been formally proved for making exhibit.
In the present case the contention of the election petitioner that he had submitted an application
dated 04.06.2016 (Ext. 1) with the Election Officer is a matter of fact which could have been
established by bringing cogent evidences. The Election Officer deposed in the present case as O.P.W.
2. In her cross- examination she has denied that the election petitioner had given any application.
She also denied accepting it. Under these circumstances, the election petitioner could have called for
the original official records to prove that such an application (Ext. 1) was submitted with the
Election Officer but this exercise was not undertaken. The Election Tribunal has, however, relied on
Ext. '1' as a very important document and has taken a view that by the said Patna High Court CWJC
No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 document (Ext. 1) the election petitioner had prayed for recounting
by giving reasons. In my opinion, merely because the application dated 04.06.2016 was marked Ext.
1, the same could not have been treated as proof of fact that the said letter was submitted with the
Block Election Officer (O.P.W. 2).
The aforesaid view of this Court brings it to a next question as to whether on this ground alone that
the election petitioner was unable to prove that he had submitted his application dated 04.06.2016
with O.P.W. 2, his election petition was liable to be thrown out.
It appears that before the Election Tribunal a number of judgments were cited including that of the
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Ramrati Devi vs. Saroj Devi reported in
(1997) 6 SCC 66 : AIR 1997 SC 3072. In the said case the Hon'ble Supreme Court was considering
the requirement of Rule 76 of the M.P. Panchayat Election Rules 1994. It was held that "in the light
of mandatory language of the Rule 76 of the Rules it is incumbent upon a candidate or an agent, if
the candidate was present, to make an application in writing and give reasons in support thereof
while seeking recounting. If it is not done then the Tribunal or the court is not empowered to direct
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 8
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 recounting even after adducement of the
evidence and consideration of the alleged irregularities in the counting".
The aforesaid judgment in the case of Ramrati Devi (supra) was however, overruled by Hon'ble
three Judges Bench of the Supreme Court in the case of Sohan Lal V. babu Gandhi and Others
reported in (2003) 1 SCC 108. The Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the M.P. Panchayat Raj Evam
Gram Swaraj Adhiniyam, 1993 and the rules framed thereunder particularly Rule 80 of the Rules.
After analyzing the aforesaid provisions in paragraph 14 their Lordship of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court held as under:
"14. In view of Section 122 and the Rules, we are unable to agree with the ratio laid
down in Ram Rati case1. It is not correct to hold that, in an election petition, after the
declaration of the result, the court or tribunal cannot direct re-counting of votes
unless the party has first applied in writing for re-counting of votes. There is no
prohibition in the Act or under the Rules prohibiting the court or tribunal to direct a
re-counting of the votes. Even otherwise, a party may not know that the re-counting
is necessary till after the result is declared. At this stage, it would not be possible for
him to apply for re- counting to the Returning Officer. His only remedy would be to
file an election petition under Section 122. In such a case, the court or the tribunal is
bound to consider the plea and where a case is made out, it may direct re-count
depending upon the evidence led by the parties. In the present case, there was
obvious error in declaring the result. We, therefore, hold that the ratio laid down in
Ram Rati case 1 is not correct."
Rules 79, 80, 81 and 82 of the Bihar Panchayat Election Rules, 2006 are quoted hereunder for ready
reference:
"79. Recounting of votes.--The candidate or in his/her absence his/her election agent
or counting agent may make a written application to the Returning Officer or the
Officer authorised by him/her for recounting of votes stating therein the grounds for
the same. (2) The Returning Officer or the Officer authorised by him/her may, fully
or partially, accept or reject the application stating the reasons for the same. (3) If the
Returning Officer or the Officer authorised by him/her accepts fully or partially the
application under sub-rule(2), he/she shall get the ballotpapers recounted and
amend the result of the counting in the form prescribed in sub-rule(2) of Rule 76 and
declare the result.
(4) After that, any application for further re-counting shall not be entertained.
1. [(1997) 6 SCC 66 : AIR 1997 SC 3072] Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019
80. Equality of votes.--If after the completion of the counting of votes two or more candidates secure
equal number of votes which may be the maximum, the Returning Officer shall draw a lot among
such candidates and the candidate in whose favour the lot is drawn, shall deemed to be that he/she
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 9
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
has secured an additional vote and the Returning Officer will declare the result of the counting of
votes accordingly.
81. Declaration of results:- (1) After recording the particulars of the election result in Form-21, the
Returning Officer or the Officer authorised shall declare that candidate elected as Member of Gram
Panchayat/ Panch of Gram Katchahry /Mukhiya/Sarpanch/Member of Panchayat Samiti/Member
of Zila Parishad, as the case may be, who has secured the largest number of valid votes and shall
certify it in the same Form.
(2) One copy each duly signed of Form 21 shall be sent to the District Election Officer and through
him/her to the Commission and the Director of Panchayat Raj.
82. Election Certificate.--After the declaration of the election result, the Returning Officer shall
grant a Election Certificate in Form -22 to the candidate so elected."
It is apparent from a reading of the aforesaid provisions that under sub-Rule (4) of Rule 79, once the
result is declared, further recounting shall not be entertained. After going through the aforesaid
Rules and Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Sohan Lal (supra) this Court is of
the view that even if the submission of Mr. Manglam is accepted to the extent that the election
petitioner was unable to prove the submission of his application dated 04.06.20-16 with O. P.W. 2
which was marked Exhibit 1 with objection, it cannot be held that the election petition could not
have been entertained. This Court is also of the view that neither under the Act nor under the Rules
there is any provision prohibiting the Election Tribunal to direct a recounting of the votes. The ratio
of the judgment in the case of Ramrati Devi (supra) has also been overruled by a Larger Bench of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court.
Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 Now coming to the next question as to
whether the Election Tribunal was justified in directing recounting of votes on the basis of the
materials available on the record and whether the order of the Tribunal satisfies the test laid down
by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Bhabhi (supra), this Court finds that in the case of
Bhabhi (supra) the Hon'ble High Court had directed for a sample inspection of ballot papers without
considering the election petition, the affidavit and the oral evidence. It is in these conditions the
Hon'ble Supreme Court was considering the challenge thrown to the order of the Hon'ble High
Court. The Hon'ble Apex Court relied upon the judgment in the case of Ramsewak Yadav (supra)
wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court had occasion to consider and hold that an order for inspection
could not be granted as a matter of routine but only under special circumstances and the Hon'ble
Supreme Court observed as follows:-
"An order for inspection may not be granted as a matter of course: having regard to
the insistence upon the secrecy of the ballot papers, the Court would be justified in
granting an order for inspection provided two conditions are fulfilled:
(i) that the petition for setting aside an election contains an adequate statement of
the material facts on which the petitioner relies in support of his case; and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 10
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
(ii) the Tribunal is prima facie satisfied that in order to decide the dispute and to do
complete justice between the parties inspection of the ballot papers is necessary.
But an order for inspection of ballot papers cannot be granted to support vague pleas made in the
petition not supported by material facts or to fish out evidence to support such pleas. The case of the
petitioner must be set out with precision supported by averments of material facts. To establish a
case so pleaded an order for inspection may undoubtedly, if the interests of justice require, be
granted. But a Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 mere allegation that the
petitioner suspects or believes that there has been an improper reception, refusal or rejection of
votes will not be sufficient to support an order for inspection".
The question with regard to an order of the Election Tribunal granting inspection of ballot papers
came for consideration again before the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Jagjit Singh
(supra) in which the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed on the facts of that case that the discretion to
allow inspection of ballot papers should not be used in such a way so as to make a roving or fishing
inquiry in order to discover materials for declaring the election void. In the case of Jitendra Bahadur
Singh v. Krishna Behari reported in (1970) 1 SCR 852 = AIR 1970 SC 276 the Hon'ble Supreme
Court reversed the order of the learned Election Judge granting inspection of ballot papers because
it was found that the learned Election Judge had not followed the essential conditions laid down
before granting the prayer of inspection of ballot papers. In the facts of the said case it was held that
the allegations were vague and indefinite, no material fact was pleaded and further that the
petitioner was present at the time of counting and when he did not take any objection regarding
illegal rejection of the votes.
The same principles were followed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Sumitra Devi Vs.
Shiv Shankar Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 Prasad Yadav reported in
1973 (2) SCR 920 : AIR 1973 SC 215 in which Hon'ble Mathew, J. after reviewing the previous
authorities held:
"In the case at hand, the allegations in the election petition were vague and the
petition did not contain an adequate statement of the material facts. The evidence
adduced by the appellant to prove the allegations was found unreliable. No definite
particulars were also given in the application for inspection as to the illegalities
alleged to have been committed in the counting of the ballot papers. A recount will
not be granted as a matter of right but only on the basis of evidence of good grounds
for believing that there has been a mistake in the counting. It has to be decided in
each case whether a prima facie ground has been made out for ordering an
inspection."
There is a long list of the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court consistently on this issue. In the
case of Bhabhi (supra) after discussing all the judgments the Hon'ble Supreme Court in paragraph
15 their Lordships laid down the following tests:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 11
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
"15.Thus on a close and careful consideration of the various authorities of this Court
from time to time it is manifest that the following conditions are imperative before a
court can grant inspection, or for that matter sample inspection, of the ballot papers:
(1) That it is important to maintain the secrecy of the ballot which is sacrosanct and
should not be allowed to be violated on frivolous, vague and indefinite allegations;
(2) That before inspection is allowed, the allegations made against the elected
candidate must be clear and specific and must be supported by adequate statements
of material facts;
(3) The Court must be prima facie satisfied on the materials produced before the
Court regarding the truth of the allegations made for a recount;
(4) That the Court must come to the conclusion that in order to grant prayer for
inspection it is necessary and imperative to do full justice between the parties;
(5) That the discretion conferred on the Court should not be exercised in such a way
so as to enable the applicant to indulge in a roving inquiry with a view to fish
materials for declaring the election to be void; and Patna High Court CWJC No.21476
of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 (6) That on the special facts of a given case sample inspection
may be ordered to lend further assurance to the prima facie satisfaction of the Court
regarding the truth of the allegations made for a recount, and not for the purpose of
fishing out materials.
If all these circumstances enter into the mind of the Judge and he is satisfied that these conditions
are fulfilled in a given case, the exercise of the discretion would undoubtedly be proper."
The reliance placed by learned counsel for the petitioner on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of Chandrika Prasad Yadav (supra) may not help the case of the petitioner
inasmuch as the facts situation of that case was different and distinct. There was a totally vague
pleading which led to interference by this Court. So far as the judgment in the case of Banwari Yadav
(supra) is concerned, again this judgment has been rendered in the facts of it's own case as recorded
in paragraph 22 of the judgment. It further appears that in course of hearing the learned writ Court
was not informed that Ram Rati Devi (supra) has been held not laying down the correct law. Sohan
Lal (supra) was not cited at the Bar. Further, in the case of Raj Kishor Shukla (supra) the Hon'ble
Division Bench of this Court was dealing with a case where an application was filed by the election
petitioner with the Block Election officer after declaration of result. No order was passed thereon,
thereafter he filed an election petition in which the grounds which he agitated in the election
petition were not there in the petition filed before Block Election Officer. The learned Writ Court
found that the plaint was containing only vague Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018
dt.06-03-2019 grounds. There was no basis for a direction for re-counting hence, the order of the
Election Tribunal for a re-count of votes was set- aside. Both these cases were thus decided by this
Court in a different facts situation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 12
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
Keeping in mind the aforesaid judicial pronouncements on the subject when this Court proceeds to
consider as to whether the learned Election Tribunal has considered the materials available on the
record and whether based on such materials a prima facie satisfaction regarding the truth of
allegation for recounting of votes has been taken ? This Court finds that the learned Election
Tribunal has discussed the case of the election petitioner which specifically pointed out that the
ballot papers containing Swastik symbol pressed with light ink was not being counted in favour of
the election petitioner whereas those were being counted in favour of the returned candidate
(petitioner). The case of the election petitioner was supported by AW 2, AW 3, AW 4 and AW 5. The
learned Election Tribunal has discussed the evidences of the witnesses who have stated that they
were present at the time of counting and had supported the case of the election petitioner. In fact
one Akhileshwar Kumar who has deposed as O.P.W.1 has supported the case of the applicant in his
examination-in-chief. The learned Election Tribunal has discussed his evidence also in Patna High
Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 the impugned judgment. On going through the
discussions made by the Election Tribunal in the judgment, this Court finds that he has dealt with
the deposition of the witnesses produced on behalf of the returned candidate as well. It has been
found that the returned candidate and his witnesses has either deposed that they were not present at
the time of counting or they have no knowledge regarding valid or invalid votes. The Tribunal held
that the returned candidate has made contradictory statements regarding valid and invalid votes
when compared with other witnesses of his side.
After a careful perusal of the entire materials available on the record, this Court is of the considered
opinion that in the plaint the election petitioner has made a categorical and positive allegation and
he has supported his allegations by bringing witnesses who were present at the time of counting. In
these conditions if the Election Tribunal has found itself prima-facie satisfied and has come to a
conclusion that a recounting of vote is required, this Court finds no reason to take any other view.
In the opinion of this Court, learned Tribunal has rightly taken the view as under:
" in this case all the aforesaid conditions are fulfilled by the petitioner which are
discussed above. Thus, in the light of the discussions made above this Tribunal finds
that there were irregularities in the counting of votes in the present case, the result
Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 sheet prepared was
irregular not proper and counting of votes by the official was not done as per Rule.
Thus, this issue goes in favour of the petitioner".
By virtue of the aforesaid discussions, this Court finds that the direction for recounting of votes
cannot be faulted with, there is no illegality much less any material illegality and this Court sitting in
its supervisory writ jurisdiction does not find any reason to interfere with the aforesaid direction.
The last but equally contested issue is with regard to the declaration of the Election Tribunal that the
certificate in favour of the returned candidate is void. It appears that the learned Election Tribunal
has clearly erred at this stage, inasmuch as, in the opening line of the same paragraph wherein the
Tribunal has declared that the result of the petitioner is null and void, held that "thus, from the
discussions made above it is clear that the petitioner is not entitled to the relief of setting aside the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 13
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
election of returned candidate........"
In course of argument even Mr. P. N. Sahi, learned Senior Counsel representing the private
respondent and the State while arguing on law accepted the legal position to the extent that the
Election Tribunal while directing for recounting of votes could not have simultaneously declared the
election of the returned candidate null and void. In terms of Sections 139 and 140 of the Act of 2006
it is only the prescribed authority i.e. the Election Tribunal who is competent to declare the result of
the returned Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 candidate null and void.
Therefore, such power could not have been conferred upon the District Magistrate, Patna which has
been done in the present case by the learned Election Tribunal.
Apparently, the direction of the learned Tribunal holding that the election of the returned candidate
is null and void and then after recounting of votes by the District Magistrate, Patna -cum- District
Election Officer, the District Magistrate-Election Officer shall declare the final result and shall issue
the certificate accordingly cannot sustain. Thus, while saving the order of the learned Election
Tribunal for recounting of votes by the District Magistrate-cum-Election Officer, this Court sets
aside the part of the impugned judgment by which the learned Election Tribunal declared the
certificate of the returned candidate null and void and directed the District Magistrate, Patna to
declare the result after recounting and to issue a certificate accordingly in favour of the returned
candidate.
This Court has been informed that during the pendency of the writ application the counting of votes
have taken place as per direction of the learned Election Tribunal, subject to the interim order of
this Court dated 19.12.2018 which reads as under:
"In the meantime, even if, recounting, which is in process, is completed, the
concerned authority shall not declare the result."
Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018 dt.06-03-2019 At this stage, this Court would take note
of paragraph 28 of the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of T.A. Ahammed Kabeer v.
A.A.Azeez and others reported in AIR 2003 Supreme Court 2271 which reads as under:-
"28.It is true that a re-count is not to be ordered merely for the asking or merely
because the court is inclined to hold a recount. In order to protect the secrecy of
ballots the court would permit a recount only upon a clear case in that regard having
been made out. To permit or not to permit a recount is a question involving
jurisdiction of the court. Once a recount has been allowed the court cannot shut its
eyes on the result of recount on the ground that the result of recount as found is at
variance with the pleadings. Once the court has permitted recount within the
well-settled parameters of exercising jurisdiction in this regard, it is the result of the
recount which has to be given effect to."
The result is kept in a sealed envelope which has been kept in possession of the Registrar General of
this Court. Since this Court has set aside the part of the impugned judgment, let the matter be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 14
Brij Bhushan Prasad vs The State Election Commission ... on 6 March, 2019
remitted to the court of learned Civil Judge (Junior Division) -cum-Election Tribunal, Danapur who
will now proceed to dispose of the Election Case No. 8 of 2016 in accordance with law. Let the sealed
envelope be returned to learned counsel for the State Election Commission who will produce the
same before the learned Election Tribunal, Danapur on 14th March, 2019 for further action.
For convenience of the parties and early disposal of the case, this Court directs the Election
Tribunal, Danapur to take up the matter on 14th of March, 2019 and dispose it off within one month
from the date of receipt/production of a copy of this Patna High Court CWJC No.21476 of 2018
dt.06-03-2019 judgment. The parties shall also co-operate in early disposal of the matter.
This writ application is allowed in part, subject to the observations and directions made
hereinabove. All the interlocutory applications are also disposed of accordingly.
(Rajeev Ranjan Prasad, J) avin/-
AFR/NAFR AFR
CAV DATE 15.02.2019
Uploading Date 06.03.2019
Transmission Date
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24115162/ 15
