Bundoo vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Bundoo vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Author: Siddharth
Bench: Siddharth
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44800
Court No. - 47
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 45728 of 2024
Applicant :- Bundoo
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Harsh Vardhan,Sunil Kumar Tiwari
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Siddharth,J.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned A.G.A for the State and perused the material placed
on record.
The instant bail application has been filed on behalf of the applicant, Bundoo, with a prayer to
release him on bail in Case Crime No. 0621 of 2024, under Sections- 21/22 N.D.P.S. Act, Police
Station- Sardhana, District- Meerut, pendency of trial.
There is allegation of recovery of 0.25 mg of alprazolam amounting to 8250 tablets have been made
from the applicant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6089943/ 1
Bundoo vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Counsel for the applicant submits that the quantity of alprazolam allegedly recovered from the
applicant is much below commercial quantity.
Learned counsel for the applicant has submitted that applicant has been falsely implicated in the
present case due to ulterior motive, on the basis of false and planted recovery of 0.25 mg of
alprazolam amounting to 8250 tablets and there is no public witness of the alleged recovery. He
next submitted that the mandatory provisions contained in Sections 41, 50, 52, 53 and 57(2) of the
NDPS Act were not complied with while making the alleged search and recovery. At the stage of
consideration of bail it cannot be decided whether offer given to the applicant and his consent
obtained was voluntary. These are the questions of fact which can be determined only during trial
and not at the present stage. In case of prima facie non-compliance of mandatory provision of
Section 50 the accused is entitled to be released on bail within the meaning of Section 37 of N.D.P.S.
Act. The applicant is languishing in jail since 15.11.2024. He has no criminal history to his credit. In
case he is enlarged on bail, he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
Learned A.G.A. has opposed the prayer for bail by contending that the innocence of the applicant
cannot be adjudged at pre-trial stage who is involved in supplying contraband, therefore, the
applicant does not deserve any indulgence. In case the applicant is released on bail he will again
indulge in similar activity. The "reasonable grounds" mentioned in Section 37(1)(b)(ii) of N.D.P.S.
Act mean something more than prima facie ground. It implies substantial probable causes for
believing that accused is not guilty of the offence charged and points to existence of such facts and
circumstances which are sufficient to hold that accused is not guilty.
However the Apex Court in the Case of Union of India vs. Shiv Shankar Keshari, (2007) 7 SCC 798
has held that the court while considering the application for bail with reference to Section 37 of the
Act is not called upon to record a finding of not guilty. It is for the limited purpose essentially
confined to the question of releasing the accused on bail that the court is called upon to see if there
are reasonable grounds for believing that the accused is not guilty and records its satisfaction about
the existence of such grounds. But the court has not to consider the matter as if it is pronouncing a
judgment of acquittal and recording a finding of not guilty.
Considering the facts of the case and keeping in mind the arguments advanced on behalf of the
parties, the ratio of the Apex Court's judgment in the case of Union of India vs. Shiv Shankar
Keshari, (2007) 7 SCC 798, larger mandate of Article 21 of the constitution of India, the nature of
accusations, the nature of evidence in support thereof, the severity of punishment which conviction
will entail, the character of the accused-applicant, circumstances which are peculiar to the accused,
reasonable possibility of securing the presence of the accused at the trial, reasonable apprehension
of the witnesses being tampered with, the larger interest of the public/ State and other
circumstances, but without expressing any opinion on the merits, I am of the view that it is a fit case
for grant of bail.
Let the applicant involved in the aforesaid crime be released on bail on his furnishing a personal
bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned with the
following conditions that :-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6089943/ 2
Bundoo vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with the evidence or threaten the witnesses.
(ii) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any
adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence when the witnesses are present in Court.
In case of default of this condition, it shall be open for the Trial Court to treat it as
abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders in accordance with law.
(iii) The applicant shall remain present before the Trial Court on each date fixed,
either personally or as directed by the Court. In case of his absence, without sufficient
cause, the Trial Court may proceed against him under Section 229-A of the Indian
Penal Code.
(iv) In case the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during trial and in order to secure
his presence, proclamation under Section 82 Cr.P.C. is issued and the applicant fails
to appear before the Court on the date fixed in such proclamation then the Trial
Court shall initiate proceedings against him in accordance with law under Section
174-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(v) The applicant shall remain present in person before the Trial Court on the dates
fixed for (i) opening of the case, (ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance
with law.
In case, of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 Rohit
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/6089943/ 3
