C/M Intermediate College And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru Princ.Secy. And ... on 1 May, 2025
C/M Intermediate College And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru
Princ.Secy. And ... on 1 May, 2025
Author: Saral Srivastava
Bench: Saral Srivastava
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:69004
Court No. - 32
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 20154 of 2011
Petitioner :- C/M Intermediate College And Another
Respondent :- State Of U.P. Thru Princ.Secy. And Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- G.K. Singh,V.K. Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Saral Srivastava,J.
1. Heard learned counsel for the petitioners and Sri Ansul Nigam, learned Standing Counsel for the
State-functionaries.
2. By means of the present writ petition, the petitioner has assailed the order dated 10.03.2011
passed by the Special Secretary, Secondary Education, U.P. Government, Lucknow.
3. Challenging the aforesaid order, learned counsel for the petitioner has contended that before
passing the impugned order, the procedure prescribed under Regulation 13 of Chapter VII of the
Regulations framed under the U.P. Intermediate Education Act has not been followed. In this
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108174836/ 1
C/M Intermediate College And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru Princ.Secy. And ... on 1 May, 2025
respect, necessary averments have been made in paragraphs No.43 and 44 of the writ petition.
Paragraphs No.43 and 44 of the writ petition are reproduced herein below:-
"43. That Regulation 13 of Chapter-VII of the Regulations framed under the U.P.
Intermediate Education Act clearly provides that when the Director submits a
report/recommendation to the Board for withdrawn of recognition of an institution,
the Board would give a show-cause notice to the institution concerned. Upon
receiving the aforesaid show-cause notice the Manager would give a reply which
would be given to the Joint Director of Education who would forward the same to the
Board along with his report. The matter would thereafter be placed before the State
Government and it is only after it is approved by the State Government that an order
would be passed by the Board withdrawing the recognition or asking the
management to remove the defects.
44. That in the present case the procedure, as prescribed in Regulation 13 was not
complied with. Neither the Board nor the Joint Director of Education or the State
Government before passing the order impugned gave any notice or opportunity of
hearing of any kind to the petitioner-committee of management. No show cause
notice whatsoever had been issued by the Board to the petitioner-committee of
management. The report of the Joint Director of Education was also ex parte and a
copy of the said report was given to the petitioner-college only when an application
under R.T.I. Act was filed by a teacher thereof.
4. Accordingly, it is submitted that the impugned order cannot be sustained in law.
5. The State Government has filed counter affidavit and paragraphs No.43 and 44 of the writ
petition have been replied in paragraph No.19 of the counter affidavit. Paragraph No.19 of the
counter affidavit of the State is reproduced herein below:-
"19. That the contents of paragraph nos.34 to 43 of the writ petition as stated are
incorrect and as such are denied. In reply thereto it is submitted that the enquiry
report dated 20-01-2009 of the Joint Director of Education, Vindhyachal Mandal,
Mirzapur, enquiry report dated 30-06-2010 of the Joint Director of Education,
Varanasi Mandal, Varanasi as well as explanation submitted by the petitioners were
placed in the meeting of Recognition Committee held on 5th July, 2010 and the
Recognition Committee in its meeting dated 5th of July, 2010 passed resolution for
cancellation of unaided recognition of the institution in question upto Intermediate
level. It is further submitted that the recommendation of Recognition Committee was
accepted by the State Government and vide G.o. dated 10th March, 2010 issued by
the Special Secretary, Shiksha Anubhag-7 Government of U.P., Lucknow the
recognition of the petitioner's institution upto Intermediate level has been
withdrawn."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108174836/ 2
C/M Intermediate College And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru Princ.Secy. And ... on 1 May, 2025
6. From perusal of the averments made in paragraph No.19 of the counter affidavit, it is evident that
the specific averments made by the petitioner with regard to the non-compliance of Regulation 13 of
Chapter VII of the Regulations framed under the U.P. Intermediate Education Act has not been
denied.
7. This Court has also granted interim order on 06.04.2011 on the ground of non-compliance of
Regulation 13 of Chapter VII of the Regulations framed under the U.P. Intermediate Education Act.
8. It is pertinent to note that this Court has passed an order dated 16.05.2019 in Writ-C No.24898 of
2011 which reads as under:-
"Supplementary affidavit filed today by learned Standing Counsel on behalf of
respondent nos. 1to 3, is taken on record.
Learned counsel for the petitioners prays for and is allowed two weeks' time to file
reply to the same.
It is submitted by the learned Standing Counsel that in view of the stay order
operating in the present case over and above the order revoking the recognition no
inspection could be conducted and there has been non-cooperation of the institution
also.
It is made clear that in spite of the fact that interim order was operating herein the
concerned respondents shall hold enquiry in the matter and shall cause inspection of
the institution as well.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner shall cooperate in the
matter of enquiry and inspection for the said purpose.
At this stage learned Standing Counsel submits that the petitioners have been issued
with a notice dated 10.5.2019.
In view of the above it is hereby provided that the inspection team to be constituted
by the department concerned shall visit this institution with a prior proper notice and
the institution shall cooperate in the matter of enquiry.
A proper report shall be submitted by the department before this Court by the next
date fixed.
List on 16.7.2019.
Interim order to continue in the meanwhile."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108174836/ 3
C/M Intermediate College And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru Princ.Secy. And ... on 1 May, 2025
9. In compliance of the aforesaid order of this Court, an inspection was conducted by the Committee
constituted by the Board and the Committee has submitted its report, copy of which is enclosed as
Annexure No.4 to the compliance affidavit filed by Sri Prabhash Kumar Jha, the then Assistant
Secretary, Secondary Education Board, Regional Office, Varanasi.
10. Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that perusal of the inspection report reveals
that the same is in favour of the petitioner.
11. Thus, for the reasons given above, the impugned order cannot be sustained in law and is hereby
set aside with liberty to the respondent No.1-Principal Secretary, Secondary Education, Government
of U.P., Lucknow to pass a fresh order strictly in accordance with law after giving due notice and
opportunity of hearing to all the concerned parties in the light of the report enclosed as Annexure
No.4 to the compliance affidavit within a period of two months from the date of production of
certified copy of this order.
12. The writ petition is allowed with no order as to cost.
Order Date :- 1.5.2025 SS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108174836/ 4
