C.Vellaichamy vs The Secretary on 15 December, 2021
C.Vellaichamy vs The Secretary on 15 December, 2021
Author: M.Sundar
Bench: M.Sundar
W.P.(MD)No.1436 of 2013
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 15.12.2021
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.SUNDAR
W.P.(MD)No.1436 of 2013
and
M.P.(MD)Nos.2 to 4 of 2013
C.Vellaichamy ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Secretary,
Department of Forest,
St. George Fort,
Chennai.
2.The District Collector,
Madurai District,
Madurai.
3.The District Revenue Officer,
Madurai District,
Madurai.
1/20
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) W.P.(MD)No.1436 of 2013
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155028191/ 1
C.Vellaichamy vs The Secretary on 15 December, 2021
4.The District Forest Officer,
District Forest Office,
Madurai - 2 ... Respondents
PRAYER: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India for issuance of Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, calling for
the entire records pertaining to the orders of R.O.C.No.
80557/2010/Y1 dated 04.05.2011 issued by third respondent and in
R.O.C.No.80557/2010/Y1 in Madurai District Gazette dated
08.07.2011 issued by second respondent and quash the same and
direct the respondents from forbearing the respondents from
evicting the petitioner from his respective land, comprised in
Survey No.1/1 at Ramagowndanpatty Village, Vadipatti Taluk,
Madurai District except due process of law.
For Petitioner : Mr.R.Ramasamy
For Respondents : Mr.A.Baskaran
Additional Government Pleader
ORDER
*********** This common order will govern the captioned main writ petition and the captioned
three miscellaneous petitions [M.Ps. therein].
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
2.The nucleus of the captioned main writ petition is land admeasuring four acres or thereabouts
situate in 74 Ramagoundanpatti Village, Vadipatti Taluk, Madurai District [hereinafter 'said land'
for the sake of convenience and clarity]. To be noted, there is no disputation that said land forms
part of a larger extent of land comprised in S.F.No.1/1 admeasuring 20.03.0 hectares [49 acres and
49 cents] in Ramagoundanpatti Village, Vadipatti Taluk, Madurai District [hereinafter 'entire land'
for the sake of convenience and clarity].
3.Sometime in 2010 a Notification was issued notifying applications for grant of quarrying lease in
entire land. This notification was challenged by one E.S.Raja Gopal, by way of a Public Interest
Litigation [PIL] in this Court vide W.P.(MD)No.12697 of 2010 and a Hon'ble Division Bench of this
Court disposed of this PIL in and by an order dated 29.10.2010. Suffice to say that in and by this
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155028191/ 2
C.Vellaichamy vs The Secretary on 15 December, 2021
order Hon'ble Division Bench quashed the notification inviting applications for grant of quarry lease
primarily on the ground that quarrying operation would adversely affect ecology and would be a
hindrance to wild animals besides natural herbs, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis plants and trees.
Besides quashing the notification inviting applications for grant of quarry, Hon'ble Division Bench
had categorically directed the District Collector, Madurai to forward the recommendation of the
District Forest Officer [DFO, Madurai] dated 03.08.2010 addressed to the District Revenue Officer,
Madurai [DRO, Madurai] and has further directed the Government to consider the same.
4.The above appears to be the genesis of the matter. Pursuant to aforementioned 29.10.2010 order,
the DRO [third respondent] made proceedings bearing Reference Roc.No. 80557/2010/Y1 dated
04.05.2011, appending a notification to be published in the Madurai District Gazette. Thereafter, the
notification was filed in the Madurai District Gazette on 08.07.2011 by the second respondent
[District Collector]. In and by this notification it was notified that it is proposed to constitute entire
land as reserved forest.
5.Before I proceed further, it is necessary to set out that this 04.05.2011 proceedings made by the
third respondent [DRO] and the District Gazette Notification dated 08.07.2011 made by the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis second respondent [District Collector] have been assailed in the
captioned main writ petition and they shall be referred to as first impugned order and second
impugned order respectively, for the sake of convenience and clarity.
6.To be noted, the first and second impugned orders say that they have been made under Section 26
of Tamil Nadu Forest Act, 1882 [hereinafter 'said Act' for the sake of convenience and clarity]. To my
mind this appears to be a case of quoting a wrong provision of law as Section 26 of said Act is 'Power
to Make Rules' and it talks about the powers delegated to the Government to make subordinate
legislation ie., Rules to regulate the pasturage or of the natural produce of land at the disposal of the
Government not included in a reserved Forest.
7.Be that as it may, mere quoting of wrong provision of law will not vitiate an order if the authority /
entity concerned otherwise has powers under the Statute. It would not only not vitiate the orders, it
will not be construed as the authorities being denuded of the powers to do so. In the case on hand
there is no disputation or disagreement that the Government does have
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis powers to constitute any land at the disposal of the Government as
reserved forest. The only rider is it has to be done in manner provided under the Statute. This is
ingrained in Section 6 of the said Act which reads as follows:
'6.Proclamation by Forest Settlement Officer:- When a notification has been issued
under Section 4, the Forest Settlement Officer shall publish in the Official Gazette of
the district and at the headquarters of each taluk in which any portion of the land
included in such notification is situated and in every town and village in the
neighbourhood or such land a proclamation.
(a) specifying, as nearly as possible, the situation and limits of the land proposed to
be included within the reserved forests;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155028191/ 3
C.Vellaichamy vs The Secretary on 15 December, 2021
(b) setting forth the substance of the provisions of section 7;
(c) Explaining the consequences which, as hereinafter provided, will ensure on the
reservation of such forest; and
(d) fixing a period not less than three months from the date of publishing such
proclamation in the Official Gazette of the district and requiring every person
claiming any right referred to in section 4 either to present to such officer, within
such period, a https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis written notice specifying, or to
appear before him within such period and state the nature of such right and in either
case to produce all documents in support thereof.
The Forest Settlement Officer shall also serve a notice to the same effect on every known or reputed
owner or occupier of any land included in or adjoining the land proposed to be constituted a
reserved forest, or on his recognized agent or manager. Such notice may be sent by registered post to
persons residing beyond the limits of the district in which such land is situated.'
8.In this regard, it is deemed appropriate to extract and reproduce Section 4 which reads as follows:
'4.Notification by the Government:-
Whenever it is proposed to constitute any land a reserved forest, the Government
shall publish a notification in the Official Gazette and in the Official Gazette of the
District.
(a) Specifying, as nearly as possible, the situation and limits of such lands;
(b) declaring that it is proposed to constitute such land a reserved forest;
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(c) appointing an officer (hereinafter called the “Forest Settlement Officer”) to inquire into and
determine the existence, nature and extent of any rights claimed by, or alleged to exist in favour of,
any person in or over any land comprised within such limits or to any forest produce of such land,
and to deal with the same as provided in this chapter.
The officer appointed under clause (c) of this section shall ordinarily be a person other than a Forest
Officer, but a Forest Officer may be appointed by the Government to attend on behalf of the
Government at the inquiry prescribed by this chapter.'
9.A careful perusal of Sections 3 and 4 and a careful conjoint reading of the same with Section 6
makes it clear that the Government has powers under said Act ie., Statute to constitute any land at
the disposal of the Government as reserved forest and the first step in this regard is the Government
should publish a notification in a) official gazette b) official gazette of the district. The second
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155028191/ 4
C.Vellaichamy vs The Secretary on 15 December, 2021
impugned order is clearly the publication in the official gazette of the district which is the second
notification adumbrated https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis in Section 4 of said Act. Therefore, I
proceed by construing the second impugned order as one of the two notifications under Section 4 of
said Act.
10.To be noted, it is more than obvious that the second impugned order is one of the two
notifications contemplated in Section 4 of said Act (albeit quoting wrong provisions of law), as it had
been repeatedly averred in the counter affidavit that the procedure for section 3 constituting the
entire land as forest land has been kick started and the same will be carried to its logical end and
concluded in accordance with the said Statute. It is also to be noted that two notifications under
Section 4 of said Act are the first step in the direction of constituting any land as forest land and
thereafter, a mechanism is adumbrated in successive provisions in said Act.
11.I now proceed to examine the case of the writ petitioner. The writ petitioner submits that he has
been doing agricultural activities for more than 25 years but four stray kist receipts two in Fasli
1412, one in Fasli 1420 and another in Fasli 1421 alone have been placed before me. To be noted,
1412 Fasli translates to year https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 2002 in the Gregorian Calendar.
Likewise Fasli 1420 and 1421 translate to years 2010 & 2011 in the Gregorian Calendar / English
Calender. Therefore there is no record to demonstrate that the writ petitioner and/or his father has
been continuously doing agricultural activities in the said land.
12.In this regard, it is to be noted that in the counter affidavit the State has taken a categoric stand
that the writ petitioner is not living in said land and he is living in another property in
Ramagoundanpatti Village. It has also been averred in the counter affidavit that the writ petitioner
has put up a small mud hut only as a make-believe affair as if he is dwelling in said land. I propose
not to express any view or opinion on this aspect of the matter at this stage for two reasons. First I
am exercising powers in the writ jurisdiction and testing first impugned order and second impugned
order. Therefore, it would not be appropriate to go into such factual disputations. The second reason
is, I propose to leave it open to the State to proceed with the first of the two notifications under
Section 4 and carry it to its logical end in accordance with said Act and the statutory Scheme of the
said Act (which has been adumbrated in various provisions) when the Government wants to
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis constitute land at the disposal of the Government as reserved
forest.
13.Before I proceed further, it is also to be noticed that the terms 'Government', 'Collector' besides
'Forest Officer' and 'District Forest Officer' are defined terms vide interpretation clause being
Section 2 of said Act and the same read as follows:
''2.Interpretation Clause: In this Act, and in all Rules made here under unless there is
something repugnant in the subject or context:-
Government: “Government” means the State Government.
Collector: “Collector” means the Chief Executive Revenue Officer of a District.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155028191/ 5
C.Vellaichamy vs The Secretary on 15 December, 2021
Forest Officer: “Forest Officer” means any person appointed by name or as holding
an office by, or under the orders of the Government to be a Conservator, Deputy
Conservator, Assistant Conservator [Extra Assistant Conservator] Forest Ranger,
Forester, Forest Guard; or to discharge any function of a Forest Officer under this Act
or any rule made thereunder:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis District Forest Officer: “District Forest
Officer”means the Chief Forest Officer of a District or of a portion of a district, if in
independent charge of such portion.''
14.After the first of the two notifications under Section 4, a proclamation should be made by the
Forest Settlement Officer under Section 6 followed by an enquiry by the Forest Settlement Officer
and there is also a provision for claimants to rights of occupancy and ownership under Section 10.
To be noted, there is also provision for statutory appeal for orders made under Sections 11, 12 & 13.
This is vide Section 14 of said Act. Suffice to say that there is a self contained mechanism qua said
Act regarding a procedure for the Government to constitute land as reserved forest. In the case on
hand the first step in that regard ie., one of the two notifications under Section 4 has been made
albeit quoting a wrong provision of law.
15.This takes us to the complaint of the writ petitioner. The crux and gravamen of the complaint of
the writ petitioner or in other words going by the case file before me, the writ affidavit and
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the submissions of Mr.R.Ramasamy, learned Counsel for writ
petitioner, it is clear that the burden of the song qua writ petitioner is the procedure adumbrated
under said Act for the Government to constitute any land at its disposal as reserved forest has not
been followed. This being the burden of the song of the writ petitioner if the second impugned order
is the first notification under Section 4, if the remaining procedure follows that would douse the writ
petitioner's complaint. When the remaining procedure follows, it is well open to the writ petitioner
to canvass his rights if any in accordance with the said Statute.
16.The burden of the song qua State is that proceedings have been initiated pursuant to earlier order
of Hon'ble Division Bench, entire land is adjacent to the foot hills of Sirumalai hills, the writ
petitioner has encroached the foot hills of Paliyankaradu which is adjacent to a branch of the Odai
Sathayaru where wild animals in Sirumalai hills come here for drinking water in the Odai and the
ecology is at stake.
17.This takes me to the trajectory the captioned writ petition has taken. At the time of inception of
the writ petition a Hon'ble https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Single Judge of this Court has made an
interim order which reads as follows:
'Notice returnable in three weeks. Private notice is also permitted.
2. The petitioner claims to have inhabited the land in question for the past 30 years.
This is also borne out by the proposals sent by the District Forest Officer, to the
District Collector.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155028191/ 6
C.Vellaichamy vs The Secretary on 15 December, 2021
Though the petitioner has not taken a specific point, the petitioner appears to be entitled to
protection under the Scheduled Tribes and Other Traditional Forest Dwellers (Recognition of Forest
Rights) Act, 2006. Therefore, there will be an interim injunction restraining the respondents from
interfering with the possession of the petitioner.'
18.To be noted aforementioned interim order is operating. Another proceedings made by another
Hon'ble Single Judge on 07.08.2019 reads as follows:
'Despite a specific direction to produce the records, neither records nor officials with
instructions are available in Court today. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
2.At joint request, also to enable Mr.Ramasamy to obtain instructions in regard to
W.P.(MD)No.1119 of 2013, list on 20.08.2019.'
19.Pursuant to the aforementioned order, today the revenue records as well as the
records of the Forest Department were placed before me and the learned State
Counsel ie., Mr.A.Baskaran, learned Additional Government Pleader was duly
instructed by a Ranger from the fourth respondent's office and a Deputy Tahsildar on
behalf of respondents 2 & 3.
20.I carefully perused the records. The revenue records more particularly the 'A'
Register for 76 Ramagoundanpatti was placed before me. This revenue record, shows
that entire land has been classified as 'Karadu. I am informed that this necessarily
means that it is jPhi ; t Vw;glhj jhpR fhL [unassessed waste land]. It is not necessary
to dilate further on these factual aspects of the matter as there is no disputation or
disagreement that entire land is clearly land at the disposal of the Government within
the meaning of Section 3 of said Act. To be noted the power of the Government to
constitute entire land as reserved forest is also not subject matter
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of disputation in the captioned writ petition. The
crux of the complaint of the writ petitioner in the captioned writ petition ie., burden
of the song of the writ petitioner is that the procedure under the said Statute has not
been followed. I have dealt with this aspect of the matter and I have also made it clear
that the second impugned order [preceded by the first impugned order] is effectively
the first of the two notifications under Section 4 of the said Act which means the rest
of the mechanism qua said Act for constituting entire land as reserved forest should
follow.
21.Learned State Counsel submits that in deference to the pendency of captioned writ
petition in this Court the next step forward or the next foot forward was not placed
and the matter has remained in abeyance for all these years.
22.The aforementioned interim order dated 28.01.2013 only protects the possession
of the writ petitioner qua said land. Now the respondents will do well to continue the
process from the second impugned order and conclude the same as expeditiously as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155028191/ 7
C.Vellaichamy vs The Secretary on 15 December, 2021
the business of the respondents would permit and in any event within six [6] months
from today ie., on or before 15.06.2022.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Though obvious it is made clear that all these proceedings will
continue and will be concluded uninfluenced by the observations made in this order which are for
the limited purpose of disposal of the captioned main writ petition.
23.Captioned Writ Petition is disposed of in aforesaid manner ie., with the aforementioned
directives. Consequently, the interim order dated 28.01.2013 which is limited to protecting the
possession of the writ petitioner qua said land will continue to operate till conclusion of these
proceedings, ie., up to 15.06.2022. This is vide M.P.No.3/13. With regard to other captioned
W.M.Ps. the same are disposed of as closed. There shall be no order as to costs.
15.12.2021
Index : Yes / No
Internet: Yes / No
MR
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
NOTE: In view of the present lock down
owing to COVID-19 pandemic, a
web copy of the order may be
utilized for official purposes, but,
ensuring that the copy of the order
that is presented is the correct copy,
shall be the responsibility of the
advocate/litigant concerned.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155028191/ 8
C.Vellaichamy vs The Secretary on 15 December, 2021
To
1.The Secretary,
Department of Forest,
St. George Fort,
Chennai.
2.The District Collector,
Madurai District,
Madurai.
3.The District Revenue Officer,
Madurai District,
Madurai.
4.The District Forest Officer,
District Forest Office,
Madurai – 2.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
M.SUNDAR., J.
MR
ORDER MADE IN
15.12.2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155028191/ 9
C.Vellaichamy vs The Secretary on 15 December, 2021
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155028191/ 10
