Chain Singh Aged 72 Years vs The Union Territory Of Jammu And on 18 November, 2023
Chain Singh Aged 72 Years vs The Union Territory Of Jammu
And on 18 November, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU, KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRM(M) No. 366/2020(O&M) Reserved on : 10.11.2023
Pronounced on:. 18.11.2023
Chain Singh aged 72 years .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
S/o. Late Sh. Rawail Singh
R/o. Village Birpur, Tehsil Bari
Brahmana
District Samba
Through: Mr. S. M. Choudhary, Adv.
vs
1. The Union Territory of Jammu and ..... Respondent(s)
Kashmir, th. SHO Police Station,
Bari Brahmana District Samba
2. Sachet Chalotra S/o. Sham Lal
Chalotra R/o. H. No. 548-D Sainik
Colony, Jammu.
Through: Ms. Kavita Devi. Adv. vice
Mr. Vishal Bharti, Dy.AG for No. 1
Mr. Himanshu Beotra, Adv. for No. 2
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. The petitioner has sought the quashing of FIR No. 0007/2020 dated 14.01.2020 registered under
Section 420 IPC with Police Station, Bari Brahamana at the instance of respondent No. 2, on the
ground that from a mere perusal of the FIR, no offence is made out against the petitioner and the
FIR has been lodged by respondent No. 2 just to harass him and settle the civil dispute arisen
between them. It is also stated that it was agreed by the petitioner and the respondent No.2 that out
of total sale consideration of Rs. 5.40 crores, respondent No. 2 shall pay Rs. 1 crore as advance to the
petitioner within three months and after payment of one crore, an agreement to sell would be
executed between the contesting parties. The respondent No. 2 paid only Rs. 30 lacs in total and did
not pay the balance amount of Rs. 70 lacs, as agreed by him, as such, the agreement to sell was not
executed between the contesting parties. In a nutshell, the case projected by the petitioner is that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108862702/ 1
Chain Singh Aged 72 Years vs The Union Territory Of Jammu And on 18 November, 2023
dispute, if any, between the contesting parties, was of civil in nature and no criminality was involved
in the transaction between the parties.
2. Reply stands filed by the respondent No. 2, stating therein that the petitioner had cheated the
respondent No. 2, firstly by projecting him to be the owner of land measuring 30 kanals under
khasra No. 824 situated at Village Birpur and thereafter inducing him to pay Rs. 30 lacs as advance
amount for a land which was not owned and possessed by him. It is further stated by the respondent
No. 2 that the sale consideration was fixed at Rs. 12 lacs per kanal and i.e. 3.60 crores in total and
respondent No. 2 paid Rs. 30 lacs to the petitioner but the petitioner did not execute formal
agreement with the respondent No. 2. The respondent No. 2 kept on requesting the petitioner to
provide original documents in respect of his ownership and subsequently, he came to know that the
petitioner did not own 30 kanals of land mentioned above and was in fact owner of only 5 kanals
and 10 marlas of land comprising khasra No. 824 which too was under the status quo order dated
09.03.2016 passed by the Principal District Judge, Samba i.e. prior to the entering into agreement
with respondent No. 2. The respondent No. 2 has also placed on record the compromise allegedly
executed between the petitioner and respondent No. 2, whereby the petitioner had agreed to return
Rs. 30 lacs within a period of three months to respondent No. 2 but the petitioner did not pay the
same.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner has vehemently argued that the respondent No. 2 was at
fault as he did not pay the balance amount of Rs. 70 lacs, so as to enable the petitioner to execute the
agreement to sell. He further argued that the dispute, if any, is only civil in nature though it has been
given a criminal flavour by the respondent No.2.
4. On the contrary, learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has vehemently argued that the petitioner
had duped the respondent No. 2 of his hard-earned money and did not execute the sale deed in
favour of respondent No. 2. He further argued that the petitioner was not the owner of the land
sought to be sold by him to the respondent No.2 and the FIR cannot be quashed particularly when
the disputed questions of facts are involved.
5. Heard and perused the record.
6. The record reveals that the respondent No. 2 submitted a written report with the respondent No. 1
on 14.01.2020 and on receipt of which, FIR bearing No. 0007/2020 under section 420 IPC was
registered. The contents of the application submitted by the respondent No. 2 are extracted as
under:
"Brief facts of the case are that today on 14.01.2020, Complainant namely Sachet
Chalotra S/o. Sh. Sham Lal Chalotra R/o. 548-D, Sainik Colony reported at this P/S
and lodged a written report in English for registration of FIR. The content of the
application is as under: The SHO Bari Brahmana Samba. Subject-Complaint against
Chain Singh S/o. Rawail Singh R/o Birpur. Sir, Most respectfully, it is to bring in
your notice that one Chain Singh S/o RewailSingh R/o Birpur has offered me a land
measuring 30 kanal bearing khasra No. 824 of Rs. 30 lacs in the year 2016. I agreed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108862702/ 2
Chain Singh Aged 72 Years vs The Union Territory Of Jammu And on 18 November, 2023
with the said offer and paid said amount to the Chain Singh for making registry and
land in question in my favour. The said person has not made the registry of the land
on my name till date and always defer the same on the one pretext as the other. I
have made every effort to get the registry of land on my name as taking the given
amount back but all in vain and left with no other alternative except to approach the
legal quarter in this regard said person cheated me by doing fraud to taking rupees
30 lacs. FIR in this regard may be lodged against Chain Singh on the basis of my
instant complaint. Your faithfully Sd/- in English of Sachet Chalotra S/o Sham Lal
Chalotra R/o. 548-D Sainik Colony, 7006435809. On the content of application, the
instant case FIR No. 07/2020 under section 420IPC has been registered at this P/S
and investigation of the case is entrusted to SI Chetan Kumar No. Exj-109590. All
Copies of FIR will be submitted to the concerned offices."
7. A mere perusal of the impugned FIR would reveal that in the year 2016, the petitioner offered to
sell a land measuring 30 kanals comprising khasra No. 824, situated at Village Birpur, Tehsil Bari
Brahamana, District Samba and the respondent No. 2 accepted the offer and paid an amount of Rs.
30 lacs to the petitioner but the petitioner did not execute the sale deed in favour of respondent No.
2. The petitioner has placed on record the notice served upon the respondent No. 2 and also the
reply submitted by respondent No. 2. In the notice and reply, the petitioners and respondent No. 2
have denied the allegations levelled against each other.
8. The sole grievance projected by the petitioner is that even after receipt of Rs.
30 lacs, the petitioner did not execute the sale deed in favour of respondent No. 2 and even the
compromise agreement dated 15.10.2019 placed on record by the petitioner would show that the
respondent No. 2 was interested only in getting back the amount of Rs. 30 lacs paid by him to the
petitioner. From a mere perusal of FIR, it is evident that there is no averment that the petitioner at
any point of time deceived the respondent No. 2 to part away with the money. The element of
deception is absolutely missing in the allegations levelled by respondent No. 2 in the FIR. In absence
of deception on the part of the petitioner, thereby inducing the respondent No. 2 to part away with
the money, the petitioner cannot be prosecuted for commission of offence under Section 420 IPC. In
order to prosecute an accused for commission of offence under Section 420 IPC, the ingredients of
offence of cheating as defined under Section 415 IPC must exist in the complaint. So far as offence
under section 420 IPC is concerned, the Apex Court in R. K. Vijayasarathy v. Sudha Seetharam,
reported in (2019) 16 SCC 739, has observed:
15. Section 415 of the Penal Code reads thus:
"415. Cheating.--Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly
induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent
that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so
deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so
deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or harm to
that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to "cheat"."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108862702/ 3
Chain Singh Aged 72 Years vs The Union Territory Of Jammu And on 18 November, 2023
16. The ingredients to constitute an offence of cheating are as follows:
16.1. There should be fraudulent or dishonest inducement of a person by deceiving
him:
16.1.1. The person so induced should be intentionally induced to deliver any property
to any person or to consent that any person shall retain any property, or 16.1.2. The
person so induced should be intentionally induced to do or to omit to do anything
which he would not do or omit if he were not so deceived; and 16.2. In cases covered
by 16.1.2. above, the act or omission should be one which caused or is likely to cause
damage or harm to the person induced in body, mind, reputation or property.
17. A fraudulent or dishonest inducement is an essential ingredient of the offence. A
person who dishonestly induces another person to deliver any property is liable for
the offence of cheating.
18. Section 420 of the Penal Code reads thus:
"420. Cheating and dishonestly inducing delivery of property.--
Whoever cheats and thereby dishonestly induces the person deceived to deliver any property to any
person, or to make, alter or destroy the whole or any part of a valuable security, or anything which is
signed or sealed, and which is capable of being converted into a valuable security, shall be punished
with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to seven years, and shall also
be liable to fine."
19. The ingredients to constitute an offence under Section 420 are as follows:
19.1. A person must commit the offence of cheating under Section 415; and 19.2. The
person cheated must be dishonestly induced to
(a) deliver property to any person; or
(b) make, alter or destroy valuable security or anything signed or sealed and capable
of being converted into valuable security.
20. Cheating is an essential ingredient for an act to constitute an offence under
Section 420.
9. Otherwise also, it is evident that there is civil dispute between the contesting parties and the
respondent No. 2 in order to avoid lengthy civil litigation has resorted to shortcut method of
registering FIR, thereby forcing the petitioner to return back an amount of Rs. 30 lacs to him. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court in catena of decisions has deprecated such practice on the part of the
litigants to seek redressal of their civil grievances by launching criminal proceedings against other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108862702/ 4
Chain Singh Aged 72 Years vs The Union Territory Of Jammu And on 18 November, 2023
party. Reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Indian Oil
Corpn. v. NEPC India Ltd., (2006) 6 SCC 736, wherein it has been held as under:
13. While on this issue, it is necessary to take notice of a growing tendency in
business circles to convert purely civil disputes into criminal cases. This is obviously
on account of a prevalent impression that civil law remedies are time consuming and
do not adequately protect the interests of lenders/creditors. Such a tendency is seen
in several family disputes also, leading to irretrievable breakdown of
marriages/families. There is also an impression that if a person could somehow be
entangled in a criminal prosecution, there is a likelihood of imminent settlement. Any
effort to settle civil disputes and claims, which do not involve any criminal offence, by
applying pressure through criminal prosecution should be deprecated and
discouraged. In G. Sagar Suri v. State of U.P. this Court observed:
"It is to be seen if a matter, which is essentially of a civil nature, has been given a
cloak of criminal offence. Criminal proceedings are not a short cut of other remedies
available in law. Before issuing process a criminal court has to exercise a great deal of
caution. For the accused it is a serious matter. This Court has laid certain principles
on the basis of which the High Court is to exercise its jurisdiction under Section 482
of the Code. Jurisdiction under this section has to be exercised to prevent abuse of
the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice."
14. While no one with a legitimate cause or grievance should be prevented from seeking remedies
available in criminal law, a complainant who initiates or persists with a prosecution, being fully
aware that the criminal proceedings are unwarranted and his remedy lies only in civil law, should
himself be made accountable, at the end of such misconceived criminal proceedings, in accordance
with law. One positive step that can be taken by the courts, to curb unnecessary prosecutions and
harassment of innocent parties, is to exercise their power under Section 250 CrPC more frequently,
where they discern malice or frivolousness or ulterior motives on the part of the complainant.
(emphasis added)
10. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Rajendra Singh Tomar and ors.
vs. State of Uttarakhand and ors.2020 (1) R.C.R (Criminal) 476) has held as under:
"5. Having heard the arguments of learned senior counsel appearing for the
appellants and the learned counsel appearing for Respondent No. 4 at length and
considering the material placed before us, we are of the considered view that there is
no ingredient of criminal offence mentioned in the complaint and charge-sheet.
Execution of the documents between the two appellants is not disputed by the
parties, albeit the fourth respondent claims that the land mentioned therein is owned
by the said company and not by the second appellant. The dispute between appellant
No. 2 and the fourth respondent, even if the claim of the second appellant is incorrect
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108862702/ 5
Chain Singh Aged 72 Years vs The Union Territory Of Jammu And on 18 November, 2023
and wrong, at best would disclose a civil dispute. Execution of special power of
attorney or memorandum of understanding by the second appellant in favour of or
with the first appellant would not make the power of attorney or the memorandum of
understanding a fabricated or forged document. It is to be noticed that the second
appellant has stated that the land originally belonged to her father and in the year
1972 was transferred by him to her mother, and the latter in 1995 had applied for
mutation of the land in her name before the Consolidation Officer. The second
appellant also relies upon the power of attorney executed by her mother in favour of
one of the employees of the fourth respondent which was renewed in the year 2000
before being revoked in 2008. The second appellant claims ownership by way of
succession on death of her mother in 2009. The fourth respondent, on the other
hand, relies upon the conduct of the father of the second appellant, who at one time
was one of its Directors and the factum that the fourth respondent had challenged
proceedings and orders passed under the Ceiling Act before the authorities and then
in the High Court. Father of the second appellant had accepted and acknowledged
that the fourth respondent was the owner of the land. The fourth respondent also
relies upon the power of attorney executed by the mother of the second appellant in
favour of the employee of the fourth respondent.
6. We have referred to the aforesaid facts and assertions made by the two sides only
to highlight the respective claims on the land. Clearly the dispute relates to claim of
title of the land. We do not think execution of special power of attorney or signing of
the memorandum relating to the land, which the fourth respondent claims is owned
by them, by itself indicates and shows commission of a criminal offence. Ex facie, the
allegations do not disclose commission of a criminal offence. The fourth respondent,
if required and necessary, can take recourse to civil action and assert their claim and
title to the land. A civil wrong need not result in a criminal offence."
(emphasis added)
11. In view of the above, the present petition is allowed. FIR No. 0007/2020 dated 14.01.2020,
registered with Police Station, Bari Brahamana for offence under Section 420 IPC is quashed.
(RAJNESH OSWAL) JUDGE Jammu 18.11.2023 Rakesh Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/108862702/ 6
