Chandan Singh Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 February, 2021
Chandan Singh Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25
February, 2021
Author: Gurpal Singh Ahluwalia
Bench: Gurpal Singh Ahluwalia
1
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
W.P. No. 8763 of 2018
Chandan Singh Jatav Vs. State of M.P.
Gwalior, dated 25-2-2021 (Final Hearing)
Shri Prashant Sharma, Counsel for the Petitioner.
Shri G.K. Agrawal, Govt. Advocate for the respondents/ State.
This petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India has been filed against the order dated
16-1-2017 passed by respondent no.1 by which the punishment of termination imposed by
respondent no. 3, has been modified to Compulsory Retirement.
The facts necessary for disposal of this petition in short are that the petitioner was working as Forest
Guard. A charge sheet dated 11- 12-2010 was issued to the petitioner on the following charges :
1. After revocation of his suspension order on 22-8-2009, the petitioner remained on
unauthorized absence till 24-11-2009.
2. Letter dated 31-10-2009 was sent to the petitioner thereby directing him to report
on duty. When the peons were affixing the letter on the wall of the house of the
petitioner, then they were attacked by the wife and son of the petitioner, and the cycle
of the peons was snatched.
3. The petitioner was posted as O.S.D. In game range Sabalgarh, but he is on an
unauthorized absence from 1-7-2010.
The departmental enquiry was conducted. The Dy. D.F.O. was appointed as enquiry officer. The
petitioner did not file any reply to the charge sheet, but participated in the enquiry. The enquiry
officer, in his enquiry report found that all the charges were proved. Accordingly, a show cause
notice was issued to the petitioner, along with the enquiry report, but he did not respond, and
demanded additional documents. Accordingly, he was informed that all the documents which were
relied upon the enquiry officer, have already HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Chandan
Singh Jatav Vs. State of M.P. been provided to him. Accordingly, a reminder was sent for submitting
his reply by 20-7-2013. The letter sent by respondent no.3 was received by the petitioner on
15-7-2013, but he did not respond to the show cause notice. Then again another letter dated 23-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167972949/ 1
Chandan Singh Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 February, 2021
3-2013 was sent, thereby giving a further opportunity to file his reply, but the petitioner did not
respond although the reminder was received by him on 2-9-2013.
Accordingly, the disciplinary authority perused the record. So far as the charge no. 2 is concerned, it
was held that the witnesses had failed to identify the assailants as son and wife of the petitioner and
accordingly, it was held that charge no.2 was not found proved, but the enquiry report with regard to
charge no.1 and 3 was accepted. For considering the question of punishment, the respondent no. 3
also considered the previous conduct of the petitioner and found that in the year 1985, warning was
given for his negligence in discharge of duties. In the year 2001, a punishment of withholding of one
increment without cumulative effect was imposed for remaining on unauthorized absence. Similarly
in the year 2006, he was given censure for negligence in his duties. In the year 2009, warning was
given for misbehaving with store keeper. In the year 2012, a departmental enquiry was conducted
and punishment of reduction of his pay scale to the minimum of his pay scale till his superannuation
was awarded. Thus, considering the previous conduct of the HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH Chandan Singh Jatav Vs. State of M.P. petitioner, the punishment of termination from
service was imposed.
Being aggrieved by the order of punishment, the petitioner preferred an appeal, which was partially
allowed and the punishment of termination was modified to compulsory retirement.
Challenging the punishment of compulsory retirement, it is submitted by the Counsel for the
petitioner, that since, the petitioner was seriously sick, therefore, he could not report on his duty
and the punishment of compulsory retirement is shockingly disproportionate. It is further
submitted that the order of punishment is bad in law on the ground of double jeopardy. It is further
submitted that since, the order of revocation of suspension was not served on the petitioner,
therefore, when the notice in this regard was published in the news paper, then the petitioner,
immediately submitted his joining. It is further submitted that since, the petitioner was paid
subsistence allowance till 24-11-2009, therefore, it is clear that although the order of revocation of
suspension was issued on 22-8-2009, but the department, itself was treating the petitioner under
suspension by making payment of subsistence allowance. It is further submitted that the Appellate
Authority has also considered the ACRs of the last 10 years, which was never brought to the
knowledge of the petitioner, therefore, the procedure adopted by the Appellate Authority is contrary
to the principles of Natural Justice.
Per contra, the Counsel for the State has supported the order HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH Chandan Singh Jatav Vs. State of M.P. passed by the Appellate Authority. It is submitted
that the Appellate Authority has already taken a very lenient view by imposing the punishment of
compulsory retirement. The petitioner was working on the post of Forest Guard, and his
antecedents show that he was very negligent in discharge of his duties. When the petitioner was
transferred from Game Range Sabalgarh to Atarghat Game Range, Sabalgarh, then he remained on
unauthorized absence. The Forest Guard has an onerous duty of protecting the forest, and any
negligence in discharge of duty is a serious misconduct.
Heard the learned Counsel for the parties.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167972949/ 2
Chandan Singh Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 February, 2021
Before, considering the submissions made by the Counsel for the parties, this Court thinks it
apposite to consider the scope of judicial interference in the matters of departmental enquiries.
The Supreme Court in the case of Apparel Export Promotion Council v. A.K. Chopra, reported in
(1999) 1 SCC 759 has held as under :-
''16. The High Court appears to have overlooked the settled position that in
departmental proceedings, the disciplinary authority is the sole judge of facts and in
case an appeal is presented to the appellate authority, the appellate authority has also
the power/and jurisdiction to reappreciate the evidence and come to its own
conclusion, on facts, being the sole fact- finding authorities. Once findings of fact,
based on appreciation of evidence are recorded, the High Court in writ jurisdiction
may not normally interfere with those factual findings unless it finds that the
recorded findings were based either on no evidence or that the findings were wholly
perverse and/or legally HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Chandan Singh
Jatav Vs. State of M.P. untenable. The adequacy or inadequacy of the evidence is not
permitted to be canvassed before the High Court. Since the High Court does not sit as
an appellate authority over the factual findings recorded during departmental
proceedings, while exercising the power of judicial review, the High Court cannot,
normally speaking, substitute its own conclusion, with regard to the guilt of the
delinquent, for that of the departmental authorities. Even insofar as imposition of
penalty or punishment is concerned, unless the punishment or penalty imposed by
the disciplinary or the departmental appellate authority, is either impermissible or
such that it shocks the conscience of the High Court, it should not normally substitute
its own opinion and impose some other punishment or penalty. Both the learned
Single Judge and the Division Bench of the High Court, it appears, ignored the
well-settled principle that even though judicial review of administrative action must
remain flexible and its dimension not closed, yet the court, in exercise of the power of
judicial review, is not concerned with the correctness of the findings of fact on the
basis of which the orders are made so long as those findings are reasonably supported
by evidence and have been arrived at through proceedings which cannot be faulted
with for procedural illegalities or irregularities which vitiate the process by which the
decision was arrived at. Judicial review, it must be remembered, is directed not
against the decision, but is confined to the examination of the decision-making
process. Lord Hailsham in Chief Constable of the North Wales Police v. Evans
observed:
"The purpose of judicial review is to ensure that the individual receives fair
treatment, and not to ensure that the authority, after according fair treatment,
reaches, on a matter which it is authorized or enjoined by law to decide for itself, a
conclusion which is correct in the eyes of the court."
17. Judicial review, not being an appeal from a decision, but a review of the manner in which the
decision was arrived at, the court, while exercising the power of judicial review, must remain
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167972949/ 3
Chandan Singh Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 February, 2021
conscious of the fact that if the decision has been arrived at by the administrative authority after
following the principles HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Chandan Singh Jatav Vs. State of
M.P. established by law and the rules of natural justice and the individual has received a fair
treatment to meet the case against him, the court cannot substitute its judgment for that of the
administrative authority on a matter which fell squarely within the sphere of jurisdiction of that
authority.
18. It is useful to note the following observations of this Court in Union of India v. Sardar Bahadur:
(SCC p. 623, para 15) "Where there are some relevant materials which the authority has accepted
and which materials may reasonably support the conclusion that the officer is guilty, it is not the
function of the High Court, exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226, to review the materials and
to arrive at an independent finding on the materials. If the enquiry has been properly held, the
question of adequacy or reliability of the evidence cannot be canvassed before the High Court."
19. After a detailed review of the law on the subject, this Court, while dealing with the jurisdiction of
the High Court or Tribunal to interfere with the disciplinary matters and punishment in Union of
India v. Parma Nanda opined: (SCC p. 189, para 27) "27. We must unequivocally state that the
jurisdiction of the Tribunal to interfere with the disciplinary matters or punishment cannot be
equated with an appellate jurisdiction. The Tribunal cannot interfere with the findings of the
enquiry officer or competent authority where they are not arbitrary or utterly perverse. It is
appropriate to remember that the power to impose penalty on a delinquent officer is conferred on
the competent authority either by an Act of legislature or rules made under the proviso to Article
309 of the Constitution. If there has been an enquiry consistent with the rules and in accordance
with principles of natural justice, what punishment would meet the ends of justice is a matter
exclusively within the jurisdiction of the competent authority. If the penalty can lawfully be imposed
and is imposed on the proved misconduct, the Tribunal has no power to substitute its own
discretion for that of the authority."
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Chandan Singh Jatav Vs. State of M.P. The Supreme Court
in the case of Mithilesh Singh v. Union of India, reported in (2003) 3 SCC 309 has held as under :-
''9. The only other plea is regarding punishment awarded. As has been observed in a
series of cases, the scope of interference with punishment awarded by a disciplinary
authority is very limited and unless the punishment appears to be shockingly
disproportionate, the court cannot interfere with the same. Reference may be made
to a few of them. (See: B.C. Chaturvedi v. Union of India, State of U.P. v. Ashok
Kumar Singh, Union of India v. G. Ganayutham, Union of India v. J.R. Dhiman and
Om Kumar v. Union of India.)'' The Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. P.
Gunasekaran, reported in (2015) 2 SCC 610 has held as under :-
''12. Despite the well-settled position, it is painfully disturbing to note that the High
Court has acted as an appellate authority in the disciplinary proceedings,
reappreciating even the evidence before the enquiry officer. The finding on Charge I
was accepted by the disciplinary authority and was also endorsed by the Central
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167972949/ 4
Chandan Singh Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 February, 2021
Administrative Tribunal. In disciplinary proceedings, the High Court is not and
cannot act as a second court of first appeal. The High Court, in exercise of its powers
under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, shall not venture into
reappreciation of the evidence. The High Court can only see whether:
(a) the enquiry is held by a competent authority;
(b) the enquiry is held according to the procedure prescribed in that behalf;
(c) there is violation of the principles of natural justice in conducting the
proceedings;
(d) the authorities have disabled themselves from reaching a fair conclusion by some
considerations extraneous to the evidence and merits of the case;
(e) the authorities have allowed themselves to be influenced by irrelevant or
extraneous considerations;
(f) the conclusion, on the very face of it, is so wholly arbitrary and capricious that no
reasonable HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Chandan Singh Jatav Vs. State of
M.P. person could ever have arrived at such conclusion;
(g) the disciplinary authority had erroneously failed to admit the admissible and
material evidence;
(h) the disciplinary authority had erroneously admitted inadmissible evidence which
influenced the finding;
(i) the finding of fact is based on no evidence.
13. Under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution of India, the High Court shall not:
(i) reappreciate the evidence;
(ii) interfere with the conclusions in the enquiry, in case the same has been
conducted in accordance with law;
(iii) go into the adequacy of the evidence;
(iv) go into the reliability of the evidence;
(v) interfere, if there be some legal evidence on which findings can be based.
(vi) correct the error of fact however grave it may appear to be;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167972949/ 5
Chandan Singh Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 February, 2021
(vii) go into the proportionality of punishment unless it shocks its conscience.'' For
unauthorized absence of the petitioner, from service from 1-7-2010 is concerned, it is
submitted by the Counsel for the petitioner, that since, he was seriously ill, therefore,
it cannot be said that he was on unauthorized absence. It is further submitted that
after submitting his joining on 15-6-2011, the petitioner submitted his medical
certificates on 22-6-2011.
Considered the submissions made by the Counsel for the petitioner.
It is the case of the petitioner, that on 22-6-2011, he had submitted his medical certificate, however,
it is fairly conceded, that HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Chandan Singh Jatav Vs. State of
M.P. neither the petitioner had filed any application for grant of medical leave during the period of
his absence, nor had filed any copy of medical prescription or receipt of purchase of medicines.
Further, it is also admitted that the petitioner never applied for re- reimbursement of his medical
expenses. Thus, it is clear that the contention of the petitioner that he was medically sick was rightly
not accepted by the Authorities. Further, this Court while exercising its powers under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India, cannot act as an Appellate Court and cannot substitute its own findings.
The petitioner has not raised any objection with regard to the procedure adopted in the
Departmental Enquiry. He was duly served with Charge sheet. It is the case of the petitioner, that
the disciplinary authority after issuing show cause notice along with the enquiry report, did not
supply the documents sought by the petitioner, therefore, the entire procedure was vitiated.
However, the Counsel for the petitioner could not point out the relevance of the documents sought
by the Petitioner. Mere non-supply of every document sought by the delinquent officer, would not
vitiate the departmental enquiry, unless and until, it is established by the delinquent officer, that
non- supply of documents had caused serious prejudice to him. Further, not only the copy of the
enquiry report was supplied to the petitioner, but all the documents, which were relied upon by the
department were also supplied.
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Chandan Singh Jatav Vs. State of M.P. The Supreme Court
in the case of Pandit D. Aher v. State of Maharashtra, reported in (2007) 1 SCC 445 has held as
under :-
''10.....A finding of fact has been arrived at that a copy of the inquiry report was
supplied to him. A copy of the document which has not been relied upon, is not
required to be supplied to a delinquent officer. The documents which are required to
be supplied are only those whereupon reliance has been placed by the department.''
The Supreme Court in the case of Chandrama Tewari v.
Union of India, reported in 1987 Supp SCC 518 has held as under :
''4......However, it is not necessary that each and every document must be supplied to
the delinquent government servant facing the charges, instead only material and
relevant documents are necessary to be supplied to him. If a document even though
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167972949/ 6
Chandan Singh Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 February, 2021
mentioned in the memo of charges is not relevant to the charges or if it is not referred
to or relied upon by the enquiry officer or the punishing authority in holding the
charges proved against the government servant, no exception can be taken to the
validity of the proceedings or the order. If the document is not used against the party
charged the ground of violation of principles of natural justice cannot successfully be
raised. The violation of principles of natural justice arises only when a document,
copy of which may not have been supplied to the party charged when demanded is
used in recording finding of guilt against him. On a careful consideration of the
authorities cited on behalf of the appellant we find that the obligation to supply
copies of a document is confined only to material and relevant documents and the
enquiry would be vitiated only if the non-supply of material and relevant documents
when demanded may have caused prejudice to the delinquent officer.'' Thus,
non-supply of relevant documents on which the department has placed reliance
would be fatal to the departmental HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH Chandan
Singh Jatav Vs. State of M.P. procedure. However, the Counsel for the petitioner, has
not pointed out the documents which were sought by the petitioner and its relevance.
However, while rejecting the prayer of the petitioner, for supply of documents, it was
observed by the respondent no.3, that all documents on which reliance has been
placed by the department have already been supplied to the petitioner. The petitioner
could not controvert the above mentioned observation of the respondent no.3.
So far as the consideration of ACRs of 10 years of the petitioner is concerned, this
Court is of the considered opinion, that no illegality has been committed by the
Appellate Authority by doing so for the purposes of deciding the quantum of
punishment. In fact, the Appellate Authority has modified the punishment order
from that of termination to Compulsory Retirement.
So far as the question of double jeopardy is concerned, the Counsel for the petitioner
has not filed any document to show that for the charges levelled against the petitioner
in the charge sheet in question, the petitioner was already punished. Therefore, the
principle of double jeopardy has no application to the facts and circumstances of the
case.
Further the petitioner did not file any reply to the charge sheet as it is clear from the
enquiry report (Annexure R/2) as well as to the show cause notice issued by the
Disciplinary Authority.
Looking to the charges levelled against the petitioner, this HIGH COURT OF
MADHYA PRADESH Chandan Singh Jatav Vs. State of M.P. Court is of the
considered opinion, that the punishment of compulsory retirement cannot be said to
be shockingly disproportionate to the conscience of the Court.
Accordingly, the petition fails and is hereby dismissed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167972949/ 7
Chandan Singh Jatav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 February, 2021
(G.S. Ahluwalia) Judge MAHENDRA KUMAR BARIK 2021.03.02 10:50:29 +05'30'
VALSALA VASUDEVAN 2018.10.26 15:14:29 -07'00'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167972949/ 8
