Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
Author: G.Jayachandran
Bench: G.Jayachandran
W.P.(MD)No.5417 of 2016
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
Reserved on : 17.03.2020
Delivered on : 20.03.2020
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE DR.JUSTICE G.JAYACHANDRAN
W.P.(MD)No.5417 of 2016
Chelliah, S/o.K.S.Kasinathan .. Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Principal Secretary,
Government of Tamil Nadu,
Home Department (Police),
Fort St. George,
Chennai.
2.The Director General of Police,
Kamarajar Salai,
Chennai.
3.The Inspector General of Police,
South Zone,
Race Course, Madurai.
4.The District Collector,
Tirunelveli District,
Tirunelveli.
1/27
http://www.judis.nic.in
(cid:12) W.P.(MD)No.5417 of 2016
5.S.Syed Ibrahim .. Respondents
[R5 impleaded vide order dated 06.03.2020, made in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27886235/ 1
Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
W.M.P.(MD)No.14538/2019 in W.P.(MD)No.5417/2016]
Prayer:- Petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
seeking for issuance of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the respondents to
pay compensation of Rs.5,00,000/- or above for the atrocities against the
petitioner in Crime No.62 of 2011, on the file of City Crime Branch,
Tirunelveli, within a time frame to be fixed by this Court.
For Petitioner : Mr.R.J.Karthick
For R1 to R4 : Mr.S.Chandrasekar
Additional Public Prosecutor
For R5 : Mr.M.Subash Babu
ORDER
The writ petitioner herein is an Engineering Graduate and also qualified Class-I Contractor at State
Level in the Highways Department. In response to the tender notification dated 24.08.2011, issued
by the Highways Department, calling for tender pertaining to 86 works in Tirunelveli District, the
writ petitioner has applied with necessary Pay Order for issuance of tender schedule. The Divisional
Engineer, National http://www.judis.nic.in Highways, Tirunelveli, has refused to give him the
tender schedule. On representation to the Higher Officials, the Divisional Engineer gave the tender
schedule to the writ petitioner and on his application, the work in Serial No.10 in the said
Notification was sanctioned to him. To receive the work order, the writ petitioner went to the Office
of the Divisional Engineer, National Highways on 25.11.2011. Mr.Soundarrajan, Divisional Engineer
of National Highways, alleged to have demanded a sum of Rs.1,31,000/- as illegal gratification for
issuance of work order. The writ petitioner not inclined to give illegal gratification, has preferred a
complaint to the Vigilance and Anti-Corruption, Tirunelveli, on 29.11.2011 and the same was
registered as Crime No.3 of 2011.
2.While so, the Contractor by name, R.S.Murugan and other Contractors developed grudge over the
writ petitioner for giving complaint against the Divisional Engineer, who was very much favourable
to them. Hence, they have hatched conspiracy and gave a complaint before the City Crime Branch,
Tirunelveli, as if on 15.10.2009, one E.Murugan borrowed Rs.3,50,000/- from the writ petitioner to
meet out his daughter's marriage http://www.judis.nic.in expenses, for which, the writ petitioner
charged exorbitant interest at the rate of 10% per month and also obtained four blank promissory
notes and original title deed of the said E.Murugan. In the complaint, it was stated that the borrower
E.Murugan was regularly paying the interest of Rs. 35,000/- per month from the date of borrowing
till October 2011. On 15.10.2011, the writ petitioner came to his house and received the principal
amount of Rs.3,50,000/-. When the complainant demanded back the signed promissory notes and
original title deed, the writ petitioner has promised to return the same within two days. But, after
two days, when the complainant went to the house of the writ petitioner, again, he gave some excuse
that the documents are with his Uncle. His family members became suspicious about the conduct of
the writ petitioner. The complainant on 15.10.2011 went to the house of the writ petitioner and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27886235/ 2
Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
insisted upon return of documents. At that time, the writ petitioner alleged to have abused and
threatened the complainant. When the complainant insisted upon return of documents, the writ
petitioner attacked him on chest and stomach and tried to assault him with Aruval.
http://www.judis.nic.in
3.Upon receiving the complaint, Mr.S.Syed Ibrahim, Assistant Commissioner of Police, City Crime
Branch, fifth respondent herein, has registered a case in Crime No.62 of 2011, against the writ
petitioner for the offences under Sections 294(b), 506(ii), 420 and 384 IPC and Section 4 of the
Tamil Nadu Prohibition of Charging Exorbitant Interest Act.
4.The sequence of the complaint is that, for the incident, which alleged to have been taken place on
15.12.2011, one E.Murugan has given a complaint on 16.12.2011 and the same was received and a
case was registered on 17.12.2011 by the said S.Syed Ibrahim, Assistant Commissioner of Police. On
the same day, the writ petitioner was arrested and remanded to judicial custody. The writ petitioner
came out on bail after 13 days. Meanwhile, the wife of the writ petitioner has sent representation to
the authorities stating that there was no transaction between the complainant E.Murugan and her
husband Chelliah as alleged in the complaint. The entire complaint is a concocted story, fabricated
by R.S.Murugan, Contractor and E.Natarajan, Contractor [Brother of http://www.judis.nic.in
E.Murugan, Complainant], to settle score with her husband Chelliah, who has given complaint
against the Divisional Engineer of National Highways Department to the Vigilance and
Anti-Corruption, Tirunelveli.
5.According to the writ petitioner, the complaint of E.Murugan alleging demand of exorbitant
interest and money transaction is a false one. The fifth respondent, Assistant Commissioner of
Police without proper enquiry, in order to help the complainant E.Murugan and his brother
E.Natarajan, has entertained the complaint as a retaliation to the complaint in Crime No.3 of 2011,
given by the writ petitioner before the Vigilance and Anti-Corruption, Tirunelveli.
6.The petitioner's contention is that the complaint, in which, he was arrested and remanded to
judicial custody for 13 days by the fifth respondent was subsequently investigated by the Inspector
of Police, Organized Crime Unit, CBCID, Tirunelveli, and final report was filed on 07.01.2013,
closing the complaint as it was a false one. http://www.judis.nic.in
7.The petitioner claims that in view of the illegal confinement, his reputation and career have
spoiled and his income has come to nil. Because, he has given a genuine complaint against the
public servant namely, Soundarrajan, Divisional Engineer, as a counter-blast, the associates of the
Said Soundarrajan and other Contractors have lodged a false complaint against him through
E.Murugan. The fifth respondent – S.Syed Ibrahim, Assistant Commissioner of Police in connivance
with the associates of the said Soundarrajan, has registered the false complaint, arrested the writ
petitioner and remanded him to judicial custody without following the procedure contemplated
under the law and in violation of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Hence, the State is
vicariously liable for the misdeed of its Servant namely, S.Syed Ibrahim, Assistant Commissioner of
Police, Tirunelveli and therefore, direction is sought to pay Rs.5,00,000/- as compensation for the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27886235/ 3
Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
atrocities faced by the writ petitioner.
8.The specific contention of the writ petitioner is that as a counter- blast to his complaint in Crime
No.3 of 2011 against Soundarrajan, http://www.judis.nic.in Divisional Engineer, National
Highways, through E.Murugan and S.Syed Ibrahim, Crime No.62 of 2011 was registered against him
and was arrested. Later, it was found to be false and the same was closed. This clearly indicating that
the said S.Syed Ibrahim, Assistant Commissioner of Police, has fallen into the hands of E.Natarajan
and R.S.Murugan, Contractors. Being the Principal and act being a sovereign function, the State is
liable to pay compensation of Rs.5,00,000/- to the writ petitioner.
9.The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner would further submit that the final report in
Crime No.62 of 2011, in which, the writ petitioner was arrested and remanded to judicial custody for
13 days would clearly show that the complaint is a fertile imagination emanated from R.S.Murugan
and others, in which, S.Syed Ibrahim, Assistant Commissioner of Police, has connived with them
and arrested the writ petitioner without following the procedure under law. The final report at
length disclosed about the various dispute between the writ petitioner and R.S.Murugan. The
conclusion of the Investigation Officer as found in the final report is that at the instigation of
R.S.Murugan, his associate E.Natarajan through his http://www.judis.nic.in brother E.Murugan,
has given a false complaint against the writ petitioner. The fifth respondent viz., S.Syed Ibrahim,
Assistant Commissioner of Police, City Crime Branch, without proper investigation, has registered
the case and in haste, arrested the writ petitioner and remanded him to judicial custody and the
complaint of E.Murugan was found to be a false one on conducting enquiry.
10.From the affidavit averments and the documents relied by the writ petitioner, it appears that the
criminal complaint given by E.Murugan, in which, the writ petitioner was arrested and remanded to
judicial custody, later found to be a false complaint after examining 88 witnesses. For foisting false
complaint, the writ petitioner holds the State to be vicariously liable and has filed the present Writ
Petition seeking compensation of Rs.5,00,000/- against the respondents 1 to 4.
11.Pending disposal of the writ petition, S.Syed Ibrahim, Assistant Commissioner of Police, against
whom, serious allegations made, has taken out a petition to get himself impleaded as a respondent.
This Court has http://www.judis.nic.in allowed that impleading petition on 06.03.2020, since
certain averments have been made in the Writ Petition questioning the style of his function while
discharging his duty as Assistant Commissioner of Police. In the affidavit filed in support of the
impleading petition, the said S.Syed Ibrahim, who is impleaded as fifth respondent, has placed his
version about the allegation as under:-
''2. I state that the entire allegation made against me in the writ petition is totally
false and concocted one. Actually I received a current paper from the Commissioner
of Police, Tirunelveli City, on 16.12.2011 with endorsement to take appropriate action.
When I gone through the complaint it is seen that the defacto complainant namely
E.Murugan has asked a loan of Rs.3,50,000/- for interest from the writ petitioner.
Accordingly the writ petitioner paid the amount of Rs.3,50,000/- for 10% interest on
16.10.2009, further for security purpose the writ petitioner demanded and collected
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27886235/ 4
Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
unfilled promissory notes and original property documents from the defacto
complainant. As per the terms and conditions, the de-
facto complainant paid the interest perfectly upto month http://www.judis.nic.in of October 2011
without fail. Since the interest is the very huge the de-facto complainant borrowed debt from his
relatives and his known sources and accordingly, paid the borrowed loan amount of Rs.3,50,000/-
with interest to the writ petitioner on 15.10.2011 and de- facto complainant requested the writ
petitioner to return the documents and pro-notes, which were collected by him for security purpose.
On the other hand, the petitioner informed that he kept all the documents in his uncle's house, who
gone to tour and assured that he will hand over the documents within 2 days.
3. I state that thereafter in spite of multiple approaches the writ petitioner told some evasive reasons
and failed to return the documents. Ultimately, on 15.12.2011 the de-facto complainant went to the
writ petitioner's house and requested him to return the documents, where the writ petitioner
demanded some amount. When the de-facto complainant refused to pay the amount, writ petitioner
entered quarrel with the de- facto complainant and made a serious life threat and also attempt to
assault him with weapons. Further, he informed that his intention is to get all his property by filing
cases against him using the documents. Further, it http://www.judis.nic.in is seen in the complaint
that the writ petitioner threatened the de-facto complainant with dire consequence and also
threatened that if again he came to his home, surely he will murder.
4. I state that on bare reading of the complaint, it is disclosed that there is a strong prima-facie case
against the writ petitioner, further the Commissioner of Police has forwarded the complaint with
endorsement to conduct personal enquiry and take appropriate action. On perusal of the complaint,
there is ingredient of cheating, extortion, attempt to assault using weapons and not handed over his
documents and also demanded high rate of interest. Therefore, I registered the case in Crime
No.62/2011 for offence under Sections 294(b), 384, 506(i) and 420 of IPC and Section 4 of Tamil
Nadu Prevention of charging Exorbitant Interest Act, 2003.''
12.The fifth respondent states in his counter affidavit that he has followed the procedures
contemplated under the Police Standing Orders as well as the guidelines given by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court while dealing with the complaint. He has duly recorded the statements of the
witnesses http://www.judis.nic.in under Section 164 Cr.P.C. The case was entrusted to him by the
Commissioner of Police, for investigation. In view of the fact that the writ petitioner was not
available in his house and the house was found locked, he had reasonable belief that the writ
petitioner is trying to abscond. Therefore, when he received secret information about the presence of
the writ petitioner, he went near Marutham Hotel and took him to City Crime Branch Office, for
interrogation and being satisfied that the writ petitioner has committed the offence, he arrested the
writ petitioner and remanded him to judicial custody. On 04.05.2012 as per the directions of the
Commissioner of Police, he handed over the case diary to the Inspector of Police, Raj Kumar,
CBCID. According to him, in the further investigation conducted by CBCID, the witnesses have
turned hostile and therefore, FIR has been closed as ''mistake of fact''. He has discharged his duty as
per law and he had no motive against the writ petitioner and also he was not aware of the alleged
motive between the writ petitioner and one R.S.Murugan, Contractor.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27886235/ 5
Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
13.Thus, from the above rival contentions, this Court finds that the writ petitioner claims that the
fifth respondent S.Syed Ibrahim has acted hand in glove with E.Murugan, de-facto complainant in
Crime No.62 of 2011. The said E.Murugan, who is the brother of E.Natarajan, has acted on behalf of
his brother and the friend of his brother R.S.Murugan. Whereas the fifth respondent contends that
he is a responsible officer and on receipt of the complaint from E.Murugan and being satisfied with
the allegations and on the strength of abscondness of the writ petitioner, in exercise of his power
bona fidely, discharged his duty by recording the statement of witnesses under Section 164 Cr.P.C.,
arrested the writ petitioner and remanded him to judicial custody within 24 hours of the arrest, by
following all the norms and guidelines.
14.In the said factual scenario, the question before this Court is in the given facts and circumstances
can the Court by exercising the power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India award
compensation on the ground of violation of Article 21 of the Constitution.
http://www.judis.nic.in
15.The issue of entertaining writ petition for awarding compensation has been dealt by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court on various occasions. The appropriate case on this point, to the knowledge of this
Court is Sube Singh Vs. State Haryana and others, rendered by three Judges Bench, reported in
2006 (3) SCC 178. After tracing the history of awarding compensation for custodial death or
custodial torture or violation of fundamental rights, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has concluded as
below:-
''45.Cases where violation of Article 21 involving custodial death or torture is
established or is incontrovertible stand on a different footing when compared to cases
where such violation is doubtful or not established. Where there is no independent
evidence of custodial torture and where there is neither medical evidence about any
injury or disability, resulting from custodial torture, nor any mark/scar, it may not be
prudent to accept claims of human right violation, by persons having criminal
records in a routine manner for awarding compensation. That may open the
floodgates for false claims, either to mulct money from the State or as to prevent or
thwart further investigation. Courts should, therefore, while jealously
http://www.judis.nic.in protecting the fundamental rights of those who are illegally
detained or subjected to custodial violence, should also stand guard against false,
motivated and frivolous claims in the interests of the society and to enable Police to
discharge their duties fearlessly and effectively. While custodial torture is not
infrequent, it should be borne in mind that every arrest and detention does not lead
to custodial torture.
46.In cases where custodial death or custodial torture or other violation of the rights
guaranteed under Article 21 is established, courts may award compensation in a
proceeding under Article 32 or 226.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27886235/ 6
Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
However, before awarding compensation, the Court will have to pose to itself the following
questions : (a) Whether the violation of Article 21 is patent and incontrovertible, (b) whether the
violation is gross and of a magnitude to shock the conscience of the court, (c) whether the custodial
torture alleged has resulted in death or whether custodial torture is supported by medical report or
visible marks or scars or disability. Where there is no evidence of custodial torture of a person
except his own statement, and where such http://www.judis.nic.in allegation is not supported by
any medical report or other corroborative evidence, or where there are clear indications that the
allegations are false or exaggerated fully or in part, courts may not award compensation as a public
law remedy under Article 32 or 226, but relegate the aggrieved party to the traditional remedies by
way of appropriate civil/criminal action.
47.We should not, however, be understood as holding that harassment and custodial violence is not
serious or worthy of consideration, where there is no medical report or visible marks or independent
evidence. We are conscious of the fact that harassment or custodial violence cannot always be
supported by a medical report or independent evidence or proved by marks or scars. Every illegal
detention irrespective of its duration, and every custodial violence, irrespective of its degree or
magnitude, is outright condemnable and per se actionable. Remedy for such violation is available in
civil law and criminal law. The public law remedy is additionally available where the conditions
mentioned in the earlier paragraph are satisfied. We http://www.judis.nic.in may also note that this
Court has softened the degree of proof required in criminal prosecution relating to such matters.
......''
16.Following the abovesaid judgment, a Division Bench of the Bombay High Court in Gopal Vs. State
of Maharashtra [Criminal Writ Petition No.3960 of 2015, dated 05.05.2017], has held as below:-
''45.From the observations made by the Courts in all the aforesaid decisions, it is
clear that the compensation was awarded to the aggrieved person therein in the facts
and circumstances of the said cases. The cases related to illegal detention or
undergoing an extra detention, although, some of the petitioners were released by the
Court. The cases also related to the false implication of the accused therein which was
spelt out by the evidence on record. It is pertinent to note that in some of the cases
which are relied upon by the petitioner although it was the prosecution case that the
victim was murdered it was revealed that the victim was alive and, therefore, the
Court found that there was gross violation of the fundamental right of the petitioner
therein and, hence for violation of http://www.judis.nic.in fundamental rights, the
compensation was awarded.
46.In the case of D.K. Basu Vs. State of Bengal [1997 (1) SCC 416 : AIR 1997 SC 610],
the Supreme Court was pleased to observe that for established breach of fundamental
rights, the compensation can be granted under public law by the Supreme Court and
by the High Courts in addition to private remedy for tortious action and punishment
to wrongdoers under criminal laws. It was further observed that custodial violence
including torture and death in the lockups strikes a blow at the rule of law which
demands that the powers of the executive should not only be derived from law but
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27886235/ 7
Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
also that the same should be limited by law. Custodial violence is a matter of concern.
It is aggravated by the fact that it is committed by persons who are supposed to be the
protectors of the citizen. It is committed under the shield of uniform and authority in
the four walls of the police station or lockup. The victim being totally helpless. The
protection of an individual from torture and abuse by the police and other law
enforcing officers is a matter of deep concern in a free society. However, in paragraph
31 of the said http://www.judis.nic.in decision it was observed as follows:-
''31.There is one other aspect also which needs out consideration, We are conscious of
the fact that the police in India have to perform a difficult and delicate task,
particularly in view of the deteriorating law and order situation, communal riots,
political turmoil, student unrest, terrorist activities, and among others the increasing
number of underworld and armed gangs and criminals, Many hard core criminals
like extremist, the terrorists, drug peddlers, smugglers who have organized gangs,
have taken strong roots in the society. It is being said in certain quarters that with
more and more liberalisation and enforcement of fundamental rights, it would lead to
difficulties in the detection of crimes committed by such categories of hardened
criminals by soft peddling interrogation. It is felt in those quarters that if we lay to
much of emphasis on protection of their fundamental rights and human rights such
criminals may go scot-free without exposing any element or iota or criminality with
the result, the crime would go unpunished and in the ultimate analysis the society
would suffer. The concern is genuine and the http://www.judis.nic.in problem is real.
To deal with such a situation, a balanced approach is needed to meet the ends of
justice. This all the more so, in view of the expectation of the society that police must
deal with the criminals in an efficient and effective manner and bring to book those
who are involved in the crime. The cure cannot, however, be worst than the disease
itself.'' ''
17.Compensation for violation of fundamental right is both a common law remedy as well as civil
remedy. If the Violator, who is an instrument of the State, has failed to discharge the sovereign
function, the State becomes vicariously liable. However, it is not in all cases, compensation can be
given under the public law remedy, that too, by invoking Article 32 or Article 226 of the Constitution
of India. The Courts have entertained Writ Petitions and awarded compensation if violation of
fundamental right or custodial torture or abuse of power is patently seen from the record. Whereas
the closure of complaint, acquittal by the Trial Court or by the Appellate Court per se will not give
any right to seek compensation for http://www.judis.nic.in violation of fundamental right. It has to
be tested by the appropriate forum. Arbitrary claiming of compensation and arbitrary fixation of
compensation summarily in a Writ Petition is unheard.
18.The learned counsel appearing for the writ petitioner would rely upon the unreported judgment
of a Division Bench of this Court in W.A. (MD)No.1544 of 2018, dated 13.06.2019 [V.Kumaravel Vs.
The Director General of Police and others]. Even in the said judgment, the Division Bench of this
Court has been conscious of the limitation and has passed the following order:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27886235/ 8
Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
''11.The reports of three Superior Officers would certainly help the appellant to
conclude that the minimum procedure was not followed when the appellant was
detained illegally. Even the guidelines of the Supreme Court in Bhajan Lal's case was
not followed when he was arrested and remanded. The illegal detention of the
appellant is definitely an act of humiliation affecting the fundamental rights of the
appellant guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. For awarding
compensation for http://www.judis.nic.in the damage caused to the appellant, the
Writ Petition may not be appropriate in all cases where the issue involves disputed
facts. However, the pride, moral and dignity of the police officers cannot be
compromised unmindful of the evil consequences. However, we cannot accept the
contention of the appellant that he is entitled to Rs.1 Crore by way of compensation.
Having regard to the overall circumstances, this Court is of the view that the
appellant is entitled to a compensation of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees Five Lakhs only)
from the first respondent State who in turn can fix the liability by proceeding against
the fourth respondent departmentally if the State so desires. ....''
19.In the said case, the reports of the three superior officers to arrive at a prima facie conclusion that
there was gross violation in detaining the appellant. In this case, on the date of arrest, there was
some prima facie materials subject to satisfaction of the Investigation Officer to arrest the writ
petitioner. The final outcome of the investigation, on the face of it, does not indicate that the fifth
respondent has maliciously exercised his power. In the absence of such material under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India, http://www.judis.nic.in this Court shall not award compensation
arbitrarily. No doubt, there are some materials to show violation of fundamental right, however, to
what extent and which is the cause for it are to be tested before the appropriate forum.
20.In addition to the above, admittedly, the de-facto complainant and the writ petitioner are related
to each other. Even according to the complainant/E.Murugan, the writ petitioner has told him, the
documents are not in his possession and the same has been given to his Uncle. It is not the case of
the writ petitioner that he never knew the de-facto complainant. Recovery of documents from the
de-facto complainant's house at a later point of time, per se cannot be taken for awarding
compensation. Since even few days before the arrest, the writ petitioner himself has told the
complainant that he has handed over the documents to his Uncle. While filing the Writ Petition, the
writ petitioner has not impleaded the private individuals or the police official, against whom, he has
alleged abuse of power. The fifth respondent, on his own got impleaded. On closure of his
complaint, whether he filed any protest petition or not is a fact not http://www.judis.nic.in
elucidated. The de-facto complaint has a right to explain how the documents came back to his
possession. All these facts are matter for trial. The writ petitioner herein has filed the writ petition
only against the State. At a later point of time, the fifth respondent, on his own, has come before this
Court to get himself impleaded. When serious allegations are made against the individuals, filing of
Writ Petition without impleading them and seeking compensation from the State itself is not proper.
Hence, the Writ Petition is liable to be dismissed. While dismissing the Writ Petition, this Court
gives liberty to the writ petitioner to move the appropriate forum and seek the civil remedy.
Accordingly, this Writ Petition is dismissed. No costs.
Index : Yes 20.03.2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27886235/ 9
Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
Internet : Yes/No
smn2
http://www.judis.nic.in
To
1.The Principal Secretary,
Government of Tamil Nadu,
Home Department (Police),
Fort St. George,
Chennai.
2.The Director General of Police,
Kamarajar Salai,
Chennai.
3.The Inspector General of Police,
South Zone,
Race Course, Madurai.
4.The District Collector,
Tirunelveli District,
Tirunelveli.
5.The Additional Public Prosecutor,
Madurai Bench of Madras High Court,
Madurai.
http://www.judis.nic.in
DR.G.JAYACHANDRAN, J.
smn2
order made in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27886235/ 10
Chelliah vs The Principal Secretary on 6 March, 2020
20.03.2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27886235/ 11
