Chhote Lal Rajpoot vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 1 May, 2025
Chhote Lal Rajpoot vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 1 May,
2025
Author: Ashwani Kumar Mishra
Bench: Ashwani Kumar Mishra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:68921-DB
Court No. - 29
Case :- SPECIAL APPEAL No. - 307 of 2025
Appellant :- Chhote Lal Rajpoot
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 5 Others
Counsel for Appellant :- Siddharth Khare,Sr. Advocate
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar Mishra,J.
Hon'ble Praveen Kumar Giri,J.
1. Appellant claims to have been appointed as assistant teacher in the Sarvjanik Kisan Uchchatar
Madhyamik Vidyalaya, Jagdishpur, Bhaurajpur, Kannauj on 10.12.1988. At the time of his
appointment the institution was not getting any aid from the State. The appointment of appellant
came to be approved by the educational authority on 17.6.1998. The order of approval records that
appellant was appointed as an untrained teacher on 2/3 salary on the post of LT grade teacher and
thereafter he attained the B.Ed. qualification in 1991. His adhoc appointment consequently was
approved. Institution came on the list of aided schools in the year 2004. The name of appellant was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58968979/ 1
Chhote Lal Rajpoot vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 1 May, 2025
also included in the list of teachers of the institution and he started getting salary. All was good till a
complaint was made in respect of appointments made in the institution on the ground that the
Committee of Management appointed its own relatives by violating the procedure laid down for
appointment. This Court intervened in the matter and a detailed order came to be passed by learned
Single Judge of this Court on 30.3.2011 in Writ-A No.16586 of 2011, which is reproduced
hereinafter:-
"This petition is another example as to how the orders passed by the writ Court are
being deliberately violated and situation is being created by the highest officers of the
Education Department namely the Secretary (Secondary Education) and the Director
of Education (Secondary) for approving payment of salary to teachers and staff
without actually verifying as to when they were appointed and after following what
procedure.
This Court may refer to the judgment of the Hon'ble Single Judge dated 06.04.2007
passed in Civil Misc. Writ Petition No. 26113 of 2006 to which both the officers were
a party. The Hon'ble Single Judge in paragraph 9 of the said judgment recorded that
kith and kins of Principal, Manager, teaching, non-teaching staff, employees of
District Inspector of Schools' office were inserted in the list of Staff of the institution
for payment of salary after the institution was taken on grant-in-aid list by the State
Government with a vested interest to benefit their own men whose names were:
(a) Jay Prakash Rajpoot s/o. Manager of the institution.
(b) Chhote Lal Rajpoot: real nephew of the real brother-in-law of the Manager.
(c) Malikhan Singh : real nephew of the Principal.
(d) Dinesh Chandra : son of the Manager.
(e) Rakesh Kumar Katiyar : relative of clerk in the office of the District Inspector of
Schools.
(f) Anita : daughter of retired Clerk of the office of the District Inspector of Schools.
Thereafter the Court proceed to direct the Director of Education to not only examine the correctness
or otherwise of the relationship noticed above but also see the mode and manner of their
appointment. It was provided as follows :
The Director of Education (Secondary) U.P. at Allahabad Camp Officer at Lucknow
after calling for entire record from the institution. It shall also be seen as to at what
point of time, incumbents in whose favour order had been passed under U.P. Act No.
24 of 1971, had been appointed and the way and manner in which they had been
appointed. Needless to say that fresh exercise be taken preferably within period of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58968979/ 2
Chhote Lal Rajpoot vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 1 May, 2025
three months from the date of production of certified copy of this order.?
It is surprising that the Director who was granted three months' time to undertake
the exercise, took three years to do the needful. The findings recorded by the Director
of Education in his order dated 10.09.2009 are shocking. The Director in his order
after issuing notices to the parties concerned, in paragraph nos. 3, 4 and 5 records
that the relationship with the persons concerned as noticed above, could not be
established from records. Such approach of the Director practically amounts to abuse
of the powers vested in him and an attempt to defrauding the public exchequer by
deliberately not recording a finding as to whether the employee concerned was
related to the prohibited degree with the management of the institution or not.
What makes the position worst is that the Director despite the specific direction of
this Court did not record any finding whatsoever with regard to the procedure
adopted in the matter of appointment of teachers and employees who were directed
to pay salary under the impugned order. The Director in order to save his skin
adopted a smart procedure and instead of passing final orders, as directed by this
Court, forwarded the papers to the Secretary, Secondary Education for final orders
after recording the aforesaid findings.
It is now that the Secretary comes into the act. He even after noticing the directions
of the high Court as per the order dated 06.04.2007 which had been quoted in the
order of the Director, deliberately did not consider any of the directions issued by this
Court qua the process adopted in the matter of appointment of teachers and staff
concerned. He vide order dated 14.02.2011 directed payment of salary to the staff of
the institution (Annexure-15 to the writ petition) after removing names of persons
and by inducting two new names. It is against this order that the present writ petition
has been filed.
This Court is surprised as to how the highest officers of the Education Department
are acting. While sanctioning payment of salary to the teachers and staff of the
institution from State exchequer, absolutely no exercise has been undertaken which
could establish that the teachers and staff had been validly appointed, what is worst
is that there has been wilful disobedience of the directions issued by the writ Court.
Before any further orders are passed, it would be in the interest of justice that the
officers may be afforded an opportunity to explain the facts noticed above.
Put on 06.04.2011.
The Secretary (Secondary Education) and Director of Education (Secondary) shall file
their personal affidavits explaining the facts noticed above, by the next date fixed.
Copy of the order may be issued to the learned Standing Counsel by 02.04.2011."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58968979/ 3
Chhote Lal Rajpoot vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 1 May, 2025
2. The educational authorities examined the legality of appointment offered to appellant and it
transpired that his high school certificate itself was cancelled. It was also noticed that this aspect of
the matter was agitated by the appellant right up to the Supreme Court and he had lost. The
authorities, therefore, were of the view that neither the appellant possessed qualification for
appointment to the post of LT grade teacher nor he had the qualification for the post and, therefore,
he was not entitled to payment of any salary. The State Government consequently passed orders
holding the appointment of appellant to be illegal and also directed the salary paid to the appellant
to be recovered. Aggrieved by this order, the appellant approached learned Single Judge, who by his
composite judgment has dismissed the writ petition. Thus aggrieved the appellant is before this
Court in the present special appeal.
3. Sri Ashok Khare, learned Senior counsel for the appellant argues that the appellant was validly
appointed and his appointment was also approved by the educational authority. It is submitted that
the appellant had in fact passed high school examination but later it was found that his result was
placed in category-E which apparently related to cases of mass copying. It is also submitted that the
appellant was not aware of such facts and he was allowed to pursue further studies and consequently
he passed intermediate, graduation and B.Ed on the strength of which he was appointed as a teacher
and was allowed to work. It is pointed out that for the first time appellant came to know that his
result had been cancelled pursuant to the communication of the board dated 7.11.2008, whereby the
appellant was informed that his result had been cancelled. This communication was challenged by
the appellant by filing Writ-A No.6270 of 2008. This writ petition was allowed on the ground that
principles of natural justice had been violated. The judgment of learned Single Judge was assailed in
Special Appeal Defective No.928 of 2009 which was allowed by the Division Bench vide following
orders passed on 26.8.2009. The judgment of the Division Bench reads as under:-
"Appellant aggrieved by order dated 23.7.2009 passed in Civil Misc. Writ Petition
No.62701 of 2008 has preferred this appeal under Rule 5 Chapter VIII of the High
Court Rules.
Short facts, giving rise to the present appeal, are that writ petitioner - appellant
challenged the communication dated 7.11.2008 of the Secretary of Board of High
School & Intermediate Education addressed to the Deputy Director of Education
wherein it has been informed that Chhote Lal S/o Ram Vilas, the petitioner herein,
had appeared in the High School Examination 1983 bearing Roll No.1123691 and his
result was cancelled under 'E' category. He challenged the aforesaid order inter alia
contending that the order is to his prejudice and that has been passed without giving
any notice to him, as such, suffers from violation of principles of natural justice and,
accordingly, said communication be quashed. Counter-affidavit was filed on behalf of
State and in paragraph no.14 thereof, it was averred as follows:-
"14. That in reply to the contents of paragraph nos. 21 and 22 of the writ petition it is
stated that the result of those candidates whose result has been withheld under
category 'e', they have been given charge sheet for submitting their explanation.
Thereafter, the matter in question was produced before the Committee for its
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58968979/ 4
Chhote Lal Rajpoot vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 1 May, 2025
disposal and after taking decision by the Committee the same has been duly informed
to the concerned person. The result of the petitioner' High School Examination Year
1983 had been cancelled under category 'e' by the order of Committee dated 26.5.84.
Allegation to the contrary is incorrect and denied."
The learned Judge by impugned order found the communication dated 7.11.2008 as illegal being in
violation of the principles of natural justice and, accordingly, set aside the said order. While doing
so, it observed as follows:-
"Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed. A writ in the nature of certiorari is issued
quashing the order dated 7.11.2008 contained in Annexure No.9 to the writ petition
with consequential benefits. The petitioner is permitted to pass fresh order with due
compliance of principle of natural justice. It is clarified that while allowing this writ
petition, this Court has not entered into the merits of the case and the order has been
set aside only on the ground of non-compliance of principles of natural justice."
Mr. Yogish Kumar Saxena, appearing on behalf of the appellant, submits that letter dated 7.11.2008
was just a communication and the writ petitioner, without disclosing the fact that his result was
already cancelled in the year 1984, got the relief on an erroneous assumption that the impugned
communication is in violation of principles of natural justice. He further points out that learned
single Judge, while quashing the impugned communication, did not take into consideration the
averment made in the counter-affidavit of the State referred to above.
Mr. Shobhit Dubey, appearing on behalf of Respondent No.4, however, submits that in the facts of
the present case, the learned Judge did not err in setting aside the impugned communication.
The submission of Mr. Saxena, commend us. It seems that result of the writ petitioner was cancelled
as back as on 26.5.1984 and a communication to that effect appears to have been made to him. It
seems that at the instance of the appellant, the Deputy Director of Education made some query from
the Secretary of Board of High School and Intermediate Examination and in response thereto, the
former was informed that the result of the writ petitioner was already cancelled in the year 1984.
Writ petitioner, without disclosing the aforesaid fact, pretended before the learned single Judge that
he came to know about the cancellation for the first time by the impugned communication
contending that it is in violation of principles of natural justice. As observed earlier, the result of the
writ petitioner was cancelled as back as in the year 1984 in accordance with the prescribed
procedure. The impugned communication is not a decision but communication and hence the
principles of natural justice are not even remotely attracted. The exchange of such information did
not obligate the authority to give any notice to the appellant.
We are of the opinion that learned single Judge erred in setting aside the communication on the
ground of violation of principles of natural justice.
In the result, the appeal is allowed. The impugned judgment of the learned single Judge is set aside.
No order as to cost."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58968979/ 5
Chhote Lal Rajpoot vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 1 May, 2025
4. Our attention has also been invited to the fact that one Ram Asre, who had filed the appeal had
sought leave from the Court to institute appeal which was allowed by the Division Bench on
26.8.2009. The Division Bench judgment was thereafter challenged before the Supreme Court in
Special Leave to Appeal (Civil) No(s).26479-26480 of 2009 which was dismissed on 30.10.2009. It
is submitted that mere fact that the high school certificate of the appellant has been cancelled would
not mean that his qualifications of intermediate, graduation and B.Ed ceases to exist. It is also
submitted that the appellant was fully qualified and his appointment was also approved. Since he
had already worked for more than 22 years, as such the action of the State in treating his
appointment to be void and directing recovery of salary paid to him is wholly arbitrary and
unsustainable.
5. Learned State counsel, on the other hand, has invited attention of the Court to order passed by the
learned Single Judge in writ petition no.26113 of 2006, wherein allegations were made against
appointments made in the institution concerned on various grounds. The allegations made before
the learned Single Judge had been noticed in para 9 of the writ petition, which is reproduced
hereinafter:-
"9. That it was surprising that the name of Kith and Kins of Principla, Manager,
teaching, non-teaching staff, employees of District Inspector of Schools office, were
incorporated and inserted in the list of staff of the institution with a vested interest to
benefit their own men whose names are details below:-
1. Mr. Jay Prakash Rajpoot: son of Manager of the institution.
2. Mr. Chhote Lal Rajpoot: real nephew of Sri Lal Ram, Sanchalak of college who is
real brother-in-law of Mr. Mewa Ram, Manager of College.
3. Mr. Malikhan Singh : real nephew of the Principal Mr. Bachcha Lal Verma.
4. Mr. Dinesh Chandra : son of Mr. Lal Ram, Sanchalak.
5. Mr. Rakesh Kumar Katiyar : relation of Mr. Sarvjeet Katiyar, clerk of D.I.O.S.
office.
6. Mrs. Anita : daughter of Suresh Saxena the retire clerk of D.I.O.S. office."
6. It was in this context that subsequent orders were passed by the writ court directing the State
Government to conduct an inquiry into legality of the appointment and it was at that stage that the
State found that the appointment was obtained by the appellant fraudulently. It is alleged that the
appointment of the appellant was otherwise impermissible, inasmuch as on the date of his
appointment i.e. 10.12.1988 the appellant was not even qualified for appointment to the LT grade
post. The minimum qualification for the post included Bachelor of Education which was acquired by
the appellant later in the year 1992. It is also noticed that the qualification of B.Ed. had been
obtained as a regular student from Rohtak, Haryana while the appellant claims to be working in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58968979/ 6
Chhote Lal Rajpoot vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 1 May, 2025
same institution from 1988. It is further submitted that the appellant is the real nephew of Sri Lal
Ram, who was the sanchalak of the college and is brother-in-law of Mr. Mewa Ram who is the
Manager of the institution. It is, therefore, submitted that appointment of appellant being
fraudulent in nature confers no right upon the appellant to continue.
7. Sri Ashok Khare, learned Senior counsel for the appellant, in reply, submits that though
allegations were made of appellant being a relative of the Manager but this aspect was examined in
the inquiry and it was found that there was no relationship of the appellant with the then Manager.
It is, therefore, submitted that there was no basis for the authorities to suspect the legality of
appointment offered to the appellant. It is also submitted that after such long lapse of time it is
inequitable to question the appellant's appointment for the reasons put forth by the State.
8. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have carefully perused the materials placed on
record.
9. The appellant claims to have been appointed on 10.12.1988. There is nothing on record to show
that any fair procedure was followed for appointment offered to the appellant. Apart from it we also
find that on the date of his appointment in 1988 the appellant was not even possessing minimum
qualification for the post, inasmuch as he was only a graduate. His appointment apparently came to
be approved by the authorities on 17.6.1998 alongwith large number of other teachers and
employees of the institution. There was apparently no detailed examination of the legality of
appointment offered to the appellant. However, it remains undisputed that the approval order of
17.6.1998 was not set aside or questioned.
10. The B.Ed. result of the appellant is also on record as per which he obtained the qualification in a
one year course from Maharshi Dayanand University, Rohtak. This qualification was also obtained
during the period when the appellant was working as a teacher in the same institution. Though this
aspect has not been highlighted by the State authorities and it is also not clear as to whether such
qualification was obtained after availing study leave from the management nevertheless the manner
in which the appointment itself has been offered to the appellant raises serious cloud upon the
appellant's appointment itself.
11. We otherwise find that the appointment of the appellant was based on his educational certificates
including his high school certificate. Record reveals that the appellant had never passed the high
school examination. It was only when the legality of certificate was checked that the board informed
the concerned Deputy Director of Education on 7.11.2008 that the result of the appellant has already
been cancelled. The challenge laid to such decision ultimately failed with the order passed by the
Division Bench in special appeal against the appellant. The special leave petition filed against such
Division Bench judgment also failed. In such circumstances, it is clearly admitted on record that the
appellant had not passed high school examination. Once he is not shown to have legally passed high
school certificate the subsequent qualifications obtained by the appellant would also be in cloud.
This is because unless a candidate passes high school he would not be entitled to appear in
intermediate and other examination.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58968979/ 7
Chhote Lal Rajpoot vs State Of U.P. And 5 Others on 1 May, 2025
12. Examining the facts of the present case in its entirety, we find that the very entry of the appellant
into the institution pursuant to his appointment dated 10.12.1988 is not free from doubt. The fact
that no procedure is shown to have been followed before issuing appointment; the appellant was not
qualified to be appointed on 10.12.1988; he acquired the qualification of B.Ed. while in service; his
high school certificate was cancelled and challenge to such cancellation had failed, we are of the view
that the appellant is not entitled to claim that he was lawfully appointed or that he is entitled to
continue or receive salary. In such circumstances, we do not find any error in the judgment of
learned Single Judge dismissing the writ petition of the appellant.
13. Learned State counsel lastly submits that a sum of Rs.2 lakhs and odd is still recoverable from
appellant. Although we have dismissed the appeal of the appellant and sustained the order of the
State Government and learned Single Judge yet, in the facts and circumstances, we find that no
further recovery be allowed to be made from the appellant. Considerations of equity demands that
such limited relief be granted to the appellant as he has otherwise worked during this period.
14. Subject to the observations made above, this special appeal fails and is dismissed.
Order Date :- 1.5.2025 RA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58968979/ 8
