Children In Conflict With Law Namely ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 8 May, 2019
Children In Conflict With Law Namely ... vs The State Of Madhya
Pradesh on 8 May, 2019
1 CRR-1854-2019
The High Court Of Madhya Pradesh
CRR-1854-2019
(CHILDREN IN CONFLICT WITH LAW NAMELY ROSHAN GUPTA Vs THE STATE OF MADHYA
PRADESH)
3
Jabalpur, Dated : 08-05-2019
Shri U.S. Jaiswal, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Shri Manoj Kumar Singh, learned PL for the respondent-State.
T his revision has been preferred by the mother of juvenile being aggrieved by the order dated
25.3.2019 passed in Cr.A. No. 38/2019 by learned IX Addl. Sessions Judge, Rewa District-Rewa,
affirming the order dated 27.02.2019 passed by learned Principal Judge, Juvenile Justice Board,
Rewa, District-Rewa (M.P.). The learned Principal Judge, Juvenile Justice Board, Rewa, dismissed
the bail application presented by the mother of the juvenile.
The prosecution case in brief is that complainant Vikas Singh, lodged the report at Police Station
Civil Lines Rewa. It is alleged in that report that on 22.12.2018 at about 09:00 P.M. when he was
sitting at Mahakal Restaurant, at that time, three persons, namely, Rijwan Khan, Hitesh Soni and
Bachche Khan came there, they asked for consuming liquor and when the owner of that restaurant
prevented them, then they abused in filthy language and ran away from the spot. Thereafter, at
about 11:00 P.M., they came along with other persons and juvenile at the said restaurant, they
inflicted injuries to the owner of restaurant, namely, Sanjay Singh. When the workers interfered,
then juvenile and other persons ran away from the spot. Sanjay Singh was admitted in the hospital,
who died due to the injuries inflicted by the juvenile and other co-accused persons. On the
information, the police has registered Crime No.548/2018 under Section 302 of IPC against the
juvenile and other co-accused. The juvenile and other persons have been arrested by the police. The
juvenile has been arrested on 2.12.2018 and since then he is in Observation Home. The mother of
juvenile filed an application for Supurdginama before Juvenile Justice Board, which was rejected.
Thereafter, 2 CRR-1854-2019 mother of the juvenile filed a revision against that order, but learned
Addl. Sessions Judge also dismissed the revision petition.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the learned Court below has failed to see the
mandatory provisions to release the juvenile on Supurdginama and bail. learned Court below has
ignored this fact that the Probationary Officer has submitted the report in which it is mentioned that
no criminal history or record is available against juvenile. The juvenile is only earning member of his
family. His father is no more. No role has been attributed to the delinquent juvenile. Therefore, she
prays for setting aside the impugned order and grant of bail to the juvenile.
Learned Panel Lawyer for the respondent-State has opposed the revision and grant of bail.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24753196/ 1
Children In Conflict With Law Namely ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 8 May, 2019
Heard both the parties and perused the record.
According to the petitioner's mother, the order of the Principal Judge Juvenile Justice Board and
learned IX Addl. Sessions Judge, Rewa are not proper and bad in law. Learned Principal Judge
Juvenile Justice Board and learned Special Judge, Rewa, have not considered the law in its true
perspective. The mother of the petitioner submitted that in view of the mandatory provision for bail
u/s 12 of the Act, the petitioner-juvenile is entitled for bail. There was nothing on record to show
that the release of petitioner was likely to bring him into association with any known criminal or
expose him to moral danger so it is in the interest of justice to release the petitioner on bail.
It is found evident that regarding bail to a juvenile, it is relevant for u/s 12 which reads as under:-
"12. Bail to a person who is apparently a child alleged to be inconflict with law.
(1) When any person, who is apparently a child and is alleged to have committed a
bailable or non-bailable offence, is apprehended or detained by the police or appears
or brought before a Board, such person shall, notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of 3 CRR-1854-2019 Criminal Procedure, 1973 or in any other law for the
time being in force, be released on bail with or without surety or placed under the
supervision of a probation officer or under the care of any fit person:
Provided that such person shall not be so released if there appears reasonable
grounds for believing that the release is likely to bring that person into association
with any known criminal or expose the said person to moral, physical or
psychological danger or the persons release would defeat the ends of justice, and the
Board shall record the reasons for denying the bail and circumstances that led to such
a decision.
(2) When such person having been apprehended is not released on bail under
subsection (1) by the officer-in-charge of the police station, such officer shall cause
the person to be kept only in an observation home in such manner as may be
prescribed until the person can be brought before a Board.
(3) When such person is not released on bail under subsection (1) by the Board, it
shall make an order sending him to an observation home or a place of safety, as the
case may be, for such period during the pendency of the inquiry regarding the person,
as may be specified in the order.
(4 ) When a child in conflict with law is unable to fulfill the conditions of bail order within seven
days of the bail order, such child shall be produced before the Board for modification of the
conditions of bail."
It is evident that in all the aforesaid provisions if a juvenile is arrested or detained or appears or is
brought before a Board such person shall be released but he shall not be so released if their appears
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24753196/ 2
Children In Conflict With Law Namely ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 8 May, 2019
reasonable grounds for believing that the release is likely to bring him into association with any
known criminal or expose him to moral, physical or psychological danger or that his release would
defeat ends of the justice. Thus, every juvenile have whatsoever offence he charged with shall be
released on bail except under the above circumstances.
From perusal of case diary, a report of Probationary Officer has been 4 CRR-1854-2019 received in
this regard. It is mentioned in the said report of Probationary Officer that there is no previous
criminal record of juvenile. It is also mentioned in the report that work and behaviour of the juvenile
are good. It is also advised that one opportunity be granted to juvenile to restore his family because
his father is no more. This is also evident that there is no criminal record against his family
members. So, in this case there is no material available on record showing any reasonable ground
for believing that the release of the petitioner is likely to bring him into association with known
criminals or expose him to moral, physical or psychological danger or his release would defeat ends
of the justice. In this regard, Hon'ble Apex Court dealt with the similar issues in the case of Ranjeet
Singh V. State of H.P. reported in 2005 Cri.L.J. 972 & Rahul Rajendra V. State of M.P. reported in
2001(1) M.P.L.J. 172 . It is directed that petitioner juvenile shall be released on bail on furnishing a
bail bond of Rs. 40,000/- (Rupees Forty Thousand Only) by his mother with one solvent surety in
the like amount to the satisfaction of the Principal Judge, Juvenile Justice Board, Rewa for his
appearance before that Juvenile Justice Board, Rewa, and on all such other subsequent dates as may
be fixed by it in this regard.
Hence, this revision is disposed of.
C.C. as per rules.
(RAJENDRA KUMAR SRIVASTAVA) JUDGE A.Praj.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/24753196/ 3
