Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri D M Purnesh on 17 February, 2020
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri D M Purnesh on 17
February, 2020
Bench: Alok Aradhe, Ravi V Hosmani
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 17THDAY OF FEBRUARY 2020
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ALOK ARADHE
AND
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAVI V. HOSMANI
ITA No.346/2010
BETWEEN:
1. Commissioner of Income Tax,
Central Revenue Buildings,
Queens Road,
Bangalore- 560 001
2. Deputy Commissioner
Of Income Tax,
Circle -8(1),Bangalore.
...APPELLANTS
(By Sri. Jeevan J Neeralagi, Advocate)
a/w Sri. E.I. Sanmathi, Advocate)
AND:
Shri D.M. Purnesh,
6/1, Connaught Road,
Bangalore. ...RESPONDENT
(By Sri. V Chandrashekar, Advocate)
a/w Sri V Narendra Sharma, Advocate)
THIS INCOME TAX APPEAL IS FILED UNDER SECTION 260-A OF
THE INCOME TAX ACT 1961, ARISING OUT OF ORDER DATED
16/04/2010 PASSED IN ITA NO.408/BANG/2009, FOR THE
ASSESSMENT YEAR 2004-05, PRAYING TO i) FORMULATE THE
SUBSTANTIAL QUEISTIONS OF LAW STATED THEREIN ii) SET ASIDE
THE APPELLATE ORDER DATED 16/04/2010 PASSED BY THE ITAT, 'A'
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139005506/ 1
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri D M Purnesh on 17 February, 2020
BENCH, BANGALORE, IN APPEAL PROEEIDNGS ITA
NO.408/BANG/2009, AS SOUGHT FOR IN THIS APPEAL.
THIS APPEAL COMING ON FOR FINAL HEARING, THIS DAY,
ALOK ARADHE J., DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
JUDGMENT
Mr. Jeevan J Neeralagi, learned counsel, along with Mr. E.I. Sanmathi, learned counsel for the
revenue.
Mr. V Chandrashekar, learned counsel along with Mr. V. Narendra Sharma, for the respondent.
This appeal is filed under Section 260-A of the Income Tax Act has been filed by the revenue, which
was admitted by a Bench of this Court on the following substantial questions of law:
i) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in
law in setting aside the disallowance of Rs.39,86,424 when assessing authority has
made disallowance considering that assessee along with two others, has jointly
developed sites by converting three acres out of 6.5 acres of agricultural land by
entering into an agreement M/s Amalgamated property developers and the total
proceeds realized out of the sale of these 44 sites is Rs.1,62,81,350/- which is
undisputed?
ii) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in
law in setting aside the disallowance towards de-notification charges of
Rs.18,00,000/-, administrative charges of Rs.6,60,000/-, total disallowance to the
extent of Rs.24,60,000/- when the assessing authority has done the same
considering the share of assessee being 1/3rd of total profit and after allowing the
applicable costs?
iii) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in
law in setting aside the computation of long term capital gain made by assessing
authority relating to Rs.2,94,26,600/- as long term capital being transfer of land in
"Devagiri Farms" by the assessee when the assessee was the owner of the said land
and had gifted the same to his wife Smt. Anitha Purnesh through a registered Gift
Deed dated 20.1.2003 subsequently assessee's wife in turn transferred the said lands
to the firm known as "Devagiri Farms"
which was constituted by a partnership deed dated 28.9.2003 when the assessing
officer has rightly held the said transaction as gift of lands to assessee's wife and the
subsequent transfer of these lands to the above said firm is within 9 months from the
date on which these were gifted, as "transfer'"
within the meaning of Sec. 64(1)(IV) of the Act and 45(3) of the Act?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139005506/ 2
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri D M Purnesh on 17 February, 2020
iv) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in law in setting
aside the disallowance made in respect of long term capital asset even when the land in question was
not an agricultural land and same is rightly treated as capital asset within the meaning of Sec.2(14)
of the Act by the assessing authority?
v) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in law in setting
aside the disallowance made by the assessing authority to tax an amount of Rs.1,12,745/- under the
head "Income of other sources" even when the assessing authority rightly observed that the assessee
had not furnished any proof with regard to foreign tour taken by the assessee during the year except
that the amount was spent by M/s Classic Coffee and Spices (P) Ltd., in which the assessee is a
Director?
vi) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in law in setting
aside disallowance made by the assessing authority to an extent of Rs.37,31,000/- under the head
"Income from others" even when the assessee had not proved liability and assessee had not
produced any documentary evidence in support of his claim that the said amount is due to the HUF
of D.M. Purnesh and D.M. Shankar?
vii) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in law in setting
aside the disallowance made by assessing authority to tax an amount of Rs.42,09,420/- claimed as
cash deficit even when the assessee had not produced any of his personal account nor bank pass
books/bank statements in spite of several reminders and assessing authority based on the bank
statements, rightly worked out the cash deficit amount?
viii) Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Tribunal is right in law in setting
aside disallowance made on account of amounts deposited by cheques to an extent of Rs.84,61,055/-
even when the assessee failed to explain the said deposit with proper material?
2. The facts giving rise to filing of this appeal briefly stated are that, the assessee files income tax
returns for the assessment year 2004-2005 declaring the loss of Rs.8,12,981/- and agricultural
income of Rs.8,20,000/-. The total income consisted of income from salary, business and other
sources. The return filed by the assesse was processed under Section 143(3) of the Income Tax Act.
An order of assessment was passed on 17.03.2005. The Assessing Authority passed an order of
assessment by making certain additions such as income from joint development of sites, long term
capital gains on transfer of land, income declared under agriculture was brought under the head,
income from other sources, addition of income from coffee estate, addition relating to personal
savings and other additions. The aforesaid order was challenged before the Commissioner of Income
Tax (Appeals) by the assessee. The appeal preferred by the assessee was allowed. Being aggrieved,
the revenue challenged the aforesaid order in appeal before the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal. The
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal by order dated 16.04.2010 dismissed the appeal preferred by the
revenue and partly allowed the appeal preferred by the assessee. In the aforesaid factual
background, the revenue has filed this appeal.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139005506/ 3
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri D M Purnesh on 17 February, 2020
3. Learned counsel for the revenue has taken us through the orders passed by the Assessing Officer
and has submitted that the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) has reversed the findings
recorded by the Assessing Officer on the basis of the material produced before it and the Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal in cryptic and cavalier manner has upheld the finding recorded by the
Commissioner of Income Tax(Appeals). It is further submitted that the Tribunal committed error of
law in setting aside the disallowance of Rs.39,86,424/-, when the Assessing Authority has made the
disallowance on considering that the assessee along with two others has jointly developed sites by
converting 03 acres out of 6.5 acres of agricultural land. It is further submitted that the Tribunal
grossly erred in setting aside the computation of long term capital gain made by the Assessing
Authority relating to a sum of Rs.2,94,26,600/- as long term capital being transfer of land in
'Devagiri Farms" by the assessee. It was also submitted that the Tribunal grossly erred in
disallowing the assessment made by the Assessing Authority to tax amount of Rs.1,12,745/- under
the head "Income of other sources". Even when the Assessing Authority rightly observed that the
assessee had not furnished any proof with regard to foreign tour undertaken by the assessee during
the year except that the amount was spent by M/s Classic Coffee and Spices (P) Ltd., in which the
assessee is a Director.
4. On the other hand, the learned counsel for the assessee has submitted that the powers of the
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) are co-extensive with the Assessing Officer and the assessee
had produced the material before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals). The Commissioner of
Income Tax (Appeals) had called for the Remand Report from the Assessing Officer and in the
Remand Report, the Assessing Officer himself after going through the material produced by the
appellant had submitted that as the assessee's argument with regard to the addition as long term
capital gains to the tune of Rs.2,94,600/- is acceptable.
5. It is also pointed out that the assessee submits with regard to addition as "income from other
sources" to the tune of Rs.84,61,055/- also be accepted. It is also pointed out from the Remand
Report by the counsel for the assessee that the Assessing Officer has stated that the argument of the
assessee with regard to the addition of income from other sources namely, foreign tour to the tune of
Rs.1,12,475/- may be accepted. Thus, it is submitted that the aforesaid Remand Report has been
made the basis by the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) for passing the order, which has been
affirmed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal that the instant appeal does not involve any
substantial questions of law.
6. Lastly, it is urged that the amount under the three heads as recommended by the Assessing
Officer is accepted, the appeal filed by the revenue before this Court is not maintainable, as the same
is covered by the monetary limit prescribed in sub-Clause 17 of circular 2019 dated 08.08.2019.
7. We have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and perused the
record.
8. Section 250(4) of the Income Tax Act provides that the Commissioner (Appeals) may, before
disposing of any appeal, make such further inquiry as he thinks fit, or may direct the (Assessing)
Officer to make further inquiry and report the result of the same to the Commissioner(Appeals).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139005506/ 4
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Shri D M Purnesh on 17 February, 2020
When the assessee produced the material before the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals), the
Commissioner, in exercise of power under Section 250(4) of the Act, directed the Assessing Officer
to submit the Remand Report. The relevant extract of the remand report reads as under:
"Addition as long term capital gain -
Rs.2,94,26,600/-(point 7) The assessee's argument in this regard are acceptable.
Addition as income from other sources - Foreign Travel-Rs.1,12,475/-( Point 11) The assessee has
filed certificate issued by the Director of M/s Classic Coffee & Spices (P) Ltd., wherein it is stated
that Sri. D.M. Purnesh, Director was requested to represent the Company and attend Specialty
Coffee Association of America's Trade Show and Conference at Boston, U.S.A. in April 2003.
Further, it is stated that the expenditure of Rs.1,12,475/-has been posted under the head of account
'business promotion expenses' of the company. The argument of the assessee in this regard may be
accepted. On addition of Rs.84,61,055/ The assessee's Chartered Accountant Sri Kiron has stated
that the cheque deposits in assessee's Savings account are all transfers from within the family
members, firms and companies wherein He is either a partner or a director. The assessee's
submissions may be accepted.
Addition as income from other sources-
unexplained investment in Harey estate of Rs.9,45,000/-(Point 15) Assessee's submissions may be
accepted."
9. Thus, from perusal of the report submitted by the Assessing Officer himself, it is evident that, if
the Remand Report is accepted with regard to long term capital gains, then addition as income from
other sources and income from other sources is also accepted, therefore, the question of law framed
in this regard namely, substantial questions of law No.3, 4, 5 and 8 do not arise for consideration in
this appeal, as the Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) has passed the order on the aforesaid
Remand Report and the order passed by the Commissioner of Income Tax(Appeals) has been
accepted by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal.
So far as other substantial questions of law are concerned, it is not necessary for us to answer the
same as the Remand Report is accepted in respect of the aforesaid three heads, the appeal filed by
the revenue would not be acceptable before this Court in view of the circular 2019 dated 8.8.2019. In
view of the preceding analysis, we do not find any merit in this appeal. The same fails and is hereby
dismissed.
Sd/-
JUDGE Sd/-
JUDGE Psg*
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139005506/ 5
