Commissioner State Taxes vs M/S Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited on 28 July, 2025
Commissioner State Taxes vs M/S Reliance Jio Infocomm
Limited on 28 July, 2025
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
STR No. 1/2024
Dated: 28th of July, 2025.
1. Commissioner State Taxes,
J&K Government,
Excise & Taxation Complex,
Solina, Rambagh, Srinagar/
Rail Head Complex, Jammu.
2. Assessing Authority, Commercial Taxes Check Post,
Lower Munda, Kashmir
[Presently State Tax Officer,
Office of Dy. Commissioner, State Taxes
(Enforcement) South, Lower Munda, Kashmir].
... Petitioner(s)
Through: -
Mr Mohsin-ul-Showkat Qadri, Sr. AAG with
Ms Maha Majeed, Assisting Counsel.
V/s
M/s Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited,
Drangbal Pampore,
Principal Place 1st Floor K. C. Plaza,
Residecy Road, Jammu.
... Respondent(s)
Through: -
Mr Sachin Sharma, Advocate.
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr Justice Sanjeev Kumar, Judge. Hon'ble Mr Justice Sanjay Parihar, Judge.
(JUDGMENT) Sanjeev Kumar-J:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16179778/ 1
Commissioner State Taxes vs M/S Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited on 28 July, 2025
01. This is a Petition by the Commissioner, State Taxes, J&K Government and
Another, filed under Section 12-D of the Jammu & Kashmir General Sales Tax Act,
1962 ["the GST Act" for short] read with Section 6 of the J&K Entry Tax on Goods
Act, 2000 ["the Act of 2000"] for seeking a direction to the J&K Sales Tax (Appellate)
Tribunal ["the Tribunal"] to refer the following questions of law:
"(a) Whether the findings returned by the J&K Sales Tax (Appellate) Tribunal are
perverse keeping in view the law laid down by the Apex Court holding/ observing that
the source of power is not specifically referred to or a reference is made to a wrong
provision of law, that by itself does not vitiate the exercise of power so long as the
power does exist and can be traced to a source available in law; and
(b) Whether invoking of section 67 (1) (o) of the J&K VAT Act, 2005 by the Assessing
Authority instead of invoking section 17 (1) (o) of the J&K GST Act, 1962 renders the
order passed by the Assessing Authority as well as proceedings vitiated, more
particularly section 17 (1) (o) of the J&K GST Act, 1962 is pari-materia to section 69
(1) (o) of the J&K Vat Act, 2005, in view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court of
India in case reported as in Ram Sunder Ram v. Union of India (2007) 13 SCC 255."
02. Before we advert to the questions of law sought to be referred by the Petitioners herein to the
High Court, we deem it appropriate to give a brief factual background leading to the filing of this
Petition.
03. Vide Order dated 16th of December, 2016 passed by the Assessing Authority, Commercial Taxes
Check Post, Lower Munda ["the Assessing Authority"], a penalty to the tune of Rs.1,48,17,658/- was
imposed upon the Respondent-Company purportedly under Section 69 (1)
(o) of the J&K VAT Act, 2005 ["the Act of 2005"]. The penalty was imposed in reference to an
incident which took place on 15 th of November, 2016 when a vehicle carrying the goods of the
Respondent-Company was intercepted at Lower Munda Check Post and it was found that the goods
carried by the vehicle had not been cleared at the Commercial Taxes Check Post, Lakhanpur.
04. On the failure of the driver of the vehicle to produce the documents evidencing the clearance of
goods/ vehicle at Lakhanpur Check Post, the goods were detained and proceedings under the Act of
2005 were initiated. Accordingly, notice under Sections 67 (10) and 69 (1) (o) of the Act of 2005
were issued to the Respondent-Company.
05. The aforesaid notices were contested by the Respondent- Company through their Sales Tax
Practitioner and, after considering the matter in the light of submissions made by the Sales Tax
Practitioner concerned, the Assessing Authority came to the conclusion that the goods were being
transferred by the Respondent-Company for its own use and consumption and not for sale and
were, therefore, liable to Entry Tax under Section 4 (2) of the Act of 2000. The proceedings under
Section 67 (10) of the Act of 2005 were dropped and order for payment of Entry Tax under Section 4
(2) of the Act of 2000 was issued. The Assessing Authority also invoked the penalty provision, i.e.,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16179778/ 2
Commissioner State Taxes vs M/S Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited on 28 July, 2025
Section 69 (1) (o) of the Act of 2005 and imposed penalty equal to double the amount of tax payable
under the Act of 2000.
06. The said Order of the Assessing Authority was called in question by the Respondent-Company
before the Appellate Authority. The Appellate Authority rejected the appeal and upheld the Order
passed by the Assessing Authority. This constrained the Respondent-Company to approach the
Tribunal by way of a second appeal.
07. The Tribunal, having considered the matter in the light of submissions made on both the sides,
came to the conclusion that invocation of jurisdiction by the Assessing Authority under Section 69
(1) (o) of the Act of 2005 was uncalled for and, therefore, the entire proceedings were vitiated. There
was further direction from the Tribunal to the Petitioners herein to refund the penalty, if any,
deposited by the Respondent-Company.
08. Feeling dissatisfied with the Judgment dated 17th of March, 2022 passed by the Tribunal, the
Petitioners herein moved an application before the Tribunal under Section 12-D of the GST Act
seeking reference of questions of law purportedly arising out of the proceedings of appeal before the
Tribunal. Later, during the pendency of the proceedings, on the concession made by the Petitioners
herein, the proceedings were treated as proceedings under Section 75 of the Act of 2005.
09. Be that as it may, the matter was considered by the Tribunal at some length and, after hearing
both the sides, the Tribunal came to the conclusion that the questions posed by the Petitioners
herein for reference were not the questions arising out of the appeal and were, therefore, not
referable to the High Court for determination. This is how the instant Petition has been moved by
the Petitioners in terms of second proviso to
10. Having heard learned Counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, we are of the
considered opinion that the questions of law framed by the Petitioners herein for making reference
to the High Court for determination actually do not arise out of the proceedings. Once it is conceded
by the Petitioners that the goods seized by the authorities at Lower Munda Check Post were leviable
to Entry tax Under Section 4 of the Act of 2000, no proceedings should have been initiated, either
under the GST Act or the Act of 2005. The only provisions under the Act of 2000 pertaining to
penalty is sub-section (3) of Section 4 which reads thus:
"(3) Any person carrying the goods with documents specified in sub-section (1),
which are fake or false in respect of any particulars containing therein, shall be liable
to penalty, which shall be equal to double the amount of entry tax payable on such
goods."
11. From reading of sub-section (3) of Section 4 of the Act of 2000, it clearly transpires that the
penalty can be imposed on the person carrying the goods with documents specified in sub-section
(1) only on the ground that the documents accompanying the goods are fake or false in respect of
any particulars contained therein. This penalty which is leviable under sub-section (3) shall be equal
to the double amount of Entry Tax payable on such goods. Indisputably, it is not the case of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16179778/ 3
Commissioner State Taxes vs M/S Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited on 28 July, 2025
Petitioners herein that the documents accompanying the goods seized at Lower Munda, Check Post
were either fake or false.
12. With a view to find out as to whether there is any provision in the Act of 2000 relating to
imposition of penalty for bypassing the Commercial Taxes Check Post, we went through the entire
Act. We, however, stumbled on Section 6 of the Act of 2000 which, for facility of reference, is
reproduced hereinbelow:
"6. Application of certain provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir General Sales Tax
Act, 1962: The provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir General Sales Tax Act, 1962
relating to appeal, revisions, appellate tribunal, power to withdraw and transfer
cases, recovery of fines, taxes or penalty, powers by authorized person, powers to give
instructions and determination of issues, shall, mutatis mutandis, apply to all such
proceedings under this Act."
13. From careful reading of Section 6 of the Act of 2000, it is abundantly clear that the provisions of
the GST Act or, for that matter, the Act of 2005 do apply to the proceedings under the Act of 2000,
but their application is limited to the provisions relating to appeal, revisions, Appellate Tribunal,
power to withdraw and transfer cases, recovery of fines, taxes or penalties, etc., etc. The procedural
provisions of the GST Act, of which reference is made in Section 6 of the Act of 2000, have been
applied to the proceedings under the Act of 2000 mutatis mutandis and, therefore, shall be deemed
to be part of the Act of 2000 by reference. The provisions of Section 69 (1) (o) of the Act of 2005 and
the provisions of Section 17 (1)
(o) of the GST Act have, thus, not been made part of the Act of 2000. In short, the only provisions
which are adopted mutatis mutandis for the proceedings under the Act of 2000, in terms of Section
6 of the Act of 2000, are either those which pertain to the right of appeal and revision and the
forums for hearing such appeals and revisions or to the provisions providing for recovery and refund
of fines, taxes and penalties imposable under the Act of 2000. Since, no penalty is imposable under
the Act of 2000 for bypassing the Commercial Taxes Check Post simplicitor, as such, Section 6 of the
Act of 2000 cannot be interpreted to create a provision of penalty which otherwise does not exist in
the Act of 2000.
14. When a Statute levies tax, interest or penalty, it does so by inserting a charging Section by which
a liability is created or fixed and then proceeds to provide machinery to enforce the liability. The
Section in the Statute that creates or fixes liability, whether it is tax, interest or penalty, is known as
'Charging Section' and the Section that provides mode for recovery and collections of tax, interest or
penalty is known as 'Machinery Provision'. The penalty is a statutory liability and is in addition to
tax and, therefore, can only be created by a 'Charging Section'. This view we have taken is fortified
by a Judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in case titled 'M/s Khemka and Co.
(Agencies) Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Maharashtra', reported as (1975) 2 SCC 22. Paragraph Nos. 25 to 28
are relevant and reproduced hereunder:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16179778/ 4
Commissioner State Taxes vs M/S Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited on 28 July, 2025
"25. Penalty is not merely sanction. It is not merely adjunct to assessment. It is not
merely consequential to assessment. It is not merely machinery. Penalty is in
addition to tax and is a liability under the Act. Reference may be made to section 28
of the Indian Income-tax Act, 1922 where penalty is provided for concealment of
income. Penalty is in addition to the amount of income-tax. This Court in Jain
Brothers & Ors. v. Union of India said that penalty is not a continuation of
assessment proceedings and that penalty partakes of the character of additional tax.
26. The Federal Court in Chatturam & Ors. v.
Commissioner of Income-tax, Bihar said that liability does not depend on
assessment. There must be a charging section to create liability. There must be, first a
liability created by the Act. Second, the Act must provide for assessment. Third, the
Act must provide for enforcement of the taxing provisions. The mere fact that there is
machinery for assessment, collection and enforcement of tax and penalty in the State
Act does not mean that the provision for penalty in the State Act is treated as penalty
under- the Central Act. The meaning of penalty under the Central Act cannot be
enlarged by the provisions of machinery of the State Act incorporated for working out
the Central Act.
27. This Court in State of Tamil Nadu v. K. A. Ramudu Chettiar & Co. said that the
power to enhance assessment which was contained in the Madras Act of 1959 though
such power was not available under the 1939 Act would be available in respect of
assessment under the Central Act. Enhancement it of assessment is in the process of
assessment. It is a procedural power. The liability to tax is created by the statute.
Therefore, when the power to assess is attracted a fortiori enhancement is within the
power.
28. For the foregoing reasons we are of opinion that the provision in the state Act
imposing penalty for non-payment of income-tax within the prescribed time is not
attracted to impose penalty on dealers under the Central Act in respect of tax and
penalty payable under the Central Act. There is no lack of sanction for payment of
tax. Any dealer who would not comply with the provisions for payment of tax, would
be subjected to recovery proceedings under the public Demands Recovery Act. A
penalty is a statutory liability. The Central Act contains specific provisions for
penalty. Those are the only provisions for penalty available against the dealers under
the Central Act. Each State Sales Tax Act contains provisions for penalties. These
provisions in some cases are also for failure to submit return or failure to register. It
is rightly said that those provisions cannot apply to dealers under the Central Act
because the Central Act makes similar provisions. The Central Act is a self-contained
code which by charging section creates liability for tax and which by other sections
creates a liability for penalty and impose penalty. Section 9(2) of the Central Act
creates the State authorities as agencies to carry out the assessment, reassessment,
collection and enforcement of tax and penalty by a dealer under the Act."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16179778/ 5
Commissioner State Taxes vs M/S Reliance Jio Infocomm Limited on 28 July, 2025
15. It is, thus, trite that penalty, being a liability and a sort of additional tax, requires constitutional
mandate for its imposition. Article 265 of the Constitution of India provides that no tax shall be
levied or collected, except by authority of law. It is, thus, well settled that the penalty is like addition
tax and can only be charged or levied by a substantive 'Charging Section'. In the instant case, Section
4 of the Act of 2000 is a standalone 'Charging Section' dealing with imposition of penalty and
provides for its imposition only if the documents accompanying the taxable goods are found false
and forged with regard to particulars containing therein. Section 6 of the Act of 2000 is merely a
'Machinery Provision' that is by reference to GST Act/ Act of 2005.
16. There may be lacuna in the Act of 2000, but the Court has to interpret and apply the provisions
of the Statute as they stand. We also find it little anomalous that a person, who violates law and does
not report the concerned Check Post for verification of the documents and the goods, is not held
liable for any penalty and would be let off only by payment of the Entry Tax leviable under the Act of
2000. This was something for the Petitioners herein to ponder over and take remedial measures, if
they so deemed it fit. This lacuna was required to be taken care of at the appropriate stage but the
legislation has now been repealed, therefore, nothing more is required to be said on the issue.
However, in the instant case, the debate on the various provisions of the GST Act and the Act of
2005 was totally uncalled for and the forums below were unnecessarily kept engaged on the issues
that never arose for determination in the proceedings. It is, thus, high time that we put quietus on
the issue.
17. For all the aforesaid reasons, we find no merit in this Petition and the same is, accordingly,
dismissed. Interim direction(s), if any subsisting as on date, shall stand vacated.
(Sanjay Parihar) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
SRINAGAR
July 28th, 2025
"TAHIR"
i. Whether the Judgment is approved for reporting? Yes.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16179778/ 6
