Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan
Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Javed Iqbal Wani
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CEA No. 06/2018
Reserved on 06.06.2023.
Pronounced on 13.07.2023.
Commissioner of Central GST and Central ..... appellant (s)
Excise
Through :- Mr. Jagpaul Singh Advocate
V/s
Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr.Naveen Bindal, Advocate with
Mr. Mohd Ashfaq Mir Advocate
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE JAVED IQBAL WANI, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
Sanjeev Kumar, J.
1. This appeal by the Revenue filed under Section 35 G of the Central Excise Act, 1944 ['the Act'] is
directed against a final order No.A/62272/2018-EX (DB) dated 19.03.2018 passed by the Customs,
Excise & Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, Chandigarh ['CESTAT'] whereby the appeal preferred by
the respondent has been accepted and the impugned order dated 17.02.2011 passed by the
Commissioner, Central Excise, J&K, Jammu has been set aside.
2. Briefly stated the facts leading to filing of this appeal are that the respondent is engaged in
manufacturing of various products like Pesticides, Insecticides, Herbicides and Plant Growth
Regulators and has established its unit at SIDCO Industries Complex, Samba. The respondent is
registered for the manufacture of aforesaid products under Tariff Heading Nos. 38089330,
38089990, 38089090 & 38089340 respectively of the 1st Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act,
1985 ['the Act of 1985']. The respondent being eligible had been availing exemption/refund of excise
duty under Notification No. 56/2002-CE dated 14.11.2002 as amended ['the exemption
notification']. The respondent filed monthly claims of exemption for the period from 2005-06 to
2008-09 which was duly sanctioned by the appellant in favour of the respondent by passing
separate orders for each month. The orders passed by the appellant for exemption/refund under the
exemption notification were not assailed by the appellant-revenue and instead, the sanctioned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20569842/ 1
Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
amount was released in favour of the respondent. It seems that, during some investigation, the
appellant noticed that, during the relevant period, the respondent had cleared the products
Paushak/Joy and Kri-kelp on payment of duty by classifying the same under sub-heading 3808
9340 and claimed the benefit of exemption notification. It was found by the appellant that the
Chemist and the Director of the respondent in their statements had clearly admitted that
Paushak/Joy, used to increase the size and yield of fruits and vegetables, was manufactured by
mixing various solvents, dye, caustic soda and stabilizers with Gibberillic acid. The appellant,
therefore, found that the only active ingredient in the product aforementioned manufactured by the
respondent was Gibberillic acid and the rest being only solvents, dyes and stabilizers, as such, the
product was required to be classified under sub-heading 3808 93330 as Gibberillic acid and
exempted from payment of duty as mentioned at S.No. 285 of Notification No. 06/2002-CE prior to
01.03.2006 and S.No.53 of Notification No. 04/2006- CE thereafter. Kri-kelp was also found
manufactured from the extract of sea weeds and was a biological plant growth enhancer as per the
product label and was, thus, classifiable under sub-heading 3101 0099. The appellant was of the
opinion that the respondent had willfully suppressed/misstated the facts to the appellant-revenue
with an intent to pay duty on goods which was otherwise exempted and consequently, take
erroneous refund under the exemption notification. The appellant-revenue, thus, concluded that, in
the instant case, the extended period of limitation as provided under the proviso to Section 11 A(1) of
the Act was invocable for recovery of excess amount of refund claimed and granted to the
respondent. Resultantly, a show cause notice was issued to the respondent for recovery of erroneous
refund sanctioned in its favour on the ground that the goods in question were not dutiable and,
therefore, the respondent was neither liable to pay the duty, nor was entitled to refund of the same.
The said show cause notice culminated into order in original passed by the appellant and demand
was confirmed along with interest and penalty.
3. Feeling aggrieved against the aforesaid order in original passed by the Commissioner, Central
Excise, Jammu, an appeal was filed by the respondent before CESTAT. The appeal of the respondent
was allowed vide order impugned primarily on the following two grounds:
(i) That all the facts were in the knowledge of the Revenue and there was no
suppression on the part of the respondent before CESTAT and, therefore, the
extended period of limitation was not invocable. The demand along with interest and
penalty raised by the appellant herein was, thus, time barred; and,
(ii) That the Revenue had not challenge the appealable orders sanctioning refund to
the respondent herein before CESTAT and, therefore, those orders had attained
finality. The demand could not have been raised under Section 11A of the Act without
challenging the appealable orders.
4. The revenue did not accept the final order passed by the CESTAT accepting the appeal of the
respondent and is, therefore, in appeal before us in terms of Section 35 G of the Act.
5. This Court vide its order dated 16.04.2019, after hearing both the sides, framed the following
substantial question of law for determination in this appeal:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20569842/ 2
Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
"Whether the erroneous refund which was sanctioned under Notification No. 56 of
2002-CE can be recovered under Section 11A of the Central Excise Act, 1944 by
invocation of extended period of limitation, where the refund was granted on the
basis of any approval, acceptance and assessment relating to the rate of duty ?
6. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
7. Mr. Jagpaul Singh, learned counsel appearing for the appellant- revenue vehemently submits that
the respondent through its counsel Sh. P.S.Pruthi has not disputed so far as the classification of the
goods in question falling under heading 3808 9340 of the Act of 1985 is concerned. The respondent
has also not disputed before the CESTAT that the goods classified under the aforesaid heading were
exempted from payment of duty. He submits that, in view of the aforesaid admission made by
learned counsel appearing for the respondent, it was no longer res integra that the goods
manufactured by the respondent were predominantly Gibbereillic acid classifiable under heading
3808 9340 and, therefore, not exigible to excise duty. He argues that the respondent being aware
that Gibberiellic accid manufactured by it was exempted from payment of duty, yet passed on the
same as plant growth regulator classifiable under Chapter heading 3808 9340. He submits that the
respondent by misrepresentation and misstatement first paid the excise duty on the product which
was otherwise exempted from payment of excise duty and thereafter submitted its claim for refund
under the exemption notification. He, therefore, argues that the case of 'erroneous refund' made in
favour of the respondent was covered by the extended period of limitation as provided under proviso
to Section 11A(1) of the Act. Learned counsel submits that the revenue rightly invoked the extended
period of limitation and put the respondent on show cause notice for recovery of erroneous refund
of excise duty paid to it on the basis of misstatement/misrepresentation made by the respondent. 8
Per contra, Mr. Naveen Jindal, learned counsel appearing for the respondent argues that Section
11A of the Act, inter alia, deals with recovery of duty of excise "erroneously refunded" and, therefore,
it has to be a case of refund of duty of excise under Section 11B of the Act which is the only section
dealing with refund of the excise duty. He, therefore, argues that Section 11A and Section 11B of the
Act go hand in hand and, therefore, are required to be read together. He submits that, as per the
Board Circular dated 19.12.2002, the provisions of Section 11B are not applicable to the exemption
notification, for, the said notification only provides a mechanism to operationalise the exemption
and is not a provision for refund. He submits that the case of the respondent was a case of grant of
exemption and not a case of refund in the eye of law and, therefore, the provisions of Section 11A
were not invocable. His further argument is that the orders sanctioning refund passed by the
Revenue were indisputably appealable under Section 35 of the Act. The revenue did not file appeals
and accepted the orders passed by the Assessing Authority and sanctioned the refund by passing
separate orders for each month. He submits that, unless the orders sanctioning refund are reviewed
or recalled, the same should be deemed to have attained finality. The refund sanctioned under such
final orders cannot be termed as 'erroneous' and made subject matter of recovery by having resort to
Section 11A of the Act.
9 To buttress his submissions, learned counsel relies upon a judgment of Gauhati High Court in the
case of Commissioner of Central Excise Shillong vs. Jellalpore Tea Estate, 2011 (268) ELT 14 (Gau).
Learned counsel goes a step further and submits that Section 11A of the Act can be invoked in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20569842/ 3
Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
case of 'erroneous refund' and, therefore, for invoking Section 11A, the revenue is required to
demonstratively show that the refund sanctioned in favour of the respondent was actually an
erroneous refund. He contends that the refund duly sanctioned by the Competent Authority by
passing a formal assessment order which otherwise is appealable under Section 35 of the Act can
only be declared erroneous by the Appellate Authority. The Adjudicating Authority does not have
any power to sit in appeal in collateral proceedings and refuse to accept the final order passed by the
Assessing Authority. His further contention is that Section 11A and Section 35 E of the Act operate in
two different fields and none of them can be said to have overriding effect on the other. So far as the
recovery of erroneous refund is concerned, Section 35 E of the Act is the only provision to declare
the refund as erroneous which would, in turn, pave the way for recovery of erroneous refund under
Section 11A of the Act.
10 Regarding invoking of extended period of limitation, learned counsel for the respondent submits
that the extended period of limitation as provided under proviso to Section 11A(1) of the Act was not
attracted, for, it was not the case of the revenue demonstrated by reference to any evidence that
there had been willful suppression or willful misstatement of facts bringing the case of the revenue
within proviso to Section 11A(1) of the Act. He, therefore, submits that the CESTAT vide final order
impugned in this appeal has correctly held the demand raised by the revenue on account of
erroneous refund of the excise duty as time barred.
11 Before we proceed to appreciate the rival contentions and adjudicate the substantial question of
law framed by this Court in the instant appeal, it is necessary to first set out the provisions of Section
11A of the Act.
"11A. Recovery of duties not levied or not paid or short-levied or short-paid or
erroneously refunded--
(1) When any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied or
short-paid or erroneously refunded,whether or not such non levy or non payment,
short levy or short payment or acceptance or assessment relating to the rate of duty
on or valuation of excisable goods under any other provisions of this Act or the rules
made thereunder, a Central Excise Officer may, within six months from the relevant
date, serve notice on the person chargeable with the duty which has not been levied
or paid or which has been short-levied or short-paid or to whom the refund has
erroneously been made, requiring him to show cause why he should not pay the
amount specified in the notice--
Provided that where any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied or
short-paid or erroneously refunded by reason of fraud, collusion or any willful misstatement or
suppression of facts or contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or of the rules made
thereunder with intent to evade payment of duty by such person or his agent, the provisions of this
sub section shall have effect Explanation: where the service of the notice is stayed by an order of a
Court the period of such stay shall be excluded in computing the aforesaid period of six months or
five years, as the case may be.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20569842/ 4
Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
(1A) when any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied or short paid or
erroneously refunded, by reason of fraud, collusion or any willful misstatement or suppression of
facts or contravention of any of the provisions of this Act or the rules made thereunder with intent to
evade payment of duty, by such person or his agent, to whom a notice is served under the proviso to
sub section (1) by the CENTRAL Excise Officer, may pay duty in full or in part as may be accepted by
him, and the interest payable thereon under section 11AB and penalty equal to twenty five per cent
of the duty specified in the notice or the duty so accepted by such person within thirty days of the
receipt of the notice.
2. The Central Excise Officer shall, after considering the representation if any made by the person on
whom notice is served under sub section (1), determine the amount of duty of excise due from such
person not being in excess of the amount specified in the notice and thereupon such person shall
pay the amount so determined;
Provided that if such person has paid the duty in full together with, interest and penalty under sub
section (1A), the proceedings in respect of such person and other persons to whom notice is served
under sub section (1), shall, without prejudice to the provisons of sections 9, 9A and 9AA be deemed
to be conclusive as to the matters stated therein:
Provided further that if such person has paid duty in part, interest and penalty under
sub section (1A), the Central Excise Officer, shall determine the amount of duty or
interest not being in excess of the amount partly due from such person.
(2A)............................................. (2B).............................................
(2C)......................................... (3) For the purposes of this section-
(i) "refund" includes rebate of duty of excise on excisable goods exported out of India
or on excisable materials used in the manufacture of goods which are exported out of
India;
(ii) "relevant date" means,--
(a) in the case of excisable goods on which duty of excise has not been levied or paid
or has been short-levied or short- paid-
(A) where under the rules made under this Act a periodical return, showing
particulars of the duty paid on the excisable goods removed during the period to
which the said return relates, is to be filed by a manufacturer or a producer or a
licensee of a werehouse as the case may be, the date on which such return is so filed
(B) where no periodical return as aforesaid is filed, the last date on which such return
is to be filed under the said rules;
(C) In any other case, the date on which the duty is to be paid under this Act or the
rules made thereunder
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20569842/ 5
Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
(b) In a case where duty of excise is provisionally assessed under this Act or the rules
made thereunder, the date of adjustment of duty after the final assessment thereof;
(c) In the case of excisable goods on which duty of excise has been erroneously
refunded, the date of such refund"
12 From a reading of Section 11A of the Act, it clearly transpires that when any duty of
excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied or short-paid or
erroneously refunded, the Central Excise Officer, may within six months from the
relevant date, serve a notice on the person chargeable with the duty which has not
been so levied or paid or which has been so short-levied or short-paid or to whom the
refund has erroneously been made to show why he should not be asked to pay the
amount specified in the notice. Indisputably, in the instant case, the period of six
months from the relevant date has since expired. To put it more clearly, the
expression 'relevant date" is defined under sub-section 3 (ii) of Section 11A of the Act.
Neither side has disputed that the limitation, provided for issuance of show cause
notice in terms of sub-section 1 of section 11 A of the Act had expired much prior to
the issuance of show cause notice to the respondent. The revenue, however, has relied
upon the proviso appended to sub-section (1) of Section 11A of the Act which provides
for extended period of limitation of five years, provided it is a case where duty of
excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied or short-paid or
erroneously refunded by reason of fraud or collusion or any willful misstatement or
suppression of facts or contravention of any of the provisions of this Act and the rules
made thereunder with an intent to evade payment of duty by such person or his agent
etc. The sine quo non for invoking the proviso is to demonstrate by reference to
material on record that the assessee had claimed and has been paid erroneous refund
of the excise duty by reason of fraud, collusion or any willful misstatement or
suppression of facts or contravention of any provisions of the Act and the rules
framed thereunder and that this fraud, collusion, willful misstatement or suppression
of facts etc., is made with an intention to evade payment of duty by the assessee or his
agent. 13 We have gone through the entire record, but could not find an iota of
material on record which would suggest that the assessee-the respondent herein had,
at any time, suppressed any material facts or made any willful misstatement as is
attributed to it by the Adjudicating Authority in the Order In Original passed for
recovery of purported erroneous refund. Rather, it has come on record that the
respondent had fairly and in a transparent manner explained the entire process
leading to the manufacture of the product in question in the industrial unit of the
respondent. The process of manufacture followed in the industrial unit and the
product produced in the manufacturing process was all along clearly indicated by the
respondent by filing periodical returns. The periodical audits also took place and
refunds were sanctioned by the Competent Authority in favour of the respondent by
passing a speaking order for each month. It is pursuant to the refund sanctioning
orders passed by the competent authority, the respondent was released the refund. 14
Viewed form any angle, we do not find sufficient material on record to come to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20569842/ 6
Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
conclusion that the respondent, with an intention to evade payment of duty,
suppressed or misstated any facts relating to the manufacturing process and the
product which it produced and passed on by payment of excise duty. Whether the
product produced by the respondent is a Gibbereillic acid simplicitor or is a plant
growth regulator containing Gibbereillic acid as dominant ingredient, is a question of
fact which cannot be gone into by this Court hearing an appeal on a substantial
question of law. Be that as it may, even if we were to assume that the revenue had
erroneously made the refund of the excise duty in favour of the respondent, yet the
period of limitation for issuing show cause notice in terms of sub-section (1) of
section 11A of the Act, had since expired and, therefore, the entire process had
become time barred. As already explained, the extended period of limitation as
provided under provision to sub -section (1) of Section 11A was not invocable for the
simple reason that the twin factors which are sine quo non for invoking the proviso
were missing in the instant case. We are not convinced with the argument of Mr.
Jagpaul Singh that not only the respondent had misstated/suppressed the facts with
regard to the classification of the product in question, but had done so with an intent
to evade payment of excise duty. 15 That apart, we are also in agreement with
CESTAT that, once the excise duty in favour of assessee is sanctioned by the
competent authority after passing a speaking order and which order is appealable
under section 35 of the Act, parallel proceedings seeking recovery of the sanctioned
refund cannot be launched by the Adjudicating Authority. Unless the orders of
sanctioning refund passed by the Adjudicating Authority are reversed in appeal or
revision under the Act, Section 11 cannot be invoked by terming such sanctioned
refund of excise duty as 'erroneous refund' by holding collateral proceedings under
section 11A of the Act. Any duty, which is paid /refunded to the assessee after holding
formal proceedings and passing speaking orders in favour of the assessee, cannot be
termed as 'erroneous refund'. The revenue, if it is of the opinion that the Adjudicating
Authority has made an erroneous refund in favour of assessee to which it was not
otherwise eligible, can avail the remedy of filing appeal or revision under the Act. So
long as the orders stand as having attained finality, the same cannot be tampered
with by the Adjudicating Authority by launching collateral proceedings purportedly
under Section 11A of the Act.
16 The judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of Priya Blue Industries
Pvt. Ltd., 2004 (172) ELT 145 (SC) and Flock India Pvt. Ltd., 2000 (12) ELT 285
(SC), relied upon by the CESTAT are exactly on the point and leaves no manner of
doubt that Section 11A of the Act is not invocable when refund has been sanctioned
by the Adjudicating Authority by passing a speaking order and which order is
appealable under Section 35 of the Act, more particularly, when such order has not
been challenged by the revenue and has attained finality.
17 The case in hand is also covered by the Division Bench judgment of the Gauhati
High Court rendered in the case of Jellalpore Tea Estate (supra) wherein the issue
has been considered and dealt with by the Division Bench in paragraphs (12) to (15)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20569842/ 7
Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
which, for facility of reference are reproduced hereunder:
"12. The material portion of Section 11A of the Act reads as follows:
"11-A. Recovery of duties not levied or not paid or short- levied or short-paid or
erroneously refunded-
(1) When any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied or
short-paid or erroneously refunded, whether or not such non- levy or non-payment,
short-levy or short-payment or erroneous refund, as the case may be, was on the
basis of any approval, acceptance or assessment relating to the rate of duty on or
valuation of excisable goods under any other provisions of this Act or the rules made
thereunder a Central Excise Officer may, within one year from the relevant date,
serve notice on the person chargeable with the duty which has not been levied or paid
or which has been short-
levied or short-paid or to whom the refund has erroneously been made, requiring him to show cause
why he should not pay the amount specified in the notice:
Provided that where any duty of excise has not been levied or paid or has been
short-levied or short-paid or erroneously refunded by reason of fraud, collusion or
any willful misstatement or suppression of facts, or contravention of any of the
provisions of this Act or of the rules made thereunder with intent to evade payment
of duty, by such person or his agent, the provisions of this sub-section shall have
effect, as if, for the words one year, the words "five years" were substituted.
A bare reading of Section 11A of the Act indicates that power can be exercised only if
duty has not been levied or paid or has been short-levied etc. "on the basis of any
approval, acceptance or assessment relating to the rate of duty on or valuation of
excisable goods under any other provisions of this Act". Insofar as the present case is
concerned, the only issue that arose for consideration was whether the assessee was
entitled to the benefit of Notification No.33/99-CE dated 8.7.99. There was no issue
of any approval, acceptance or assessment relating to the rate of duty nor was there
any issue relating to the valuation of any excisable goods. Ex-facie, therefore, Section
11A of the Act was inapplicable to the facts of the case".
13. That apart, the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise, Silchar had passed a
final order in favour of the assessee on 29.4.2002 and admittedly, this order was
revisable under Section 35-E of the Act. For reasons best known to the Commissioner
of Central Excise, Shillong no action was taken to have the order of the Assistant
Commissioner revised or set aside. Having failed to avail of the statutory remedy
available under the Act, the Revenue sought to circumvent the law (as it were) by
taking recourse to Section 11A of the Act. In our opinion, this was clearly
impermissible inasmuch as what is required to be done in a manner prescribed by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20569842/ 8
Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
law, ought to be done in that manner only or not at all.
14. Insofar as the present case is concerned, the prescription of law required that the
order of the Assistant Commissioner passed on 29.4.2002 could be challenged only
by resorting to Section 35-
E of the Act. The Revenue could not initiate collateral proceedings to set aside the order dated
30.4.2002 by resorting to the enabling power under Section 11A of the Act.
15. Consequently, we are of the opinion that: (i) Section 11A of the Act is not applicable to the facts of
the case since the issue raised did not concern any approval, acceptance or assessment relating to
the rate of duty on or valuation of any excisable goods. The issue raised by the assessee related to its
entitlement to the benefit of Notification No.33/99-CE dated 8.7.99. (ii) Even otherwise, the
Revenue could not take recourse to Section 11A of the Act when it had a statutory remedy available
to it to challenge the order dated 29.4.2002 passed by the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise,
Silchar by resorting to the revisional power available under Section 35-E of the Act"
18 The expression 'willful suppression' also fell for determination of the Supreme
Court in the case of Anand Nishikawa Company Ltd vs. Commissioner of Central
Excise, Meerut, 2005 (188) ELT 149 (SC) wherein the Apex Court, after considering
the provisions of Section 11A of the Act in para 27 held thus:
"27.Relying on the aforesaid observations of this Court in the case of Pushpam
Pharmaceutical Co. Vs. Collector of Central Excise, Bombay [1995 Suppl. (3) SCC
462], we find that "suppression of facts" can have only one meaning that the correct
information was not disclosed deliberately to evade payment of duty, when facts were
known to both the parties, the omission by one to do what he might have done not
that he must have done would not render it suppression. It is settled law that mere
failure to declare does not amount to willful suppression. There must be some
positive act from the side of the assessee to find willful suppression. Therefore, in
view of our findings made herein above that there was no deliberate intention on the
part of the appellant not to disclose the correct information or to evade payment of
duty, it was not open to the Central Excise Officer to proceed to recover duties in the
manner indicated in proviso to section 11A of the Act. We are, therefore, of the firm
opinion that where facts were known to both the parties, as in the instant case, it was
not open to the CEGAT to come to a conclusion that the appellant was guilty of
"suppression of facts". In Densons Pultretaknik vs. Collector of Central Excise [2003
(11) SCC 390], this Court held that mere classification under a different sub-heading
by the manufacturer cannot be said to be willful misstatement or "suppression of
facts". This view was also reiterated by this Court in Collector of Central Excise,
Baroda, vs. LMP Precision Engg.Co.Ltd. [2004 (9) SCC 703]"
19 The judgment passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Grasim Industries Ltd vs Commissioner
of Central Excise, (2011) 14 Supreme Court Cases 685, relied upon by by Mr. Jagpaul Singh learned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20569842/ 9
Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
counsel appearing for the revenue, is beside the point and the question of law formulated for
adjudication in this appeal. Para 10 of the judgment which has been strongly relied upon by Mr.
Jagpaul is set out hereinbelow.
"10.Section 11A provides for a right of issuance of show cause notice, if, according to
the Department, duty of excise has been erroneously refunded to a party. In the event
of such erroneous refund of excise duty, the competent authority may then issue such
a show cause notice as provided for under Seciton 11A in which case the assessee has
to show cause as to why the aforesaid amount of refund, which it erroneously
refunded, should not be recovered from him. In such a case, there is no question of
filing any appeal, as appropriate remedy as provided under Section 11A is available.
Therefore, in our considered opinion, the first contention of the counsel appearing
for the appellant has no merit."
20 From a reading of para 10, it clearly transpires that the Supreme Court has only held that, once a
show cause notice, in terms of section 11A of the Act has been issued by the revenue department to
the assessee for recovery of erroneous refund made to it, the remedy of the aggrieved assessee is
provided under section 11A itself. The judgment therefore cannot be held to lay down a proposition
of law that section 11A is invocable even in a case where there is no erroneous refund, rather the
refund of the excise duty is pursuant to a speaking order passed by the Adjudicating Authority after
following due process of law. Such order passed by the Assessing Authority is appealable under
Section 35 of the Act or the competent Authority of the revenue may invoke Section 35E of the Act
and direct the concerned Authority to take an appropriate remedy against such order sanctioning
erroneous refund, if any, in favour of the assessee.
21 For the foregoing reasons, we find no illegality or infirmity in the final order passed by the
CESTAT Chandigarh impugned in this appeal and, therefore, uphold the same. The substantial
question of law framed by this Court vide order dated 16.04.20119 reproduced above is replied in
the following manner:
The refund of excise duty claimed by an assessee and sanctioned by the competent
Authority vide its order under Notification No. 56 of 2002-CE which order has
attained finality as not having been challenged before any appellate or revisional
authority under the Excise Act cannot be termed as 'erroneous refund' and recovered
by resort to section 11A of the Act. The extended period of limitation as provided
under proviso to sub section (1) of Section 11A would be attracted only in a case
where the refund made in favour of the assessee is erroneous by reason of fraud,
collusion or any willful misstatement or suppression of facts, or contravention of any
provisions of the act and the rules framed thereunder with an intent to evade
payment of duty by the assessee or his agent.
22 As conclusively held hereinabove in the instant case, the refund sanctioned by the adjudicating
authority in favour of the respondent was after proper application of mind and by passing of
speaking orders and therefore, cannot be termed as 'erroneous refund' for the purposes of section
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20569842/ 10
Commissioner Of Central Gst And Central vs Krishi Rasayan Exports Pvt. Ltd on 13 July, 2023
11A of the Act. The extended period of limitation provided under proviso to sub section 1 of section
11A is not attracted as we find no material on record to demonstrate that the purported erroneous
refund was sanctioned in favour of the respondent-assessee on the basis of some fraud, collusion or
misstatement /misrepresentation of facts and, that too, with an intention to evade payment of excise
duty. The revenue has also failed to make out a case of unjust enrichment having failed to show as to
how the respondent has been benefited by such purported erroneous refund sanctioned in its favour
by the Competent Authority.
13. For the foregoing reasons, we find no merit in this appeal, accordingly, dismissed the same.
(JAVED IQBAL WANI) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
Jammu
13.07.2023
Sanjeev
Whether order is speaking:Yes
Whether order is reportable:Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20569842/ 11
