Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Smt.Padmavathi on 6 October, 2020
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Smt.Padmavathi on 6 October,
2020
Author: T.S.Sivagnanam
Bench: T.S.Sivagnanam, V.Bhavani Subbaroyan
TCA.No.350 of 2020
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 06.10.2020
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE T.S.SIVAGNANAM
and
THE HONOURABLE Mrs.JUSTICE V.BHAVANI SUBBAROYAN
Tax Case Appeal No.350 of 2020
Commissioner of Income Tax,
Ward - 3,
Tirunelveli .. Appellant
Vs.
Smt.Padmavathi .. Respondent
Tax Case Appeal filed under Section 260A of the Income Tax
Act, 1961, against the order made in ITA No.1306/Chny/2019 dated
02.12.2019 passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, 'C' Bench,
Chennai for the Assessment Year 2014-2015.
For Appellant : Mr.M.Swaminathan
Senior Standing Counsel
Assisted by
Ms.V.Pushpa
Junior Standing Counsel
For Respondent : Mr.G.Baskar
1/14
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186171738/ 1
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Smt.Padmavathi on 6 October, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
(cid:12) TCA.No.350 of 2020
JUDGMENT
[Judgment of the Court was delivered by T.S.SIVAGNANAM, J.] This appeal, at the instance of the
revenue filed under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (the 'Act' for brevity), is directed
against the order passed by the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Madras 'C' Bench, Chennai in ITA
No.1306/Chny/2019 dated 02.12.2019 for the Assessment Year 2014-2015.
2. The following Substantial Questions of Law were raised for consideration:
“1. Whether on the facts and in the circumstances of the case, the Income Tax
Appellate Tribunal was right in coming to conclusion that in a limited scrutiny case,
the CIT cannot exercise the power of revision u/s. 263 of the Income Tax Act to look
in to any other issue which the Assessing officer himself could not look?
2. Whether on the facts and in the circumstance of the case the Income tax Appellate
Tribunal was right in holding that invoking of Section 56(2)(vii)(b) of the Income Tax
Act 1961 is beyond the purview of the Assessing officer when the reason for limited
scrutiny is 'purchase of property' and the same issue is very much related to the
purchase of property?
http://www.judis.nic.in
3. Whether on the facts and in the circumstance of the case the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal was
right in concluding that while completing the assessment under limited scrutiny the Assessing
Officer cannot look beyond the issue for which the case was selected for scrutiny without noting that
the CBD instruction No.20/2015 has exception clause in 3(d) to convert the same into a complete
scrutiny?"
3. The assessee is an individual and a partner in a firm under the name and style of
Sri Ram Associates. She filed her return of income on 27.10.2015 admitting a total
income of Rs.2,58,110/-. The return was processed under Section 143(1) of the Act.
Subsequently, the case was selected under Computer Aided Scrutiny Selection [for
brevity 'CASS'] 'Limited Scrutiny' with regard to a purchase of a property by the
assessee.
The assessing officer after hearing the assessee, verifying the source of funds
completed the assessment by order dated 28.12.2016 under Section 143(3) of the Act
and made an addition of Rs.8,00,000/-.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186171738/ 2
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Smt.Padmavathi on 6 October, 2020
4. The Principal Commissioner of Income Tax, Madurai [for brevity 'PCIT'] invoked his power under
Section 263 of the Act, issued show cause notice dated 26.10.2018 to the assessee for the reason that
the assessee had purchased the immovable property by a sale deed registered as
http://www.judis.nic.in document no.7165 of 2013 on the file of Sub-Registrar, Thirumangalam for
a consideration of Rs.41,50,000/-, whereas, the guideline value fixed by the State Government was
Rs.77,19,000/- and there is a difference of Rs.35,69,000/- which was not properly enquired into by
the assessing officer and not considered during the course of assessment. For such reason, the
assessing officer proposed to invoke his powers under Section 263 of the Act.
5. The assessee submitted her reply dated 11.01.2019 and also appeared in-person through her
Authorised Representative, a Chartered accountant. In the explanation, the assessee pointed out
that even going by the averments in the show cause notice shows that the assessing officer did make
an enquiry, but the PCIT was of the opinion that the assessing officer did not make proper enquiry
and contended that there is a difference between lack of enquiry and indeaquate enquiry and in this
regard, referred to a decision of the High Court of Delhi in C.I.T. V. Anil Kumar Sharma reported in
[2011] 335 ITR Page 83.
6. Further, the assessee contended that the assessing officer has clearly recorded the guideline value
and the sale consideration in the http://www.judis.nic.in assessment order, which proves that he
conducted necessary enquiry, as deemed fit by him. Therefore, the assessee contended that there
was no reason to invoke the power under Section 263 of the Act, when there was an enquiry and on
the ground that the enquiry was inadequate. Without prejudice to the said submission, the assessee
contended that the guideline value be automatically taken as deemed purchase consideration and
the assessing officer has to refer to the valuation officer under Section 50(C)(2) of the Act and since
the assessment was getting time barred, the assessing officer, stepped into the shoes of the valuation
officer, made enquiry and ascertained that the guideline value was not fair market value of the
property and the actual consideration paid by the assessee represented the fair market value.
Therefore, it was contended that there was no occasion for the PCIT to invoke the power under
Section 263 of the Act. The assessee placed reliance on the decision of Agra Tribunal in the case of
Income Tax officer, 1(3) Vs. Ramesh Chandra Kulshresth and others ITA No.228/Agra/ 2018.
7. The PCIT considered the explanation and held that in the first place a request has to be made by
the assessee for valuation of property and nothing is discernible from the records that the assesee
made any request, http://www.judis.nic.in which needs to any inference that the assessing officer
did apply his mind to the fair market value and the consequential taxability of the investment as
'unexplained investment' under Section 56(2)(vii)(b)(ii) of the Act.
8. The PCIT further held that though the assessing officer verified the source of funds, he failed to
apply the said provision, namely, Section 56(2)(vii)(b)(ii) of the Act. Thus, the PCIT rejected the
explanation given by the assessee and set aside the assessment and referred back the same to the
assessing officer to redo the assessment. The assessee challenged the said order dated 18.03.2019
passed under Section 263 of the Act by filing an appeal before the Tribunal. The Tribunal held that
the value adopted for stamp duty purposes is taken as 'deemed consideration' under Section
56(2)(vii)b of the Act and this is only a deeming provision and there is no occasion for the assessee
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186171738/ 3
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Smt.Padmavathi on 6 October, 2020
to explain the source for deemed consideration. Further, the Tribunal held that since the assessment
was under limited scrutiny, it would be beyond the powers of the assessing officer to look into any
other issue, which has come to his notice clearing the course of assessment and also faulted the PCIT
for invoking his power under Section 263 of the Act. Challenging the said order, the Revenue is
before us by way of this appeal.
http://www.judis.nic.in
9. We have heard Mr.M.Swaminathan, learned senior standing counsel assisted by Ms.V.Pushpa,
learned junior standing counsel for the appellant / revenue and Mr.G.Baskar, learned counsel,
accepting notice on behalf of the respondent / assessee.
10. We take up the substantial question of law No.3 for consideration at the first instance. The
revenue would contend that the finding rendered by the Tribunal with regard to the scope of limited
scrutiny and the role of the assessing officer in a limited scrutiny is incorrect and such finding has
been rendered by the Tribunal without taking note of the instruction issued by Central Board of
Direct Taxes, [for brevity 'CBDT'] in instruction No.20/2015 dated 29.12.2015. Drawing our
attention to the said instruction, it is submitted that during the course of assessment proceedings in
limited scrutiny cases, if it comes to the notice of the assessing officer that there is potential
escapement of income exceeding Rs.5 Lakhs [for metro charges, the monetary limit shall be Rs.10
Lakhs] requiring substantial verification on any other issue, then, the case may be taken up for
'complete scrutiny', with the approval of the PCIT / CIT concern. In such cases, the procedure
stipulated in paragraph no.3.a.b.c. of the instructions, would not apply. For better appreciation, the
relevant http://www.judis.nic.in portion of the instruction is quoted herein below:
'3. As far as the returns selected for scrutiny through CASS-2015 are concerned, two
type of cases have been selected for scrutiny in the current Financial year - one is
'Limited Scrutiny' and other is 'complete Scrutiny'. The assessees concerned have
duly been intimated about their cases falling either in 'Limited scrutiny' or 'Complete
Scrutiny' through notices issued under section 143(2) of the Income-tax Act, 1961
('Act'). The procedure for handling 'Limited scrutiny' cases shall be as under:
a. In 'Limited scrutiny' cases, the reasons / issues shall be forthwith communicated to
the assessee concerned.
b. The Questionnaire under section 142(1) of the Act in 'Limited Scrutiny' cases shall
remain confined only to the specific reasons / issues for which case has been picked
up for scrutiny. Further, the scope of enquiry shall be restricted to the 'Limited
Scrutiny' issues.
c. These cases shall be completed expeditiously in a limited number of hearings.
d. During the course of assessment proceedings in 'Limited Scrutiny' cases, if it
comes to the notice of the Assessing Officer that there is potential escapement of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186171738/ 4
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Smt.Padmavathi on 6 October, 2020
income exceeding Rs. Five lakhs (for metro charges, the monetary limit shall be
Rs.Ten lakhs) requiring substantial verification on any other issue(s), then, the case
may be taken up for 'complete Scrutiny' with the approval of the Pr.CIT/CIT
concerned.
http://www.judis.nic.in However, such an approval shall be accorded by the
Pr.CIT/CIT in writing after being satisfied about merits of the issue(s) necessitating
'Complete Scrutiny' in that particula case. Such cases shall be monitored by the
Range Head concerned. The procedure indicated at points (a), (b) and (c) above shall
no longer remain binding in such cases. (For the present purpose, 'Metro Charges'
would mean Delhi, Mumbai, Chennai, Kolkata, Bengaluru, Hyderabad and
Ahmedabad).'
11. It is further submitted that the Tribunal in a subsequent decision, authored by the very same
Hon'ble Member took note of the circular and decided the case against the assessee in ITA
No.1498/Chny/2019 in the case of M/s Sahayamatha Salterns Private Limited, Tuticorin Vs. Deputy
Commissioner of Income Tax, Circle I, Tuticorin dated 11.12.2019. Therefore, it is submitted that the
Substantial Question of Law no.3 has to be answered in favour of the revenue.
12. Mr.G.Baskar, learned counsel appearing for the respondent / assessee submitted that the
revenue is right in submitting that in the case of Sahayamatha Salterns Private Limited, the Tribunal
noted the instruction No. 20/2015 dated 29.12.2015 and decided the matter against the assessee.
However, the assessee has filed an appeal before this Court in http://www.judis.nic.in TCA No.158
of 2020 and the appeal has been admitted to consider the substantial question of law, which has
been framed almost on similar lines, as substantial question of law no.3 above.
13. We note that the Tribunal did not consider the effect of instruction no.20/2015, which had been
considered in the case of Sahayamatha Salterns Private Limited, which issue is now pending before
the Division Bench of this Court by way of a Tax Case Appeal, therefore, we are of the view that the
Revenue can agitate the said question in the said tax case appeal and it would suffice to vacate the
observations made by the Tribunal in the impugned order to the extent with regard to the scope of
'limited scrutiny assessments'.
14. Accordingly, that portion of the order and observations made in paragraph no.7 of the impugned
order are set aside and the substantial question no.3 is left open to be agitated by the Revenue in
TCA No.158 of 2020.
15. The substantial question nos.1 and 2 are interconnected namely, the power of the PCIT under
Section 263 of Act and whether he could have http://www.judis.nic.in set aside the assessment on
the ground that the assessing officer did not invoke Section 56(2)(vii)b(ii). The reading of the
assessment order shows that the case was selected for limited scrutiny only on this aspect regarding
the sale consideration paid by the assessee for purchase of the immovable property and the source of
funds. The assessing officer has noted that the sale consideration paid by the assessee was
Rs.41,50,000/- and she has paid stamp duty and other expenses of Rs.5,75,000/-. The source of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186171738/ 5
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Smt.Padmavathi on 6 October, 2020
funds was verified and the assessing officer was satisfied with the same. The PCIT while invoking his
power under Section 263 of Act, faults the assessing officer on the ground that he did not make
proper enquiry. It is not clear as to what in the opinion of the PCIT is 'proper enquiry'. By using such
expression, it presupposes that the assessing officer did conduct an enquiry. However, in the
opinion of the PCIT, the enquiry was not proper in absence of not clearly stating as to why in the
opinion of PCIT, the enquiry was not proper, we have to necessarily hold that the invocation of the
power under Section 263 of the Act was not justified.
16. The only reason for setting aside the scrutiny assessment was on the ground that the guide line
value of the property, at the relevant time, was higher than the sale consideration reflected in the
registered http://www.judis.nic.in document. The question would be as to what is the effect of the
guideline value fixed by the State Government. There are long line of decisions of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court holding that guideline value is only an indicator and the same is fixed by the State
Government for the purposes of calculating stamp duty on a deal of conveyance. Therefore, merely
because the guideline was higher than the sale consideration shown in the deed of conveyance,
cannot be the sole reason for holding that the assessment is erroneous and prejudicial to the interest
of revenue.
17. The assessing officer in his limited scrutiny, has verified the source of funds, noted the sale
consideration paid, the expenses incurred for stamp duty and other charges. Furthermore, the
assessee in their reply dated 11.01.2019 to the show cause notice dated 26.10.2018 issued by the
PCIT has specifically stated that the assessment was getting time barred, assessing officer took upon
himself the role of a valuation officer under Section 50(C)(2) and found that the guideline value was
not actual fair market value of the property and the actual consideration paid was the fair market
value and therefore, he did not choose to make any addition under Section 50(C) of the Act.
http://www.judis.nic.in
18. The PCIT, has not dealt with this specific objection, but, would fault the assessing officer for not
invoking Section 56(2)(vii)(b)(ii) merely on the ground that the market value was higher. As point
out earlier, the guideline value is only an indicator and that will always not represent the fair market
value of the property and therefore, the invocation of the power under Section 263 of the Act by the
PCIT is not sustainable in law.
In the result, the present appeal is dismissed and the substantial question of law nos.1 and 2 are
answered against the revenue and the substantial question of law no.3 is left open to the revenue to
agitate the same in TCA No.158 of 2020. No costs.
[T.S.S.J.,] [V.B.S.J.,]
06.10.2020
Internet: Yes
Speaking Judgment / Non speaking Judgment
To
The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186171738/ 6
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs Smt.Padmavathi on 6 October, 2020
'C' Bench, Chennai
ssd
http://www.judis.nic.in
T.S.SIVAGNANAM,J
AND
V.BHAVANI SUBBAROYAN,J
ssd
06.10.2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186171738/ 7
