Commissioner Of Sales Tax vs Madhuban Glass House on 13 December, 2023
Commissioner Of Sales Tax vs Madhuban Glass House on 13
December, 2023
Bench: Chief Justice, Rahul Bharti
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on : 20.04.2023.
Pronounced on : 13.12.2023.
Case:- STR No. 14/2007
Commissioner of Sales Tax,
(Commissioner Commercial Taxes),
J&K, Jammu.
.....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. K. D. S. Kotwal, Dy. AG
Vs
Madhuban Glass House,
Raj Tilak Road, Jammu.
.....Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Sachin Sharma, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAHUL BHARTI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Per: Rahul Bharti-J
01. The Jammu & Kashmir State Sales Tax (Appellate Tribunal), Jammu (hereinafter referred to be
in short as "SSTAT") has submitted this reference under section 75(1) of the Jammu & Kashmir
Value Added Tax Act, 2005 for seeking a judgment from this Court with respect to the question of
law framed and referred.
02. Before we proceed to delve and deliberate in the matter, the factual background in which the
reference has come to land before us needs to be set out.
03. The Commercial Tax Officer came to conduct an inspection of the business premises of the
respondent business concern i.e. Madhuban Glass House, Raj Tilak Road, Jammu on 14.01.2006
which resulted in purported detection of the fact by the said Inspection Officer that there were 35
improper invoices/estimates which were pointer to the fact that the respondent was not issuing sale
invoices in respect of the sale transactions being conducted by it.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94392848/ 1
Commissioner Of Sales Tax vs Madhuban Glass House on 13 December, 2023
04. This development led to issuance of a notice in terms of order dated 30.01.2006 by the
Commercial Tax Officer to the respondent resulting in imposition of a penalty of an amount of Rs.
3,50,000/- upon the respondent.
05. Against this order of imposition of penalty by the Commercial Tax Officer against it, the
respondent preferred a statutory appeal before the appellate authority of Deputy Commissioner,
Commercial Taxes (Appeals), Jammu which came to be dismissed vide an order dated 29.10.2006
thereby maintaining the imposition and demand of payment of penalty of Rs.3,50,000/- against the
respondent.
06. Against this appellate authority order, the respondent approached SSTAT with an appeal on file
no. 298/ST/T/J on 10.01.2007 thereby posing challenge to the original order of imposition of
penalty confirmed by the appellate authority order.
07. The SSTAT in terms of its adjudication vide order dated 23.03.2007 came to set aside the
original order of the Commercial Tax Officer which was of imposition of penalty and the matter was
remanded back to the Commercial Tax Officer for determining the tax payable for each improper
sale invoice/estimate and then to decide the quantum of penalty required to be levied in the case.
08. After this remand order by the SSTAT, an application came to be preferred on behalf of the
Commissioner of Commercial Taxes, J&K by recourse to section 75 of the J&K Value Added Tax Act,
2005 for seeking reference to this Court on the question of law as proposed by the Commissioner of
Sales Tax (Commissioner, Commercial Taxes) J&K, Jammu.
09. In response to this application, the SSTAT felt persuaded to reckon that the case involved
question of law and, therefore, warranted a reference.
10. The source of reference made by the SSTAT is section 69 of the J&K Value Added Tax Act, 2005.
Chapter X of the J&K Value Added Tax Act, 2005 deals with the offences and penalties. Section 69
defines the offences, section 70 provides conviction for offences, section 71 provides for composition
of offences.
Section 69 in the context of the present case is reproduced hereunder:-
Section 69 Section 69 in the context of the present case is reproduced hereunder:-
69 Defaults:-
(1) If any person:-
(a) .......
(b) .......
(c) .......
(d) .......
(e) .......
(f) .......
(g) ........
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94392848/ 2
Commissioner Of Sales Tax vs Madhuban Glass House on 13 December, 2023
(h) ........
(i) .......
(j) .......
(k) fails to issue a tax invoice or a retail invoice as the
case may be simultaneous with making a
transaction of sale or issues a false tax invoice or retail invoice or receives and uses a
tax invoice, knowing it to be false;
(l) .......
(m) .......
(n) .......
(o) .......
(p) .......
(q) .......
(r) .......
(s) .......
the appropriate authority shall direct that such person shall pay in addition to the fee
or tax, by way of penalty:-
(i) .........
(ii) .........
(iii) ........
(iv) ........
(v) ........
(vi) ........
(vii) ........
(viii) ........
(ix) ........
(x) ........
(xi) for default specified in clause(k) a penalty equal to ten
times of the tax payable on each such default or rupees ten thousand whichever is
higher;
(xii) ..........
(xiii) ..........
(xiv) ..........
(xv) .........."
11. In its judgment dated 23.03.2007, the SSTAT came to hold that before imposition
of penalty as envisaged under section 69(1)(k), the appropriate authority is required
to determine the tax payable with respect to the transaction of sale with respect to
which a person has failed to issue tax invoice or retail invoice or issues a false tax
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94392848/ 3
Commissioner Of Sales Tax vs Madhuban Glass House on 13 December, 2023
invoice or retail invoice or receives and uses a tax invoice, knowing it to be false. As
understood and held by SSTAT, it is only upon adjudging the tax liability at the first
instance that the penalty imposition and assessment can come into picture as to
whether the penalty is to be levied ten times of the tax payable on each such default
or rupees ten thousand whichever being higher.
12. The SSTAT found the original order of the appropriate authority i.e. Commercial
Tax Officer to be defective in its nature of having imposed the penalty of
Rs.3,50,000/- by reference to 35 questionable/improper invoices/estimates,
meaning thereby ten thousand per questionable/improper invoice. The quantum of
penalty of Rs. 3,50,000/- so imposed itself recommends an inference that the penalty
imposed was not ten times of the tax payable per invoice but Rs. 10,000/- being
higher liability as against the ten times value of the tax payable per invoice. Since, the
Commercial Tax Officer was found to have defaulted in computing the tax payable as
against the respective invoice adding upto 35 invoices, as such, the SSTAT required
the said deficiency in the order of the Commercial Tax Officer to be rectified firstly
before levy of penalty.
13. The SSTAT on its own reckoned that imposition of penalty of an amount of
Rs.3,50,000/- was not born out of correct application of law because the Commercial
Tax Officer had reckoned every questionable invoice, totaling 35 in number, to be an
individual default warranting higher default of Rs.10,000/- but as per the SSTAT the
inspection being done on a same day was to be the basis to reckon default on the part
of the respondent to be a single default for which single notice had been issued to the
respondent by the Commercial Tax Officer. Thus, the SSTAT held the discovery of 35
objectionable invoices found from the respondent as a single event itself to be read as
a single default and, therefore, a cumulative tax penalty against 35 questionable
invoices was to be worked out to choose the option of imposing penalty by reference
to ten times the amount of the tax payable or Rs. 10,000/- whichever being higher.
14. It is in this background that the reference was sought upon the questions of law
which stood proposed by the SSTAT in the following manner:-
"Whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the Tribunal was justified in
holding that issuance of 35 improper invoices on the same day constitutes a single
default and thereby entails a penalty of 10 times of the tax payable on those invoices
or Rs. 10,000/-, whichever is higher?"
15. Before we proceed to deal with this reference, we need to refer ourselves to the relevant
provisions of the Jammu & Kashmir Value Added Tax Act, 2005 (in short "VAT Act, 2005") which
was then in operation at the relevant point of time.
Section 2 defines following words as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94392848/ 4
Commissioner Of Sales Tax vs Madhuban Glass House on 13 December, 2023
(cid:128) Section 2(V) defines "Assessee" to be any person by whom tax or any other sum of
money is payable under the Act and includes every person in respect of whom any
proceedings under the Act have been taken.
(cid:128) Section 2(XI) defines "Dealer" means to any person who carries on (whether
regularly or otherwise) the business of selling, purchasing, supplying or distributing
the goods, transferring the right to use any goods or supplying by way of or as part of
any service, any goods directly or indirectly, for cash or for deferred payment, or for
commission, remuneration or other valuable consideration and includes
.....................................
(cid:128) Section 2(XXVIII) defines "Sale" to be with all its grammatical variations and
cognate expressions meaning every transfer of the property in goods, other than by
way of mortgage, hypothecation, charge or pledge, by one person to another in the
course of trade or business for cash, deferred payment or other valuable
consideration and includes ...............................
(cid:128) Section 2(XXXIII) defines "Tax" meaning tax payable under the Act.
(cid:128) Section 2(XXXIV) defines "Tax Invoice" an invoice in such form and containing
such particulars as may be prescribed.
Section 12 defines "Incidence of Tax."
Section 12(1) provides which dealer is liable to tax under the J&K Value Added Tax
Act.
Section 12(2) to 12(4) deals with the taxable limits in relation to a given dealer and
Section 12(5) calculation of the gross turnover to determine the liability to pay tax
under the Act, which is to be calculated on the basis of turnover of all the sales or
purchases. Whether such sales or purchases are taxable or not?
Section 13 provides "Tax on Sales."
Section 20 defines "Tax Payable" and section 25 defines "Turnover Tax".
Chapter-IV (section 27 to section 30) provides for "Registration of Dealers,
Amendment and Cancellation of Registration Certificates".
Chapter-V (section 31 to section 56) deals with "Returns, Assessment, Recovery and
Refund of Tax".
Chapter-VII (section 58 to section 61) deals with "Accounts and Records" wherein
section 59 provides for tax invoice. Section 59 provides that any dealer liable to pay
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94392848/ 5
Commissioner Of Sales Tax vs Madhuban Glass House on 13 December, 2023
tax under the Act shall in respect of goods sold by him or on his behalf issue to the
purchaser, at the time of sale, a VAT invoice or a Retail invoice as the case may be,
containing such particulars and subject to such conditions as may be prescribed.
16. Under the VAT Act, 2005 the then State of Jammu & Kashmir came to frame the Jammu &
Kashmir Value Added Tax Rules, 2005. Rule 63 lays provisions for "Tax Invoice." The tax invoice is
classified into a VAT invoice and a retail invoice.
17. In the context of the present case, we are concerned with the retail invoice, which is to be issued
by a VAT dealer or a casual trader when making sale of good in the State to non-VAT dealers,
unregistered dealers and consumers. A retail invoice is to be in form VAT-51 and is to be in duplicate
with original to be given to the purchaser and duplicate (carbon copy) to be kept for the record.
18. A reading of preamble of the VAT Act, 2005 shows that it was to provide for levy and collection
of value added tax on the sale and purchase of goods in the State of Jammu & Kashmir. Purchase
has been defined under section 2(XXV) and Sale has been defined under section 2(XXVIII). This
makes it very clear that it is transaction of a sale which is of the essence of the operation of the VAT
Act, 2005. Section 13 of the VAT Act, 2005 says that the tax payable on sale of goods by a dealer
liable to pay tax under section 12 which shall be on his taxable turnover of sales. It is in this context
that the tax invoice provided under rule 63 by reference to section 2(XXXIV) which begs for an
understanding to answer the reference.
19. The tax invoice can be a VAT invoice or a retail invoice. In the present case it is the retail invoices
which are in reference. This retail invoice is mandated to be issued under rule 63 by a VAT dealer or
a casual trader when making sale of goods in the State to non-VAT dealers, unregistered dealers and
consumer. In the present case the invoices in reference are the ones relatable to sale of goods to
consumers. Now, once a retail invoice deals with a particular sale of good transaction, as such,
Section 69 has in its legislative intent the default on the part of the dealer under clause (k)
sub-section 1 to be a tax invoice specific.
20. Tax invoice means a particular sale transaction made by the VAT dealer or a casual trader to a
consumer. It is a tax invoice which generates default and if that default is proved then it invites
penalty, against a defaulting person, equal to ten times of the tax payable on such default or Rs.
10,000/- whichever is higher. A questionable tax invoice, be it sham, false, forged or fake, has no
relation with the day on which it is or was generated. If on any given day, a VAT dealer or a casual
trader has generated any number of objectionable tax invoices each representing a respective sale
transaction, then each invoice will constitute default as envisaged by clause (k) of sub-section 1 of
section 69. For each tax invoice, an individual default gets generated and it is that individual default
vis- à-vis individual tax invoice which is meant to be penalized and, therefore, it is not by reference
to the transaction of the day that default is to be clubbed and recognized but transaction of a
particular tax invoice that it is to be recognized.
21. Therefore, the SSTAT is not correct in drawing a reference that the 35 improper invoices on the
same day constitute a single default. We do not see from where this understanding came to be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94392848/ 6
Commissioner Of Sales Tax vs Madhuban Glass House on 13 December, 2023
gathered by the SSTAT to generate a question of law when there was no scope for any such question
of law coming forth when the VAT Act, 2005 and the Rules, read and understood in proper
perspective clearly meant that a tax invoice, if ridden with the defect/default as spelt out in clause
(k) of sub-section 1 of section 69, is found out then the liability as envisaged under section 69(1)(xi)
is to be attracted. When section 69 itself does not hint to any angle of time duration, SSTAT was in
error in pressing the time duration into play and reckon that the default envisaged under clause (k)
of sub-section 1 of section 69 was referable to the time duration and not to the tax invoice.
22. The penalty envisaged under section 69(1)(xi), relatable to the default identified in clause (k) of
sub-section 1 of section 69 was meant to be a deterrent so that any VAT dealer or a casual trader
would not venture and resort to acts of omission or commission which would have the effect of
under assessment or evasion of the tax liability resting upon the said VAT dealer or a casual trader.
It is in this context that a particular tax invoice generating a particular amount of tax, if found to be
default ridden, then either ten times the tax payable is to be the penalty or Rs. 10,000/- whichever
being the higher.
23. Clause (xi) of sub-section 1 of section 69 itself decodes that a particular tax invoice may have a
tax liability which multiplied by ten times may still fall short of a deterrent effect to a VAT duty
evading trader and, therefore, even a penalty of ten times the tax payable may be on a lesser side
and, therefore, the other option of penalizing a given defaulting VAT trader on a higher side has
been provided for. Therefore, there was no reason to read that the default as envisaged under clause
(k) of sub-section 1 of section 69 relatable to time duration of a given day and not to the tax invoice
in itself.
24. In light of the aforesaid, we answer the reference that each tax invoice, if afflicted with the
default as envisaged under clause (k) of sub-section 1 of section 69, is to bear the penalty in
reference to it and not in reference to the accumulation of tax invoices and that it has nothing to do
with the collection of tax invoices for a particular day. Each default vis-à-vis each particular tax
invoice is to earn the liability as envisaged under section 69 of sub-section 1 of clause (xi) of the VAT
Act, 2005. We, therefore, return the reference with the aforesaid answer for being taken into
cognizance by the SSTAT and by the authorities concerned.
(RAHUL BHARTI) (N. KOTISWAR SINGH)
JUDGE CHIEF JUSTICE
JAMMU
13.12.2023
Muneesh
Whether the order is speaking : Yes
Whether the order is reportable : Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/94392848/ 7
