Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt Ltd on 30 July, 2018
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt Ltd on
30 July, 2018
Bench: Vineet Kothari, S.Sujatha
1/22
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA, BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 30TH DAY OF JULY, 2018
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE DR. JUSTICE VINEET KOTHARI
AND
THE HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE S. SUJATHA
INCOME TAX APPEAL NO.340 OF 2010
BETWEEN:
1. COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX
C.R.BUILDING, QUEENS ROAD
BANGALORE -560 001.
2. DEPUTY COMMISSIONER OF INCOME-TAX
CIRCLE-12(2)
BANGALORE.
...APPELLANTS
(BY MR. E.I.SANMATHI, ADV.)
AND:
M/S.POLYFLEX (INDIA) PVT. LTD.
NO.116 & 117
BOMMASANDRA INDUSTRIAL AREA
ANEKAL TALUK
BANGALORE-562 158.
...RESPONDENT
(BY MR.ASHOK A.KULKARNI, ADV. )
***
Date of order: 30-7-2018
I.T.A. No.340/2010
Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs.
M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51479424/ 1
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt Ltd on 30 July, 2018
2/22
THIS INCOME TAX APPEAL IS FILED UNDER SECTION
260A OF THE INCOME TAX ACT, 1961, PRAYING TO
FORMULATE THE SUBSTANTIAL QUESTIONS OF LAW STATED
THEREIN AND ALLOW THE APPEAL AND SET ASIDE THE
ORDER PASSED BY THE INCOME-TAX APPELLATE TRIBUNAL,
'B' BENCH, BANGALORE IN ITA No.1145/BANG/2009 DATED
12.04.2010 IN THE INTEREST OF JUSTICE.
THIS INCOME TAX APPEAL IS COMING ON FOR ORDERS
THIS DAY, S. SUJATHA J., MADE THE FOLLOWING:-
ORDER
Mr. E.I.Sanmathi, Adv. for Appellants- Revenue Mr. Ashok A.Kulkarni, Adv. for Respondent -
Assessee This Income Tax Appeal filed by the Appellant-
Revenue earlier came to be disposed of by a co-ordinate Bench of this Court on 02.11.2011, on the
ground that the appeal was not maintainable due to the tax effect involved being less than the
prescribed monetary limit of Rs.20 lakhs in the Instructions issued by Central Board of Direct Taxes
in 2011 (for short the 'CBDT').
Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
2. The matter was remanded back to this Court by orders of the Hon'ble Supreme Court by a
common order passed in some Civil Appeals, including the lead Civil Appeal No.16815 of 2017 @
SLP (C) No.1425 of 2014 (THE COMMISSIONER OF INCOME TAX, BANGALORE-I & ANOTHER
vs. M/S.GEMINI decided on 12.10.2017, but the said order of the two-
judges Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of M/s. Gemini Distilleries (supra) came to be
explained by a later decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of DIRECTOR OF
INCOME-TAX vs. S.R.M.B. DAIRY FARMING (P.) LTD. reported in (2018) 400 ITR 9 (SC) decided
on 23.11.2017 about the retrospective application of the CBDT Circulars with regard to monetary
limits for maintaining the pending appeals before the Hon'ble High Court under Section 260A of
Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
the Income Tax Act. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in S.R.M.B.Dairy Farming (P.) Ltd. (supra) held as
under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51479424/ 2
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt Ltd on 30 July, 2018
"Appeal to High Court - Monetary limits for litigation by Department - Circular to
apply to pending appeals - but Circular not to be applied by court ipso facto when
matter has cascading effect or where common principles involved in large number of
matters
- Income Tax Act, 1961 ss. 260A, 268A - Instruction No.3 of 2011, dated 9-2-2011.
The view adopted by the Delhi High Court making the circular applicable to pending
matters came up before a three- Judges Bench of this Court in SLP (C) No.CC 13694
of 2011 titled CIT v. Surya Herbal Ltd. when the following order was passed on
August 29, 2011:
"Delay condoned.
Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
Liberty is given to the Department to move the High Court pointing out that the
Circular dated February 9, 2011 should not be applied ipso facto, particularly, when
the matter has a cascading effect. There are cases under the Income-tax Act, 1961 in
which a common principle may be involved in subsequent group of matters or a large
number of matters. In our view, in such cases if attention of the High Court is drawn,
the High Court will not apply the circular ipso facto. For that purpose, liberty is
granted to the Department to move the High Court in two weeks.
The Special Leave Petition is, accordingly, disposed of."
20. The aforesaid order, in our view, actually should have laid the controversy to rest. The
retrospective applicability of the Circular dated February 9, 2011 was not Date of order: 30-7-2018
Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
interfered with, but with two caveats -
(i) Circular should not be applied by the High Courts ipso facto when the matter had
a cascading effect; (ii) where common principles may be involved in subsequent
group of matters or a large number of matters.
It was opined that in such cases, the attention of the High Court would be drawn and the
Department was even given liberty to move the High Court in two weeks. In our view this order
holds the field and should continue to hold the field.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51479424/ 3
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt Ltd on 30 July, 2018
21. Unfortunately, this order was not brought to the notice of the subsequent two Judges Bench of
this court in CIT v. Suman Dhamija again arising from a Delhi High Court order, wherein it was
simply stated that since the appeals were preferred before 2011 and the instructions were dated
February 9, 2011, the earlier cases would not be covered by the instruction. This order in Date of
order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
turn had been followed by another two- Judges Bench in Civil Appeal No.16815 of 2017 titled CIT v.
Gemini Distilleries dated October 12, 2017.
22. Once again, in another matter CIT v. Century Park, the line adopted by the three- Judges Bench
in Surya Herbal Ltd. Case (supra) has been followed.
23. We have already given our imprimatur to the observations made by the Karnataka High Court in
a detailed analysis in Ranka and Ranka case (supra), which was dealt with the litigation policy
philosophy behind applying the circular and the benefit being extended in view thereof to all
assesses where appeals have been pending, but below the financial limit, as otherwise an anomalous
situation would arise.
Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
24. We may also take note of the judgment of this court in Suchitra Components Ltd. v. CCE on the
general principle of application of circulars. Reliance was placed on the view expressed in CCE v.
Mysore Electricals Industries Ltd. opining that a beneficial circular has to be applied retrospectively
while an oppressive circular has to be applied prospectively.
25. We are of the view that the mater needs to be put to rest and a clarity be obtained in view of the
impact of this issue on pending cases before the High Courts as well as the cases which have been
disposed of by various High Courts by applying Circular of 2011 to pending litigations. In our view
the matter has been squarely put to rest taking further care of the interest of the Revenue by the
order passed by the three-Judges Bench of this court in Surya Herbal Ltd. Case (supra), which had
put two caveats even to Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
the retrospective application of the circular. The subsequent orders have been passed by the
two-Judges Bench without those orders being brought to the notice of the court, a duty which was
cast on the Department to have done so to avoid the ambiguity which has arisen. Thus, the said view
of the three- Judges Bench would hold water and the circular would apply even to pending matters
but subject to the two caveats provided in Surya Herbal Ltd. Case (supra).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51479424/ 4
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt Ltd on 30 July, 2018
The appeals of the Revenue are, thus, dismissed in the aforesaid terms."
3. Recently, the CBDT has again revised the Instructions in this regard and besides para 13
specifically allowing withdrawal of pending appeals, the monetary limits for maintaining such
Income Tax Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
appeals before the High Court is raised from Rs.20 lakhs to Rs.50 lakhs. The said Circular is quoted
extenso below:-
F No. 279/Misc. 142/2007-ITJ (Pt) Government of India Ministry of Finance
Department of Revenue Central Board Direct Taxes New Delhi the 11th July, 2018
Subject: Revision of monetary limits for filing of appeals by the Department before
Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, High Courts and SLPs/appeals before Supreme
Court - measures for reducing litigation-Reg.
Reference is invited to Board's Circular No.21 of 2015 dated 10.12.2015 wherein
monetary limits and other conditions for filing departmental appeals (in Income-tax
matters) before Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, High Courts and SLPs/appeals
before Supreme Court were specified.
Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
2. In supersession of the above Circular, it has been decided by the Board that
departmental appeals may be filed on merits before Income Tax Appellate Tribunal
and High Courts and SLPs/appeals before Supreme Court keeping in view the
monetary limits and conditions specified below.
3. Henceforth, appeals/SLPs shall not be filed in cases where the tax effect does not
exceed the monetary limits given hereunder:
Sl. Appeals/SLPs in Monetary
No. Income-tax matters Limit (Rs.)
1. Before Appellate 20,00,000
Tribunal
2. Before High Court 50,00,000
3. Before Supreme Court 1,00,00,000
It is clarified that an appeal should not be filed merely because the tax effect in a case
exceeds the monetary limits prescribed above. Filing of appeal in such cases is to be
decided on merits of the case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51479424/ 5
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt Ltd on 30 July, 2018
4. For this purpose, 'tax effect' means the difference between the tax on the total
income Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
assessed and the tax that would have been chargeable had such total income been reduced by the
amount of income in respect of the issues against which appeal is intended to be filed (hereinafter
referred to as 'disputed issues'). Further, 'tax effect' shall be tax including applicable surcharge and
cess. However, the tax will not include any interest thereon, except where chargeability of interest
itself is in dispute. In case the chargeability of interest is the issue under dispute, the amount of
interest shall be the tax effect. In cases where returned loss is reduced or assessed as income, the tax
effect would include notional tax on disputed additions. In case of penalty orders, the tax effect will
mean quantum of penalty deleted or reduced in the order to be appealed against.
5. The Assessing Officer shall calculate the tax effect separately for every assessment year in respect
of the disputed issues in the case of every assessee. If, in the case of an assessee, the disputed issues
arise in more than one assessment year, appeal can be filed in respect of Date of order: 30-7-2018
Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
such assessment year or years in which the tax effect in respect of the disputed issues exceeds the
monetary limit specified in para 3. No appeal shall be filed in respect of an assessment year or years
in which the tax effect is less than the monetary limit specified in para 3. In other words, henceforth,
appeals can be filed only with reference to the tax effect in the relevant assessment year. However, in
case of a composite order of any High Court or appellate authority, which involves more than one
assessment year and common issues in more than one assessment year, appeals shall be filed in
respect of all such assessment years even if the tax effect is less than the prescribed monetary limits
in any of the year(s), if it is decided to file appeal in respect of the year(s) in which tax effect exceeds
the monetary limit prescribed. In case where a composite order/ judgment involves more than one
assessee, each assessee shall be dealt with separately.
6. Further, where income is computed under the provisions of section 115JB or section Date of
order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
115JC, for the purposes of determination of 'tax effect', tax on the total income assessed shall be
computed as per the following formula-
(A - B)+(C - D) where, A = the total income assessed as per the provisions other than the provisions
contained in section 115JB or section 115JC (herein called general provisions);
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51479424/ 6
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt Ltd on 30 July, 2018
B = the total income that would have been chargeable had the total income assessed as per the
general provisions been reduced by the amount of the disputed issues under general provisions;
C = the total income assessed as per the provisions contained in section 115JB or section 115JC;
D = the total income that would have been chargeable had the total income assessed as per the
provisions contained in section 115JB or Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax &
Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
section 1I5JCwas reduced by the amount of disputed issues under the said provisions:
However, where the amount of disputed issues is considered both under the
provisions contained in section 115JB or section 115JC and under general provisions,
such amount shall not be reduced from total income assessed while determining the
amount under item D.
7. In a case where appeal before a Tribunal or a Court is not filed only on account of the tax effect
being less than the monetary limit specified above, the Pr. Commissioner of Income-tax/
Commissioner of Income Tax shall specifically record that "even though the decision is not
acceptable, appeal is not being filed only on the consideration that the tax effect is less than the
monetary limit specified in this Circular". Further, in such cases, there will be no presumption that
the Income-tax Department has acquiesced in the decision on the disputed issues. The Income-tax
Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
Department shall not be precluded from filing an appeal against the disputed issues in the case of
the same assessee for any other assessment year, or in the case of any other assessee for the same or
any other assessment year, if the tax effect exceeds the specified monetary limits.
8. In the past, a number of instances have come to the notice of the Board, whereby an assessee has
claimed relief from the Tribunal or the Court only on the ground that the Department has implicitly
accepted the decision of the Tribunal or Court in the case of the assessee for any other assessment
year or in the case of any other assessee for the same or any other assessment year, by not filing an
appeal on the same disputed issues. The Departmental representatives/counsels must make every
effort to bring to the notice of the Tribunal or the Court that the appeal in such cases was not filed or
not admitted only for the reason of the tax effect being less than the specified monetary limit and,
therefore, no inference should be drawn that the decisions rendered therein were acceptable to the
Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51479424/ 7
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt Ltd on 30 July, 2018
Department. Accordingly, they should impress upon the Tribunal or the Court that such cases do
not have any precedent value and also bring to the notice of the Tribunal/ Court the provisions of
sub section (4) of section 268A of the Income-tax Act, 1961 which read as under :
"(4) The Appellate Tribunal or Court, hearing such appeal or reference, shall have
regard to the orders, instructions or directions issued under sub-section (1) and the
circumstances under which such appeal or application for reference was filed or not
filed in respect of any case."
9. As the evidence of not filing appeal due to this Circular may have to be produced in courts, the
judicial folders in the office of Pr.CsIT/ CsIT must be maintained in a systemic manner for easy
retrieval.
10. Adverse judgments relating to the following issues should be contested on merits
notwithstanding that the tax effect entailed is Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of
Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
less than the monetary limits specified in para 3 above or there is no tax effect:
(a) Where the Constitutional validity of the provisions of an Act or Rule is under
challenge, or
(b) Where Board's order, Notification, Instruction or Circular has been held to be
illegal or ultra vires, or
(c) Where Revenue Audit objection in the case has been accepted by the Department,
or
(d) Where the addition relates to undisclosed foreign assets/ bank accounts.
11. The monetary limits specified in para 3 above shall not apply to writ matters and Direct tax
matters other than Income tax. Filing of appeals in other Direct tax matters shall continue to be
governed by relevant provisions of statute and rules. Further, in cases where the tax effect Date of
order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
is not quantifiable or not involved, such as the case of registration of trusts or institutions under
section 12A/12AA of the IT Act, 1961 etc., filing of appeal shall not be governed by the limits
specified in para 3 above and decision to file appeals in such cases may be taken on merits of a
particular case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51479424/ 8
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt Ltd on 30 July, 2018
12. It is clarified that the monetary limit of Rs. 20 lakhs for filing appeals before the ITAT would
apply equally to cross objections under section 253(4) of the Act. Cross objections below this
monetary limit, already filed, should be pursued for dismissal as withdrawn/ not pressed. Filing of
cross objections below the monetary limit may not be considered henceforth. Similarly, references
to High Courts and SLPs/appeals before Supreme Court below the monetary limit of Rs. 50 lakhs
and Rs. 1 Crore respectively should be pursued for dismissal as withdrawn/ not pressed. References
before High Court and SLPs/ appeals below these limits may not be considered henceforth.
Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
13. This Circular will apply to SLPs/appeals/cross objections/references to be filed henceforth in
SC/HCs/Tribunal and it shall also apply retrospectively to pending SLPs/ appeals/cross
objections/references. Pending appeals below the specified tax limits in para 3 above may be
withdrawn/not pressed."
14. The above may be brought to the notice of all concerned.
15. This issue under Section 268A of the Income-tax Act 1961.
16. Hindi version will follow.
Sd/-
(11/07/2018) (Neetika Bansal) Director (ITJ), CBDT, New Delhi.
4. Learned counsel for the appellant-Revenue with regard to paragraph No.20 of the judgment of
the Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of DIRECTOR OF INCOME TAX vs. S.R.M.B. DAIRY FARMING
(P.) LTD.
quoted above and in the case of CIT vs. SURYA HERBAL LTD. (supra) has submitted before us that
the present appeal filed by Revenue neither has any cascading tax effect nor it involves any issues of
common principles involved in a group of matters or a large number of matters. Thus, the decision
initially pointed out by the learned counsel for the appellant-
Revenue in the case of CIT vs. M/S.GEMINI DISTILLERIES does not come in the way of the present
appeal being withdrawn and the withdrawal of the appeal can be permitted as per recent CBDT
Circular dated 11.07.2018.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51479424/ 9
Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S Polyflex (India) Pvt Ltd on 30 July, 2018
5. Learned counsel for the respondent-
Assessee does not dispute this position.
Date of order: 30-7-2018 Commissioner of Income-Tax & Anr.
vs. M/s.Polyflex (India) Pvt. Ltd.
6. Accordingly, in view of the aforesaid reasons and the Circular dated 11.07.2018 issued by the
Central Board of Direct Taxes, the present appeal filed by the appellant-Revenue is permitted to be
withdrawn.
The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed as withdrawn/not pressed. No costs.
Sd/-
JUDGE Sd/-
JUDGE VMB
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51479424/ 10
