Crl A(Ad) No. 07/2022 vs Adil Ahmed Sofi on 28 April, 2023
Crl A(Ad) No. 07/2022 vs Adil Ahmed Sofi on 28 April, 2023
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
1 Crl A(AD) No. 07/2022
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Crl A(AD) No. 07/2022
Reserved on: 17.04.2023
Pronounced on: 28.04.2023
State of J&K ... Appellant(s)
Through: - Mrs. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
v.
Adil Ahmed Sofi ...Respondent(s)
Through: - Mr. Arif Javid Khan, Adv.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Rajesh Sekhri-J
1. This appeal has been directed against judgment dated 31.05.2018 propounded by learned Special
Judge (Principal Sessions Judge), Ramban (for short, learned trial court) in File No. 17/Spl. Challan,
titled 'State v. Adil Ahmed Sofi' and FIR No. 35 of 2016 of Police Station Banihal for offences under
Section 8/15 of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act, 1985 (for short, NDPS Act), vide
which, respondents have been acquitted of charges.
2. Shorn of customary verbosity, case of the appellant-State/prosecution is that on 24.03.2016,
while HC-Chanderdev No. 778 Rbn of Police Post, Jawahar Tunnel along with police personnels
were conducting traffic checking on NHW 1-A at Jawahar Tunnel, they intercepted a Xylo Car
bearing Registration No. JK01-U/1711 at about 11:45 being driven by respondent on its way from
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171753564/ 1
Crl A(Ad) No. 07/2022 vs Adil Ahmed Sofi on 28 April, 2023
Srinagar. None else was stated to be travelling in the said vehicle. On search of the vehicle, a white
coloured plastic bag containing poppy straw came to be recovered from a hole of the dickey and 36
polythene bags of green colour containing poppy straw were recovered from both sides of the dickey
and inside the rear window. It is alleged that respondent-accused failed to offer satisfactory
explanation with respect to the possession of the contraband. A docket (EXTP-1) was sent to Police
Station, Banihal through SPO-Raju Singh, consequently aforesaid FIR came to be registered and
investigation was assigned to Sub Inspector Shamsher Singh. Investigating Officer rushed to the
spot and he conducted rituals of the investigation including weight of the contraband through an
electronic weighing scale. The total weight of the contraband came out to be 57 kg and 300 grams.
500 grams each of the contraband was extracted from the bags and two parcels marked as A-1 and
A-2 were prepared for chemical examination. The remaining contraband was marked as A. Likewise,
100 grams each of the contraband was extracted from 36 polythene bags for chemical examination
and two parcels containing 1800 grams each of the poppy straw were also prepared. Two plastic
bags containing 18 polythene bags each were marked as B and C and marks B-1 and B-2 were put on
the parcels containing poppy straw extracted from 36 polythene bags aforesaid. All theses parcels
were sealed with a specimen seal impression 'J' and the said seal was kept on the superdnama of
Chanderdev HC No. 778 Rbn. Weighing scale was kept on the superdnama of Shakeel Ahmed No.
776 Rbn. Statements of prosecution witnesses under Section 161 of Code of Criminal Procedure,
1973 (for short, Cr.P.C.) were also recorded. As per the prosecution story, the recovered and sealed
contraband were deposited with the Incharge Malkhana Police Station Banihal. Subsequently, the
aforesaid samples came to be re-sealed by the Executive Magistrate 1st class, Banihal and thereafter
parcels bearing marks A-1 and B-1 were sent to FSL Jammu for chemical analysis. Statements of
PWs Raju Singh and Khadam Hussain SPO were recorded under Section 164-A Cr.P.C. and accused
was arrested. FSL report was also obtained and it came to the fore, during investigation, that having
purchased the contraband, respondent was on his way to Jammu for sale of the contraband.
3. Having concluded that offences under Sections 8/15 of the NDPS Act were proved against the
respondent, a final report, under Section 173 Cr.P.C., was presented in the trial court. Respondent
came to be charged for the aforesaid offences whereby he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial,
therefore, prosecution was directed to adduce evidence to substantiate allegations against the
respondent. Pursuant thereto, prosecution has examined 11 witnesses to bring home guilt of the
respondent.
4. On conclusion of the prosecution evidence, statement of the accused under Section 342 Cr.P.C.
was recorded whereby he denied incriminating evidence against him and appeared in the witness
box as a solitary defence witness.
5. Learned trial court, on appreciation of the case has concluded that prosecution has failed to
establish guilt of the respondent beyond reasonable shadow of doubt and accordingly, respondent
has been acquitted of the charges.
6. Appellant-State has questioned the impugned judgment of acquittal on the conventional grounds
that respondent has been acquitted by the trial court despite sufficient material on record to sustain
conviction as learned trial court has failed to appreciate the law and facts of the case in right
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171753564/ 2
Crl A(Ad) No. 07/2022 vs Adil Ahmed Sofi on 28 April, 2023
perspective.
7. Having heard Mrs. Monika Kohli, learned Sr. AAG for the appellant- State and Mr. Arif Javid
Khan, learned counsel for the respondent, we do not find any illegality or impropriety in the
impugned judgment of acquittal for the following reasons.
8. For the sake of brevity, instead of giving a detailed resume of the prosecution evidence, it is
proposed to refer to the relevant parts of depositions of the prosecution witnesses by highlighting
their respective names as, when and where required.
9. It is an admitted case of the prosecution that samples were sealed on the spot with a specimen
seal impression 'J'. However, PWs Darminder Kumar and Mohd. Rafiq have deposed that seal
impression of the seal used for sealing the samples of the contraband in question was 'T'. Both PWs
Darminder Kumar and Mohd. Rafiq are police officials and, therefore, this contradiction with
respect to seal impression in the present case assumes significance and cannot be lost sight of. The
prosecution has even failed to produce said seal having seal impression 'J' in the court during the
trial.
10. It is also positive case of the prosecution that 57 kg 300 grams of poppy straw came to be
recovered and seized on the spot. However, PW Shamus-ud-Din Incharge Malkhana has deposed
that on 24.03.2016 SI Shemshar Singh produced 20 kg 300 grams poppy straw, he deposited the
said contraband in the Malkhana and made an entry in Register No. 19. Prosecution has failed to
furnish any explanation with respect to remaining contraband recovered and seized in the case.
Another serious discrepancy with respect to the weight of the sample is that it is also case of the
prosecution that samples A-1 and B-1 weighing 500 grams and 1 Kg 800 grams respectively were
sent to FSL for chemical examination, but PW- Pawan Abrol Scientific Officer has deposed that he
received two sealed packets forwarded by SDPO Banihal. The said sealed packets marked A-1 and
B-1 were given exhibits No. P-486/2016 and P-487/2016 by him. According to him, exhibit No.
P-486/2016 weighed 500 grams and the second exhibit No. P-487/2016 weighed 800 grams. In
cross examination, he has clarified that though letter No.SBD/FSL/16/1449-52 dated 26.03.2016
forwarded by SDPO, Banihal through ASI-Romesh Chander to him reveals at serial No. 3 that
packet No. B-1 contained 01 kg 800 grams of poppy straw, but when he received the said packet B-1,
it contained only 800 grams of poppy straw. Again prosecution has failed to explain and justify
about the said packet of 01 kg 800 grams of the contraband and, therefore, tampering of the
contraband, in such circumstances, cannot be ruled out.
11. Another flaw noticed in the prosecution case with respect to number of samples and weights of
samples is that testimonies of eye witnesses are also discrepant. The eye witnesses to the occurrence
have also made contradictory statements with respect to total number of samples and weights of the
packets containing samples of the contraband. PW-Khadam Hussain SPO has stated that four
number of packets of the samples each weighing 100 grams were prepared on the spot. Contrary to
him, PW-Dhaminder Kumar has stated that four number of samples were prepared on the spot, out
of which, two packets weighed 100 grams each and the remaining two packets weighed 01 kg 800
grams. PW-Raju Singh has contradicted both PWs-Khadam Hussain and Dharminder Kumar by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171753564/ 3
Crl A(Ad) No. 07/2022 vs Adil Ahmed Sofi on 28 April, 2023
stating that only three number of packets of samples weighing 100 grams each were prepared on the
spot.
12. Further in order to ensure that contraband recovered and seized on the spot, samples drawn
therefrom and later deposited in the Malkhana are not tampered with, prosecution is obliged to
prove that they were properly sealed and were got re-sealed from the Executive Magistrate 1st Class,
as mandated by the NDPS Act. The placement of seal used for sealing of samples, therefore, is of
vital importance. As per the prosecution case, seal was kept on the Superdnama of PW HC
Chanderdev. However, PWs-Nawab Ahmed and Shakel Ahmed have stated that said seal was kept
on the Superdnama of PW Mohd. Rafiq and contradicting him, PW-Dharminer Kumar has deposed
that said seal was kept by IO Shamsher Singh with himself, whereas IO Shamsher Singh has stated
that seal was kept on the superdnama of HC Chanderdev. Be it noted that PW-Chanderdev, witness
to the superdnama of seal, has not said anything in his statement with respect to the placement of
seal on his superdnama.
13. It is evident from the above that link evidence adduced by the prosecution in the present case viz.
"the quantity of contraband received by Incharge Malkhana qua the quantity recovered and seized
by the Investigating Officer, receipt of one of the samples by the Chemical Analyst, lesser in quantity
than sent by the Executive Magistrate, discrepant testimonies of eye witnesses with respect to
number of samples and weights of samples and placement of seal on Superdnama, is far from being
satisfactory and inevitable effect of unsatisfactory link evidence is that prosecution has failed to rule
out the possibility of samples being changed or tampered with, which prosecution is obliged to prove
affirmatively. Be it also noted that the witnesses who have contradicted each other on these material
aspects of the case are police personnels. These discrepancies could have been ignored if such
witnesses were independent or laymen or rustic villagers. Unfortunately, the discrepancies noted
above have come to the fore from the mouth of trained police officials, who are supposed to be
aware of the consequences of their testimonies made in the Court.
14. In a similar fact situation, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana in Lala and others v. State of
Punjab reported as 2013 (2) Criminal Cases 598 has observed as below:
"The other grounds of defence i.e. discrepancies in the statements official witnesses
regarding the number of dockets prepared or as to who was driving the tractor are
not material in a case where the witness is a layman. However, six out of seven
prosecution witnesses, in the instant case are police officials who receive adequate
training and know the implications of the statements made by them before the court
of law. The discrepancies or contradictions in the statements become material in the
instant case as the statements have come from the trained officials of the Police
Force. Therefore, in the opinion of this Court, a contradiction or defect in the
statement of police witness takes the complexion of material deficiencies. This is
more so because NDPS Act imposed strict liability on offenders. The guilt of anyone
accused of a crime under NDPS Act thus, has to be established by scanning the
prosecution evidence in the manner of a microscopic examination. Thus, the
contradiction in the statements of PWs with regard to the mode of transportation and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171753564/ 4
Crl A(Ad) No. 07/2022 vs Adil Ahmed Sofi on 28 April, 2023
preparation of other records in the present case, are material."
15. We have also noticed that there is nothing in the prosecution case to indicate that sample of seal
used for sealing of the contraband was sent to the Chemical Analyst along with the samples for the
purpose of comparison of the seals on the packets of samples. This safeguard is provided to ensure
that seals found on the samples were in fact the same seals and to rule out the possibility of the
samples being changed or tampered with during the period they remained in the custody of the
Investigating Officer or Malkhana.
16. The importance of forwarding of the sample seal along with samples for the purpose of
comparison was discussed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Rajasthan v. Gurmail Singh
reported as AIR 2005 SC 1578 in which the Apex Court has ruled as below:
".......We further find that no sample of the seal was sent along with the sample to
Excise Laboratory, Jodhpur for the purpose of comparing with the seal appearing on
the sample bottles. Therefore, there is no evidence to prove satisfactorily that the
seals found were in fact the same seals as were put on the sample bottles immediately
after seizure of the contraband......"
17. The principle of law enunciated in the afore-quoted case law is applicable to the facts and
circumstances of the present case on account of failure on the part of investigating agency to
forward samples of the seal, along with samples, to the Chemical Analyst for the purpose of
comparison that the said seals were in fact same seals which were put on the samples or not, and for
this omission, the prosecution case is rendered highly doubtful
18. Next, loophole in the prosecution case is that the sealed samples are required to be signed by the
SHO of the concerned Police Station as well as by the accused. However, there is nothing in the
prosecution evidence to suggest that said samples were signed by anyone of them.
19. Another aspect of the matter, which cannot be lost sight of is that it is also case of the
prosecution that none except respondent was found in the vehicle at the time of occurrence.
However, PWs-Dharminder Kumar and Raju Singh have contradicted the entire prosecution story
by stating that there were two to three other persons travelling in the said vehicle at the relevant
time. Hiding the genesis of the crime always creates a doubt on the veracity of the prosecution case.
20. We also find infraction of section 57 of the NDPS which inter alia provides that whenever any
person makes arrest and seizure, he shall make full report of all particulars of arrest and seizure to
his superior officer within a period of 48 hours, however, there is nothing in the prosecution case or
the evidence that Investigating Agency has complied with the said provision.
21. It is trite that in cases under the NDPS Act, keeping in view the gravity of offences and the
severity of punishment attached thereto, prosecution is obliged to adduce cogent and trustworthy
evidence as also to ensure that mandatory provisions of the Act are religiously complied to rule out
any possibility of tampering and consequent false implication of accused. It is also settled law that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171753564/ 5
Crl A(Ad) No. 07/2022 vs Adil Ahmed Sofi on 28 April, 2023
more serious the offence, the stricter degree of proof is required to sustain conviction of an accused.
Needless to say that mandate of law enshrined under NDPS Act is required to be complied strictly in
view of severity of punishment prescribed under the Act. Legislature in its wisdom has enacted
various safeguards in various provisions of the Act to be strictly followed by an Investigating Agency
at different stages of investigation to rule out the possibility of false implication.
22. What we have observed in the present case is that not only the prosecution evidence and that too
of police officials is replete with contradictions and discrepancies on material aspects of the case
including total numbers and weight of packets containing the sample of the contraband, the seal
impression, recovery and seizure of the contraband and the receipt of the same by the Incharge
Malkhana but mandatory provisions of the NDPS Act have been observed in breech.
23. Having regard to what has been observed and discussed above, we do not find any illegality
much less impropriety in the well reasoned impugned judgment of acquittal. Viewed thus, we have
not been persuaded to take a view different from the one taken by learned trial court. Hence present
appeal is dismissed and the impugned judgment is upheld. Respondent is discharged of his bail
bonds. Record of the trial court, if any, shall be returned.
(RAJESH SEKHRI) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
Jammu
28.04.2023
Paramjeet
Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171753564/ 6
