Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21
May, 2019
Author: Jyoti Saran
Bench: Jyoti Saran, Anjani Kumar Sharan
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.10439 of 2019
======================================================
CTI Infrastructure Private Limited, a Company registered under the
provisions of the Companies Act, 1956 having its registered office at 50,
Chowringhee Road, ISSCO House, Block B, 10th Floor, Kolkata- 700071
through its Branch Manager-cum-authorized signatory Mr. Vijay Singhania,
Male, aged about 39 years, Son of Late Om Prakash Singania, Resident of
Flat No.308, Jyoti Apartment, 19, Panna Lal Basak Lane, Bally (M), District-
Howrah- 711204.
... ... Petitioner
Versus
1. The State of Bihar through the Principal Secretary, Registration, Excise and
Prohibition, Government of Bihar, Patna.
2. The Excise Commissioner, Bihar, Patna.
3. The District Magistrate, Kishanganj.
4. The Superintendent of Police, Kishanganj.
5. The Station House Officer, Kishanganj Police Station, Kishanganj.
... ... Respondents
======================================================
Appearance :
For the Petitioner/s : Mr. Satyabir Bharti, Adv.
Mr. Alok Chandra, Adv.
For the Respondent/s : Mr. Lalit Kishore, A.G.
Mr. Vikash Kumar, SC11
Mr. Akash Chaturvedi, AC to SC11
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE JYOTI SARAN
and
HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ANJANI KUMAR SHARAN
ORAL JUDGMENT
(Per: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE JYOTI SARAN)
Date : 21-05-2019
The petitioner by filing this writ petition under Article
226 of the Constitution of India prays for the following reliefs:
(i) Issuance of writ of mandamus, directing the respondents
to forthwith release 300 cases of beer, (220 cases of Kalyani
Black Label Strong Beer-500 ml Can and 80 cases of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 1
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
Kingfisher Extra Strong Premium Beer- 500 ml Can) owned
by M/s United Breweries Ltd., which has been seized in
connection with Kishanganj P.S.Case No. 85 of 2019 dated
Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019
2/25
15.2.2019
, instituted under Section 30(a) of the Bihar Prohibition and Excise Act, 2016, which was being
lawfully transported on the strength of valid statutory documents/ permits issued by the West
Bengal Excise Department from Celebrity Breweries Pvt. Ltd, Mauza- AIMA and Somsar, P.S.
Dadpur, Hooghly, West Bengal, West Bengal to BEVCO Warehouse of the West Bengal State
Beverage Corporation Limited, at Siliguri, District Darjeeling.
(ii) To restrain the respondents from initiating any proceeding for confiscation of the aforesaid
consignment of beer, seized in connection with Kishanganj P.S.Case No. 89 of 2019 dated 15.2.2019,
as the consignment was lawfully transported from Celebrity Breweries Pvt. Ltd., Mauza- AIMA and
Somsar, P.S. Dadpur, Hooghly, West Bengal to BEVCO Warehouse of the West Bengal State
Beverage Corporation Limited, Siliguri, District West Bengal. With the consent of the parties the
writ petition has been heard with a view to final disposal at the stage of admission on completion of
pleadings.
The facts of the case briefly stated is that the petitioner is a Company incorporated under the
Companies Act, 1956 having its registered office at 50, Chowringhee Road, ISSCO House, Block B,
10th Floor, Kolkata. The petitioner is engaged in the business of providing transportation services to
its clients and Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 during which course it
transports different goods to different parts of the Country. The case of the petitioner is that it is in
one such course of transportation that the petitioner entered into an agreement with the United
Breweries Limited for transportation of its goods/ beer through the designated routes as indicated
in the transport permits. A copy of the agreement is enclosed at Annexure 1 to the writ petition. It is
the case of the petitioner that it is based on such agreement that the petitioner had hired a Tata 407
vehicle bearing registration No. WB 89/0104 for transportation of 300 cases of beer (220 cases of
Kalyani Black Label Strong Beer and 80 cases of Kingfisher Extra Strong Premium Beer, each
packed in 500 ml. Can). The beer owned by M/s United Breweries Ltd. was manufactured at the
contract brewery namely M/s Celebrity Breweries Pvt. Ltd., Mauza AIMA and Somsar, P.S. Dadpur,
Hooghly, in the State of West Bengal and was to be transported to BEVCO Warehouse of the West
Bengal State Beverage Corporation Limited, Siliguri, West Bengal.
It is the case of the petitioner that the vehicle carrying beer duly supported with lawful and valid
documents issued by the West Bengal State Beverages Corporation Limited (hereinafter referred to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 2
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
as 'the Beverages Corporation') at Annexure 2 series was on its way to its destination at Siliguri on
13.2.2019 following Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 designated route
through Memari, Morgram, Malda and Siliguri passing through Dalkola and Kishanganj on the
National Highway and no sooner it entered the check-post at Kishanganj in the State of Bihar that it
was stopped, the vehicle together with the goods loaded thereon seized, a police case registered
giving rise to Kishanganj P.S.Case No. 85/2019 for alleged violation of the Bihar Prohibition and
Excise Act, 2016 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') and the driver and Cleaner made accused for
such violation. A copy of the F.I.R. is at Annexure 4.
The petitioner after representing before the District Magistrate, Kishanganj on 22.2.2019 with
reminders on 25.2.2019 and 15.3.2019 and getting no response has approached this Court through
the writ petition in question for the reliefs as reproduced hereinabove.
Mr. Satyabir Bharti, learned counsel has appeared for the petitioner while the State in its Excise
Department is represented through Mr. Lalit Kishore, learned Advocate General assisted by Mr.
Vikash Kumar, learned SC-11.
Mr. Bharti, learned counsel for the petitioner, while reiterating the facts of the case has straightway
invited the attention of this Court to the documents which accompanied the transportation, copies
of which are enclosed at Annexures 2 series, Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019
dt.21-05-2019 to submit that the goods transported is supported by the 'order for supply' issued by
the West Bengal State Beverages Corporation Limited at running Page-33. In reference to the
transport pass at page-34, he submits that it clearly mentions the details of the goods transported
from Celebrity Breweries Pvt. Ltd. to the Warehouse of the Beverages Corporation, the details of the
vehicle and the route which the vehicle was to follow. He submits that the invoice at page-35, the
consignment note at page-37 all of which was produced at the check-post, but simply because a
digital lock was not installed on the vehicle and the driver failed to show any paper supporting grant
of permission for transportation of the goods through the State of Bihar, that the vehicle was seized
together with goods and the F.I.R. instituted.
Learned Counsel has referred to the F.I.R. at Annexure 4 to submit that except for the allegation of
non-installation of digital lock and permission taken for entering the State of Bihar, there is no other
allegation against the petitioner of any other violation. He submits that it is on mere suspicion that
the seizure has taken place.
Learned counsel has invited the attention of this Court to the statement made in paragraphs 7 and 8
of the counter affidavit filed on behalf of the Principal Secretary and the Excise Patna High Court
CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 Commissioner to submit that except for the said charge
there is no other allegation of violation against the petitioner. Learned counsel in reference to a map
at running page-38 submits that it is in between Malda and Siliguri while moving on NH27 which
was earlier NH31 that the National Highway crosses over to the district of Kishanganj in the State of
Bihar and it is for this cross over that the petitioner has been penalized despite supporting
documents produced on a valid transportation. Mr. Bharti has submitted that except for the
National Highway in question through which the goods were being transported, there is no other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 3
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
route which could have been followed by the consignment. He submits that it is right at the
check-post that true and proper disclosure was made by the driver which is also recorded in the
F.I.R. yet the vehicle was seized. According to Mr. Bharti, in case the petitioner had to comply with
any formality, it was the duty of the Excise Officials posted at the check-post to allow him to do the
needful including installation of the digital lock and consequently give a safe passage to the vehicle
rather than seizing the vehicle on a complete misapplication of the law.
In reference to the statement made in paragraph 7 of the counter affidavit of the Principal Secretary
and the Excise Commissioner he submits that even while accepting that Rampur Patna High Court
CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 Khagda check post has the facility of installing digital locks
which has to be removed at Faring Gola check-post at Kishanganj before the vehicle leaves the State
territory but since the officials posted at the entry check-post at Rampur Khagda failed to discharge
their obligation of installing such lock that the petitioner is being penalized.
Learned counsel has referred to the certification by the West Bengal Government at Annexure 5 to
submit that it certifies the transportation.
Learned counsel has next referred to the notification relied upon by the respondent Excise
Department to support the seizure dated 28.12.2015 which introduced the New Excise Policy in the
State, at Annexure-A to the counter affidavit to submit that while Clause 1(kha) saves the business in
IMFL, Clause 2(gha)(v) conceptualized an arrangement of installation of digital lock but no followup
action has been taken for framing of Rule or issuance of instruction as to how this policy decision is
to be given effect to in the manner provided in Clause 5 and 6.
Learned counsel has next referred to the definition of the 'notification' provided in Section 2(50) of
'the Act' to submit that it is only a notification issued under 'the Act' which is published in the
Official Gazette which has been treated a valid notification. Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of
2019 dt.21-05-2019 Mr. Bharti while referring to the saving clause at Section 97 of 'the Act' submits
that though notifications issued under the Bihar Excise Act, 1915 and the other legislation in force at
the relevant time have been saved but the said provisions yet does not come to the aid of the
respondents because the New Excise Policy, 2015, simply enabled the State to take necessary steps
for regulating trade after obtaining sanction from the Committee constituted but in absence of any
followup action taken by the State, the reliance on the said policy would be completely misplaced.
Learned counsel has next referred to Section 14 which provides for movement of intoxicants under
valid permit and after obtaining transit permission in the prescribed manner to submit, that in
absence of Rules framed to give effect to the provision underlying Section 14, it is unworkable as
held by this Court in the judgment rendered in the case of Mahadev Carrier Pvt. Ltd. vs. the State of
Bihar & ors. arising from C.W.J.C.No. 2866/2019.
Learned counsel has also invited the attention to the provisions underlying Sections 15 and 16 of 'the
Act' to submit that they enable the State Government to lay down reasonable restrictions and
exercise regulatory powers but which again is unworkable because neither any Rule has been framed
nor any Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 notification has been issued until
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 4
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
date, to give effect to these provisions.
It is thus submitted that the action of the respondents in seizing the vehicle and in keeping it in
continued detention is wholly illegal and contrary to the constitutional guarantee available to the
petitioner.
Per contra, Mr. Lalit Kishore, learned Advocate General, has relied upon the provisions of 'the Act'
as well as provisions of the New Excise Policy at Annexure 'A' to defend the impugned action and to
submit that since there is no dispute that the petitioner was travelling without valid permit and had
avoided installation of digital lock, an offence had been committed under 'the Act' and the petitioner
would have to suffer the consequences. Learned Advocate General has referred to the New Excise
Policy, 2015 at Annexure 'A' to submit that at Clause 2(gha) obliged every transporter of liquor to
install a digital lock at the time of entry as well as to obtain permission for passing through the State
of Bihar but the petitioner has failed on each of the two obligations. Learned Advocate General has
referred to the consignment note/ transport pass at running page-34 of Annexure 2 series to submit
that even though the route was clearly mentioned and at no place there is any reference to the
district of Kishanganj or that the truck Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019
would be passing through the State of Bihar, the petitioner is guilty of violation of the route. It is
further urged that even in case the consignment crossed over to the State of Bihar at Kishanganj,
then the law obliged him to obtain permission and get a digital lock installed, which obligation was
not carried out.
In response to the reliance made by Mr. Bharti to the judgment of Mahadev Carrier Pvt. Ltd. (supra)
he submits that several aspects were not placed before the Court viz the New Excise Policy at
Annexure 'A' which obliges the transporter to get a digital lock installed. According to the learned
Advocate General, even if the Rules have not been framed as yet, the New Excise Policy, 2015 which
is in tune with the provisions present at Sections 14 to 16 of 'the Act', amply empowers the State
Government to regulate the movement of intoxicants within the State. By producing another map it
is canvassed that there was an alternative route available with the petitioner and he has violated the
same to cross over in the State of Bihar and since the law of prohibition is in force, the petitioner
would have to face the consequences.
Learned Advocate General in his attempt to distinguish the present case from the case of Mahadev
Carrier Pvt. Ltd. (supra) has submitted that while in the said case the truck was Patna High Court
CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 installed with GPS tracking Data which gives the details,
there is no such equipment installed in the present case.
Learned Advocate General by placing reliance on the judgment of this Court in C.W.J.C.No.
6944/2018 (Tirupati Logistics Private Limited vs. the State of Bihar & ors.) has submitted that on a
similar issue coming for consideration, the Division Bench presided by Hon'ble the Chief Justice
relegated the matter to the Excise Commissioner for its disposal within a time frame. Learned
Advocate General defending the impugned action under the regulatory power vested in the State in
Sections 14, 15 and 16 of 'the Act' read alongside New Excise Policy, 2015 has submitted that there is
no illegality in the action complained.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 5
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
In his short rejoinder Mr. Bharti has produced the order of the Excise Commissioner passed in
Appeal Case No. 36/2018 (M/s Tirupati Logistics Pvt. Ltd. vs. the Collector, Kishanganj & ors.) to
submit that the learned Advocate General has placed only part information in the case of Tirupati
Logistics Pvt. Ltd. (supra) where the matter was relegated to the Excise Commissioner. He submits
that the fact is that on such relegation, on identical issue arising where the consignment had crossed
over to Kishanganj, while travelling to Siliguri, the Excise Commissioner vide his order dated
21.5.2018 has directed the Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 Excise
Superintendent, Kishanganj to verify the documents of consignment and in case they were found to
be genuine, to release the same within a period of seven days in favour of the said petitioner.
He thus submits that the Excise Commissioner while considering the identical case of Tirupati
Logistics (supra) relied upon by learned Advocate General has concluded in favour of the petitioner
but has taken a different stand in so far as the present case is concerned even when, in each of the
two cases the issue related to transportation of liquor of West Bengal Beverages Corporation and the
destination was Siliguri routed through the district of Kishanganj in the State of Bihar. It is the
submission of Mr. Bharti that an arbitrary stand has been taken by the Excise Commissioner in the
present counter affidavit which is in contrast to his direction issued in the case of Tirupati Logistics
Pvt. Ltd. (supra).
We have heard learned counsel for the parties and have perused the records.
This matter came up for consideration on 7.5.2019 and this Court taking note of the situation,
allowed the respondents including the District Magistrate, Kishanganj i.e. respondents no. 1 to 3, to
take a prudent and correctional course in view of the Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019
dt.21-05-2019 judgment rendered by us in the case of Mahadev Carrier Pvt. Ltd. (supra) on a similar
matter but such was not to be. For the sake of convenience we are persuaded to reproduce our
expression in the said case which practically answers the issue:
" The impugned seizure has been carried out in purported exercise of powers so
vested in the law enforcing agencies within the State of Bihar under the provisions of
'the Act' which under section 14 of 'the Act' restricts movement of intoxicants except
under a valid permit or after obtaining transit permission and in section 30(a)
imposes a penalty for any such unlawful import, export, transport, manufacture,
possession, sale of intoxicants or liquor etc. Though heavy reliance was placed by Mr.
Vivek Prasad, learned Government Pleader No.7 on the provisions of section 14 of
'the Act' to defend the impugned action and to submit that the movement of any
intoxicants can only be through a valid permit or under transit permission obtained
from the prescribed authority, to a query made by the Court as to whether 'the Act'
provides for any statutory permit or whether the Rules as mandated under section
14(4) have yet been framed by the State Government, Mr. Prasad has no answer
because though 'the Act' was brought into force with effect from 02.10.2016 yet the
statutory rules have yet not been framed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 6
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
On a pointed query to Mr. Prasad as to what ought to be the proper course for the law
enforcing agencies in the State of Bihar in case a transporter, in course of
transportation of liquor on strength of valid travel documents, within the territory of
a State where no Prohibition Law is in force like in the present case the State Patna
High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 of Jharkhand, mistakenly treads
over the territory of the State of Bihar where the Prohibition Law is in force and the
vehicle driver is possessed with documents to support a lawful transportation of the
goods, whether the authorities of the State of Bihar should have assisted to put the
vehicle back to its normal course i.e. to return to the State of Jharkhand and/or to
direct the driver to obtain permission from the competent authority or should have
hurriedly proceeded for seizure, as done in the present case, no satisfactory answer
could come forth.
In our opinion, the documents at Annexure 2 series are sufficient indication of a valid
transportation of goods under the dispatch note issued by the Jharkhand State
Beverages Corporation Limited from Ranchi to Deoghar, within the State of
Jharkhand. The GPS tracking data at Annexure 4 very clearly confirms that the
vehicle all along travelled within the State of Jharkhand and just before reaching
Deoghar that it must have mistakenly crossed over to Chandramandi in the district of
Jamui within the State of Bihar and having realised the mistake the driver tried to
return to the State of Jharkhand when the police authorities intercepted the vehicle
and took it into their custody. While the FIR at Annexure 3 very fairly acknowledges
that the driver of the vehicle did inform the Station House Officer that the goods were
being transported from Ranchi to Deoghar, there is no such mention in the FIR,
either that the goods were being transported without valid documents or that the
driver failed to produce the same. In fact, this lacuna is sought to be filled up through
the counter affidavit when the Dy. Superintendent of Police, Jamui filing the affidavit
under the authority of the Superintendent of Police, Jamui has tried to plug the
loopholes to say that the Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019
driver failed to produce the documents. This statement again falls by the
acknowledgment in paragraph 7 of the counter affidavit where the deponent accepts
that somebody came with valid permit as regarding the transportation in question on
27.12.2018. It reflects plain abuse of statutory power that even when the respondents
acknowledge that on 27.12.2018 some one produced the valid permits to support the
transportation yet, neither the police authorities in the district of Jamui nor the
prescribed authority under 'the Act' bothered to release the vehicle with the goods
rather perpetuated the illegality to keep the truck in illegal seizure and relegated the
driver of the vehicle to illegal custody. Article 301 of the Constitution of India
guarantees freedom of trade, commerce and intercourse throughout the territory of
India. Though powers have been vested in the Parliament under Article 302 to
impose reasonable restrictions and Article 304(b), inter alia, enables a Legislature of
a State by law, to impose such reasonable restrictions on the freedom of trade,
commerce or intercourse as may be required in public interest but then such
restrictions have to be subject to the guarantee available under Article 301 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 7
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
Constitution of India. No doubt, with effect from the date, the Prohibition Law was
brought into force within the State of Bihar, none was permitted to import, export,
transport, consume any intoxicant/liquor except under a valid permit but the case in
hand is not a case where the consignment in question was being brought into the
State of Bihar rather the consignment started its course at Ranchi within the State of
Jharkhand and was meant to be delivered at the Warehouse of the Jharkhand State
Beverages Corporation Limited, Deoghar which again fell in the State of Jharkhand.
There Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 was thus no occasion
for the consigner to obtain any valid permit from the excise authorities of the State of
Bihar nor even if the truck crossed over to the territory of Bihar, could the Excise
Department coerce the consigner to obtain a valid permit once it got confirmed from
the travelling documents that the consignment was travelling under a statutory
permit issued by the Government Corporation in the State of Jharkhand and was
meant to be delivered at the Warehouse of the Jharkhand State Beverages
Corporation Limited, Deoghar. This position is also admitted by Mr. Arup Kumar
Chongar, learned counsel representing the State of Jharkhand as well as the
Jharkhand State Beverages Corporation Limited.
This Court has on numerous occasions commented upon the repeated abuse of the
Prohibition Law by the statutory authorities but the case in hand is a classic example
where neither the district police authorities of Jamui nor the excise authorities are
willing to relent and correct the mistake committed even when valid documents
supporting the transportation has been brought to their notice and admitted at
paragraph 7 of the counter affidavit. The respondent authorities in the Excise and
Prohibition Department, Government of Bihar yet continue to stand by their illegal
action as canvased through their counsel Mr. Vivek Prasad.
In our opinion the provisions underlying section 14 of 'the Act', which obliges a
transport carrier to obtain a valid permit from excise authority, much relied upon by
Mr. Prasad, is unworkable because no Rules have yet been framed to prescribe the
procedure nor any form is prescribed to make the provisions effective. In such
situation, the reliance by Mr. Prasad, learned Government Patna High Court CWJC
No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 Pleader No.7 on section 14 was completely
misplaced and does not come to the aid of the respondents.
In our opinion, even if the State in its Police Department and the 'Excise Department'
have their reasons for suspicion that it was a case of illegal transportation of liquor
within the territory of the State of Bihar, once the Station House Officer admits that
the driver of the vehicle had informed that the consignment was being transported
from Ranchi to Deoghar and the Station House Officer, Chandramandi Police
Station, Jamui, does not record any doubt in the statements so made while drawing
the FIR, either he should have allowed the vehicle to return to the territory of
Jharkhand and/or even if, section 14 of 'the Act' was pressed in service then, he
should have allowed sufficient time to the transporter or the consigner as the case
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 8
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
may be, to obtain permits for the cross over into the State of Bihar but the district
police did neither, rather mechanically proceeded to seize the vehicle along with the
goods to register a police case and took the driver into custody.
We are satisfied to record that in view of the documents present at Annexure 2 series
read alongside the G.P.S. tracking data present at Annexure 4, the authorities in the
'Excise Department' in the State of Bihar as well as the Jamui District Police should
have exercised prudence rather than to mechanically apply the Prohibition Law to
seize the goods which was being lawfully transported and which act is in direct
conflict with the Constitutional guarantee provided under Article 301 of the
Constitution of India and the impugned action does not get saved by the provisions of
Article 304(b) in the attending circumstances."
Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 There is absolutely no dispute that the
goods in question was travelling with valid documents. The certification by the Government of West
Bengal at Annexure 5 further concludes this issue. The F.I.R. at Annexure 4 also does not allege any
evasion on the part of the petitioner rather it clearly records that the vehicle in question stopped on
indication and informed that the goods were being transported from Hooghly to Siliguri. It also
records that on demand the documents supporting transportation was also produced. There is no
allegation in the F.I.R. that the driver tried to flee away or that the consignment in question was
meant for the State of Bihar or that it was being offloaded in the territory of the State. It is simply
because the driver failed to produce any permission granted by the competent authority in the State
of Bihar for transportation of intoxicants through the territory of the State of Bihar, no digital lock
was installed and since the prohibition law was in force that the driver and the Khalasi were arrested
and F.I.R. instituted.
Two sets of counter affidavits have been filed, one at the instance of respondents no. 4 and 5 i.e. the
Superintendent of Police, Kishanganj and the Station House Officer of Kishanganj Police Station
and the other on behalf of the Principal Secretary of the Excise Department as well as Excise
Commissioner. Since Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 each of the two
affidavits contains the same stand we would be referring to the counter affidavit filed on behalf of
the Excise Department and the statements at paragraphs 7, 8 and 9 would confirm that even when
these departmental heads do acknowledge that the digital locks were to be installed when the vehicle
was entering the State of Bihar and in the present case when it entered the Rampur Khagda Excise
Check Post at Kishanganj where the petitioner was apprehended on NH31 but they put no query on
the departmental officials posted at the said Check Post as to why they failed in their duty to install
such digital lock on the vehicle.
Paragraph 8 of the counter affidavit comments upon cross over by the vehicle in the State of Bihar at
Kishanganj and since the said district is not amongst the stations mentioned in the transport pass,
so the consignment after being doubted has been seized but it again fails to either give an alternative
possible route for the vehicle or point any provision casting a prohibition for such cross over. In fact
what we have decided in the case of Mahadev Carrier Pvt. Ltd. (supra) regarding absence of
statutory prescriptions, is admitted at paragraph 9 when the Principal Secretary and the Excise
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 9
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
Commissioner do admit that detailed Rules have been contemplated for prescribing procedure for
installation of digital locks on tankers and would be brought into Patna High Court CWJC No.10439
of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 force after its approval by the Cabinet and on lifting of the Model Code of
Conduct. Meaning thereby, there is no rule in force and thus the reliance placed by learned Advocate
General either on the notification announcing the New Excise Policy, 2015 or on the provisions of
Sections 14 to 16 of 'the Act' is completely misplaced. In fact the reliance placed by the learned
Advocate General on the New Excise Policy for supporting installation of digital locks fails to cure
the situation for two other reasons namely:
(a) Clause 2(gha)(v) of the policy decision is an enabling provision which allows the
State to make arrangements for regulating entry of vehicles loaded with liquor/
intoxicants in the State of Bihar, which power has not been given effect to because no
rule/ guideline or instruction have yet been issued pursuant to such policy decision;
and
(b) A review Committee under the Chairmanship of the Chief Secretary was
constituted vide Clause 5 with power vested in the Excise Department under Clause 6
to issue necessary instructions, guidelines and notifications for giving effect to the
policy decision after seeking approval from such Committee but again no notification
has been issued by the State under such enabling power.
Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 The situation existing as discussed is
ample proof of absolute abuse of statutory power on insistence of digital locks even when the
Principal Secretary/ Excise Commissioner admit before this Court that statutory rules are in the
making for laying procedure for installation of digital locks.
In so far as the other allegation regarding obtaining permission for passing through the territory of
State of Bihar is concerned, much reliance has been placed by learned Advocate General on Sections
14 to 16 of 'the Act' in support of the objection taken.
Sections 14 to 16 of 'the Act reads under:
"14. Movement of intoxicants etc.- (1) No liquor, intoxicants or final product shall be
imported, exported or transported or transited within or from outside or through the
State except with a valid permit and subject to such duty (if any) payable.
(2) If any consignment of liquor or intoxicants is being transported by road from a
place outside the State of Bihar to another such place and the vehicle carrying the
consignment passes through the territory of the State, the driver or any other person
in-charge of the vehicle shall obtain transit permission in the prescribed manner
from the authority of the first check post falling enroute after entry into the State and
shall surrender the same transit permission to the authority of the last check post
before leaving the State and in the event of failure to do so within the stipulated
hours of leaving the first check post falling Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 10
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
dt.21-05-2019 enroute, it shall be deemed that liquor or intoxicants so transported
have been sold or disposed off by the owner or the person-in-charge of the vehicle
within the State of Bihar. (3) In case the driver or person referred to in sub-section
(2) fails to comply with the provisions of sub-section (2), he may, apart from being
levied such penalty as the State Government may decide, also be prosecuted under
Section 30 of this Act;
(4) The State Government may make detailed rules for this purpose.
15. Restrictions on vehicles carrying intoxicants etc.- The State Government may lay down
reasonable restrictions on the vehicles transporting any excisable articles or final products and may
require them to adhere to certain specifications:
Provided further that the State Government may require the transport vehicles to
install such devices as it may require as a pre-condition for registration under the
Motor Vehicle Act and give such directions to the State Transport Authority as it
deems fit.
16. Power to Regulate Transport intoxicants.- Notwithstanding anything contained in the Act or any
Act for the time being in force, the State Government may by notification, regulate the movement or
import or export of any or all liquor or intoxicant into or from or through the State or any specified
part or area of the State." We have already held that Section 14 is unworkable in absence of any
Rules framed by the State in our judgment rendered in the case of Mahadev Carrier Pvt. Ltd.
(supra). Even Sections 15 and 16 which enables the State to lay down Patna High Court CWJC
No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 restrictions or to have regulatory control remain unworkable in
absence of corresponding rules, guidelines or notifications issued on the subject by the State
Government as mandated under the said provision. It is undisputed that neither any Rules have
been framed for regulating the movement of vehicle loaded with intoxicants within the State of
Bihar as mandated in Section 14 nor the State Government has issued by notification for restricting
movement of intoxicants as mandated in Section 15 nor any notification has been issued to regulate
the movement of such intoxicants in terms of Section 16. We have already taken note of the
acceptance by the Excise Department at paragraph 9 where they admit that the Rules contemplated
for regulating the procedure for installation of digital locks are yet awaiting approval by the Cabinet.
We completely fail to appreciate that in situation of the present kind where the legislation having
been enacted the regulatory controls are yet to be given effect to in absence of corresponding Rules,
notifications or guidelines issued by the State, how learned Advocate General has tried hard to
defend an absolute defenceless act which is in absolute teeth of the constitutional guarantee
available to every citizen of this Country under Article 301 read alongside Article 19(1)(d) and (g) of
the Constitution of India.
Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 We again fail to appreciate the stand of
the Excise Commissioner for after having appreciated the route followed by such similar
consignment of West Bengal Beverage Corporation Limited while adjudicating on the case of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 11
Cti Infrastructure Private Limited vs The State Of Bihar on 21 May, 2019
Tirupati Logistics Pvt. Ltd. (supra) which is present in his order dated 21.5.2018, he has chosen to
oppose the prayer on the issue of route in the present case.
We wish to remind the authorities in the Excise Department that while it is their bounden duty to
implement the law on prohibition in the State, they also have a duty to safeguard the constitutional
rights available to the citizens of this Country and which cannot be interfered with either on whims
or on mechanical application of the law even when the documents support a valid transportation
from the originating station until its destination. A simple cross over to the territory of the State is
not to be eyed with suspicion unless there are reasons to back such suspicion and which in the
present case is absolutely lacking.
For the reasons so discussed, we hereby direct respondents no. 1 to 5 more particularly the
confiscating authority, i.e. the District Magistrate, Kishanganj (in case confiscation proceeding has
been initiated) and/or the designated court at Kishanganj (in case no confiscation proceeding is
initiated) to Patna High Court CWJC No.10439 of 2019 dt.21-05-2019 ensure release of the truck
bearing registration No. WB 89/0104 together with the goods loaded thereon as fully described in
the documents supporting transportation at Annexures 2 series within a period of 72 hours of
receipt/ production of a copy of this order, failing which the petitioner would be entitled to a cost
quantified at Rs. 10 lacs payable by the Excise Department, Govt. of Bihar.
As a consequence, the confiscation proceeding, if any, initiated against the vehicle and the goods in
question, would stand quashed.
The petitioner however would be at liberty to question the F.I.R. by taking recourse to proper
proceedings.
The writ petition is allowed.
Let a writ of mandamus be issued accordingly.
(Jyoti Saran, J) ( Anjani Kumar Sharan, J) Surendra/-
AFR/NAFR AFR
CAV DATE NA
Uploading Date 22.05.2019
Transmission Date NA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99251321/ 12
