Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur
Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
Author: M.V. Muralidaran
Bench: M.V. Muralidaran
Page |1
JOHN
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
TELEN KOM AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 226 of 2022
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh, aged about 37
2022.08.18 years old, S/O M. Ingocha Singh of Khangabok
12:56:19 +05'30' Part-II Makha Leikai, P.O. and P.S. Thoubal,
Thoubal District, Manipur.
-- -- -- Petitioner
- VERSUS-
1. The State of Manipur through the Principal
Secretary/Commissioner (Home), Government of
Manipur, Old Secretariat P.O. & P.S. Imphal,
Imphal West District, Manipur-795001.
2. The Director General of Police, Manipur,
Babupara, P.O. & P.S. Imphal, Imphal West
District, Manipur-795001.
3. The Superintendent of Police, Thoubal, P.O. &
P.S. Thoubal, Thoubal District, Manipur-795138.
-- -- -- Respondents
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.V. MURALIDARAN For the Petitioners :: Mr. N. Bipin, Advocate For
the Respondents :: Mr. H. Samarjit, GA.
Page |2 Date of Hearing and reserving Judgment & Order :: 07.07.2022 Date of Judgment & Order
:: 19.08.2022 JUDGMENT AND ORDER (CAV) This writ petition has been filed to quash the
impugned suspension order dated 2.9.2021 issued by the third respondent and to direct the
respondents to release the entitled subsistence allowance of the petitioner within a stipulated
period.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 1
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
2. Briefly stated, the case of the petitioner is as follows: The petitioner was appointed as driver in the
Manipur Police Department and joined as driver in the office of the Superintendent of Police,
Thoubal District. On 27.8.2021, the petitioner was proceeding from Khangabok to Moreh by
carrying Rs.50,000/- for purchasing some carpets and household items from Moreh. Thereafter, the
petitioner was proceeding from Moreh to Khangabok after completing his purchase by hiring one
Eco Van Taxi. While he was approaching Wangjing Bridge on his way from Moresh to Khangabok,
he has been informed by a senior police officer to Page |3 meet at Wangjing Bazaar. Accordingly, the
petitioner met the senior police officer and thereafter, the petitioner was taken to a place near
Khongjom by the team of the senior police officer.
Subsequently, the petitioner and two others were arrested in connection with an alleged incident
that occurred at Moreh on a report submitted by one senior officer of the police department in
connection with transportation of illegal drugs contraband items from Moreh towards Imphal and
he was handed over to Moreh Police Station on 28.8.2021 and case in FIR No.42(8)2021 under
Section 21(c)/29/60(3) of ND&PS Act was registered by the Moreh Police Station against the
petitioner and others.
3. Further case of the petitioner is that after knowing the arrest, the third respondent placed the
petitioner under suspension vide the impugned order dated 2.9.2021. On medical ground, the
petitioner was granted interim bail and released o 24.2.2022. He was wrongly implicated in the FIR
and as on date, no charge sheet has been filed against the petitioner in the FIR case.
4. According to the petitioner, placing a Government employee under suspension for a long period
shall not serve Page |4 any purpose, because the suspended employee has to be paid subsistence
allowance under the provisions of the relevant Rules and on the other hand, the suspended
employee shall not discharge any useful or productive duty for the concerned period.
5. Under Rule 10(7) of the CCS (CCA) Rules, an order of suspension made or deemed to have been
made under the rules shall be reviewed by the competent authority to modify or revoke the
suspension, before expiry of 90 days from the date of order of suspension and if the said order of
suspension is not reviewed/extended for further period as provided under Rule 10(6), the order of
suspension shall cease to exist after expiry of 90 days in view of the provision to Rule 10(7) of CCS
(CCA) Rules, 1965. The petitioner is under suspension for more than 180 days and no review
committee was constituted before expiry of 3 months from initial date of suspension. Thus, the
impugned suspension order is liable to be revoked.
6. The respondents 2 and 3 filed affidavit-in- opposition stating that after collecting materials
against the petitioner and considering the probability of the petitioner being involved in FIR
No.42(8)2021, the petitioner was implicated and Page |5 arrested. In fact, the petitioner is the main
accused in the said FIR. It is stated that the petitioner was on interim bail since 6.10.2021 on
medical grounds as he was found suffering from severe Bronchitis with acute Asthmatic attached
which required proper specialized medical treatment and that the interim bail was extended from
time to time by the Court upon finding the condition of the petitioner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 2
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
7. It is stated that as per the Circular dated 12.9.1995 of the Director General of Police, it was
informed that appointment, dismissal etc. of subordinate police officers (from constable upto
inspector) is governed by Section 7 of the Police Act, 1861 and for its operation Assam Police Manual
has been framed and hence the provisions of CCS (CCA) Rules will not be applicable for disciplinary
proceedings of subordinate police personnel in the rank of Constable to Inspector. Rule 10(7) of CCS
(CCA) Rules, 1965 is inapplicable in the case of the petitioner. Hence, the respondent authorities
prayed for dismissal of the writ petition.
8. Assailing the impugned suspension order, Mr. N. Bipin, the learned counsel for the petitioner
submitted that the petitioner has been falsely implicated in FIR42(8)2021 Page |6 registered under
Section 21(c)/29/60(3) of the ND & PS Act on the file of the Moreh Police Station and that based on
the false FIR, he has been suspended vide impugned order dated 2.9.2021.
9. The learned counsel further submitted that the petitioner is under suspension for more than 180
days and no review committee was constituted before expiry of 90 days from the initial date of
suspension i.e. 2.9.2021. In terms of the provision of Rule 10(6) and (7) of the CCS (CCA) Rules,
suspension order deserves to be revoked after completion of 90 days from the date of suspension.
10. The learned counsel urged that there is no review committee meeting for extension of
suspension period of the petitioner after completion of 90 days was held. Therefore, the suspension
order is an act of arbitrary exercise of power violating the relevant provisions of CCS (CCA) Rules.
11. The learned counsel added that the petitioner was granted interim bail on medical ground and, in
fact, the petitioner was not paid the entitled subsistence allowance till Page |7 date. Thus, a prayer is
made to set aside the impugned suspension order dated 2.9.2021.
12. This Court considered the rival submissions and also perused the materials available on record.
13. The grievance of the petitioner is that detaining and suspending of the petitioner from service
only for naming him in the FIR is unfair and the petitioner ought to have been re-instated once the
90 days of suspension period is over, as no review committee meeting was held for extension of
suspension period.
14. The impugned order dated 2.9.2021 was issued by the third respondent in exercise of power
conferred under Section 7 of the Police Act, 1861 read with Rule 66 of Assam Police Manual Part-III.
15. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that while issuing the suspension order, the
third respondent had applied the true spirit and intent of Rule 10(2) of the CCS (CCA) Rules and,
therefore, it ought to apply the aforesaid spirit by which the suspension order is required to be
reviewed before expiry of 90 days and the suspension order shall not be valid Page |8 after the
period of 90 days, unless extended after a review for a further period of 90 days and, in any case, it
cannot be extended beyond 180 days at a time.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 3
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
16. Relying upon the provisions of Rule 10(6) and (7), the learned counsel further submitted that the
suspension order dated 2.9.2021 is not sustainable in the eye of law for the simple reason that it was
not reviewed before the expiry of 90 days from the date of order of suspension.
17. By relying upon the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Ashok
Kumar Aggarwal, (2013) 16 SCC 147, Mr. H. Samarjit, the learned Government Advocate submitted
that long period of suspension does not make the order of suspension invalid and even if a criminal
trial or enquiry takes a long time, it is ordinarily not open to the court to interfere in the case of
suspension as it is in the exclusive domain of the competent authority who can always review its
order of suspension that the respondent authorities are ready to review the suspension order and
issue appropriate order thereof.
Page |9
18. In Union of India v. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal, supra, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held thus:
"19. During suspension, the relationship of master and servant continues between the employer and
the employee. However, the employee is forbidden to perform his official duties. Thus, a suspension
order does not put an end to the service. Suspension means the action of debarring for the time
being from a function or privilege or temporary deprivation of working in the office. In certain cases,
suspension may cause stigma even after exoneration in the departmental proceedings or acquittal by
the criminal court, but it cannot be treated as a punishment even by any stretch of imagination in
the strict legal sense. (Vide O.P. Gupta v. Union of India [(1987) 4 SCC 328 : 1987 SCC (L&S) 400 :
(1987) 5 ATC 14 : AIR 1987 SC 2257] and Capt. M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. [(1999) 3
SCC 679 : 1999 SCC (L&S) 810 : AIR 1999 SC 1416] )
20. In State of Orissa v. Bimal Kumar Mohanty [(1994) 4 SCC 126 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 875 : (1994) 27
ATC 530] this Court observed as under: (SCC p. 133, para 13) P a g e | 10 "13. ... the order of
suspension would be passed after taking into consideration the gravity of the misconduct sought to
be inquired into or investigated and the nature of the evidence placed before the appointing
authority and on application of the mind by the disciplinary authority. Appointing authority or
disciplinary authority should consider ... and decide whether it is expedient to keep an employee
under suspension pending aforesaid action. It would not be as an administrative routine or an
automatic order to suspend an employee. It should be on consideration of the gravity of the alleged
misconduct or the nature of the allegations imputed to the delinquent employee. The court or the
Tribunal must consider each case on its own facts and no general law could be laid down in that
behalf. ... In other words it is to refrain him to avail further opportunity to perpetrate the alleged
misconduct or to remove the impression among the members of service that dereliction of duty
would pay fruits and the offending employee could get away even pending inquiry without any
impediment or to provide an opportunity to the delinquent officer to scuttle the inquiry or
investigation or to win over the witnesses or the delinquent P a g e | 11 having had an opportunity in
office to impede the progress of the investigation or inquiry, etc. ... It would be another thing if the
action is actuated by mala fides, arbitrarily or for ulterior purpose. The suspension must be a step in
aid to the ultimate result of the investigation or inquiry. The authority also should keep in mind
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 4
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
public interest of the impact of the delinquent's continuance in office while facing departmental
inquiry or trial of a criminal charge."
(emphasis added) (See also R.P. Kapur v. Union of India [AIR 1964 SC 787] and Balvantrai Ratilal
Patel v. State of Maharashtra [AIR 1968 SC 800]
21. The power of suspension should not be exercised in an arbitrary manner and without any
reasonable ground or as vindictive misuse of power. Suspension should be made only in a case
where there is a strong prima facie case against the delinquent employee and the allegations
involving moral turpitude, grave misconduct or indiscipline or refusal to carry out the orders of
superior authority are there, or there is a strong prima facie case against him, if proved, would
ordinarily result in P a g e | 12 reduction in rank, removal or dismissal from service. The authority
should also take into account all the available material as to whether in a given case, it is advisable to
allow the delinquent to continue to perform his duties in the office or his retention in office is likely
to hamper or frustrate the inquiry.
22. In view of the above, the law on the issue can be summarised to the effect that suspension order
can be passed by the competent authority considering the gravity of the alleged misconduct i.e.
serious act of omission or commission and the nature of evidence available. It cannot be actuated by
mala fide, arbitrariness, or for ulterior purpose. Effect on public interest due to the employee's
continuation in office is also a relevant and determining factor. The facts of each case have to be
taken into consideration as no formula of universal application can be laid down in this regard.
However, suspension order should be passed only where there is a strong prima facie case against
the delinquent, and if the charges stand proved, would ordinarily warrant imposition of major
punishment i.e. removal or dismissal from service, or reduction in rank, etc. P a g e | 13
23. In Jayrajbhai Jayantibhai Patel v. Anilbhai Nathubhai Patel [(2006) 8 SCC 200] this Court
explained: (SCC p. 209, para 18) "18. Having regard to it all, it is manifest that the power of judicial
review may not be exercised unless the administrative decision is illogical or suffers from procedural
impropriety or it shocks the conscience of the court in the sense that it is in defiance of logic or
moral standards but no standardised formula, universally applicable to all cases, can be evolved.
Each case has to be considered on its own facts, depending upon the authority that exercises the
power, the source, the nature or scope of power and the indelible effects it generates in the operation
of law or affects the individual or society. Though judicial restraint, albeit self-recognised, is the
order of the day, yet an administrative decision or action which is based on wholly irrelevant
considerations or material; or excludes from consideration the relevant material; or it is so absurd
that no reasonable person could have arrived at it on the given material, may be struck down. In
other words, when a court is satisfied that there is an abuse or misuse of power, and its jurisdiction
is invoked, it is P a g e | 14 incumbent on the court to intervene. It is nevertheless, trite that the
scope of judicial review is limited to the deficiency in the decision-making process and not the
decision."
24. Long period of suspension does not make the order of suspension invalid. However, in State of
H.P. v. B.C. Thakur [1994 SCC (L&S) 835 : (1994) 27 ATC 567] , this Court held that where for any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 5
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
reason it is not possible to proceed with the domestic enquiry the delinquent may not be kept under
suspension.
25. There cannot be any doubt that the 1965 Rules are a self-contained code and the order of
suspension can be examined in the light of the statutory provisions to determine as to whether the
suspension order was justified. Undoubtedly, the delinquent cannot be considered to be any better
off after the charge-sheet has been filed against him in the court on conclusion of the investigation
than his position during the investigation of the case itself. (Vide Union of India v. Udai Narain
[(1998) 5 SCC 535 : 1998 SCC (L&S) 1418] .) P a g e | 15
26. The scope of interference by the Court with the order of suspension has been examined by the
Court in a large number of cases, particularly in State of M.P. v. Shardul Singh [(1970) 1 SCC 108] ,
P.V. Srinivasa Sastry v. Comptroller & Auditor General [(1993) 1 SCC 419 : 1993 SCC (L&S) 206 :
(1993) 23 ATC 645] , ESI v. T. Abdul Razak [(1996) 4 SCC 708 : 1996 SCC (L&S) 1061] , Kusheshwar
Dubey v. Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. [(1988) 4 SCC 319 : 1988 SCC (L&S) 950] , Delhi Cloth & General
Mills Ltd. v. Kushal Bhan [AIR 1960 SC 806], U.P. Rajya Krishi Utpadan Mandi Parishad v. Sanjiv
Rajan [1993 Supp (3) SCC 483 : 1994 SCC (L&S) 67 : (1993) 25 ATC 764] , State of Rajasthan v. B.K.
Meena [(1996) 6 SCC 417 : 1996 SCC (L&S) 1455] , Prohibition and Excise Deptt. v. L. Srinivasan
[(1996) 3 SCC 157 : 1996 SCC (L&S) 686 : (1996) 33 ATC 745] and Allahabad Bank v. Deepak Kumar
Bhola [(1997) 4 SCC 1 : 1997 SCC (L&S) 897] , wherein it has been observed that even if a criminal
trial or enquiry takes a long time, it is ordinarily not open to the court to interfere in case of
suspension as it is in the exclusive domain of the competent authority who can always review its
order of P a g e | 16 suspension being an inherent power conferred upon them by the provisions of
Article 21 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 and while exercising such a power, the authority can
consider the case of an employee for revoking the suspension order, if satisfied that the criminal
case pending would be concluded after an unusual delay for no fault of the employee concerned.
Where the charges are baseless, mala fide or vindictive and are framed only to keep the delinquent
employee out of job, a case for judicial review is made out. But in a case where no conclusion can be
arrived at without examining the entire record in question and in order that the disciplinary
proceedings may continue unhindered the court may not interfere. In case the court comes to the
conclusion that the authority is not proceeding expeditiously as it ought to have been and it results
in prolongation of sufferings for the delinquent employee, the court may issue directions. The court
may, in case the authority fails to furnish proper explanation for delay in conclusion of the enquiry,
direct to complete the enquiry within a stipulated period. However, mere delay in conclusion of
enquiry or trial cannot be a ground for quashing the suspension order, if P a g e | 17 the charges are
grave in nature. But, whether the employee should or should not continue in his office during the
period of enquiry is a matter to be assessed by the disciplinary authority concerned and ordinarily
the court should not interfere with the orders of suspension unless they are passed in mala fide and
without there being even a prima facie evidence on record connecting the employee with the
misconduct in question.
27. Suspension is a device to keep the delinquent out of the mischief range. The purpose is to
complete the proceedings unhindered. Suspension is an interim measure in the aid of disciplinary
proceedings so that the delinquent may not gain custody or control of papers or take any advantage
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 6
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
of his position. More so, at this stage, it is not desirable that the court may find out as to which
version is true when there are claims and counterclaims on factual issues. The court cannot act as if
it is an appellate forum de hors the powers of judicial review.
28. Rule 10 of the 1965 Rules provides for suspension and clause 6 thereof provides for review
thereof by the competent authority before expiry of 90 days from the effective date P a g e | 18 of
suspension. However, the extension of suspension shall not be for a period exceeding 180 days at a
time. CVC can also review the progress of investigation conducted by CBI in a case under the 1988
Act.
29. The Vigilance Manual issued by CVC on 12-1-2005 specifically deals with suspension of a public
servant. Clause 5.13 thereof provides that the Commission can lay down the guidelines for
suspension of a government servant. However, if CBI has recommended suspension of a public
servant and the competent authority does not propose to accept the said recommendation, the
matter may be referred to CVC for its advice. CBI may be consulted if the administrative authority
proposes to revoke the suspension order. Clause 6.1 read with Clause 6.3.2 thereof provide that
suspension is an executive order only to prevent the delinquent employee to perform his duties
during the period of suspension. However, as the suspension order constitutes a great hardship to
the person concerned as it leads to reduction in emoluments, adversely affects his prospects of
promotion and also carried a stigma, an order of suspension should not be made in a perfunctory or
in a routine and casual manner P a g e | 19 but with due care and caution after taking all factors into
account."
19. The learned Government Advocate urged that by following the decision in the case of Union of
India v. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal, supra, this Court in W.P.(C) No.638 of 2015, decided on 25.01.2016
[Palmei Langbanjao v. State of Manipur and others], while disposing of the writ petition held that
"in the present case, the stand of the State Government is not clear as to the stage of investigation
but considering the limited facts and the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Union of India v. Ashok Kumar Aggarwal (supra), this court is of the view that the ends of justice
will be made by disposing of the present writ petition with the direction that the State respondents
shall review the suspension order and issue an appropriate order thereof".
20. The learned Government Advocate further submitted that since the order impugned was issued
under Section 7 of the Police Act, 1891, the CCS (CCA) Rules are not applicable for disciplinary
proceedings of subordinate police personnel from the rank of Constable to Inspector. As such, the P
a g e | 20 question of review of the order of suspension before expiry of 90 days from the date of
suspension or cessation of the order after expiry of 90 days does not arise.
21. Section 7 of the Police Act, 1861 provides:
"7. Appointment, dismissal, etc., of inferior officers.- Subject to the provisions of
article 311 of the Constitution, and to such rules as the State Government may from
time to time make under this Act, the Inspector- General, Deputy Inspectors-
General, Assistant Inspector-General and District Superintendents of Police may at
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 7
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
any time dismiss, suspend or reduce any police-officer of the subordinate ranks
whom they shall think remiss or negligent in the discharge of his duty, or unfit for the
same; or may award any one or more of the following punishments to any
police-officer of the subordinate ranks who shall discharge his duty in a careless or
negligent manner, or who by any act of his own shall render himself unfit for the
discharge thereof, namely:-
(a) fine to any amount not exceeding one month's pay;
(b) confinement to quarters for a term not exceeding fifteen days, with or without P a
g e | 21 punishment- drill, extra guard, fatigue or other duty;
(c) deprivation of good- conduct pay;
(d) removal from any office of distinction or special emolument.
22. As could be seen from the provisions of Assam Police Manual, the continuation of suspension
has to be based on factors and considerations as contemplated under Para 2.1.4 to Para 2.1.8, which
read thus:
"2.1.4. Although suspension is not a punishment by itself, it cannot be denied at the
same time that in such cases the officers placed under suspension suffer a lot. Apart
from this suspension of a Government Servant is a liability on the part of the
Government. The idea behind placing an officer under suspension is not to inflict
punishment, which can be done only when the charges are proved, but to safeguard
against further loss to Government, manipulation of records, intimidation of
witnesses or embarrassment to Government in the public eye, as in the case, where
moral turpitude is involved. In all cases of suspension the elementary justice
demands that the period of suspension should be reduced to the barest P a g e | 22
minimum. It is, therefore, necessary to conclude proceedings drawn up as quickly as
possible and in any case if it is not possible to do so due to reasons beyond control,
the persons proceeded against may be allowed to resume their duties, where possible
in places away from their former place of duty, vacating the suspension order so as to
save Government expenditure in the event of his acquittal. 2.1.5. By way of
clarification, of the general principle enunciated above, the following circumstances
are indicated in which a Disciplinary Authority may consider it appropriate to place a
Government Servant under suspension. These are only intended for guidance and
should not be taken as mandatory.
(i) cases where continuance in office of a Government Servant will prejudice the
investigation, trial or any inquiry (e.g. apprehended tampering of documents and
intimidation of witnesses);
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 8
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
(ii) where the continuance in office of a Government Servant is likely to seriously
subvert discipline in the office in which the Government Servant is working;
(iii) where the continuance in office of a Government Servant will be against the
wider P a g e | 23 public interest (other than the cases covered by
(i) and (i) above) such as there is a public scandal against him and it is necessary to
place the Government Servant under suspension to demonstrate the policy of
government to deal strictly with officers involved in such scandals, particularly
corruption;
(iv) where allegations have been made against a Government Servant and the
preliminary enquiry has revealed that a prima facie case is made out which would
justify his prosecution or his being proceeded against in departmental proceedings
and where the proceedings are likely to end in his conviction and/or dismissal,
removal or compulsory retirement from service.
2.1.6. In the first three circumstances enumerated above, the Disciplinary Authority may exercise his
discretion to place a Government Servant under suspension even when the case is under
investigation and before a prima facie case has been established. 2.1.7. Certain types of
misdemeanour where suspension may be desirable in the circumstances mentioned above are
indicated below-
(i) any offence or conduct involving more turpitude;
P a g e | 24
(ii) corruption, embezzlement or
misappropriation of Government money,
possession of disproportionate assets, misuse of official power for personal gain;
(iii) serious negligence and dereliction of duty resulting in considerable loss to Government;
(iv) desertion of duty, and
(v) refusal or deliberate failure to carry out written orders of superior officers. In respect of types of
misdemeanor specified in sub-clause (iii), (iv) and (v) discretion has to be exercised with care.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 9
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
2.1.8. The following principles and procedure with regard to suspension need strict compliance-
(i) suspension should be resorted to only in cases where a major punishment is likely to be imposed
if the charges are proved;
(ii) charges and the statement of allegations should be served within three months from the date of
suspension failing which the Government Servant concerned should be reinstated; and
(iii) in cases where it is not reasonably practicable to prepare the charges for service within three
months from the date suspension and the continued suspension of the Government servant is
considered P a g e | 25 necessary in the public interest, the authority concerned should move the
Personnel Department through Administrative Department well before the expiry of the period of
three months with a letter detailing the nature of the allegations and the reasons for which charges
could not be prepared so that the Personnel Department could advise whether any further extension
of the period of suspension should be permitted or not".
23. The immediate circumstance of his being arrested and detained for more than 48 hours would
not have much relevance to decide on the continuation of the suspension, as the involvement of the
employee would depend upon the material gathered against him showing prima facie involvement
in the crime and other factors mentioned in Para 2.1.4 to Para 2.1.8 of the Assam Police Manual and
not his arrest.
24. Thus, it is clear that where charge-sheet in connection with criminal case has not been submitted
before the competent court within three months, the disciplinary authorities would be required to
review the continuance of suspension by seeking advice of the Department of Personnel.
P a g e | 26 As a consequence, if such review is not held within three months where charge-sheet is
not filed before the competent court, the suspended employee would be entitled to be reinstated in
service.
25. Though the impugned suspension order was issued in exercise of power conferred under Section
7 of the Act of 1861, the procedure to be followed before and after the suspension order is not
prescribed in Section 7 of the Act of 1861.
26. It is apposite to mention that merely because an employee is arrested and detained for more
than 48 hours does not ipso facto lead to the inference that the employee is guilty of the offences.
There may or may not be prima facie case against him but may be arrested and detained more than
48 hours on more suspicion and his involvement. It may be also noted under criminal jurisprudence
till charge sheet is filed, it cannot be also presumed that there is a prima facie case against an
accused. However, irrespective of the nature of charges, continuation of suspension of a person who
had been arrested and detained would be guided by similar P a g e | 27 considerations as
enumerated in Para 2.1.4 to 2.1.8 of the Manual, supra.
27. It is not the case of the respondents that charge-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 10
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
sheet has been filed in the criminal case. Thus, it is clear that till date neither any charge-sheet has
been filed in the criminal case nor any departmental proceeding has been initiated against the
petitioner by issuing any charge memo and the petitioner continued to remain under suspension till
date.
28. In Ajay Kumar Choudhury v. Union of India and others, (2015) 7 SCC 291, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court held:
"21. We, therefore, direct that the currency of a suspension order should not extend
beyond three months if within this period the memorandum of charges/charge-sheet
is not served on the delinquent officer/employee; if the memorandum of
charges/charge-sheet is served, a reasoned order must be passed for the extension of
the suspension. As in the case in hand, the Government is free to transfer the person
concerned to any department in any of its offices within or outside the State so as to
sever any local or personal contact that he may have and which he may misuse for
obstructing P a g e | 28 the investigation against him. The Government may also
prohibit him from contacting any person, or handling records and documents till the
stage of his having to prepare his defence. We think this will adequately safeguard the
universally recognised principle of human dignity and the right to a speedy trial and
shall also preserve the interest of the Government in the prosecution. We recognise
that the previous Constitution Benches have been reluctant to quash proceedings on
the grounds of delay, and to set time-limits to their duration. However, the
imposition of a limit on the period of suspension has not been discussed in prior case
law, and would not be contrary to the interests of justice. Furthermore, the direction
of the Central Vigilance Commission that pending a criminal investigation,
departmental proceedings are to be held in abeyance stands superseded in view of the
stand adopted by us."
29. At this juncture, the learned counsel for the petitioner urged that while issuing the impugned
suspension order, the third respondent applied the spirit and intent behind Rule 10(2) of CCS (CCA)
Rules. Therefore, the authority ought to apply the spirit of other provisions of Rule 10(6) and (7) by
P a g e | 29 which the suspension order is required to be reviewed before the expiry of 90 days.
Hence, the impugned suspension order is not sustainable in view of the provisions of Rule 10(6) and
(7) for the simple reason that it was not reviewed before the expiry of 90 days from the date of the
order of suspension.
30. In Union of India and others v. Deepak Mali, (2010) 2 SCC 222, the Hon'ble Supreme Court
held:
"10. Having carefully considered the submissions made on behalf of the parties and
having also considered the relevant dates relating to suspension of the respondent
and when the petitioner's case came up for review on 20-10-2004, we are inclined to
agree with the views expressed by the Central Administrative Tribunal, as confirmed
by the High Court, that having regard to the amended provisions of sub-rules (6) and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 11
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
(7) of Rule 10, the review for modification or revocation of the order of suspension
was required to be done before the expiry of 90 days from the date of order of
suspension and as categorically provided under sub-rule (7), the order of suspension
made or deemed would not be valid after a period of 90 days unless it was P a g e | 30
extended after review for a further period of ninety days.
11. The case sought to be made out on behalf of the petition Union of India as to the
cause of delay in reviewing the respondent's case, is not convincing. Section 19 (4) of
the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, speaks of abatement of proceedings once an
original application under the said Act was admitted. In this case, what is important
is that by operation of sub-rule (6) of Rule 10 of the 1965 Rules, the order of
suspension would not survive after the period of 90 days unless it was extended after
review. Since admittedly the review had not been conducted within 90 days from the
date of suspension, it became invalid after 90 days, since neither was there any
review nor extension within the said period of 90 days. Subsequent review and
extension in our view, could not revive the order which had already become invalid
after the expiry of 90 days from the date of suspension."
31. It is settled law that there cannot be any doubt that the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 are a
self-contained code and the order of suspension can be examined in the light of the statutory P a g e
| 31 provisions to determine as to whether the suspension order was justified. Undoubtedly, the
delinquent cannot be considered to be any better off after the charge sheet has been filed against
him in the court on conclusion of the investigation than his position during the investigation of the
case itself.
32. As per the dictum laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v.
Ashok Kumar Aggarwal, supra, long period of suspension does not make the order of suspension
invalid and even if a criminal trial or enquiry takes a long time, it is ordinarily not open to the Court
to interfere in case of suspension as it is in the exclusive domain of the competent authority who can
always review its order of suspension being an inherent power conferred upon them by the
provisions of Article 21 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 and while exercising such power, the
authority can consider the case of an employee for revoking the suspension order, if satisfied that
the criminal case pending would be concluded after an unusual delay for no fault of the employee
concerned.
33. From the legal prescription propounded by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Ajay
Kumar Choudhury v. Union of India and others, supra, it is seen that the currency P a g e | 32 of a
suspension order should not extend beyond three months if within this period the memorandum of
charges/charge-sheet is not served on the delinquent officer/employees.
34. The power of suspension should not be exercised in an arbitrary manner and without any
reasonable ground or as vindictive misuse of power. Suspension should be made only in a case
where there is a strong prima facie case against the delinquent employee and the allegations
involving moral turpitude, grave misconduct or indiscipline or refusal to carry out the orders of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 12
Date: Shri Moirangthem Sushil Singh vs The State Of Manipur Through The ... on 18 August, 2022
superior authority are there, or there is a strong prima facie case against him, if proved, would
ordinarily result in reduction in rank, removal or dismissal from service. The authority should also
take into account all the available material as to whether in a given case, it is advisable to allow the
delinquent to continue to perform his duties in the office or his retention in office is likely to hamper
or frustrate the inquiry.
35. In view of the above, the law on the issue can be summarised to the effect that suspension order
can be passed by the competent authority considering the gravity of the alleged misconduct i.e.
serious act of omission or commission and the nature of evidence available. It cannot be actuated by
mala fide, P a g e | 33 arbitrariness, or for ulterior purpose. Effect on public interest due to the
employee's continuation in office is also a relevant and determining factor. The facts of each case
have to be taken into consideration as no formula of universal application can be laid down in this
regard. However, suspension order should be passed only where there is a strong prima facie case
against the delinquent, and if the charges stand proved, would ordinarily warrant imposition of
major punishment i.e. removal or dismissal from service, or reduction in rank etc.
36. In the instant case, it is beyond any demur that the memorandum of charges/charge sheet has
not been filed till date, though the petitioner was suspended on 02.09.2021.
Therefore, there cannot be other option but to make interference with the impugned order of
suspension dated 02.09.2021, which is accordingly done. As a result, the respondent authorities
shall forthwith reinstate the petitioner to his post. It is, however, made clear that the employer will
be at liberty to post the petitioner as per the administrative exigency.
The petitioner shall be entitled to the subsistence allowance for the period of suspension, which
shall be paid within four weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
P a g e | 34
37. With the aforesaid observation and direction, this writ petition is allowed. There will be no order
as to costs.
JUDGE FR/NFR Sushil
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174382988/ 13
