Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 PAT 1412, 2019 ACD 1112 (PAT)
Author: Aditya Kumar Trivedi
Bench: Aditya Kumar Trivedi
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
CRIMINAL APPEAL (U/S) No.4 of 2018
Arising Out of PS. Case No.-855 Year-2014 Thana- PATNA COMPLAINT CASE District-
Patna
======================================================
Deepak Kumar S/o Late Ramjee Prasad, R/o Nasriganj, P.S.- Danapur, Distt.-
Patna. ... ... Appellant/s
Versus
1. State Of Bihar
2. Anil Kumar Gupta S/o Late Jagal Narayan Lal , R/o Mohalla- Bibiganj, P.S.-
Danapur, Distt.- Patna.
... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
Appearance :
For the Appellant/s : Mr. Arun,
Mr.Dhananjay Kumar Tiwary
Mr. Amardeep Lokpriya, Advocates
For Respondent No.2 : Mr. Bindhyachal Singh,
Mr. Vipin Kumar Singh,
Mr. Satya Prakash, Advocates.
For the State : Mr.Sri Zeyaul Hoda, APP
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ADITYA KUMAR TRIVEDI
CAV ORDER
20-08-2019 Instant appeal has been filed in accordance with
Section 376(4) of the CrPC after having special leave granted by
this Court vide order dated 22.11.2010 under SLA No. 14/2018.
It is needless to say that complainant is the appellant and the
judgment impugned is dated 08.02.2018 passed by ACJM-1st,
Danapur in Complaint Case No. 953/2014, Trial No. 20/2015
(Deepak Kumar v. Anil Kumar Gupta) acquitting Respondent
No.2.
2. At the time of admission, the judgment impugned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 1
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
has been gone through and perceiving the finding of the learned
lower court under para-4 as well as 9 of the judgment, the
Respondent No.2 has been noticed to the effect as to why not
the judgment impugned be set aside, waiving the rigour so laid
Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018
2/36
down under Section 390 of the CrPC perceiving the nature of
offence to be under Section 138 of the NI Act, summons triable,
bailable one, whereupon, there has been appearance of
Respondent No.2. During midst thereof, lower court record has
been called. That means to say, at the stage of admission, the
appeal is being disposed of in its finality.
3. Heard the parties.
4. It is the case of the appellant/complainant that he
as well as Respondent No.2/accused are bosom friends and in
the aforesaid background, in the first week of April 2013,
Respondent No.2 had asked for friendly loan on an undertaking
that within four months the same would be paid whereupon he
had given Rs. 23,76,000/- on 15.04.2013 on the aforesaid
understanding. Even after expiry of the aforesaid period when
money was not returned back by the Respondent No.2/accused,
he demanded and then, the Respondent No.2/ accused handed
over two cheques of Punjab National Bank each containing
11,88,000/- on 11.07.2014 and for getting the same credited to
his account, deposited in his account standing at Axis Bank but
the aforesaid two cheques got dishnoured with a remark that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 2
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
signature is not tallying, and the Bank had communicated the
said information on 15.07.2014. Then thereafter, registered
Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018
3/36
notice was served on 23.07.2014, even then, the amount has not
been paid, consequent thereupon, the complaint petition has
been filed on 12.08.2014.
5. The complaint was filed on 12.08.2014 whereupon
after examining the complainant on SA, an inquiry in terms of
Section 202 CrPC commenced and concluded by an order dated
24.06.2015
whereby the learned lower court had summoned the Respondent No.2 to face trial for an offence
punishable under Section 138 NI Act. Accordingly, after appearance, the trial commenced and
concluded in a manner, subject matter of instant appeal.
6. It has been submitted at the end of learned counsel for the appellant that the finding recorded by
the learned lower court is against the statutory provisions of law whereupon, could not sustain. In
order to justify the same, it has been submitted that from para-4 of the judgment impugned, it is
evident that there happens to be an admission at the end of Respondent No.2/accused regarding
issuance of two cheques in favour of appellant, then in that event, the court would have drawn
preemption against the Respondent No.2/accused in accordance with Section 139 of the NI Act,
though rebuttable and further the learned lower court should have also considered that Patna High
Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 Respondent No.2/accused failed to discharge his onus by way of
rebuttal.
7. It has also been submitted that from para-9 of the judgment, it is evident that observation so
made by the learned lower court was contrary to Section 139 of the NI Act and in likewise manner,
basing upon the principle laid down by the Kerala High Court in Cr. Appeal No. 560/2007 that there
should be positive evidence regarding receipt of the notice, happens to be contrary to the principle
laid down by the Apex Court wherein it has been observed that there will be presumption in case of
notice has been sent through registered post. Apart from this, para-8 as is evident, happens to be
contrary to the own admission of the Respondent No.2/accused. In the aforesaid backdrop, it has
been submitted that the finding so recorded by the lower court happens to be perverse, cryptic,
illegal and is fit to be set aside.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 3
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
8. On the other hand, learned counsel representing Respondent No.2/accused has submitted that
the appeal is not maintainable, more particularly, once having a finding of innocence in ordinary
course of nature. It has further been submitted that unless and until appellant succeeds in
substantiating that the judgment happens to be contrary to the Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S)
No.4 of 2018 spirit of law, illegal, perverse and further, no other theory than the guilt of accused is
found exposed, completely overlooked at the end of the learned lower court causing miscarriage of
justice then and then only, the judgment so appealed is to be interfered with, otherwise not.
9. It has also been submitted that non matching of signature would not come within the purview of
NI Act. In likewise manner, it has also been submitted that the deficiency whatsoever, persisting in
the case of the appellant, is found duly exposed coupled with the fact that prosecution is under
obligation to substantiate the date on which notice has been received and that has got a purpose in
the background of period so prescribed for launching of prosecution in accordance with Section 142
of the NI Act. As there happens to be negligence and lapses at the end of the appellant/complainant
on that very score, the learned lower court had rightly dismissed the claim and acquitted the
Respondent No.2/accused.
10. The Hon'ble Apex Court, times without number, has propagated the theory as well as laid down
the principles, criteria over which, the appeal against the acquittal could be entertained. Recently, in
Munishamappa & Ors. v. State of Karnataka as reported in (2019) 3 SCC 393, it has been held, Patna
High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 after perceiving the principles having been noticed at the
end of High Court which was dealing with judgment of acquittal under para-10 enumerated
thereunder which is as follows:-
"10. The High Court, in the course of its judgment, adverted to the principles which it
was required to follow in an appeal against acquittal, formulating them in the
following terms:
1. In an appeal against acquittal, the Appellate Court would be slow in reversing the
judgment of the Trial court unless miscarriage of justice has thereby ensued.
2. The Appellate Court would not interfere with the order of acquittal even if, based
on the evidence on record two views are possible and the view taken by the Trial
court is equally plausible.
3. If the Appellate Court finds that the appreciation of evidence by the Trial court is
without evidence or capricious or against the interest of justice, then only the
Appellate Court would venture to reverse the order of acquittal.
4. If after appreciation of the evidence, the Appellate Court independently finds that
order of acquittal is not in accordance with law and the conclusion arrived at by the
Trial court are not based on the correct appreciation of the evidence on record, and
the incident cannot be explained except with the guilt of the Accused and is totally
inconsistent with the innocence of the Accused, in such cases only the Appellate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 4
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
Court would reverse the order of acquittal."
Under para-16, it has been further held as follows:-
"16. The High Court in the present case was dealing with an appeal against acquittal.
In such a case, it is well settled that the High Court will not interfere with an order of
acquittal merely because it opines that a different view is possible or even preferable.
The High Court, in Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 other words, should
not interfere with an order of acquittal merely because two views are possible. The
interference of the High Court in such cases is governed by well established
principles. According to these principles, it is only where the appreciation of evidence
by the Trial Court is capricious or its conclusions are without evidence that the High
Court may reverse an order of acquittal. The High Court may be justified in
interfering where it finds that the order of acquittal is not in accordance with law and
that the approach of the Trial court has led to a miscarriage of justice. The High
Court, however, must be satisfied that the incident cannot be explained except on the
basis of the guilt of the Accused and is inconsistent with their innocence.
11. In Sampat Babso Kale and Ors. vs. The State of Maharashtra reported in 2019 CrLJ 2428, it has
been held:-
"7. With regard to the powers of an appellate court in an appeal against acquittal, the
law is well established that the presumption of innocence which is attached to every
Accused person gets strengthened when such an Accused is acquitted by the trial
court and the High Court should not lightly interfere with the decision of the trial
court which has recorded the evidence and observed the demeanour of witnesses.
This Court in the case of Chandrappa and Ors. v. State of Karnataka : (2007) 4 SCC
415, laid down the following principles:
42. From the above decisions, in our considered view, the following general
principles regarding powers of the appellate court while dealing with an appeal
against an order of acquittal emerge:
(1) An appellate court has full power to review, reappreciate and reconsider the
evidence upon which the Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 order of
acquittal is founded.
(2) The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 puts no limitation, restriction or condition
on exercise of such power and an appellate court on the evidence before it may reach
its own conclusion, both on questions of fact and of law.
(3) Various expressions, such as, "substantial and compelling reasons", "good and
sufficient grounds", "very strong circumstances", "distorted conclusions", "glaring
mistakes", etc. are not intended to curtail extensive powers of an appellate court in an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 5
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
appeal against acquittal. Such phraseologies are more in the nature of "flourishes of
language" to emphasise the reluctance of an appellate court to interfere with acquittal
than to curtail the power of the court to review the evidence and to come to its own
conclusion.
(4) An appellate court, however, must bear in mind that in case of acquittal, there is
double presumption in favour of the accused. Firstly, the presumption of innocence is
available to him under the fundamental principle of criminal jurisprudence that every
person shall be presumed to be innocent unless he is proved guilty by a competent
court of law.
Secondly, the Accused having secured his acquittal, the presumption of his innocence is further
reinforced, reaffirmed and strengthened by the trial court.
(5) If two reasonable conclusions are possible on the basis of the evidence on record, the appellate
court should not disturb the finding of acquittal recorded by the trial court.
12. It is needless to recollect, as per Section 386 CrPC, the appellate court is within its domain to
transform the Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 judgment of acquittal into judgment of
conviction, after getting the same set aside.
13. Now coming to the facts of the case, as is evident, the learned lower court has failed to consider
legal requirement coupled with the factual status. It is evident that presumption with regard to
registered postal service is attached therewith, once the postal receipt is brought on record as has
been observed by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Parameswaran Unni v.
G. Kannan reported in 2017 CrLJ 2838 under para-13 which is as follows:-
"13. It is clear from Section 27 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 and Section 114 of the
Indian Evidence Act, 1872, that once notice is sent by registered post by correctly
addressing to the drawer of the cheque, the service of notice is deemed to have been
effected. Then requirements under proviso (b) of Section 138 stands complied, if
notice is sent in the prescribed manner. However, the drawer is at liberty to rebut this
presumption."
14. Whether remark of the bank relating to signature of the drawer mismatches or differs or no
image found signatured or incomplete signature, illegible signature, basis for returning of the
dishonour of the cheque would attract prosecution under Section 138 of the NI Act and the same has
been answered in affirmative in Laxmi Dyechem v. State of Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of
2018 Gujarat reported in (2012) 13 SCC 375 wherein it has been held as follows:-
"16. The above line of decisions leaves no room for holding that the two contingencies
envisaged under Section 138 of the Act must be interpreted strictly or literally. We
find ourselves in respectful agreement with the decision in NEPC Micon Ltd. (supra)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 6
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
that the expression "amount of money .... is insufficient" appearing in Section 138 of
the Act is a genus and dishonour for reasons such "as account closed", "payment
stopped", "referred to the drawer" are only species of that genus. Just as dishonour of
a cheque on the ground that the account has been closed is a dishonour falling in the
first contingency referred to in Section 138, so also dishonour on the ground that the
"signatures do not match" or that the "image is not found", which too implies that the
specimen signatures do not match the signatures on the cheque would constitute a
dishonour within the meaning of Section 138 of the Act.
16.1 This Court has in the decisions referred to above taken note of situations and
contingencies arising out of deliberate acts of omission or commission on the part of
the drawers of the cheques which would inevitably result in the dishonour of the
cheque issued by them. For instance this Court has held that if after issue of the
cheque the drawer closes the account it must be presumed that the amount in the
account was nil hence insufficient to meet the demand of the cheque. A similar result
can be brought about by the drawer changing his specimen signature given to the
bank or in the case of a company by the company changing the mandate of those
authorised to sign the cheques on its behalf. Such changes or alteration in the
mandate may be dishonest or fraudulent and that would inevitably result in
dishonour of all cheques signed by the previously authorised signatories. There is in
our view no qualitative Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 difference
between a situation where the dishonour takes place on account of the substitution by
a new set of authorised signatories resulting in the dishonour of the cheques already
issued and another situation in which the drawer of the cheque changes his own
signatures or closes the account or issues instructions to the bank not to make the
payment. So long as the change is brought about with a view to preventing the cheque
being honoured the dishonour would become an offence under Section 138 subject to
other conditions prescribed being satisfied.
16.2 There may indeed be situations where a mismatch between the signatories on
the cheque drawn by the drawer and the specimen available with the bank may result
in dishonour of the cheque even when the drawer never intended to invite such a
dishonour. We are also conscious of the fact that an authorised signatory may in the
ordinary course of business be replaced by a new signatory ending the earlier
mandate to the bank. Dishonour on account of such changes that may occur in the
course of ordinary business of a company, partnership or an individual may not
constitute an offence by itself because such a dishonour in order to qualify for
prosecution under Section 138 shall have to be preceded by a statutory notice where
the drawer is called upon and has the opportunity to arrange the payment of the
amount covered by the cheque. It is only when the drawer despite receipt of such a
notice and despite the opportunity to make the payment within the time stipulated
under the statute does not pay the amount that the dishonour would be considered a
dishonour constituting an offence, hence punishable. Even in such cases, the
question whether or not there was a lawfully recoverable debt or liability for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 7
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
discharge whereof the cheque was issued would be a matter that the trial Court will
examine having regard to the evidence adduced before it and keeping in view the
statutory presumption that unless rebutted the Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4
of 2018 cheque is presumed to have been issued for a valid consideration.
15. How the presumption as provided under Section 139 of the NI Act is to be considered, has
properly been explained in Kishan Rao v. Shankargouda : 2018 CrLJ 3613 in following way:-
"17. Section 139 of the Act, 1881 provides for drawing the presumption in favour of
holder. Section 139 is to the following effect:
139. Presumption in favour of holder.-It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is
proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the nature referred to in
Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability.
18. This Court in Kumar Exports v. Sharma Carpets, : 2009 (2) SCC 513, had
considered the provisions of Negotiable Instruments Act as well Evidence Act.
Referring to Section 139, this Court laid down following in paragraphs 14, 15, 18 and
19:
14. Section 139 of the Act provides that it shall be presumed, unless the contrary is
proved, that the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the nature referred to in
Section 138 for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability.
15. Presumptions are devices by use of which the courts are enabled and entitled to
pronounce on an issue notwithstanding that there is no evidence or insufficient
evidence. Under the Evidence Act all presumptions must come under one or the
other class of the three classes mentioned in the Act, namely, (1) "may presume"
(rebuttable), (2) "shall presume" (rebuttable), and (3) "conclusive presumptions" (irrebuttable). The
term "presumption" is used to designate an inference, affirmative or disaffirmative of the Patna
High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 existence of a fact, conveniently called the "presumed fact"
drawn by a judicial tribunal, by a process of probable reasoning from some matter of fact, either
judicially noticed or admitted or established by legal evidence to the satisfaction of the tribunal.
Presumption literally means "taking as true without examination or proof".
18. Applying the definition of the word "proved" in Section 3 of the Evidence Act to the provisions of
Sections 118 and 139 of the Act, it becomes evident that in a trial Under Section 138 of the Act a
presumption will have to be made that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for
consideration and that it was executed for discharge of debt or liability once the execution of
negotiable instrument is either proved or admitted. As soon as the complainant discharges the
burden to prove that the instrument, say a note, was executed by the accused, the Rules of
presumptions Under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act help him shift the burden on the accused. The
presumptions will live, exist and survive and shall end only when the contrary is proved by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 8
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
accused, that is, the cheque was not issued for consideration and in discharge of any debt or liability.
A presumption is not in itself evidence, but only makes a prima facie case for a party for whose
benefit it exists.
19. The use of the phrase "until the contrary is proved" in Section 118 of the Act and use of the words
"unless the contrary is proved"
in Section 139 of the Act read with definitions of "may presume" and "shall presume"
as given in Section 4 of the Evidence Act, makes it at once clear that presumptions to
be raised under both the provisions are rebuttable. When a presumption is
rebuttable, it only points out that the party on whom lies the duty of going forward
with evidence, on the fact presumed and when that party has produced evidence
fairly and reasonably tending to show that the real fact is not as presumed, the
purpose of the presumption Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 is over.
19. This Court held that the Accused may adduce evidence to rebut the presumption,
but mere denial regarding existence of debt shall not serve any purpose. Following
was held in paragraph 20:
20....The Accused may adduce direct evidence to prove that the note in question was
not supported by consideration and that there was no debt or liability to be
discharged by him. However, the court need not insist in every case that the Accused
should disprove the non- existence of consideration and debt by leading direct
evidence because the existence of negative evidence is neither possible nor
contemplated. At the same time, it is clear that bare denial of the passing of the
consideration and existence of debt, apparently would not serve the purpose of the
accused. Something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the
burden of proof shifted to the complainant. To disprove the presumptions, the
Accused should bring on record such facts and circumstances, upon consideration of
which, the court may either believe that the consideration and debt did not exist or
their non-existence was so probable that a prudent man would under the
circumstances of the case, act upon the plea that they did not exist...
20. ***
21. Another judgment which needs to be looked into is Rangappa v. Sri Mohan, : 2010 (11) SCC 441.
A three Judge Bench of this Court had occasion to examine the presumption Under Section 139 of
the Act, 1881. This Court in the aforesaid case has held that in the event the Accused is able to raise a
probable defence which creates doubt with regard to the existence of a debt or liability, the
presumption may fail. Following was laid down in paragraphs 26 and 27:
26. In light of these extracts, we are in agreement with the Respondent claimant that
the presumption mandated by Section 139 of the Act Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S)
No.4 of 2018 does indeed include the existence of a legally enforceable debt or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 9
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
liability. To that extent, the impugned observations in Krishna Janardhan Bhat, :
(2008) 4 SCC 54, may not be correct.
However, this does not in any way cast doubt on the correctness of the decision in that case since it
was based on the specific facts and circumstances therein. As noted in the citations, this is of course
in the nature of a rebuttable presumption and it is open to the Accused to raise a defence wherein
the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability can be contested. However, there can be no
doubt that there is an initial presumption which favours the complainant.
27. Section 139 of the Act is an example of a reverse onus Clause that has been included in
furtherance of the legislative objective of improving the credibility of negotiable instruments. While
Section 138 of the Act specifies a strong criminal remedy in relation to the dishonour of cheques, the
rebuttable presumption Under Section 139 is a device to prevent undue delay in the course of
litigation. However, it must be remembered that the offence made punishable by Section 138 can be
better described as a regulatory offence since the bouncing of a cheque is largely in the nature of a
civil wrong whose impact is usually confined to the private parties involved in commercial
transactions. In such a scenario, the test of proportionality should guide the construction and
interpretation of reverse onus clauses and the Defendant-accused cannot be expected to discharge
an unduly high standard or proof.
22. No evidence was led by the accused. The defence taken in the reply to the notice that cheque was
stolen having been rejected by the two courts below, we do not see any basis for the High court
coming to the conclusion that the Accused has been successful in creating doubt in the mind of the
Court with regard to the existence of the debt or liability. How the presumption Under Section 139
can be rebutted Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 on the evidence of PW. 1, himself has
not been explained by the High court.
16. In Rohitbahi Jivanlal Patel v. State of Gujarat:
2019 CrLJ 2400 wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court was adjudicating upon the finding
recorded by the High Court setting aside the order of the lower court and convicting
the appellant, observed as follows:-
"12. For determination of the point as to whether the High Court was justified in
reversing the judgment and orders of the Trial Court and convicting the Appellant for
the offence Under Section 138 of the NI Act, the basic questions to be addressed to
are two-fold: as to whether the complainant-Respondent No. 2 had established the
ingredients of Sections 118 and 139 of the NI Act, so as to justify drawing of the
presumption envisaged therein; and if so, as to whether the accused-Appellant had
been able to displace such presumption and to establish a probable defence whereby,
the onus would again shift to the complainant?
13. We may usefully take note of the provisions contained in Sections 118 and 139,
being the special Rules of evidence applicable to the case as follows4:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 10
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
118. Presumption as to negotiable instruments. ----- Until the contrary is proved, the
following presumptions shall be made:
(a) of consideration ----- that every negotiable instrument was made or drawn for
consideration, and that every such instrument, when it has been accepted, indorsed,
negotiated or transferred, was accepted, indorsed, negotiated or transferred for
consideration;
(b) as to date---that every negotiable instrument bearing a date was made or drawn
on such date;
Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018
(c) as to time of acceptance ----- that every accepted bill of exchange was accepted within a
reasonable time after its date and before its maturity;
(d) as to time of transfer----that every transfer of a negotiable instrument was made before its
maturity;
(e) as to order of indorsements----that the indorsements appearing upon a negotiable instrument
were made in the order in which they appear thereon;
(f) as to stamps--- that a lost promissory note, bill of exchange or cheque was duly stamped;
(g) that holder is a holder in due course----that the holder of a negotiable instrument is a holder in
due course;
Provided that, where the instrument has been obtained from its lawful owner, or from any person in
lawful custody thereof, by means of an offence or fraud, or has been obtained from the maker or
acceptor thereof by means of an offence of fraud, or for unlawful consideration, the burden of
proving that the holder is a holder in due course lies upon him.
139. Presumption in favour of holder ---- It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that
the holder is a cheque received the cheque of the nature referred to in Section 138 for the discharge,
in whole or in part, if any debt or other liability.
14. So far the question of existence of basic ingredients for drawing of presumption Under Sections
118 and 139 the NI Act is concerned, apparent it is that the accused-Appellant could not deny his
signature on the cheques in question that had been drawn in favour of the complainant on a bank
account maintained by the Accused for a sum of Rs. 3 lakhs each. The said cheques were presented
to the Bank concerned within the period of their validity and were returned unpaid for the reason of
either the balance being insufficient or the account being closed. All the basic ingredients of Section
138 as also of Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 Sections 118 and 139 are apparent on
the face of the record. The Trial Court had also consciously taken note of these facts and had drawn
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 11
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
the requisite presumption. Therefore, it is required to be presumed that the cheques in question
were drawn for consideration and the holder of the cheques i.e., the complainant received the same
in discharge of an existing debt. The onus, therefore, shifts on the accused-Appellant to establish a
probable defence so as to rebut such a presumption.
15. In Rangappa v. Sri Mohan : (2010) 11 SCC 441, this Court has reiterated and summarised the
principles relating to presumptions Under Sections 118 and 139 of the NI Act and rebuttal thereof in
the following:
26. In the light of these extracts, we are in agreement with the Respondent claimant
that the presumption mandated by Section 139 of the Act does indeed include the
existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability. To that extent, the impugned
observations in Krishna Janardhan Bhat may not be correct. However, this does not
in any way cast doubt on the correctness of the decision in that case since it is based
on the specific facts and circumstances therein. As noted in the citations, this is of
course in the nature of a rebuttal presumption and it is open to the Accused to raise a
defence wherein the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability can be
contested. However, there can be no doubt that there is an initial presumption which
favours the complainant.
27. Section 139 of the Act is an example of a reverse onus Clause that has been
included in furtherance of the legislative objective of improving the credibility of
negotiable instruments. While Section 138 of the Act specifies a strong criminal
remedy in relation to the dishonour of cheques, the rebuttable presumption Under
Section 139 is a device to prevent undue delay in the course of litigation.
However, it must be remembered that the offence made punishable by Section 138 can be better
Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 described as a regulatory offence since the bouncing of
a cheque is largely in the nature of a civil wrong whose impact is usually confined to the private
parties involved in commercial transactions. In such a scenario, the test of proportionality should
guide the construction and interpretation of reverse onus clauses and the Defendant-accused cannot
be expected to discharge an unduly high standard of proof.
28. In the absence of compelling justifications, reverse onus clauses usually impose an evidentiary
burden and not a persuasive burden. Keeping this in view, it is a settled position that when an
Accused has to rebut the presumption Under Section 139, the standard of proof for doing so is that
of "preponderance of probabilities". Therefore, if the Accused is able to raise a probable defence
which creates doubts about the existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability, the prosecution
can fail. As clarified in the citations, the Accused can rely on the materials submitted by the
complainant in order to raise such a defence and it is conceivable that in some cases the Accused
may not need to adduce evidence of his/her own.
16. On the aspects relating to preponderance of probabilities, the Accused has to bring on record
such facts and such circumstances which may lead the Court to conclude either that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 12
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
consideration did not exist or that its non- existence was so probable that a prudent man would,
under the circumstances of the case, act upon the plea that the consideration did not exist. This
Court has, time and again, emphasized that though there may not be sufficient negative evidence
which could be brought on record by the Accused to discharge his burden, yet mere denial would not
fulfil the requirements of rebuttal as envisaged Under Section 118 and 139 of the NI Act. This Court
stated the principles in the case of Kumar Exports (supra) as follows:
20. The Accused in a trial Under Section 138 of the Act has two options. He can either
show that consideration and debt did not exist or Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S)
No.4 of 2018 that under the particular circumstances of the case the non-existence of
consideration and debt is so probable that a prudent man ought to suppose that no
consideration and debt existed. To rebut the statutory presumptions an Accused is
not expected to prove his defence beyond reasonable doubt as is expected of the
complainant in a criminal trial. The Accused may adduce direct evidence to prove
that the note in question was not supported by consideration and that there was no
debt or liability to be discharged by him.
However, the court need not insist in every case that the Accused should disprove the non- existence
of consideration and debt by leading direct evidence because the existence of negative evidence is
neither possible nor contemplated. At the same time, it is clear that bare denial of the passing of the
consideration and existence of debt, apparently would not serve the purpose of the accused.
Something which is probable has to be brought on record for getting the burden of proof shifted to
the complainant. To disprove the presumptions, the Accused should bring on record such facts and
circumstances, upon consideration of which, the court may either believe that the consideration and
debt did not exist or their non-existence was so probable that a prudent man would under the
circumstances of the case, act upon the plea that they did not exist. Apart from adducing direct
evidence to prove that the note in question was not supported by consideration or that he had not
incurred any debt or liability, the Accused may also rely upon circumstantial evidence and if the
circumstances so relied upon are compelling, the burden may likewise shift again on to the
complainant. The Accused may also rely upon presumptions of fact, for instance, those mentioned
in Section 114 of the Evidence Act to rebut the presumptions arising Under Sections 118 and 139.
21. The Accused has also an option to prove the non-existence of consideration and debt or liability
either by letting in evidence or in some clear and exceptional cases, from the case set out Patna High
Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 by the complainant, that is, the averments in the complaint, the
case set out in the statutory notice and evidence adduced by the complainant during the trial. Once
such rebuttal evidence is adduced and accepted by the court, having regard to all the circumstances
of the case and the preponderance of probabilities, the evidential burden shifts back to the
complainant and, therefore, the presumptions Under Sections 118 and 139 of the Act will not again
come to the complainant's rescue.
17. In Bir Singh v. Mukesh Kumar reported in (2019) 4 SCC 197 wherein order of acquittal relating
to Criminal Revision filed by the respondent/petitioner before the High Court was subject to
adjudication wherein it has been observed as follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 13
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
"5. Sections 138 and 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act are set out herein below
for convenience:
138. Dishonour of cheque for insufficiency, etc., of funds in the account.-
Where any cheque drawn by a person on an account maintained by him with a banker for payment
of any amount of money to another person from out of that account for the discharge, in whole or in
part, of any debt or other liability, is returned by the bank unpaid, either because of the amount of
money standing to the credit of that account is insufficient to honour the cheque or that it exceeds
the amount arranged to be paid from that account by an agreement made with that bank, such
person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and shall, without prejudice to any other
provisions of this Act, be punished with imprisonment for a term which may be extended to two
years, or with fine which may extend to twice the amount of the cheque, or Patna High Court
CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 with both:
Provided that nothing contained in this Section shall apply unless-
(a) the cheque has been presented to the bank within a period of six months from the
date on which it is drawn or within the period of its validity, whichever is earlier;
(b) the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, makes a
demand for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to
the drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from
the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid; and
(c) the drawer of such cheque fails to make the payment of the said amount of money
to the payee or, as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque, within
fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "debt or other liability" means a legally enforceable
debt or other liability.]
139. Presumption in favour of holder.-It shall be presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that the
holder of a cheque received the cheque of the nature referred to in Section 138 for the discharge, in
whole or in part, of any debt or other liability.
6. The object of Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act is to infuse credibility to negotiable
instruments including cheques and to encourage and promote the use of negotiable instruments
including cheques in financial transactions. The penal provision of Section 138 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act is intended to be a deterrent to callous issuance of negotiable instruments such as
cheques without serious intention to honour the promise implicit in the issuance of the same.
7 *** 8*** 9*** 10*** 11*** Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 12*** 13*** 14*** 15***
16*** 17***
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 14
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
18. In passing the impugned judgment and order dated 21-11-2017, the High Court mis- construed
Section 139 of Negotiable Instruments Act, which mandates that unless the contrary is proved, it is
to be presumed that the holder of a cheque received the cheque of the nature referred to in Section
138, for the discharge, in whole or in part, of any debt or other liability. Needless to mention that the
presumption contemplated Under Section 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, is a rebuttable
presumption. However, the onus of proving that the cheque was not in discharge of any debt or
other liability is on the Accused drawer of the cheque.
19. In Hiten P. Dalal v. Bratindranath Banerjee: (2001) 6 SCC 16, this Court held that both Section
138 and 139 require that the Court shall presume the liability of the drawer of the cheques for the
amounts for which the cheques are drawn. Following the judgment of this Court in State of Madras
v. Vaidyanatha Iyer :AIR 1958 SC 61, this Court held that it was obligatory on the Court to raise this
presumption.
20. Section 139 introduces an exception to the general Rule as to the burden of proof and shifts the
onus on the Accused. The presumption Under Section 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act is a
presumption of law, as distinguished from presumption of facts. Presumptions are Rules of evidence
and do not conflict with the presumption of innocence, which requires the prosecution to prove the
case against the Accused beyond reasonable doubt. The obligation on the prosecution may be
discharged with the help of presumptions of law and presumptions of fact unless the Accused
adduces Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 evidence showing the reasonable possibility
of the non-existence of the presumed fact as held in Hiten P. Dalal (supra).
21. Presumption of innocence is undoubtedly a human right as contended on behalf of the
Respondent-Accused, relying on the judgments of this Court in Ranjitsing Brahmajeetsing Sharma
v. State of Maharashtra and Anr. : (2005) 5 SCC 294 and Rajesh Ranjan Yada @ Pappu Yadav v. CBI
through its Director : (2007) 1 SCC 70. However the guilt may be established by recourse to
presumptions in law and presumptions in facts, as observed above.
22. In Laxmi Dyechem v. State of Gujarat and Ors. : (2012) 13 SCC 375, this Court reiterated that in
view of Section 139, it has to be presumed that a cheque was issued in discharge of a debt or other
liability but the presumption could be rebutted by adducing evidence. The burden of proof was
however on the person who wanted to rebut the presumption. This Court held "however, this
presumption coupled with the object of Chapter XVII of the Act leads to the conclusion that by
countermanding payment of a post dated cheque, a party should not be allowed to get away from the
penal provision of Section 138 of the Act".
23. In Kumar Exports v. Sharma Carpets :
(2009) 2 SCC 513, this Court reiterated that there is a presumption that every
negotiable instrument duly executed, is for discharge of a debt or liability, but the
presumption is rebuttable by proving the contrary. In the facts and circumstances of
the case it was found that the cheque in question was towards advance for purchase
of carpets, which were in fact not sold by the payee of the cheque to the drawer, as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 15
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
proved from the deposition of an official of the Sales Tax Department, who stated
that the payee had admitted that he had not sold the carpets.
24. In K.N. Beena v. Muniyappan and Anr. :
(2001) 8 SCC 458, this Court held that in view of the provisions of Section 139 of the
Negotiable Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 Instruments Act read with
Section 118 thereof, the Court had to presume that the cheque had been issued for
discharging a debt or liability.
The said presumption was rebuttable and could be rebutted by the Accused by proving the contrary.
But mere denial or rebuttal by the Accused was not enough. The Accused had to prove by cogent
evidence that there was no debt or liability. This Court clearly held that the High Court had
erroneously set aside the conviction, by proceeding on the basis that denials/averments in the reply
of the Accused were sufficient to shift the burden of proof on the complainant to prove that the
cheque had been issued for discharge of a debt or a liability. This was an entirely erroneous
approach. The Accused had to prove in the trial by leading cogent evidence that there was no debt or
liability.
25. In R. Vijayan v. Baby and Anr. : (2012) 1 SCC 260 this Court observed that the object of Chapter
XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act is both punitive as also compensatory and restitutive. It
provides a single forum and single proceeding for enforcement of criminal liability by reason of
dishonour of cheque and for enforcement of the civil liability for realization of the cheque amount,
thereby obviating the need for the creditor to move two different fora for relief. This Court expressed
its anguish that some Magistrates went by the traditional view, that the criminal proceedings were
for imposing punishment and did not exercise discretion to direct payment of compensation,
causing considerable difficulty to the complainant, as invariably the limitation for fling civil cases
would expire by the time the criminal case was decided.
26. In R. Vijayan v. Baby and Anr. (supra) this Court observed that unless there were special
circumstances, in all cases of conviction, the Court should uniformly exercise the power to levy fine
up to twice the cheque amount and keeping in view the cheque amount and the Patna High Court
CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 simple interest thereon at 9% per annum as the reasonable quantum of
loss, direct payment of such amount as compensation. This Court rightly observed that uniformity
and consistency in deciding similar cases by different courts not only increases the credibility of the
cheque as a Negotiable Instrument but also the credibility of the Courts of Justice.
27. The judgment of this Court in Raj Kumar Khurana v. State of (NCT of Delhi) and Anr. : (2009) 6
SCC 72 was rendered in the particular facts of the case where the drawer of the cheque had reported
to the police and the bank that two unfilled cheques signed by him had been stolen.
28. The proposition as re-enunciated in John K John v. Tom Varghese and Anr. (2008) 4 SCC 54
cited on behalf of the Respondent-Accused that if two views are possible, this Court, in exercise of its
jurisdiction Under Article 136 of the Constitution would ordinarily not interfere with a judgment of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 16
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
acquittal, is well settled. In the aforesaid case this Court affirmed an acquittal Under Section 138 of
the Negotiable Instrument Act, in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case where several civil
suits between the parties were pending.
29. In Krishna Janardhan Bhat v. Dattatraya G. Hegde : (2008) 4 SCC 54, cited on behalf of the
Respondent-Accused, this Court reaffirmed that Section 139 of the Act raises a presumption that a
cheque duly drawn was towards a debt or liability. However, keeping in view the peculiar facts and
circumstances of the case, this Court was of the opinion that the courts below had approached the
case from a wholly different angle by wrong application of legal principles.
30*** 31***
32. The proposition of law which emerges from the judgments referred to above is that the onus to
rebut the presumption Under Section 139 that the cheque has been issued in discharge of a debt or
liability is on the Accused and the fact Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 that the cheque
might be post dated does not absolve the drawer of a cheque of the penal consequences of Section
138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act.
33. A meaningful reading of the provisions of the Negotiable Instruments Act including, in
particular, Sections 20, 87 and 139, makes it amply clear that a person who signs a cheque and
makes it over to the payee remains liable unless he adduces evidence to rebut the presumption that
the cheque had been issued for payment of a debt or in discharge of a liability. It is immaterial that
the cheque may have been filled in by any person other than the drawer, if the cheque is duly signed
by the drawer. If the cheque is otherwise valid, the penal provisions of Section 138 would be
attracted.
34. If a signed blank cheque is voluntarily presented to a payee, towards some payment, the payee
may fill up the amount and other particulars. This in itself would not invalidate the cheque. The
onus would still be on the Accused to prove that the cheque was not in discharge of a debt or liability
by adducing evidence.
18. In Rangappa v. Mohan: AIR 2010 SC 1898, it has been held as follows:-
"14. In light of these extracts, we are in agreement with the respondent-claimant that
the presumption mandated by Section 139 of the Act does indeed include the
existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability. To that extent, the impugned
observations in Krishna Janardhan Bhat (supra) may not be correct. However, this
does not in any way cast doubt on the correctness of the decision in that case since it
was based on the specific facts and circumstances therein. As noted in the citations,
this is of course in the nature of a rebuttable presumption and it is open to the
accused to raise a defence wherein the existence of a legally enforceable debt or
liability Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 can be contested. However,
there can be no doubt that there is an initial presumption which favours the
complainant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 17
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
Section 139 of the Act is an example of a reverse onus clause that has been included
in furtherance of the legislative objective of improving the credibility of negotiable
instruments. While Section 138 of the Act specifies a strong criminal remedy in
relation to the dishonour of cheques, the rebuttable presumption under Section 139 is
a device to prevent undue delay in the course of litigation. However, it must be
remembered that the offence made punishable by Section 138 can be better described
as a regulatory offence since the bouncing of a cheque is largely in the nature of a civil
wrong whose impact is usually confined to the private parties involved in commercial
transactions. In such a scenario, the test of proportionality should guide the
construction and interpretation of reverse onus clauses and the accused/defendant
cannot be expected to discharge an unduly high standard or proof.
In the absence of compelling justifications, reverse onus clauses usually impose an
evidentiary burden and not a persuasive burden. Keeping this in view, it is a settled
position that when an accused has to rebut the presumption under Section 139, the
standard of proof for doing so is that of `preponderance of probabilities'. Therefore,
if the accused is able to raise a probable defence which creates doubts about the
existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability, the prosecution can fail. As clarified
in the citations, the accused can rely on the materials submitted by the complainant
in order to raise such a defence and it is conceivable that in some cases the accused
may not need to adduce evidence of his/her own.
15. Coming back to the facts in the present case, we are in agreement with the High
Court's view that the accused did not raise a probable defence. As noted earlier, the
defence of the loss Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 of a blank cheque
was taken up belatedly and the accused had mentioned a different date in the `stop
payment' instructions to his bank. Furthermore, the instructions to `stop payment'
had not even mentioned that the cheque had been lost. A perusal of the trial record
also shows that the accused appeared to be aware of the fact that the cheque was with
the complainant. Furthermore, the very fact that the accused had failed to reply to the
statutory notice under Section 138 of the Act leads to the inference that there was
merit in the complainant's version. Apart from not raising a probable defence, the
appellant-accused was not able to contest the existence of a legally enforceable debt
or liability. The fact that the accused had made regular payments to the complainant
in relation to the construction of his house does not preclude the possibility of the
complainant having spent his own money for the same purpose. As per the record of
the case, there was a slight discrepancy in the complainant's version, in so far as it
was not clear whether the accused had asked for a hand loan to meet the
construction-related expenses or whether the complainant had incurred the said
expenditure over a period of time. Either way, the complaint discloses the prima facie
existence of a legally enforceable debt or liability since the complainant has
maintained that his money was used for the construction-expenses. Since the accused
did admit that the signature on the cheque was his, the statutory presumption comes
into play and the same has not been rebutted even with regard to the materials
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 18
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
submitted by the complainant.
19. In MSR Leathers v. S. Palaniappan: (2013) 1 SCC 177, it has been held as follows:-
10. The Proviso to Section 138, however, is all important and stipulates three distinct
conditions precedent, which must be satisfied Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4
of 2018 before the dishonour of a cheque can constitute an offence and become
punishable. The first condition is that the cheque ought to have been presented to the
bank within a period of six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the
period of its validity, whichever is earlier. The second condition is that the payee or
the holder in due course of the cheque, as the case may be, ought to make a demand
for the payment of the said amount of money by giving a notice in writing, to the
drawer of the cheque, within thirty days of the receipt of information by him from the
bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid. The third condition is that the
drawer of such a cheque should have failed to make payment of the said amount of
money to the payee or as the case may be, to the holder in due course of the cheque
within fifteen days of the receipt of the said notice. It is only upon the satisfaction of
all the three conditions mentioned above and enumerated under the proviso to
Section 138 as clauses (a), (b) and (c) thereof that an offence under Section 138 can
be said to have been committed by the person issuing the cheque
20. In Harihara Krishnan v. J. Thomas: (2018) 13 SCC 663, it has been held as follows:-
"26. The scheme of the prosecution in punishing Under Section 138 of THE ACT is
different from the scheme of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Section 138 creates an
offence and prescribes punishment. No procedure for the investigation of the offence
is contemplated. The prosecution is initiated on the basis of a written complaint
made by the payee of a cheque. Obviously such complaints must contain the factual
allegations constituting each of the ingredients of the offence Under Section
138. Those ingredients are: (1) that a person drew a cheque on an account maintained
by him Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 with the banker; (2) that such a
cheque when presented to the bank is returned by the bank unpaid; (3) that such a
cheque was presented to the bank within a period of six months from the date it was
drawn or within the period of its validity whichever is earlier; (4) that the payee
demanded in writing from the drawer of the cheque the payment of the amount of
money due under the cheque to payee; and (5) such a notice of payment is made
within a period of 30 days from the date of the receipt of the information by the payee
from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid. It is obvious from the
scheme of Section 138 that each one of the ingredients flows from a document which
evidences the existence of such an ingredient. The only other ingredient which is
required to be proved to establish the commission of an offence Under Section 138 is
that inspite of the demand notice referred to above, the drawer of the cheque failed to
make the payment within a period of 15 days from the date of the receipt of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 19
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
demand. A fact which the complainant can only assert but not prove, the burden
would essentially be on the drawer of the cheque to prove that he had in fact made
the payment pursuant to the demand.
21. Now coming to the order impugned, it is evident that learned lower court at para-8 has stated
that cheque is filled up in different pen, one of the grounds of acquittal is found duly covered under
Bir Singh v. Mukesh Kumar (supra). Learned lower court at para-8 has stated that the complainant
has failed to substantiate with regard to possession of such huge amount and further, mode of
payment is also not a relevant factor for consideration as decided by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the
case Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 of Kishan Rao v. Shankargouda (supra).
22. Apart from this, as is evident, the respondent no.2/accused never challenged nor controverted
that the aforesaid leaflet cheques were not issued in his favour by the bank. When there happens to
be no denial with regard thereto, then in that event, how it has gone under custody of
complainant/appellant would have also been explained much less, at least, speaking about theft of
the cheques and in likewise manner, there would have been some sort of positive activity at his end
in accordance with Section 139 of the NI Act.
23. Now coming to the evidence, it is needless to say that only three PWs have been examined.
PW-1, during course of examination-in-chief has stated that as the cheque issued by the accused has
bounced which was issued in lieu of satisfaction of the borrowed amount appertaining to Rs.
23,76,000/-, this case has been filed. During course of cross-examination, he has stated at para-3
that money was paid through cheque. In para-4, he has stated that cheque was bounced. Cheque was
issued on 11.07.2014 of Punjab National Bank. In para-5, he has stated that through complainant he
came to know with regard to dishonour of the cheque. He has further stated that the accused has put
his signature in his presence. Then thereafter at para-7, Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of
2018 he has stated that money was taken as a lone on the pretext of getting it returned within 3-4
months. Procured money through cash as well as cheque. In para-8, he has stated that he is not
remembering the cheque number issued by Deepak. In para-9, he has stated that he is not
remembering the date of RTGS. In para-17, he has stated that no document was prepared with
regard thereto. In para 20, he has stated that money was paid through bank. Then had denied the
suggestion that the complainant is in the habit of launching false case. In para-23, he has stated that
Deepak has not filed Civil suit under Specific Performance of Contract Act. Then has denied the
suggestion that being friend of the complainant, he has deposed falsely.
24. PW-2 during examination-in-chief reiterated the version. During cross-examination he has
stated at para-5 that the occurrence took place in his presence on account thereof, he has deposed.
In para-7, he has stated that actual date of payment, he is not remembering but it was the month of
April 2013. In para-10, he has stated that Deepak had informed regarding non payment of the
money. In para-12, he has stated that the cheque was handed over in his presence. He has seen the
cheque but he is unable to say on which date it was deposited in the bank. Again at para-21, he has
denied the Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 suggestion that being friend of Deepak, this
case has been filed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 20
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
25. PW-3 is informant himself and has deposed that in the background of friendship with the
accused, Anil came to him and demanded Rs. 24 Lacs on 15.04.2013 whereupon he paid Rs.
23,76,000/- after collecting it from his account as well as from his other friends. Rs. 18 Lacs was
paid through the cheque, RTGS and Rs. 7, 37,000/- was paid through cash. The aforesaid payment
was made at an assurance that it will be repaid back within four months. When the time expired,
repayment was not done, then he advanced demand whereupon, on 11.07.2014, he/accused handed
over two cheques of Punjab National Bank at his residence. Cheque was filled up by Anil Kumar
Gupta himself. Signature was put by him. Name Deepak Kumar was written by him. Accepted the
same. He has deposited both the cheques in his account lying at Axis Bank, Danapur. On 15.07.2014,
the bank informed regarding dishonour of both the cheques on account of mismatching of the
signature. Thereafter, he has served notice on 23.07.2014 (Exhibited) under registered post
(Exhibited). Also exhibited the complaint petition. During cross-examination at para-3, he has
stated that on 15.07.2014, cheque was bounced, while notice was served on 24.07.2013 (might have
been mistake over year), Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 as from Ext-3, it happens to
be 24.07.2014. In para-4, there happens to be disclosure that on account of non payment of money
as well as taking dilly-dallying tactics, complaint has been filed. In para-6, he has stated that money
was paid on 15.04.2013. In para-9, he has stated that signature over cheque was made in his
presence. He has deposited the cheque on 11.07.2014 and on 15.07.2014 he was informed by the
Bank regarding dishonour on account of mismatching of specimen signature. In para-13, he has
stated that he has served notice on 23.07.2014 but no reply was given. In para-14, he has stated that
he has not mentioned any reason with regard to non-reply of the notice. In para-17, he has stated
that date was given over the cheque on 11.07.2014 and on that date itself cheque was deposited for
encashment. The has denied the suggestion that in order to malign the prestige of the accused, after
creating his forged signature, this case has been instituted. It has further been suggested that
accused had not issued any cheque.
26. So, from the evidence aforesaid, it is apparent that nothing substantial has been at the end of
respondent no.2 much less challenging over as to how account number was mentioned in the cheque
whether aforesaid account number does not belong to leaflet aforesaid, whether cheque number was
not Patna High Court CR.APP(U/S) No.4 of 2018 issued in his favour by the concerned bank and at
least, while discharging the presumption by way of rebuttal, those things would have been there. It
is further evident that the learned lower court on its own recorded without having specific assertion
under the statement under Section 313 CrPC or during course of cross-examination, the witnesses
have been suggested that Respondent No.2/accused had issued two cheques in lieu of part
performance of negotiation over sale/purchase of the land and that being so, the finding of the
learned lower court happens to be perverse, cryptic.
27. Consequent thereupon, the same is set aside. Appeal is allowed. Accordingly, Respondent
No.2/accused is held guilty for an offence punishable under Section 138 of the N.I. Act, whereupon
is sentenced to undergo RI for one year as well as fined twice of the amount of both the cheque. In
default thereof, to undergo RI for three months. In case of deposit of fine amount, half will be given
to the appellant/complainant. Respondent no.2 is directed to surrender before the lower court
within fortnight to serve out the sentence.
perwez (Aditya Kumar Trivedi, J)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 21
Deepak Kumar vs State Of Bihar And Anr on 20 August, 2019
AFR/NAFR AFR
CAV DATE 09/07/2019
Uploading Date 20/08/2019
Transmission Date 20/08/2019
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126795161/ 22
