Deepak Gond vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
Deepak Gond vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
Author: Rajeev Misra
Bench: Rajeev Misra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:30267
Court No. - 71
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 528 BNSS No. - 5203 of 2025
Applicant :- Deepak Gond
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Sanjeev Kumar Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Rajeev Misra,J.
1. Heard Mr. Sanjeev Kumar Singh, the learned counsel for applicant, the learned A.G.A. for
State-opposite party-1 and Mr. Saurabh Shukla, Advocate, who has put in appearance on behalf of
prosecutrix/first informant/opposite party-2 by filing his Vakalatnama in Court today, which is
taken on record.
2. Perused the record.
3. Applicant- Deepak Gond, who is a charge sheeted accused and facing trial before Court below, has
approached this Court by means of present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. with the following
prayer:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102712983/ 1
Deepak Gond vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
"It is therefore most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may graciously be
pleased to allow this application and quash the entire proceedings as well as charge
sheet dated 07.07.2024 in ST No.1308 of 2024 arsing out of Case Crime No.223 of
2024 under Section 376, 323, 506 IPC, (State vs. Deepak Gond) including the
cognizance order dated 29.07.2024 as well as summoning order dated 29.07.2024,
Police Station Pipiganj, District Gorakhpur.
It is further prayed that this Hon'ble Court may be pleased to stay the further
proceedings in ST No.1308 of 2024 arising out of Case Crime No.223 of 2024 under
Section 376, 323, 506 IPC, (State vs. Deepak Gond) including the cognizance order
dated 29.07.2024 as well as summoning order dated 29.07.2024, POlice Station
Pipiganj, district Gorakhpur, pending in the court of F.T.C. Court No.1 Gorakhpur,
during pendency of the present application before this Hon'ble Court, otherwise the
applicant shall suffer irreparable loss and injury."
4. Learned counsel for applicant submits that though applicant is a named and charge sheeted
accused and facing trial before the court below in aforementioned Sessions Trial, however, in view of
the peculiar facts and circumstances as have emerged on record, the criminal prosecution of
applicant cannot be sustained now. As such, the present application is liable to be allowed by this
Court.
5. In furtherance of aforesaid submission, the learned counsel for applicant submits that criminal
prosecution of applicant commenced with the lodging of FIR dated 17.06.2024 by the
prosecutrix/first informant/opposite party no.2 which was registered as Case Crime No.0223 of
2024 under Sections 147, 323, 406, 506, 313, 376 IPC, Police Station Pipiganj, District Gorakhur.
However, subsequent to the aforesaid FIR, giving rise to present criminal proceedings, the applicant
solemnized marriage with the prosecutrix on 23.08.2024. Consequently, the prosecutrix became the
legally wedded wife of applicant. On account of above, the parties are, therefore, now residing
together as husband and wife. It is thus contended by the learned counsel for applicant that in view
of aforesaid subsequent development, the criminality, if any, committed by applicant now stands
washed off. It is further submitted by the learned counsel for applicant that marriage of the parties
has also been registered under the provisions of U.P. Marriage Registration Rules, 2017. Photocopy
of the Marriage Registration Certificate has been brought on record and is at page 45 of the paper
book. It is then contended by the learned counsel for applicant that as the marriage of the parties
has been registered under the relevant Rules, then there is a statutory presumption regarding valid
and legal marriage of the parties. On the above conspectus, it is thus urged by the learned counsel
for applicant that once the applicant and prosecutrix have solemnized marriage and are now living
together as husband and wife, as such, no useful purpose shall be served in continuing the criminal
prosecution of applicant. In case, the impugned criminal proceedings are allowed to continue, then a
happy family shall stand broken. On the edifice of aforesaid submission, the learned counsel for
applicant submits that present application is liable to be allowed.
6. Per contra, the learned A.G.A. for State-opposite party-1 has vehemently opposed the present
application. Learned A.G.A. submits that offence complained of against applicant is now private in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102712983/ 2
Deepak Gond vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
nature but a crime against society. As such, no compromise could be entered into by the parties.
Even otherwise, the compromise entered into by the parties is of no relevance. To buttress his
submission, he has referred to the judgment of Supreme Court in Rampal Vs. State of Haryana, AIR
online 2019 SC 1716, wherein the Apex Court has observed that there can be no compromise in
matters of rape and sexual assault. As such, the proceedings impugned in present application cannot
be terminated in view of the compromise entered into by the parties. However, he could not dislodge
the factual and legal submissions urged by the learned counsel for applicant with reference to the
record at this stage.
7. On the other hand, Mr. Saurabh Shukla, the learned counsel representing first
informant-prosecutrix-opposite party-2 submits that he has received instructions not to oppose the
present application. It is further submitted by Mr. Saurabh Shukla, the learned counsel representing
the prosecutrix/first informant/opposite party-2 that it is an admitted fact that the prosecutrix has
solemnized marriage with the applicant and by reason of above, she is residing with applicant as his
legally wedded wife. He, therefore, submits that he cannot have any objection, in case, the present
application is decided by this Court taking into consideration the aforesaid facts.
8. Be that as it may, this Court finds that the crux of the matter is that the applicant has solemnized
marriage with the prosecutrix.
9. Having heard, the learned counsel for applicant, the learned A.G.A. for State-opposite party-1 and
Mr. Saurabh Shukla, the learned counsel representing the prosecutrix/first informant/opposite
party-2 and upon perusal of record, this Court finds that the criminal prosecution of applicant was
set in motion when an FIR dated 17.06.2024 was lodged by prosecutrix/first informant/opposite
party-2. In the aforesaid FIR, applicant Deepak Gaud and 5 others have been nominated as named
accused. After aforementioned FIR was lodged, Investigating Officer proceeded with statutory
investigation of concerned case crime number in terms of Chapter-XII Cr.P.C. On the basis of
material collected by Investigating Officer during course of investigation, he came to the conclusion
that complicity of only one of the named accused i.e. Deepak Gaud, the applicant herein is
established in teh crime in question. Accordingly, Investigating Officer submitted the charge
sheeted/police report dated 07.07.2024 in terms of Section 173(2) Cr.P.C., whereby and
whereunder, accused-applicant Deepak Gaud was charge sheeted under Sections 376, 323, 506 IPC,
whereas, the other named accused were exculpated. After submission of aforementioned charge
sheet/police report, cognizance was taken by the Jurisdiction Magistrate in exercise of jurisdiction
under Section 190(1)(b) Cr.P.C. Simultaneously the accused-applicant was also summoned to face
trial. Since offence complained of is triable by the Court of Sessions, therefore, the Jurisdictional
Magistrate in line with Section 209 Cr.P.C. committed the case to the Court of Sessions. Resultantly,
Sessions Trial No. 1308 of 2024 (State Vs. Deepak Gaud), under Sections 376, 323, 506 IPC, Police
Station-Pipiganj, Districkt-Gorakhpur came to be registered and is now pending in the Court of
F.T.C.-Ist, Gorakhpur.
10. However, during the pendency of aforementioned Sessions Trial, applicant solemnized marriage
with the prosecutrix on 23.08.2024. Consequently, the prosecutrix became the legally wedded wife
of applicant. By reason of above, the prosecutrix is residing with the applicant as his legally wedded
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102712983/ 3
Deepak Gond vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
wife. The bona-fide of the parties is further evident from the fact that the marriage of the parties has
been registered under the provisions of U.P. Marriage Registration Rules, 2017. Since the marriage
of parties is duly registered under the relevant Rules, therefore, there is a statutory presumption
regarding valid and legal marriage of the parties. Nothing has been pointed out by Mr. Saurabh
Shukla, the learned counsel representing the prosecutrix/first informant/opposite party-2 that the
said certificate has been obtained by fraud etc. or proceedings for cancellation of said certificate are
pending. In view of aforementioned subsequent developments, the criminality if any, committed by
applicant now stands washed off. Consequently, no useful purpose shall be served in prolonging the
criminal prosecution of applicant. In case, the criminal prosecution of applicant, is allowed to
continue, a happy family shall stand broken. The trial shall only entail loss of judicial time in a futile
pursuit particularly when torrents of litigation drown the Courts with an unimaginable flood of
dockets
11. At this juncture, reference be made to the judgments of the Supreme Court in K. Dhandapani Vs.
State by the Inspector of Police 2022 SCC Online SC 1056 and Mafat Lal and Another Vs. State of
Rajasthan 2022 SCC Online SC 433, wherein the Apex Court quashed the proceedings against the
accused therein on the ground that he has solemnized marriage with the prosecutrix.
12. The judgment rendered by the Apex Court in the case of K. Dhandapnai (supra) is a short one
therefore, the same is reproduced in it's entirety.
"1. Leave granted.
2. The appellant who is the maternal uncle of the prosecutrix belongs to Valayar
community, which is a most backward community in the State of Tamilnadu. He
worksas a woodcutter on daily wages in a private factory. FIR was registered against
him forcommitting rape under Sections 5(j)(ii) read with Section 6, 5(I) read with
Section 6 and 5(n) read with Section 6 of Protection of Child from Sexual Offences
(POCSO) Act, 2012. He was convicted after trial for committing the said offences and
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 10 years by the Sessions
Judge, Fast Track Mahila Court, Tiruppur on 31.10.2018. The High Court, by an
order dated 13.02.2019, upheld the conviction and sentence. Aggrieved thereby, the
appellant has filed this appeal.
3. Mr. M.P. Parthiban, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, submitted that
allegation against him was that he had physical relations with the prosecutrix on the
promise of marrying her. He stated that, in fact, he married the prosecutrix and they
have two children. 4. The appellant submitted that this Court should exercise its
power under Article 142 of the Constitution and ought to do complete justice and it
could not be in the interest of justice to disturb the family life of the appellant and the
prosecutrix.
5. After hearing the matter for some time on 08th March, 2022, we directed the
District Judge to record the statement of the prosecutrix about her present status.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102712983/ 4
Deepak Gond vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
The statement of the prosecutrix has been placed on record in which she has
categorically stated that she has two children and they are being taken care of by the
appellant and she is leading a happy married life.
6. Dr. Joseph Aristotle S., learned counsel appearing for the State, opposed the grant
of any relief to the appellant on the ground that the prosecutrix was aged 14 years on
the date of the offence and gave birth to the first child when she was 15 years and
second child was born when she was 17 years. He argued that the marriage between
the appellant and the prosecutrix is not legal. He expressed his apprehension that the
said marriage might be only for the purpose of escaping punishment and there is no
guarantee that the appellant will take care of the prosecutrix and the children after
this Court grants relief to him.
7. In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the considered view
that the conviction and sentence of the appellant who is maternal uncle of the
prosecutrix deserves to be set aside in view of the subsequent events that have been
brought to the notice of this Court. This Court cannot shut its eyes to the ground
reality and disturb the happy family life of the appellant and the prosecutrix. We have
been informed about the custom in Tamilnadu of the marriage of a girl with maternal
uncle.
8. For the aforesaid mentioned reasons, the conviction and sentence of the appellant
is set aside in the peculiar facts of the case and shall not be treated as a precedent.
The appeal is accordingly, disposed of. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand
disposed of.
9. In case, the appellant does not take proper care of the prosecutrix, she or the State
on behalf of the prosecutrix can move this Court for modification of this Order."
13. The ratio laid down by Apex Court in aforementioned case is squarely attracted to the facts of
present case inasmuch as, in the present case also the accused-applicant has solemnized marriage
with the prosecutrix. No exception can be carved out regarding above in the case of present
applicant. The Court cannot turned a blind eye to the subsequent developments that have taken
place between the parties.
14. In view of the discussion made above, the present application succeeds and is liable to be
allowed.
15. It is, accordingly, allowed.
16. The entire proceedings of Sessions Trial No. 1308 of 2024 (State vs. Deepak Gond) arsing out of
Case Crime No. 223 of 2024, under Sections 376, 323, 506 IPC, Police Station-Pipiganj,
District-Gorakhpur, now pending in the Court of F.T.C. Court No.- Gorakhpur, are, hereby,
quashed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102712983/ 5
Deepak Gond vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
17. In the facts and circumstances of the case, the parties shall bear their own costs.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 S.A.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/102712983/ 6
