Deepak Alias Kuldeep Alias Deepu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
Deepak Alias Kuldeep Alias Deepu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others
on 28 February, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:28703
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 44886 of 2024
Applicant :- Deepak Alias Kuldeep Alias Deepu
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Keshari Nandan Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Dharmendra Kumar,G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Keshari Nandan Singh, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Dharmendra Kumar,
learned counsel for the informant as well as Sri Sunil Kumar, learned A.G.A. for the State and
perused the record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 149 of 2024, under Sections 376(3), 504 I.P.C. and Section
4 of POCSO Act, Police Station Kotwali, District Hamirpur, during the pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
4. The applicant is stated to have committed rape with the victim on 29.06.2024 at about 7:30 p.m.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181312309/ 1
Deepak Alias Kuldeep Alias Deepu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT :
5. The applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case and he has nothing to do with the
said offence.
6. The FIR is delayed by about one day and there is no explanation of the said delay caused.
7. The victim was found in the pool of blood and the said fact can be explained from the fact that the
victim was having LMP since 29.06.2024.
8. There is no injury sustained by the victim as is but evident from her injury report.
9. The prosecution story stands falsified from the fact that the victim has stated that her limbs were
tied by the applicant and thereupon she was disrobed.
10. It is not possible for a person to disrobe any one after tying down his/her limbs.
11. There is no sign of any scuffle or resistance whatsoever.
12. There is no mentioning of fact as to whether clothes of the victim were torn or not ?
13. It is a clear cut case of false implication.
14. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
15. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since
01.07.2024. The applicant is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail,
he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF INFORMANT :
16. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed.
CONCLUSION:
17. In light of the judgement of the Supreme Court passed in Niranjan Singh and another vs
Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and others AIR 1980 SC 785, this Court has avoided detailed
examination of the evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the case as no party
should have the impression that his case has been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is
needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive exploration of the merits in the order itself.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181312309/ 2
Deepak Alias Kuldeep Alias Deepu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
18. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
19. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
20. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate
of Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
21. Learned AGA could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would warrant denial of
bail to the applicant.
22. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at
the trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned AGA.
23. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
24. Let the applicant- Deepak Alias Kuldeep Alias Deepu involved in aforementioned case crime
number be released on bail on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount
to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C./351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
25. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181312309/ 3
Deepak Alias Kuldeep Alias Deepu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 28 February, 2025
26. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 28.2.2025 Sumit S (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181312309/ 4
