Devansh Singh Rawat vs Union Of India And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
Devansh Singh Rawat vs Union Of India And 3 Others on 3
March, 2025
Author: Saral Srivastava
Bench: Saral Srivastava
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:29848
Court No. - 32
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 2849 of 2025
Petitioner :- Devansh Singh Rawat
Respondent :- Union Of India And 3 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Siddharth Khare
Counsel for Respondent :- A.S.G.I.,Rajesh Tripathi,Sanjai Singh
Hon'ble Saral Srivastava,J.
1. Heard Sri Siddharth Khare, learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri Rajesh Tripathi, learned
counsel for respondent no.1 and Sri Sanjai Singh, learned counsel for respondent nos.2 to 4.
2. The petitioner by means of the present writ petition has prayed for following relief:
"i. Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus commanding the
respondents to re-evaluate the Mathematics answer sheet of the petitioner in which
he appeared on 04.09.2024 and accordingly, declare the result at the earliest.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69456249/ 1
Devansh Singh Rawat vs Union Of India And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
ii. Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of which this Hon'ble Court may deem
fit and proper under the facts and circumstances of the case.
iii. Award cost to humble petitioner throughout of the writ petition."
3. The contention of learned counsel for the petitioner is that the marks awarded to the petitioner in
'Mathematics' Subject in Senior Secondary Examination of National Institute of Open Schooling is
'17' out of '100' marks, which is much less than the marks expected by the petitioner on the basis of
his performance in the said examination paper. Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted
that the petitioner believes that due to some mistake on the part of the respective authorities in
evaluating the marks as the marks awarded to the petitioner in 'Mathematics' Subject has been
shown lesser than he deserves.
4. It is further submitted that the petitioner after getting the mark-sheet of the aforesaid
Examination in 'Mathematics' Subject, preferred a scrutiny application before the
respondent-authority raising his grievance, but no heed was paid by the authorities on his
application.
5. Learned counsel for the respondents submits that the exercise of scrutiny of the marks in respect
of all those candidates who applied for the same has now been completed and there is no provision
of re-evaluation under the relevant Rules. He further submitted that it is open for the petitioner to
move appropriate application under the Right to Information Act before the Public Information
Officer in the office of the Board of Technical Education, U.P., Lucknow to know the correct position
for his satisfaction and thereafter to take appropriate steps as permissible under law.
6. It is pertinent to note that the Apex Court in the case of Central Board of Secondary Education &
Another Vs. Aditya Bandopadhyay & Others 2011 (4) ESC 600 (SC) has been pleased to secure the
power of the examining bodies to permit examinees to have inspection of their answer books,
subject to the clarifications regarding the scope of the RTI Act and the safeguards and conditions
subject to which 'information' should be furnished. The relevant paragraphs of the judgement
passed in the Aditya Bandopadhyay (supra) are extracted herein below:-
"27. We, therefore, hold that an examining body does not hold the evaluated
answer-books in a fiduciary relationship. Not being information available to an
examining body in its fiduciary relationship, the exemption under Section 8(1)(e) is
not available to the examining bodies with reference to evaluated answer-books. As
no other exemption under Section 8 is available in respect of evaluated answer books,
the examining bodies will have to permit inspection sought by the examinees.
Re : Question (iv)
28. When an examining body engages the services of an examiner to evaluate the
answer-books, the examining body expects the examiner not to disclose the
information regarding evaluation to anyone other than the examining body. Similarly
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69456249/ 2
Devansh Singh Rawat vs Union Of India And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
the examiner also expects that his name and particulars would not be disclosed to the
candidates whose answer-books are evaluated by him. In the event of such
information being made known, a disgruntled examinee who is not satisfied with the
evaluation of the answer books, may act to the prejudice of the examiner by
attempting to endanger his physical safety. Further, any apprehension on the part of
the examiner that there may be danger to his physical safety, if his identity becomes
known to the examinees, may come in the way of effective discharge of his duties. The
above applies not only to the examiner, but also to the scrutiniser, co-ordinator, and
head-examiner who deal with the answer book. The answer book usually contains not
only the signature and code number of the examiner, but also the signatures and code
number of the scrutiniser/co-ordinator/head examiner. The information as to the
names or particulars of the examiners/co-ordinators/scrutinisers/head examiners
are therefore exempted from disclosure under Section 8(1)(g) of RTI Act, on the
ground that if such information is disclosed, it may endanger their physical safety.
Therefore, if the examinees are to be given access to evaluated answer-books either
by permitting inspection or by granting certified copies, such access will have to be
given only to that part of the answer-book which does not contain any information or
signature of the examiners/co- ordinators/scrutinisers/head examiners, exempted
from disclosure under Section 8(1)(g) of RTI Act. Those portions of the answer-books
which contain information regarding the examiners/co-ordinators/scrutinisers/head
examiners or which may disclose their identity with reference to signature or initials,
shall have to be removed, covered, or otherwise severed from the non-exempted part
of the answer-books, under Section 10 of RTI Act.
29. The right to access information does not extend beyond the period during which
the examining body is expected to retain the answer-books. In the case of CBSE, the
answer-books are required to be maintained for a period of three months and
thereafter they are liable to be disposed of/destroyed. Some other examining bodies
are required to keep the answer-books for a period of six months. The fact that right
to information is available in regard to answer-books does not mean that
answer-books will have to be maintained for any longer period than required under
the rules and regulations of the public authority. The obligation under the RTI Act is
to make available or give access to existing information or information which is
expected to be preserved or maintained. If the rules and regulations governing the
functioning of the respective public authority require preservation of the information
for only a limited period, the applicant for information will be entitled to such
information only if he seeks the information when it is available with the public
authority. For example, with reference to answer-books, if an examinee makes an
application to CBSE for inspection or grant of certified copies beyond three months
(or six months or such other period prescribed for preservation of the records in
regard to other examining bodies) from the date of declaration of results, the
application could be rejected on the ground that such information is not available.
The power of the Information Commission under Section 19(8) of the RTI Act to
require a public authority to take any such steps as may be necessary to secure
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69456249/ 3
Devansh Singh Rawat vs Union Of India And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
compliance with the provision of the Act, does not include a power to direct the
public authority to preserve the information, for any period larger than what is
provided under the rules and regulations of the public authority.
30, 31, 32 & 33 ..............................
34. When trying to ensure that the right to information does not conflict with several
other public interests (which includes efficient operations of the governments,
preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information, optimum use of limited fiscal
resources, etc.), it is difficult to visualise and enumerate all types of information
which require to be exempted from disclosure in public interest. The legislature has
however made an attempt to do so. The enumeration of exemptions is more
exhaustive than the enumeration of exemptions attempted in the earlier Act that is
Section 8 of Freedom to Information Act, 2002. The Courts and Information
Commissions enforcing the provisions of RTI Act have to adopt a purposive
construction, involving a reasonable and balanced approach which harmonises the
two objects of the Act, while interpreting Section 8 and the other provisions of the
Act.
38. In view of the foregoing, the order of the High Court directing the examining
bodies to permit examinees to have inspection of their answer books is affirmed,
subject to the clarifications regarding the scope of the RTI Act and the safeguards and
conditions subject to which 'information' should be furnished. The appeals are
disposed of accordingly."
7. Accordingly, the present writ petition is disposed off with liberty to the petitioner to apply under
the Right to Information Act, 2005. In case, petitioner prefers an application under the Right to
Information Act, 2005 in the manner as prescribed under law along with certified copy of this order
within a period of four weeks from today, the concerned authoritiy shall ensure furnishing of the
permissible information and the documents as per law to the petitioner in the light of the judgement
passed by the Apex Court in the case of Aditya Bandopadhyay (supra) within a period of one month
from the date of receipt of the aforesaid application, if there is no legal impediment.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Sattyarth
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/69456249/ 4
