Devendra vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
Devendra vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
Author: Rajeev Misra
Bench: Rajeev Misra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:31470
Court No. - 71
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 11480 of 2024
Appellant :- Devendra
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Appellant :- Akhilesh Kumar Yadav
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Hon'ble Rajeev Misra,J.
(Ref:-Order on the Memo of Appeal)-
1. Heard Mr. Arvind Kumar Srivastava, Advocate, holding brief of Mr. Akhilesh Kumar Yadav, the
learned counsel for appellant and the learned A.G.A. for State.
2. Vide order dated 22.11.2024, the appeal was admitted, notice was issued to opposite party-4 and
the lower Court record was summoned.
3. Office has submitted a report dated 18.01.2025 stating therein that trial Court record has been
received.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61069419/ 1
Devendra vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
4. Notice issued to opposite party-2 has been served through secondary person. However, inspite of
service of notice, no one has appeared on behalf of first informant opposite party-2 to oppose this
appeal.
5. List for hearing in due course.
Ref: Order on the Application for Suspension of Sentence
1. Heard Mr. Arvind Kumar Srivastava, Advocate, holding brief of Mr. Akhilesh Kumar Yadav, the
learned counsel for applicant/appellant and the learned A.G.A. for State.
2. Perused the record.
3. Feeling aggrieved by the impugned judgement and order dated 23.10.2024, passed by Additional
Sessions Judge/Special Judge, POCSO Act, District Bijnor in Sessions Case No. 928 of 2022 (State
of U.P. Vs. Devendra), arising out of Case Crime No. 140 of 2022 under Sections 452, 354, 504, 506
IPC and Section 8 of Protection of Children From Sexual Offences Act, 2012 Police Station- Rehad,
District- Bijnor.
4. By impugned judgment and order dated applicant/appellant has been convicted under Section 8
of Protection of Children From Sexual Offences Act, 2012 and consequently, sentenced to four years
rigorous imprisonment along with fine of Rs. 50,000/- and in case of default, applicant/appellant is
to undergo six months additional simple imprisonment, under Section 354 IPC and consequently,
sentenced to four years rigorous imprisonment along with fine of Rs.10,000/- and in case of default,
applicant/appellant is to undergo three months additional simple imprisonment, under Section 452
IPC and consequently, sentenced to four years rigorous imprisonment along with fine of
Rs.10,000/- and in case of default, applicant/appellant is to undergo three months additional
simple imprisonment, under Section 506 IPC and consequently, sentenced to three years simple
imprisonment along with fine of Rs. 10,000/- and in case of default, applicant/appellant is to
undergo three months additional simple imprisonment, under Section 504 IPC and consequently,
sentenced to six months simple imprisonment. Impugned judgement further records that all the
judgements shall run concurrently.
5. In view of aforesaid judgement and order, applicant/appellant was taken into custody.
Accordingly, applicant/appellant has filed aforesaid application for suspension of sentence, seeking
his enlargement on bail during the pendency of present appeal.
6. Learned counsel for applicant/appellant contends that even though the applicant/appellant is a
convicted accused, however in view of the peculiar facts and circumstances of the case
applicant/appellant is liable to be enlarged on bail. Referring the impugned judgment and order, the
learned counsel for applicant/appellant contends that applicant/appellant has been convicted and
sentences under Section 8 of Protection of Children From Sexual Offences Act, 2012 and not under
Section 3/4 POCSO Act. However, with regard to the material on record, it is thus urged by the
learned counsel for applicant/appellant that even offence under Section 8 of Protection of Children
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61069419/ 2
Devendra vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
From Sexual Offences Act, 2012 is not made out against applicant/appellant. He therefore, submits
that the findings returned by Court below to the contrary is not only illegal but also perverse. The
prosecution has failed to prove the very story which is said to be proved against applicant/appellant.
Though, witnesses adduced on behalf of prosecution inasmuch as the criminality alleged to have
been committed by applicant/appellant have not been consistent. As such, no such cogent evidence
has emerged on record on the basis of which prima facie it cannot be concluded that
applicant/appellant has committing the crime in question. No injury has been sustained by the
prosecutrix either. Apart from above, referring to the judement of Supreme Court in Atul @
Ashutosh Vs. State of M.P., (2024) 3 SCC 663, it is urged by the learned counsel for
applicant/appellant that Apex Court has itself observed that where definite sentence, punishment
has been awarded by Court below against accused appellant, the High Court must enlarge such an
accused on bail. According to the learned counsel for applicant/appellant, in view of heavy pendency
of appeals before this Court, coupled with the fact that there is acute shortage of Hon'ble Judges in
High Court, there is no likelihood of the present appeal being heard in near future.
7. Even otherwise, applicant/appellant is a man of clean antecedents inasmuch as he has no criminal
history to his credit except the present one. Applicant is in jail since 23.10.2024. As such, he has
undergone more than four months of incarceration. Apart from above, the conclusion drawn by
Court below is not only illegal but also perverse. On account of heavy pendency of appeals before
this Court, coupled with the fact that there is acute shortage of Hon'ble Judges in High Court, there
is no likelihood of the present appeal being heard in near future. It is thus urged by the learned
counsel for applicant/appellant that applicant/appellant is liable to be enlarged on bail. In case the
applicant/appellant is enlarged on bail, he shall not misuse the liberty of bail and shall co-operate
with the hearing of appeal.
8. Per contra, the learned A.G.A. has opposed the prayer for bail. He submits that since
applicant/appellant is a named as well as convicted accused, therefore he does not deserve any
indulgence by this Court. According to the learned A.G.A. interest of justice shall better be served in
case the appeal itself is heard on merits by fixing a short date instead of enlarging the
applicant/appellant on bail. However, he could not dislodge the factual and legal submissions urged
by the learned counsel for applicant/appellant in support of the prayer for bail, with reference to the
record at this stage.
9. Having heard the learned counsel for applicant/appellant, the learned A.G.A. for State, upon
perusal of material brought on record, evidence, nature and gravity of offence as well as complicity
of applicant/appellant, accusation made coupled with the fact that the Apex Court in the case of Atul
@ Ashutosh (Supra) has observed that where accused applicant has been awarded definite sentence
of punishment and there are no chances of the appeal being heard in near fture, then in such a
circumstance the accused-applicant should be enlarged on bail during the pendency of appeal, no
exception can be carved out in the case of present applicant/appellant, in view of heavy pendency of
appeals, there is no likelihood of the present appeal being heard in near future, the period of
incarceration undergone, the clean antecedents of applicant/appellant, therefore irrespective of the
objections raised by the learned A.G.A. to the present application for bail but without making any
comment on the merits of the case, applicant/appellant has made out a case for bail.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61069419/ 3
Devendra vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
10. Accordingly, the application for suspension of sentence is Allowed.
11. Let the applicant/appellant- Devendra be released on bail in aforesaid case crime number on
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court
concerned.
12. However, the amount of the fine awarded against applicant/appellant by Court below shall be
deposited by applicant/appellant with the court below, within a period of one month from today,
failing which the bail granted to applicant/appellant shall stand cancelled and he shall be taken into
custody to serve out the sentence.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Imtiyaz
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/61069419/ 4
