Devendra Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 April, 2019
Devendra Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 April,
2019
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH : JABALPUR
S.B : HON.SHRIJUSTICE VISHNU PRATAP SINGH CHAUHAN
M.Cr.C. NO.22722/2018
Devendra Yadav
Vs.
State of M.P. and others
Shri Devendra Kumar Tripathi, learned counsel for the
applicant.
Shri Kush Singh, learned Dy. Govt. Advocate for the
respondent No.1/State.
Shri A.N. Gupta, learned counsel for respondent No.2.
M.Cr.C. NO.36469/2018
Ramayan Prasad Kacher
Vs.
State of M.P. and others
Shri Manas Mani Verma, learned counsel for the
applicant.
Shri Ramji Pandey, learned Panel Lawyer for the
respondent No.1/State.
Shri A.N. Gupta, learned counsel for respondent No.2.
Shri A. Usmani, learned counsel for respondent No.3.
M.Cr.C. NO.9697/2018
Ashok Nigam
Vs.
State of M.P. and another
Shri Sharad Verma, learned counsel for the
applicant.
2
Shri Ramji Pandey, learned Panel Lawyer for the
respondent No.1/State.
Shri A.N. Gupta, learned counsel for respondent No.2.
M.Cr.C. NO.39444/2018
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88868621/ 1
Devendra Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 April, 2019
Chandrakant Naik
Vs.
State of M.P. and another
Shri B.K. Mishra, learned counsel for the
applicant.
Shri Ramji Pandey, learned Panel Lawyer for the
respondent No.1/State.
Shri A.N. Gupta, learned counsel for respondent No.2.
ORDER
(03/04/2019) All these above petitions have been filed by the applicants for quashing of FIR of
Crime No.345/2016 dated 23/07/2016 registered at Police Station, Kotwali, Shahdol for the offence
punishable under Sections 420, 467, 468, 471 read with Section 34 of IPC, therefore, they are being
disposed of by this common order.
2. The common facts giving rise to all these petitions, in short, are that bus bearing registration No.
M.P.18 P 0260 purchased by Pankaj Kumar Gupta who is respondent in all the petitions. The
vehicle was financed by the Tata Motor Finance Limited. A hire purchase agreement had been
executed between finance company and the purchaser- Punkaj Kumar Gupta. Pankaj Kumar Gupta
was running his bus after completing all the formalities from the Regional Transport Office. He
failed to deposit the instalments of loan to the finance company. The finance company, in turn,
seized the vehicle. Pankaj Kumar Gupta filed a complaint against the office bearers of the finance
company as well as other persons who are involved in the matter before the JMFC. Ultimately that
complaint was finally dismissed. During this period Tata Motor Finance Limited sold the seized
vehicle to one Harpreet who purchased that vehicle and this vehicle got registered in RTO office,
Shivpuri in the name of petitioner- Devendera Yadav and Devendra Yadav sold this vehicle to one
Dilip Sharma.
3. As per the case of prosecution, Devendra Yadav, on the basis of forged document, NOC, affidavit
and other documents, with collusion of other petitioners got succeeded in transferring the vehicle in
his name and later on transferred to Dilip Sharma. On knowing the said fact, respondent- Pankaj
Kumar Gupta filed a written complaint before the Police authorities at Shahdol and the Police
authorities inquired into the matter and found that there was a conspiracy amongst all the
applicants. The vehicle got transferred from the name of respondent-Pankaj Kumar Gupta to the
name of Devendra Yadav. Petitioner-Chandra Kant Naik was posted in the RTO Office, Shivpuri
without inquiring the fact proceed the matter on the basis of forged document before
applicant-Ashok Nigam, RTO, and applicant-Ashok Nigam, being RTO, knowing all the forged facts
without inquiring the facts from the RTO, Shahdol allowed to transfer the vehicle to the name of
applicant- Devendra Yadav. Devendra Yadav succeeded to get notarized affidavit from
applicant-Ramayan Prasad Kacher who certified the affidavit in the name of Pankaj Kumar Gupta
though Pankaj Kumar Gupta was not present before him. S.D.O. (Police) submitted a report and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88868621/ 2
Devendra Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 April, 2019
found that there is prima facie cognizable offence committed by all the applicants and lodged FIR in
Police Station Kotwali, Shahdol in Crime No.345/2016.
4. Being aggrieved by that lodging of FIR and registration of Crime No.345/2016, all the applicants
seek quashment of FIR on different grounds alleging therein that the bus in question was seized by
Tata Motor Finance Limited from the possession of respondent-Pankaj Kumar Gupta. Tata Motor
Finance Company Limited while executing the hire purchase agreement retained the signed
documents of all other parties such as affidavit, NOC and other relevant documents used in
transferring the vehicle to other persons. Harpreet is a permanent authorized buyer of the Tata
Motor Finance Limited who purchased more than 10 vehicles. He after purchasing the questioned
vehicles from the Tata Motor Finance Limited received all the papers from the Tata Motor Finance
Limited and instead of transferring the vehicle in his own name sold out the vehicle to another
persona and used that all documents signed by previous owner for transferring the vehicle in the
name of new purchaser of the vehicle. As per applicant-Devendra Yadav, he purchased that vehicle
from Harpreet. He was supplied all the documents signed by respondent Pankaj Kumar Gupta and
used that document for transferring the vehicle in his name, therefore, not committed any criminal
act.
5. Applicant-Ramayan Prasad Kacher has filed this petition on the ground that one person bring the
person for notarized affidavit, he identified that person as Pankaj Kumar Gupta and on that basis he
certified the affidavit. He did not commit any offence. Other applicant-Chandrakant Naik has filed
this petition on the ground that the questioned papers submitted by Devendra Yadav in RTO office,
he only prepared note sheet after verifying the facts and submitted it to the RTO and applicant-
Ashok Nigam, RTO, has filed this petition on the ground that as per the note sheet, NOC given by
the RTO Office, Shahdol and employee Chandrakant Naik verified all the facts and submitted note
sheet along with his comments, he allowed to transfer the vehicle in question in the name of
applicant-Devendra Yadav. He did not commit any offence. Apart from this, applicants also objected
that this is not a matter of criminal nature. Respondent-Pankaj Gupta purchased the bus on hire
purchase agreement with Tata Motor Finance Limited and Tata Motor Finance Limited seized the
vehicle and sold to its permanent buyer Harpreet and Devendra Yadav purchase the said vehicle
from Harpreet. There is a dispute of Pankaj Kumar Gupta between Harpreet and Tata Motor
Finance Limited, however, Pankaj Kumar Gupta unnecessarily involved all the applicants imposing
criminal liability instead of filing civil suit just to pressurize the applicants for getting the bus back.
Thus all the applicants pray for quashing of FIR and criminal proceeding emanating from FIR.
6. Learned counsel for respondent No.1/State opposes the averments made in all the petitions and
submits that forged documents have been prepared by notary Ramayan Prasad Kacher. On the basis
of forged documents, employee of RTO and Ashok Nigam, RTO and Chandrakant Naik transferred
the bus in the name of Devendra Yadav. They are equally involved in this racket. The matter is to be
investigated further. After preliminary enquiry, cognizable offence is found against all the
applicants, therefore, on that basis FIR has been lodged against all the applicants. The petitions
have been filed on wrong facts, therefore, prays for dismissal of all the petitions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88868621/ 3
Devendra Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 April, 2019
7. Learned counsel for respondent-Pankaj Kumar Gupta, submits that Pankaj Kumar Gupta
purchased the vehicle and Tata Motor Finance Limited financed the sale consideration, Pankaj
Kumar Gupta executed hire purchase agreement. He has paid all the money. There was a dispute
between Tata Motor Finance Limited and Pankaj Kumar Gupta. Tata Motor Finance Limited was
agreed to release the vehicle but in the meantime applicant-Devendra Yadav succeeded to get a
forged notarized affidavit in the name of Pankaj Kumar Gupta and after interpolation the
documents for transferring the vehicle made forged sign of Pankaj Kumar Gupta and some places
left blank without signature submitted the said documents before RTO, Shivpuri and the employees
of RTO Chandrakant Naik fraudulently prepared note sheet for transferring the vehicle in the name
of Devendra Yadav. Knowing the fact that all the documents are forged and are not properly signed
prepared note sheet and submitted before the RTO-Ashok Nigam, Ashok Nigam, in turn, without
verifying that facts with ill-intention allowed to transfer the vehicle in the name of Devendra Yadav
and Devendra Yadav again sold the vehicle to one Dilip Sharma. There is prima facie ingredients of
cognizable offence. Matter is being investigated in Crime No.345/2016 registered at Police Station,
Kotwali, Shahdol. If during investigation, it is found that no ingredients of any offence is made out.
The applicants may be released under Section 169 of Cr.P.C. This is a preliminary stage of
investigation, therefore, prays for dismissal of the petition.
8. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the case diary of Crime No.345/2016
registered at Police Station, Kotwali, Shahdol. It is not disputed that vehicle was purchased by
Pankaj Kumar Gupta bearing registration No.M.P.18 P 0260 and this vehicle was financed by Tata
Motor Finance Limited. Pankaj Kumar Gupta executed hire purchase agreement. When he failed to
deposit the monthly instalments of loan amount, on 25/10/2011 vehicle was taken into custody of
Tata Motor Finance Limited by its agent. After that one forged affidavit prepared in the name of
Pankaj Kumar Gupta and also prepared documents used for transferring of the vehicle as per the
Motor Vehicles Act Form No.28, 35 and 24 and submitted all the documents before the employee of
RTO, Shahdol Chandrakant Naik, who prepared note sheet and presented before RTO, Shahdol Anil
Kushram and after taking approval issued NOC and sent it to the RTO Office, District Shivpuri.
Applicant-Devendra Yadav by his own name instead the name of Pankaj Kumar Gupta in form
No.28 and all documents submitted before RTO, Shivpur, his name was interpolated and on the
basis of forged documents a clack of offence, employee of RTO Chandrakant Naik prepared a note
sheet in the name of applicant-Devendra Yadav and then RTO, Shivpuri Ashok Nigam ordered to
transfer the vehicle in the name of applicant-Devendra Yadav on the basis of forged documents.
During investigation, signature of Pankaj Kumar Gupta on the document examined by Expert State
Examiner. After examining the signature, State Examiner found that there was significant and
sufficient difference found in the signatures made on the documents as Pankaj Kumar Gupta.
9. Applicant-Devendra Yadav averred in the petition that he purchased vehicle from Harpreet who
purchased the vehicle from Tata Motor Finance Limited. The documents in question are found
signed by Pankaj Kumar Gupta not by Harpreet. Learned counsel for the respondents submitted
that respondent -Pankaj Kumar Gupta has not signed the documents in favour of Devendra Yadav.
Signature of Pankaj Kumar Gupta found forged on the affidavit certified by applicant-Ramayan
Prasad Kacher. Applicant-Chandrakant Naik prepared note sheet on the basis of forged documents.
If there is interpolation found on perusal of the documents, he was duty bound to verify the facts
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88868621/ 4
Devendra Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 April, 2019
before preparing the note sheet. He was duty bound to took impression of chessis number and
engine number of the vehicle on document. If any documents are not having the impression of chess
number and engine number before putting the note sheet before RTO, RTO, himself, verifies the
facts. As per the case of prosecution there was a whitener put on the signature and again its signed
by some persons. This clearly, prima facie, indicates that applicant-Chandrakant Nayak was having
a knowledge and intention to proceed this case on the basis of documents which are not genuine
documents and seems to be forged documents and the applicant-Ashok Nigam who was posted at
that time as RTO, Shivpuri had to verify the fact from the RTO, Shahdol in whose name NOC has
been issued and he should verify the documents before approving the transfer of the vehicle because
all the documents filed along with note sheet put up before him. There is prima facie material
available for investigation in the cognizable offence.
10. Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana & Ors. Vs. Ch. Bhajanlal & ors. [AIR 1992
SC 604] has culled out some important points for quashing of the FIR or complaint, as under:-
"108. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the
Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a
series of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article
226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted
and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
Court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
wherein such power should be exercise.
1. Where the allegations made in the First Information Report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
2. Where the allegations in the First Information Report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the F.I.R. do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156 (1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code.
3. Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the
evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any
offence and make out a case against the accused.
4. Where, the allegations in the F.I.R. do not constitute a cognizable offence but
constitute only a non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police
officer without an order of a Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the
Code.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88868621/ 5
Devendra Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 3 April, 2019
5. Where the allegations made in the F.I.R. or complaint are so absured and
inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just
conclusion that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused.
6. Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code
or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the
institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific
provision in the Code or the on concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the
grievance of the aggrieved party.
7. Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where
the proceeding is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking
vengeance on the accused and with a view to spite him due to private and personal
grudge."
109. We also give a note of caution to the effect that the power of quashing a criminal proceeding
should be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases;
that the Court will not be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliablity or genuineness
or otherwise of the allegations made in the F.I.R. or the complaint and that the extraordinary or
inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court to act according to its whim or
caprice."
11. The matter is under investigation. This Court does not find to interfere in the investigation
because, prima facie, some facts are found to be investigated. Investigation is in gestation period.
This Court does not find to kill fetus in earlier state.
12. On the basis of forgoing discussions and the principles laid down by Hon'ble Apex Court in the
case of Ch. Bhajanlal & ors.(supra), this Court is not inclined to quash FIR and the criminal
proceeding arising thereupon.
13. Accordingly, all these petitions are devoid of merit and the same are hereby dismissed.
(Vishnu Pratap Singh Chauhan) Judge ts Date: 2019.04.03 16:44:24 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88868621/ 6
