Devendra @ Mangal And Another vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
Devendra @ Mangal And Another vs State Of U.P. on 3 March,
2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:29336
Court No. - 66
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 7330 of 2025
Applicant :- Devendra @ Mangal And Another
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Anil Kumar Srivastava (Senior Adv.),Shilpy Sharma
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Sameer Jain,J.
1. Supplementary affidavit filed by the applicants is taken on record.
2. Sri Yogendra Pal Singh, Advocate submits that today he has filed his power on behalf of the
informant in the registry of this Court and therefore his name could not be shown in the cause list,
however he submits he is ready to argue the matter.
3. Heard Ms. Shilpy Sharma, learned counsel for the applicants, Sri Yogendra Pal Singh, learned
counsel for the informant and Sri Jhamman Ram, learned AGA for the State.
4. The instant bail application has been filed seeking release of the applicants on bail in Case Crime
No.245 of 2024, under Sections 191(2), 191(3), 190, 103(1), 351(2), 351 (3), 333, 60(2) of B.N.S.,
Police Station Bhawanpur, District Meerut during pendency of the trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32196848/ 1
Devendra @ Mangal And Another vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
5. FIR of the present case was lodged on 01.10.2024 against applicants and two others and
according to the FIR on 01.10.2024 at about 3.00 PM in the afternoon son of the applicant had gone
to the house of Shiv Kumar son of Ishwarchand and applicant along with three others after entering
in the house of Ishwarchand made fire upon him due to which son of informant sustained serious
injuries. It is further mentioned in the FIR that incident has been witnessed by Shivkumar,
Abhishek and the informant.
6. Learned counsel for the applicants submits, however informant claimed himself to be eye witness
but he does not appear to be eye witness as according to the informant himself his son had gone to
the house of Ishwarchand and he never stated that he also accompanied his son and it appears only
due to previous enmity which has been itself admitted by the informant in the FIR, applicants along
with others have been made accused in the present matter.
7. She further submits, as per the FIR Shivkumar son of Ishwarchand and Abhishek were also the
eye witnesses but from their statements which have been annexed along with the instant bail
application it reflects they did not disclose the name of any accused person who made assault upon
the deceased and according to them when deceased was inside the house of Ishwarchand then some
unknown person who concealed their face made assault.
8. She next submits during investigation, however investigating officer also recorded the statements
of number of other alleged eye-witnesses including Ishwarchand, the owner of the shop where
incident occurred but they also repeated the version of Shivkumar and Abhishek and they did not
disclose the name of any accused who opened fire and made assault upon him.
9. She further submits from the material available on record it reflects merely on the basis of version
of the FIR and statement of the informant applicant and others have been made accused in the
present matter and as presence of the informant at spot appears to be doubtful, therefore at this
stage it cannot be said that applicants along with others participated in the alleged crime.
10. She next submits, however earlier also applicants were made accused in one another case but in
that case after investigation final report has been submitted.
11. She next submits, in the present matter applicants are in jail since 24.10.2024.
12. Per contra, learned AGA as well as learned counsel for the informant opposed the prayer for bail
and submitted that from the FIR and the statement of the informant recorded during investigation
it reflects he was himself one of the eye-witness and he disclosed the name of applicants therefore it
cannot be said that on the basis of false allegation due to enmity applicant has been made accused in
the present matter but they could not dispute the fact that incident occurred in the house of
Ishwarchand and neither Ishwarchand nor his son nor any other witness who were present at the
spot disclosed the name of any accused who made assault upon the deceased. They further could not
dispute the fact that all these witnesses stated that unknown accused persons who concealed their
faces made assault upon the deceased.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32196848/ 2
Devendra @ Mangal And Another vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
13. Learned A.G.A. as well as learned counsel for the informant also could not dispute the fact that
however informant claimed himself to be one of the eye witness but he did not stated that he also
accompanied the deceased i.e. his son when he was going to the house of Ishwarchand. They further
could not dispute the fact that none of the eye witness including Ishwarchand and Shivkumar, the
owner of the house where incident occurred stated in their statement that informant was also
present at the time of incident. They further could not dispute the fact that at present applicants are
not having any other criminal history and in the present matter they are in jail since 24.10.2024.
14. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
15. However, it reflects applicants are named in the FIR along with three others and as per FIR they
by causing fire arm injury along with others committed the murder of the son of the informant and
it also reflects that as per the informant he is one of the eye witness but admittedly incident occurred
in the house of Ishwarchand and neither Ishwarchand nor his son Shivkumar stated that informant
was also present at the spot i.e. in their house at the time of incident.
16. Further neither from the FIR nor from the statement of informant recorded during investigation
it could be reflected that he accompanied his son i.e. deceased to the house of Ishwarchand and
considering all the above facts the argument advanced by learned counsel for the applicant that
actually informant is not an eye witness cannot be ruled out at this stage.
17. Further, incident occurred in the house of Ishwarchand but neither Ishwarchand nor his son
Shivkumar nor any other eye witness could even disclose the name of the accused persons who
made assault upon the deceased. From their statements it could only be reflected that some
unknown person made assault upon the deceased and these unknown persons also concealed their
faces and therefore from the material available on record it reflects except the statement of
informant there is no cogent evidence against the applicant on record. As presence of the informant
at the place of incident appears to be doubtful therefore, argument advanced by learned counsel for
the applicants that there is no cogent evidence against the applicants cannot be ruled out at this
stage.
18. Further enmity between both the sides is admitted and therefore, informant was having motive
to falsely implicate the applicants. Further, however, it also reflects earlier also applicants were
made accused in another case but in that case after investigation final report was submitted.
19. Further, in the present matter applicants are in jail since 24.10.2024.
20. Therefore, considering the facts and circumstances of the case discussed above, in my view,
applicants are entitled to be released on bail.
21. Accordingly, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the instant bail
application is allowed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32196848/ 3
Devendra @ Mangal And Another vs State Of U.P. on 3 March, 2025
22. Let the applicants - Devendra @ Mangal and Veer Singh be released on bail in the aforesaid case
on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
court concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) The applicants shall appear before the trial court on the dates fixed, unless their
personal presence is exempted.
(ii) The applicants shall not directly or indirectly, make inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or any police officer or tamper with the
evidence.
(iii) The applicants shall not indulge in any criminal and anti-social activity.
23. In case of breach of any of the above condition, the prosecution will be at liberty to move an
application before this Court for cancellation of the bail of the applicants.
24. It is clarified that the observations made herein are limited to the facts brought in by the parties
pertaining to the disposal of bail application and the said observations shall have no bearing on the
merits of the case during trial.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Neeraj
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/32196848/ 4
