Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2021 MP 1684
Author: Vivek Rusia
Bench: Shailendra Shukla, Vivek Rusia
1 CRA No.333/2008
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
BENCH AT INDORE
1 Case No. Criminal Appeal No.333/2008
2 Parties Name Devkaran
Vs.
State of M.P.
3 Date of Judgment 18/8/2021
4 Bench constituted of Hon'ble Shri Justice Vivek Rusia and
Hon'ble Shri Justice Shailendra Shukla
5 Judgment delivered by Hon'ble Shri Justice Shailendra Shukla
6 Whether approved for Yes
reporting
7 Name of counsels for Shri Deepak Rawal, learned counsel for the appellant.
parties. Shri Amit Singh Sisodiya, learned Govt. Advocate for
the respondent/State.
8 Law laid down (A) Conviction only on the basis of dying
declaration recorded under Section 32 of
Evidence Act - Before convicting only on the
basis of dying declaration, the Court must act with
prudence and due caution and care and in case
doubt arises, then it is an obligation to closely
scrutinise all the relevant attendant
circumstances.
Judgments relied upon :-
(1) Khushal Rao Vs. State of Bombay [AIR
1958 SC 22].
(2) Panchdeo Singh Vs. State of Bihar [AIR
2002 SC 526].
(3) Tapinder Singh Vs. State of Punjab and
another [1970(2) SCC 113].
(B) Evidentiary value of dying declaration of
injured who has survived - Such statements are
inadmissible under Section 32 of Evidence Act but
can be used for corroboration under Section 157
of the Evidence Act or for contradiction under
Section 155 of the Evidence Act.
Judgment relied upon :-
(1) Ramprasd Vs. State of Maharashtra [(1999)
5 SCC 30].
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145231910/ 1
Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
9 Significant paragraph 18, 22, 23, 24 & 25.
numbers
(Vivek Rusia) (Shailendra Shukla)
Judge Judge
2 CRA No.333/2008
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
BENCH AT INDORE
(DIVISION BENCH: HON. MR. JUSTICE VIVEK RUSIA & HON. MR.
JUSTICE SHAILENDRA SHUKLA)
Criminal Appeal No.333/2008
Devkaran S/o Nathulal,
Aged - 35 years,
Occupation - Craftsman,
R/o - Village Panchdehriya,
P.S. - Awantipur, Badodiya,
District - Shajapur (M.P.) .... Appellant
Versus
State of Madhya Pradesh
P.S. - Awantipur, Badodiya,
District - Shajapur (M.P.) .... Respondent
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Shri Deepak Rawal, learned counsel for the appellant.
Shri Amit Singh Sisodiya, learned Govt. Advocate for the
respondent/State.
----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Whether approved for reporting :
JUDGMENT
(Delivered on 18/8/2021) Per, Shailendra Shukla, J :-
1/ This appeal has been filed under Section 374 Cr.P.C. against the judgment of
conviction and sentence dated 28.2.2008 pronounced in S.T. No.205/06 by the ASJ,
Shujalpur, District Shajapur, whereby the applicant has been sentenced to Life
Imprisonment and fine of Rs.200/- for committing offence under Section 302 of IPC.
In lieu of payment of fine, the appellant has been directed to undergo one month's
additional imprisonment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145231910/ 2
Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
2/ It is admitted that deceased Sangeeta Bai was the wife of the appellant (marriage
contracted through Natra) and that she had succumbed to her burn injuries.
3/ The prosecution story, in short, was that on 22.8.2006 at about 12 to 12.30 pm
deceased Sangeeta Bai resident of Village Panch Dehriya, District Shajapur was at her
house and an altercation ensued between deceased and appellant, since the appellant
had refused to give her 10 Rupees for purchasing clip and rubber. Appellant had also
assaulted deceased and then as per prosecution story, he poured kerosene oil over
Sangeeta Bai and set her ablaze. Sangeeta Bai was brought in burnt condition at Civil
Hospital, Shujalpur. Her dying declaration was recorded by Naib Tehsildar. She was
subsequently shifted to Hamidia Hospital at Bhopal but succumbed to her injuries on
25.8.2006. Merg intimation was sent to Coafiza Police Station at Bhopal. After
instituting the Merg, the dead body was subjected to postmortem and that report was
sent to police station Avantipur Badodiya, District Shajapur, in which case under
Section 307, 302 IPC was registered at Crime No.191/06. Investigation was initiated
by investigating officer, who drew spot map and seized incriminating items which
were sent to FSL. After completing the investigation, the charge sheet was filed before
the JMFC, Shujalpur who committed the case after taking cognizance to Sessions
Judge, Shajapur, who made over the case to ASJ, Shujalpur.
4/ The trial Court framed charge under Section 302 of IPC. The accused abjured his
guilt and his defence was that it was deceased Sangeeta Bai who had put herself on
fire and the appellant had tried to save her and in the process he himself suffered
serious burn injuries.
5/ The trial court has examined 15 witnesses, whereas the appellant has not
examined any defence witness.
6/ The presiding officer vide impugned judgment has found charge framed against
the appellant proved on the basis of available evidence and convicted and sentence
the appellant, as described earlier.
7/ In the appeal which has been filed, it has been stated that the trial Court has erred
in appreciating the evidence available on record, that there was clear evidence that
deceased had ablazed herself and in the process of saving her, the appellant himself
had sustained serious burn injuries and his defence has been accepted by the
prosecution witnesses only, that the trial Court has gone on to convict the appellant
only on the basis of dying declaration without assessing the truthfulness of the same
and the citations which had been filed by the appellant in support were looked over
by the trial court. On these grounds the appeal has been sought to be allowed.
8/ The question before us is, whether in view of the grounds contained in appeal and
submissions made by learned counsel for the appellant, the appellant deserves to be
acquitted?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145231910/ 3
Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
9/ There are two sets of witnesses led by the prosecution. One set of witnesses have
stated that they had seen smoke billowing out of the house of appellant Devkaran and
Devkaran came rushing over, who was made to climb on the upper storey where the
fire was raising, that Devkaran entered and tried to save Sangeeta Bai who was
already in flames at that point of time and appellant also got burnt in the process.
The other set of witnesses are the relatives of deceased Sangeeta Bai, who claimed to
have heard Sangeeta Bai telling them that she was burnt by appellant. These
witnesses apart, Naib Tehsildar Smt. Asha Parmar (PW-11) has also recorded the
dying declaration of Sangeeta Bai, in which she has accused appellant by having set
her ablaze.
10/ The set of witnesses in the first category are Chander Singh (PW-2), Amar Singh
(PW-3) and Kailash (PW-4). All of them have stated that at the time of incident they
were sitting in the courtyard of a temple, from where they had seen the incident as
described earlier. All these witnesses have been declared hostile by the prosecution.
They deny the police statements given by them which were supporting the
prosecution story but they deny the suggestion that they are not stating truth because
of their good neighbourly relations with appellant. Witnesses such as Chander Singh
(PW-2) has described in great detail about the sequence of events leading to
appellant rushing inside his house to save the deceased, got himself burnt seriously,
that Sangeeta Bai having jumped from the gallery and subsequent shifting of
Sangeeta Bai to the hospital. These witnesses, however, do not know as to whether
there was any dispute between Sangeeta Bai and Devkaran.
11/ The other set of witnesses are Gopalsingh (PW-5), Sanjay (PW-6) and Binda Bai
(PW-7) who have stated that while Sangeeta Bai was being shifted from Shujalpur to
Bhopal, Sangeeta Bai had told them that it was appellant who had set her ablaze
pursuant to dispute ensued because of not giving of 10 Rupees to her by appellant.
These are relatives of Sangeeta Bai i.e. Gopal Singh (PW-5) and Sanjay (PW-
6) being the brothers of Sangeeta Bai and Binda Bai (PW-7) being the mother of the
deceased. Gopal Singh (PW-5) has admitted in cross-
examination that Sangeeta Bai was earlier married to one Karan Singh, who was of unsound mind
and then she had contracted Natra marriage with the appellant. He admits that after marriage
Sangeeta Bai used to come for some time to her parental house and then used to go to stay with her
brother-in-law Badri and her association with Badri was disliked by the witness and her family
members, who wanted Sangeeta Bai to stay more in her parental house. This witness in Para-6 has
stated that when he went to Shujalpur hospital, he saw Sangeeta Bai lying inside a jeep and was
sleeping. He does not state as to when Sangeeta Bai had woken up or regained consciousness during
her journey from Shujalpur to Bhopal, when she levelled allegations against appellant Devkaran.
Another witness namely Sanjay (PW-6) states that Sangeeta Bai during the course of journey from
Shujalpur to Bhopal had levelled allegations against Devkaran. This witness states that Sangeeta Bai
had told him that accused after assaulting her had poured kerosene oil over her and set her ablaze
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145231910/ 4
Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
and when Sangeeta Bai shouted, he locked the door from outside and went away and then when
villagers arrived on the spot, the accused came to the spot to save her. However, in statements
Ex.D/2 the witness has stated that the aforesaid dying declaration had been made to him by
Sangeeta Bai at Shujalpur hospital and not in the jeep. Similarly Gopal Singh (PW-5) in his police
statements has stated that when he arrived at the Shujalpur hospital, he saw Sangeeta Bai lying in
pain in a jeep and at that point of time only Sangeeta Bai had told him about the incident. He does
not state that during the course of journey from Shujalpur to Bhopal the incident was narrated by
Sangeeta Bai. A perusal of Ex.D/1 also shows that the witness has stated that it was the villagers who
had told the witness about what Sangeeta Bai was alleging against Devkaran but then the words "
xkao okyks us crk;k" have been scored off and in its place "xkao okyks ds lkeus laxhrk us crk;k ",
have been substituted. The last related witness is Binda Bai (PW-7) who is the mother of deceased,
who states that she was told by Sangeeta Bai at Bhopal hospital that she had been set ablaze by
Devkaran. In her cross-examination she denies the suggestion that Badri, the brother-in- law of
Sangeeta, used to frequent her house at Panch Dehriya, where Sangeeta Bai used to live and
appellant used to dislike such frequenting of Badri to the house of Sangeeta Bai.
12/ It has been seen that there are discrepancies in court statements and police statements of Gopal
Singh (PW-5) and Sanjay (PW-6). The dying declaration of deceased were recorded at Shujalpur by
Smt. Asha Parmar (PW-11), who was posted as Naib Tehsildar at Shujalpur on 22.8.2006. The
witness states that she had received a letter from Shujalpur police seeking to record the dying
declaration of Sangeeta Bai. She states that she arrived at Shujalpur hospital and recorded the dying
declaration in question and answer form as per Ex.P/12. This she recorded after obtaining certificate
by Dr. K.K. Joshi (PW-8) that the victim was in fit state of mind to make statements. She has not
narrated as to what questions were asked and what answers were given, for that Ex.P/12 would have
to be seen. In Ex.P/12 Sangeeta Bai has stated that she was set on fire by her husband after pouring
kerosene oil over her. She has been asked the reason for the same, to this question she has replied
that appellant was quarrelling with her from the previous night as she had asked for 10 Rupees from
him for purchasing rubber and clip but appellant declined and started assaulting her. She has
further been asked as to whether she was tried to be rescued by someone? She answers that it was
appellant Devkaran who had tried to rescue her and that neighbours had come to the spot on
hearing her shrieks. She has been asked as to whether she wants to say anything else? To this she
answers that she is wife of Devkaran by Natra and as per such contract she was to be given
Rs.15,000/- which were collected by her brother-in-law Badri Prasad and then the appellant bought
buffalo from Badri Prasad for Rs.9,000/- but this money was never paid by appellant to Badri
Prasad and quarrel used to ensue on this ground.
13/ On the top of dying declaration (Ex.P/12) there is remark by the concerned doctor that Sangeeta
Bai is in fit state of mind to give her statements. This remark has been written by Dr. K.K. Joshi
(PW-8), who admits that he had made such statements. In cross-examination he admits that he has
not written about the general condition of Sangeeta Bai but has stated in examination-in-chief that
the extent of burn injuries was 60 to 70%.
14/ There is no reason to controvert the certificate given by doctor that Sangeeta Bai was in fit state
of mind to make statements. Suggestion is being given to Naib Tehsildar Smt. Asha Parmar (PW-11)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145231910/ 5
Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
that Sangeeta Bai was in fact unconscious and this suggestion has been denied by her. She
categorically states in cross-examination that when she was recording statements, she had asked the
family members of Sangeeta Bai to go out of the room.
15/ Thus, there is no dispute regarding the fact that Sangeeta Bai was in fit state of mind to give her
dying declaration and it is also apparent that the dying declaration was recorded by Naib Tehsildar
Smt. Asha Parmar (PW-11) in question-answer form, in which the victim levelled allegations against
the appellant as the one who had poured kerosene oil over her and set her ablaze.
16/ The witness Smt. Asha Parmar (PW-11) has also stated that she had recorded the dying
declaration of appellant Devkaran as well, as per Ex.P/13. The format of examination of Devkaran
was also in question-answer form. As per Ex.P/13 the appellant had stated that Sangeeta had in fact
poured kerosene oil over him and it was Sangeeta who had set him ablaze and then she had poured
kerosene oil over herself and set herself also ablaze. Thereafter he was asked as to why both of them
had got burnt? To this the witness replies that at around 12 p.m. Sangeeta Bai had asked him to give
10 Rupees for purchasing rubber and clip, to this Devkaran told her to get these items from the
money which he had given to her a day before. To this Sangeeta Bai told him that if he cannot bear
her expenses, then why she was brought at all by him and that she does not want to stay with him
and then she went inside the house before Chander and Kailash and she bolted the front door of the
lower storey of the house and went upstairs and set herself on fire. Then appellant was made to
climb over by Chander and Kailash and then Devkaran tried to douse the fire and save her but got
burnt in that process. Further question has been asked as to whether both had entered into a
quarrel? To this Devkaran has stated that there was no quarrel but there was some altercation. He
has further been asked as to whether there was dispute relating to money? The appellant replies that
there was no dispute and that he had volunteered to pay back Natra money from selling of Soyabeen
crop. He has been asked as to whether he want to say anything else? To this he replies that his wife
did not want to stay any more in his house. The aforesaid statements have also been preceded by
certificate from Dr. K.K. Joshi (PW-8), who has stated that he had given certificate that Devkaran
was in fit state of mind to depose.
17/ As far as the admissibility of statements of Devkaran is concerned, clearly such statements
cannot be considered to be dying declaration because the appellant has survived the injuries.
However, the statements made to Naib Tehsildar and not to police, do not suffer from the
restrictions of Section 162 Cr.P.C. because these are not statements made to police under Section 161
Cr.P.C. Hence, these statements are nevertheless admissible.
18/ Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Ramprasd Vs. State of Maharashtra [(1999) 5 SCC 30] has
laid down that although the dying declaration of the injured who survives, cannot be considered to
be the dying declaration admissible under Section 32 of Evidence Act but it would be included as a
former statement made by a witness relating to the same fact and can be used for corroborating or
contradicting the testimony of such a witness. The relevant paras are excerpted as under:-
"15. Be that as it may, the question is whether the Court could treat it as an item of
evidence for any purpose. Section 157 of the Evidence Act permits proof of any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145231910/ 6
Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
former statement made by a witness relating to the same fact before "any authority
legally competent to investigate the fact" but its use is limited to corroboration of the
testimony of such a witness. Though a police officer is legally competent to
investigate, any statement made to him during such an investigation cannot be used
to corroborate the testimony of a witness because of the clear interdict contained in
Section 162 of the Code. But a statement made to a Magistrate is not affected by the
prohibition contained in the said section. A Magistrate can record the statement of a
person as provided in Section 164 of the Code and such a statement would either be
elevated to the status of Section 32 if the maker of the statement subsequently dies or
it would remain within the realm of what it was originally. A statement recorded by a
Magistrate under Section 164 becomes usable to corroborate the witness as provided
in Section 157 of the Evidence Act or to contradict him as provided in Section 155
thereof.
16. In Maqsoodan v. State of U.P. [(1983) 1 SCC 218] a three- Judge Bench of this
Court has stated the legal position thus: (SCC p. 223, para 11) "11. When a person who
has made a statement, may be in expectation of death, is not dead, it is not a dying
declaration and is not admissible under Section 32 of the Evidence Act. In the instant
case, the makers of the statements Exts. Ka-22 and Ka-23, are not only alive but they
deposed in the case. Their statements, therefore, are not admissible under Section
32; but their statements however are admissible under Section 157 of the Evidence
Act as former statements made by them in order to corroborate their testimony in
court."
19/ The prosecution has exhibited the statements recorded by appellant Devkaran, thereby
admitting to the fact that Devkaran was also injured in the process. The witnesses Chander Singh
(PW-2), Amar Singh (PW-3) and Kailash (PW-4) all have stated that the appellant had entered the
house to save his wife. The aforesaid statements stand corroborated by statements made by
Devkaran as per Ex.P/13. Vice-versa the statements in Ex.P/13 have been corroborated by Chander
Singh (PW-2), Amar Singh (PW-3) and Kailash (PW-4).
20/ From conjoint reading of the dying declaration of Sangeeta Bai and statements Ex.P-13 of
Devkaran, one common thread which emerges is that there was indeed an altercation prior to the
incident between Sangeeta Bai and Devkaran which ultimately led to engulfment of Sangeeta Bai in
flames. While Sangeeta Bai has stated that she was set ablaze by appellant, the appellant states that
it was Sangeeta Bai only who herself had set on fire and that appellant had got burnt in the process
of saving her. As already seen, appellant's story has been corroborated by Chander Singh (PW-2),
Amar Singh (PW-3) and Kailash (PW-4). Out of them Chander Singh (PW-2) and Amar Singh
(PW-3) have also been named by the appellant in Ex.P/13 purporting to be his dying declaration.
21/ It has already been found that the story of dying declaration made by Sangeeta Bai to Gopal
Singh (PW-5) and Sanjay (PW-6) suffers from contradictions and omissions, as far as the court
deposition of the witnesses and their police statements are concerned. As far as Binda Bai (PW-7) is
concerned, she has stated that the dying declaration was made to her by her daughter Sangeeta Bai
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145231910/ 7
Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
at Bhopal. However, there is no statement recorded by the investigating officer or any doctor at
Bhopal, who would have described the condition of Sangeeta Bai when she was admitted at Bhopal.
The only medical specialist is Dr. Arnit Arora (PW-15) who had conducted the postmortem
examination of Sangeeta Bai on 25.8.2006 and had found that the death was due to burn injuries
sustained by her and complications thereof, resulting in stoppage of her heart. The report is Ex.P/20
carrying signatures of the witness at A to A part. In absence of any evidence as to the general
condition of Sangeeta Bai, the statements of Binda Bai (PW-7) become doubtful. In her police
statements (Ex.D/3) she has made no such statement that Sangeeta Bai had given any statement to
her.
22/ Thus, the only evidence against the appellant is the dying declaration of Sangeeta Bai made to
Smt. Asha Parmar, Naib Tehsildar (PW-11). As far as the sanctity of dying declaration is concerned,
the general perception is that a dying person would be speaking the truth. Matthew Arnold in a very
old English case Lyre LCR InRe Vs. Woodstock [(1789) 1 Leach 500] expounded upon the latin
principle of nemo moriturus praesumitur mentire, which broadly translated would mean that truth
sits on the lips of a dying person. Section 32 of the Evidence Act specifies that such dying
declarations are admissible and can be relied upon even for convicting the accused persons.
However, the Apex Court, in its various judgments, has held that before convicting the accused only
on the basis of dying declaration, the Court must act with prudence and due caution and care. The
locus classicus in this regard is Khushal Rao Vs. State of Bombay [AIR 1958 SC 22], in which the
Hon'ble Apex Court has held as under:-
"16. On a review of the relevant provisions of the Evidence Act and of the decided
cases in the different High Courts in India and in this Court, we have come to the
conclusion, in agreement with the opinion of the Full Bench of the Madras High
Court, aforesaid, (1) that it cannot be laid down as an absolute rule of law that a dying
declaration cannot form the sole basis of conviction unless it is corroborated; (2) that
each case must be determined on its own facts keeping in view the circumstances in
which the dying declaration was made; (3) that it cannot be laid down as a general
proposition that a dying declaration is a weaker kind of evidence than other pieces of
evidence; (4) that a dying declaration stands on the same footing as another piece of
evidence and has to be judged in the light of surrounding circumstances and with
reference to the principles governing the weighing of evidence; (5) that a dying
declaration which has been recorded by a competen magistrate in the proper manner,
that is to say, in the form of questions and answers, and, as far as practicable, in the
words of the maker of the declaration, stands on a much higher footing than a dying
declaration which may suffer from all the infirmities of human memory and human
character, and (6) that in order to test the reliability of a dying declaration, the Court
has to keep in view, the circumstances like the opportunity of the dying man for
observation, for example, whether there was sufficient light if the crime was
committed at night; whether the capacity of the man to remember the facts stated,
had not been impaired at the time he was making the statement, by circumstances
beyond his control; that the statement has been consistent throughout if he had
several opportunities of making a dying declaration apart from the official record of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145231910/ 8
Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
it; and that the statement had been made at the earliest opportunity and was not the
result of tutoring by interested parties."
23/ Thus, the Court has caution that if the order test the reliability of dying declaration, the Court
has to keep in view the circumstances :-
"17. Hence, in order to pass the test of reliability, a dying declaration has to be
subjected to a very close scrutiny, keeping in view the fact that the statement has
been made in the absence of the accused who had no opportunity of testing the
veracity of the statement by cross- examination. But once, the Court has come to the
conclusion that the dying declaration was the truthful version as to the circumstances
of the death and the assailants of the victim, there is no question of further
corroboration.
If, on the other hand, the Court, after examining the dying declaration in all its
aspects, and testing its veracity, has come to the conclusion that it is not reliable by
itself, and that it suffers from an infirmity, then, without corroboration it cannot form
the basis of a conviction. Thus, the necessity for corroboration arises not from any
inherent weakness of a dying declaration as a piece of evidence, as held in some of the
reported cases, but from the fact that the Court, in a given case, has come to the
conclusion that that particular dying declaration was not free from the infirmities,
referred to above or from such other infirmities as may be disclosed in evidence in
that case."
24/ Further in the case of Panchdeo Singh Vs. State of Bihar [AIR 2002 SC 526] it has been held
that if there is some infirmity, howsoever negligible it be, the court unless satisfied with the
credibility thereof, ought to look for some corroboration. The relevant Para 3 is excerpted as under:-
"3. One of the latest pronouncement of this Court pertaining to the subject find place
in the decision of Arvind Singh v. State of Bihar (J.T. (2001) 5 SCC 127) wherein, this
court observed that apart from the care and caution factors as noticed earlier the
dying declaration ought otherwise to be treated as trustworthy. The issue thus
becomes as to whether the dying declaration has been able to bring about a
confidence thereon or not - is it trustworthy or it is a mere attempt to cover up the
latches of investigation: it must allure to the satisfaction of the court that reliance
ought to be placed thereon rather than a distrust: The confidence of the court is the
summum bonum and in the event of there being any affirmation thereto in the
judicial mind, question of any disbelieve or distrust would not arise. In the event
however of there being some infirmity, howsoever, negligible it be, the Court unless
otherwise satisfied about the credibility thereof, ought to look for some
corroboration, if however it is otherwise, question of requirement of a corroboration
would not arise: dying declaration alluring confidence of the court would be a
sufficient piece of evidence to sustain conviction. There is no format as such of dying
declaration neither the declaration need be of any longish nature and neatly
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145231910/ 9
Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
structured. As a matter of fact, perfect wording and neatly structured dying
declaration may bring about an adverse impression and create a suspicion in the
mind of the court since dying declarations need not be drawn with mathematical
precision - the declarant should be able to recollect the situation resulting in the
available state of affairs."
25/ Going further in the case of Tapinder Singh Vs. State of Punjab and another [1970(2) SCC 113],
the relevant para is Para-5 of the aforesaid judgment which is excerpted as under:-
"5. The dying declaration is a statement by a person as to the cause of his death or as
to any of the circumstances of the transaction which resulted in his death and it
becomes relevant under Section 32(1) of the Indian Evidence Act in a case in which
the cause of that person's death comes into question. It is true that a dying
declaration is not a deposition in court and it is neither made on oath nor in the
presence of the accused. It is, therefore, not tested by cross-examination on behalf of
the accused. But a dying declaration is admitted in evidence by way of an exception to
the general rule against the admissibility of hearsay evidence, on the principle of
necessity. The weak points of a dying declaration just mentioned merely serve to put
the court on its guard while testing its reliability, by imposing on it an obligation to
closely scrutinise all the relevant attendant circumstances.........................."
26/ As already found, the statements of appellant that he had entered the house on seeing fire in the
upper storey of the house and had tried to save his wife Sangeeta Bai, has been corroborated by two
other prosecution witnesses. In view of such discordant evidence between the dying declaration and
the aforesaid available evidence, it would be appropriate to look for further corroborative piece of
evidence available on record.
27/ Dwarika Sharma (PW-13) is the investigating officer, who had drawn the spot map (Ex.P/16)
and had collected a plastic bag and another plastic bag containing bra of Sangeeta Bai as well as a
burnt yellow colour blouse. The witness states that the seized items had been sent to FSL and the
FSL report is Ex.P/17. A perusal of spot map s(Ex.P/16) does not show any vessel/tumbler carrying
kerosene oil. However the seizure memo (Ex.P/14) shows recovery of a plastic bag which has been
found to be singed at various places and as per FSL report (Ex.P/17) it is this half burnt plastic bag
(Article A) in which traces of kerosene oil have been found, meaning thereby that the kerosene oil
was in fact kept in plastic bag. As per FSL report (Ex.P/17) kerosene oil traces were also found on
the bra and blouse of Sangeeta Bai. This shows that kerosene oil had already been kept in the room
in plastic bag, which was used for enflaming the deceased. The extent of burn injuries on Devkaran
are also quite extensive i.e. up to 35% showing overt act on his part to save Sangeeta Bai. Coupled
with the aforesaid facts, the statements of appellant Devkaran supported by prosecution witnesses
Chander Singh (PW-2) and Amar Singh (PW-3) land credence to the defence story that Devkaran
was helped by these witnesses to climb the upper storey of the house to save Sangeeta Bai and in the
process Devkaran suffered injuries while trying to douse the fire. The incident had occurred in the
day time and it does not appear that the witnesses Chander Singh (PW-2), Amar Singh (PW-3) and
Kailash (PW-4) are planted witnesses or chance witnesses. It does appears that the already running
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145231910/ 10
Devkaran vs State Of M.P. on 18 August, 2021
dispute between Sangeeta Bai and Devkaran had assumed serious proportions just prior to the time
of incident. However, it has not been proven that appellant had doused his wife Sangeeta Bai in
kerosene oil and had set her ablaze. The dying declaration requires corroboration in this particular
case but lacks in this regard.
28/ After duly considering the evidence on record, we are of the considered view that the
prosecution has not been able to prove beyond reasonable doubt that it was appellant who had set
Sangeeta Bai abalze and committed her murder. Consequently his conviction and sentence under
Section 302 IPC is set aside. The appeal stands allowed. The appellant, if is in jail, be released
forthwith.
29/ Let a copy of this judgment along with original record be sent to the trial Court for compliance.
30/ The disposal of the property shall be as per the order of trial Court.
(Vivek Rusia) (Shailendra Shukla)
Judge Judge
Trilok/-
Date: 2021.08.18 17:32:53 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145231910/ 11
