Dhruv Saxena vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Dhruv Saxena vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Author: Vivek Varma
Bench: Vivek Varma
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:45027
Court No. - 69
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION U/S 482 BNSS No. - 554 of 2025
Applicant :- Dhruv Saxena
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Kamal Kaushal Upadhyay
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Vivek Varma,J.
1. Heard counsel for the applicant, learned AGA for the State and perused the material on record.
2. The applicant was granted interim anticipatory bail vide order dated 14.02.2025 by the
co-ordinate Bench of this Court. The order is quoted herein below;-
"1. Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned A.G.A for the State and perused
the record.
2. The instant Anticipatory Bail Application has been filed with a prayer to grant an
anticipatory bail to the applicant in Case Crime No. 497 of 2024, under Section 409
I.P.C, Police Station- Kotwali, District- Shahjahanpur.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171890413/ 1
Dhruv Saxena vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
3. Learned counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant is innocent and has
been falsely implicated in the present case due to ulterior motive. Applicant is retired
from the post of Wasil Vaki Navis (AWVN) in the year 2021. From perusal of FIR, no
offence under alleged section is made out against the applicant. Investigation is going
on. No charge-sheet has been submitted. Applicant has no criminal history to his
credit. In case, applicant is granted anticipatory bail, he would not misuse the liberty
of bail and would co-operate with the investigation. Applicant has definite
apprehension of his arrest by the police.
4. Learned AGA vehemently opposed the prayer for anticipatory bail of the applicant
with the contention that the applicant is not entitled for anticipatory bail as, prima
facie, case is made out.
5. Learned AGA is granted four week's time to file counter affidavit. Rejoinder
affidavit, if any, may be filed within two weeks thereafter.
6. List this case after six weeks.
7. As an interim protection, till the next date of listing fixed for hearing on this
application, the applicant is granted anticipatory bail in the aforesaid case crime
number. In the event of arrest, the applicant shall be released on interim anticipatory
bail on furnishing a personal bond of Rs. 50,000/- with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the Station House Officer of the police station
concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) The applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by the police officer as
and when required;
(ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade from
disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer;
(iii) The applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court
and if applicant has passport, the same shall be deposited before the
S.S.P./S.P./C.P./A.C.P concerned.
(iv) The applicant shall not tamper with the evidence during the trial.
(v) The applicant shall not pressurize/intimidate the prosecution witness.
(vi) The applicant shall appear before the trial court on each date fixed unless
personal presence is exempted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171890413/ 2
Dhruv Saxena vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
8. In default of any of the conditions, the Investigating Officer/Govt. Advocate/concerned court is at
liberty to file appropriate application for cancellation of anticipatory bail granted to the applicant."
3. Counsel for the applicant contends that the applicant has been falsely implicated in the instant
case. The relevant records were not handed to the applicant at any point of time. The applicant had
retired in the year 2021. The applicant has been made scapegoat for the alleged incident. At this
stage there is no credible evidence to link the applicant with the offence. Pursuant to the interim
anticipatory bail, the applicant is co-operating in the investigation. The applicant has no criminal
antecedents. In case, the applicant is released on anticipatory bail, till the conclusion of trial he will
not misuse the said liberty.
4. Learned A.G.A. has opposed the prayer for anticipatory bail but could not satisfactorily dispute
the aforesaid submissions from the record.
5. Having regard to the submissions made by counsel for the applicant, considering the nature of
accusations, antecedents of the applicant, no adverse material has been produced by the learned
AGA, no violation of conditions or misuse of liberty of interim anticipatory bail has been pointed out
by learned A.G.A., without commenting on merits of the case, I am of the opinion that the applicant
is entitled to be enlarged on anticipatory bail.
6. In the event of arrest, the applicant Dhruv Saxena, involved in the aforesaid case crime be
released on anticipatory bail during pendency of trial, on furnishing a personal bond of Rs. 50,000/-
with two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned with the
following conditions:-
(i) The applicant shall co-operate with the Investigating Officer during investigation
and shall report to the Investigating Officer as and when required for the purpose of
conducting investigation;
(ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade them
from disclosing such facts to the court or to any police officer;
(iii) The applicant shall not leave the country during the currency of trial without
prior permission from the concerned trial Court.
(iv) The applicant shall surrender his passport, if any, to the concerned Court
forthwith. His passport will remain in custody of the concerned Court.
(v) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any
adjournment on the dates fixed for evidence and the witnesses are present in court.
(vi) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the trial court on the dates
fixed for (i) opening of the case, (ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171890413/ 3
Dhruv Saxena vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
under Section 351 of B.N.S.S.
7. In default of any of the conditions, the court concerned is at liberty to pass appropriate orders for
enforcing and compelling the same.
8. The application stands disposed of.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 Manish Kr
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/171890413/ 4
