Dibakar Sethi vs State Of Orissa on 5 February, 2024
Dibakar Sethi vs State Of Orissa on 5 February, 2024
Author: G. Satapathy
Bench: G. Satapathy
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRLA NO.469 of 2006
(In the matter of application under Section 374(2) of
the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973.).
Dibakar Sethi .... Appellant
-versus-
State of Orissa .... Respondent
For Appellant : Mr. R. Sahoo, Advocate
For Respondent : Mr. M.S. Rizvi, ASC
CORAM:
JUSTICE G. SATAPATHY
DATE OF HEARING :13.11.2023
DATE OF JUDGMENT:05.02.2024
G. Satapathy, J.
1. This appeal by the convict assails the judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated
27.10.2006 passed by the learned Special Judge (Vigilance), Berhampur, Ganjam in G.R. Case No.7
of 1995 (V) convicting the convict for offences U/Ss.7/ 13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (in short the "Act") and sentencing him to undergo Rigorous
Imprisonment (RI) for six months with fine of Rs.1,000/- in default whereof, to undergo RI for
three months more for offence U/S.7 of the Act and to undergo RI for one year with fine of
Rs.2,000/- in default whereof, to undergo RI for six months more for offence U/S.13(1)(d) read with
Section 13(2) of the Act with stipulation of the sentences to run concurrently.
2. Briefly stated, the convict-Dibakar Sethi was working as a Record Keeper in the Tahasil Office,
Borigumma and on 14.03.1995, the complainant Anamu Amanatya of Sunarbeli Nuagaon had
applied for the certified copy of Record of Right (ROR) of his brother-in-law, but the convict
demanded bribe of Rs.50/- for supplying the same. Finding no way out, the complainant PW1-
Anamu Amanatya approached the DSP, Vigilance, Jeypore with an FIR under Ext.1 and,
accordingly, Berhampur Vigilance PS Case No.7 of 1995 was registered and the DSP, Vigilance
PW9-Rama Kanta Sahu was asked to lay the trap. Accordingly, PW9 successfully laid the trap on
22.03.1995 by successfully requisitioning independent official witnesses and observing the
formalities of the trap and the convict was caught red-handed while demanding and accepting bribe
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123450771/ 1
Dibakar Sethi vs State Of Orissa on 5 February, 2024
of Rs.50/- from PW1 and the tainted money was recovered from his official table. After transaction
of the bribe, PW9 caught hold the convict and took his both hand washes in sodium carbonate
solution and the tainted money recovered from the convict was tallied with the numbers noted
earlier in the preparatory meeting and the same was seized. On successful completion of the
detection, PW9 prepared a detection report in presence of all the witnesses and, thereafter,
forwarded the convict to the Court after arresting him.
3. PW9 also continued with the investigation in the course of which he examined the witnesses, sent
the hand washes of the convict collected in separate bottles duly labeled and sealed at the time of
trap to Forensic Laboratory for chemical examination and he after obtaining sanction order against
the convict, submitted charge-sheet against him for commission of offences U/Ss.7/13(1)(d) read
with Section 13(2) of the Act resulting in the trial in the present case when the convict denied to the
charge for aforesaid offences.
4. In order to substantiate the charge, the prosecution examined 9 witnesses such as PWs.1 to 9,
proved certain documents under Ext.1 to 13 as well as identified material objects under MOI to V in
evidence as against the oral evidence of two witnesses DWs.1 and 2 and documentary evidence
under Exts.A and B by the defence. Of the witnesses examined by the prosecution, PW1-Anamu
Amanatya is the complainant and PW2-Basanta Kumar Tripathy is the accompany witness, whereas
PW3-Raj Kishore Padhy and PW7- Mohamad Abdul Jaleel are the two official witnesses to pre trap
arrangement, PW4-Sashibhusan Panda is the Vigilance-ASI who demonstrated pre trap
arrangement and PW5-Raghunath Das is another official witness who produced the official files of
the convict before the Collector for sanction. PW6-Raghu Amanatya is the brother-in-law of PW1,
whereas PW8-Surasen Jani is another official witness to the trap, who had tallied the GC notes soon
after the trap and lastly, PW9-Rama Kanta Sahu is the Trap Laying Officer-IO.
5. The plea of the convict in the course of trial was denial simplicitor and false implication as well as
complainant paying Rs.50/- voluntarily towards donation for Red Cross.
6. After appreciating the evidence on record upon hearing the parties, the learned trial Court by
mainly relying upon the evidence of PWs. 1, 2 and 8 convicted the appellant and sentenced him to
the punishment accordingly.
7. In assailing the impugned judgment of conviction, Mr. R. Sahoo, learned counsel for the appellant
has submitted that the learned trial Court has not appreciated the evidence on record in proper
perspective by erroneously discarding the plea of the convict, but the evidence clearly suggests for
justification of plea of the convict. It is also submitted by him that the prosecution has not only
failed to prove the demand and acceptance of bribe by the convict, but it has also failed to clarify as
to why the decoy would be aggrieved because the real issue of allegation involved in this case was for
supply of certified copy of ROR to PW6 who in his evidence had not at all supported the prosecution,
rather it is his specific evidence that he had applied for a copy of Pata (ROR) and the convict gave
the copy of such ROR as per his application, but when he was coming back, one Anamu Amanatya
called him and told him to stay for some time. It is also advanced for the convict that the learned
trial Court has failed to take note of the glaring contradictions available in the evidence of PWs.1 and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123450771/ 2
Dibakar Sethi vs State Of Orissa on 5 February, 2024
6 and, thereby, the very foundation of the case is on erroneous premises. It is further submitted that
as per the FIR story, the certified copy of ROR was applied for on 14.03.1995 on which date the first
demand was made, but as per the evidence, the actual application was made on 21.03.1995, and thus
there was no scope for demand on 14.03.1995 and, therefore, the genesis of prosecution case is
untrue. While summing up his argument, Mr. Sahoo learned counsel for the appellant has prayed to
allow the appeal by setting aside the impugned judgment of conviction and order of sentence by
acquitting the convict of the charge.
On the other hand, Mr. M.S. Rizvi, learned ASC has, however, supported the impugned judgment of
conviction and he inter-alia has submitted that not only the prosecution has established the proof of
demand and acceptance of bribe by the convict, but in addition, the convict was found to be caught
red handed, while accepting the bribe and thus, the acceptance of the bribe by the convict having
been well established. It is further submitted that the plea of the convict being found corroborating
the acceptance of bribe, which is further strengthened for the convict having failed to discharge the
burden of statutory presumption U/S.20 of the Act, the findings of the learned trial Court convicting
the convict for demanding and accepting the bribe and sentencing him to appropriate punishment
require no interference. Accordingly, Mr. Rizvi has prayed to dismiss the appeal.
8. After having carefully traversed the impugned judgment keeping in view the rival submissions
and re-appreciation of evidence on record, it is indisputedly found that the currency notes were
recovered from the possession of the convict as he had consistently taken the plea that he had
received Rs.50/- towards Red Cross fund which is very much available in the detection report under
Ext.2. The convict has also reiterated such plea in his statement U/S.313 of Cr.P.C. as well as also led
evidence to that effect by examining two defence witnesses such as DWs. 1 & 2. Law is, however, well
settled that mere recovery of tainted money from the convict divorced from the circumstance under
which it was paid is not sufficient to constitute the offence U/Ss.7/13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of
the Act, when the substantive evidence is not reliable. In the above context, it is profitable to refer to
the decision in K. Santhamma vs. State of Telangana; AIR 2022 SC 1134, wherein the Hon'ble Apex
Court has allowed the appeal by setting aside the judgment of conviction of the appellant therein by
quoting the observation made by the Apex Court at paragraph-23 in P. Satyanarayana Murthy vs.
District Inspector of Police, State of Andhra Pradesh and another; (2015) 10 SCC 152 with approval,
which reads as under :-
"23.The proof of demand of illegal gratification, thus, is the gravamen of the offence
U/S. 7 and 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act and in absence thereof, unmistakably the
charge therefore, would fail. Mere acceptance of any amount allegedly by way of
illegal gratification or recover thereof, dehors the proof of demand, ipso facto, would
thus not sufficient to bring home the charge under these two sections of the Act. As a
corollary, failure of the prosecution to prove the demand for illegal gratification
would be fatal and mere recovery of the amount from the person accused of the
offence Under Section 7 or 13 of the Act would not entail his conviction thereunder."
9. In N. Sunkanna v. State of Andhra Pradesh; 2016 (I) OLR (SC) 8, it has been held by the Apex
Court that:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123450771/ 3
Dibakar Sethi vs State Of Orissa on 5 February, 2024
"mere possession and recovery of the currency notes from the accused without proof
of demand will not bring home the offence under Section 7 of the Act, since demand
of illegal gratification is sine-qua- non to constitute the said offence".
10. In Khaleel Ahmed v. State of Karnataka; (2016) 63 OCR (SC) 150, the Apex Court has reiterated
the aforesaid principle in Paragraph-24 as under:
"In the instant case the prosecution has failed to discharge its burden to establish
that the appellant demanded illegal gratification beyond reasonable doubt. The
testimony of the complainant raises considerable doubt in the prosecution version,
and two views of the matter are possible, and therefore the benefit of the doubt must
go to the appellant. Accordingly, we hold that demand of illegal gratification by the
appellant is not proved in the instant case".
11. Moreover, very recently in Neeraj Dutta v. State (Government of NCT of Delhi); (2023) 4 SCC
731, a constitutional Bench of the Apex Court has recorded its conclusion in the context at
Paragraph-88 of the decision which is extracted as under:
88. What emerges from the aforesaid discussion is summarized as under:
88.1. (a) Proof of demand and acceptance of illegal gratification by a public servant as
a fact in issue by the prosecution is a sine qua non in order to establish the guilt of the
accused public servant under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act.
88.2. (b) In order to bring home the guilt of the accused, the prosecution has to first
prove the demand of illegal gratification and the subsequent acceptance as a matter
of fact. This fact in issue can be proved either by direct evidence which can be in the
nature of oral evidence or documentary evidence. 88.3.(c) Further, the fact in issue,
namely the proof of demand and acceptance of illegal gratification can also be proved
by circumstantial evidence in the absence of direct oral and documentary evidence.
88.4.(d) In order to prove the fact in issue, namely, the demand and acceptance of
illegal gratification by the public servant, the following aspects have to be borne in
mind:
(i) if there is an offer to pay by the bribe-
giver without there being any demand from the public servant and the latter simply accepts the offer
and receives the illegal gratification, it is a case of acceptance as per Section 7 of the Act.
In such a case, there need not be a prior demand by the public servant.
(ii) On the other hand, if the public servant makes a demand and the bribe-giver accepts the demand
and tenders the demanded gratification which in turn is received by the public servant, it is a case of
obtainment. In the case of obtainment, the prior demand for illegal gratification emanates from the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123450771/ 4
Dibakar Sethi vs State Of Orissa on 5 February, 2024
public servant. This is an offence under Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and
(ii) of the Act.
(iii) In both cases of (i) and (ii) above, the offer by the bribe-giver and the demand by the public
servant respectively have to be proved by the prosecution as a fact in issue. In other words, mere
acceptance or receipt of an illegal gratification without anything more would not make it an offence
under Section 7 or Sections 13(1)(d),(i) and (ii), respectively of the Act.
Therefore, under Section 7 of the Act, in order to bring home the offence, there must be an offer
which emanates from the bribe- giver which is accepted by the public servant which would make it
an offence. Similarly, a prior demand by the public servant when accepted by the bribe-giver and in
turn there is a payment made which is received by the public servant, would be an offence of
obtainment under Sections 13(1)(d) and (i) and (ii) of the Act.
88.5. (e) The presumption of fact with regard to the demand and acceptance or obtainment of an
illegal gratification may be made by a court of law by way of an inference only when the foundational
facts have been proved by relevant oral and documentary evidence and not in the absence thereof.
On the basis of the material on record, the court has the discretion to raise a presumption of fact
while considering whether the fact of demand has been proved by the prosecution or not. Of course,
a presumption of fact is subject to rebuttal by the accused and in the absence of rebuttal
presumption stands. 88.6. (f) In the event the complainant turns "hostile", or has died or is
unavailable to let in his evidence during trial, demand of illegal gratification can be proved by letting
in the evidence of any other witness who can again let in evidence, either orally or by documentary
evidence or the prosecution can prove the case by circumstantial evidence. The trial does not abate
nor does it result in an order of acquittal of the accused public servant.
88.7. (g) Insofar as Section 7 of the Act is concerned, on the proof of the facts in issue, Section 20
mandates the court to raise a presumption that the illegal gratification was for the purpose of a
motive or reward as mentioned in the said Section. The said presumption has to be raised by the
court as a legal presumption or a presumption in law. Of course, the said presumption is also subject
to rebuttal. Section 20 does not apply to Sections 13(1)(d)(i) and (ii) of the Act.
88.8. (h) We clarify that the presumption in law under Section 20 of the Act is distinct from
presumption of fact referred to above in sub-para 88.5(e), above, as the former is a mandatory
presumption while the latter is discretionary in nature.
12. In the aforesaid situation, the recovery of currency notes is not sufficient to bring home the
charge for the offences, but in order to sustain a conviction U/Ss.7/13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2)
of the Act, the prosecution has to objectively prove the necessary ingredients of demand and
acceptance of bribe by the accused. In this case, while adverting to the evidence of decoy PW1, it
appears from the very inception that he had applied for a copy of ROR of his land, to the Record
Keeper of Borigumma Tahasil(convict), but the consistent case of the prosecution is that the decoy
had applied for the copy of ROR of the land belonging to PW6. It is further transpired from his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123450771/ 5
Dibakar Sethi vs State Of Orissa on 5 February, 2024
evidence that the convict had demanded Rs.50/- from him for supplying the copy of ROR and he,
accordingly, approached the Vigilance. On coming to the relevant part of the evidence of PW1, it
further appears that he had not reiterated the demand of bribe by the convict in preparatory
meeting to the witnesses, who are the members of raiding party. It appears from his evidence that he
produced Rs.50/- in the shape of five Rs.10/- GC notes and all the five persons present in the
preparatory meeting noted down the numbers of GC notes and the GC notes were kept in his pocket
with instruction to hand over to the convict, but it was never stated by him in the evidence that he
has to pay the bribe money to the convict on demand. It is further transpired from the evidence of
PW1 that he and the accompanying witness went to the Tahasil office, but others stayed at a distance
of 200 meters from Borigumma Tahasil office and it was 1.30 PM and the convict was present there.
It is the specific evidence of PW1 that he enquired as to whether his ROR is ready, but the convict
also enquired from him whether he has brought the money and he (decoy) told yes and the convict
went for lunch and returned at 2 PM. It is also the evidence of PW1 that on his return, the convict
asked for money and he paid the tainted money to him and he counted the money and kept it in his
drawer and brought out the copy of ROR and, thereafter, the accompany witness gave the signal by
combing his head as per the previous instruction. What is most important is that PW1 has admitted
in cross examination that one Raghu Amanatya (PW6) actually had applied for a copy of ROR of his
land and he had merely accompanied him while giving the application and the said Raghu
Amanatya is the brother-in-law of his father-in-law. Yet another aspect of the evidence of PW1 is his
own admission that on 22.03.1995 he had been to the Vigilance Officer and four days earlier to it, he
had given an FIR to the Vigilance people and on 22.03.1995, he gave another written report to the
Vigilance officials and the second report was also written by Umesh Chandra Dewan.
13. A cumulative analysis of aforesaid facts and evidence of PW1, it not only appears to this Court
that the evidence of PW1 is not only being doubtful, but also not reliable in material aspect
inasmuch as he had never applied for copy of the ROR for himself, rather he had applied for the
copy of the ROR of PW6 as per the FIR, but in the evidence he had stated that he had applied ROR
for himself and the convict had demanded bribe. On the other hand, it is his own admission that
PW6 had applied for copy of the ROR in cross examination by signing the application and he had
merely accompanied him by giving the application. In this situation, why an officer would ask for
bribe to another person who has no work with him for doing anything nor was it the case that the
said person had given impression to do the work by influencing the public servant. It is also not
understood as to why PW1 had presented two FIRs and why the earlier FIR was suppressed, if at all
it was given by PW1. What is more important is that PW1 in his cross examination has admitted that
on 14.03.1995, he had been to the Tahasil Office to apply for the ROR, when Raghu (inadvertently
mentioned as Raghu instead of the convict in the evidence of PW1) demanded the bribe amount
from him, but Raghu was not present there. It, therefore, clearly appears that the evidence of PW1
with regard to demand of bribe by the convict on 14.03.1995 is not believable, especially when the
FIR story reveals that the convict had demanded bribe two days after 14.03.1995. Therefore, on
analysis of aforesaid evidence, this Court does not consider PW1 to be reliable witness. It is,
however, settled law that the evidence of decoy has to satisfy the twin test of reliability and
corroboration inasmuch as the complainant cannot be placed on any better footing than that of any
accomplice because he is paying the bribe for doing an act. It is, however, not disputed that the
evidence of accomplice is admissible in view of Section 133 of Indian Evidence Act and a conviction
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123450771/ 6
Dibakar Sethi vs State Of Orissa on 5 February, 2024
may lie only on the sole testimony of accomplice, but rule of prudence demands corroboration to the
testimony of accomplice in view of Illustration-(b) of Section 114 of Evidence Act which provides
that an accomplice is unworthy of credit, unless he is corroborated in material particulars. It is,
therefore, clear that if the testimony of decoy is found to be reliable, then also it is required to be
sufficiently corroborated.
14. Adverting to the evidence of other material witness, who in this case is PW2-Basanta Kumar
Tripathy who being the accompany witness is supposed to overhear the conversation between the
convict and decoy and to see the transaction of bribe between them at the relevant time. However,
PW2 in his evidence has stated that the Vigilance Officer explained to them that one staff of Tahasil
office was demanding bribe of Rs.50/- from the complainant, which does not satisfy the proof of
initial demand, since it being hearsay in nature and normally the complainant has to narrate his
grievance before the members of raiding party before proceeding to trap the convict. PW2 has then
stated that the complainant produced Rs.50/- consisting of five Rs.10/- GC notes to the Vigilance
Officer and then, the inspector of their office and the engineer witness noted down the numbers of
the notes on a separate paper and put their initials on the said notes as per the instruction of the
Vigilance Officer. It is the further evidence of PW2 that the tainted notes were given to the
complainant with instruction to keep it in his pocket and hand over the same to the convict when
demanded by the convict and he was given instruction to accompany the complainant to watch the
transaction and acceptance of bribe amount from the complainant by the convict-accused on his
demand. The evidence of PW2 on specific point of trap is that the complainant and the witness who
came with him, went to the office of convict, and others remained at a short distance from the
Tahasil office and it was 1.30 PM and the convict was going away from the office to take his lunch
and the complainant met him and enquired about his ROR and the convict told him to give the ROR
after his return from home. The specific evidence of PW2 with regard to the trap at the relevant time
is that at about 2.30 PM, the convict returned to office and he remained on the verandah of the
office and the complainant and "another witness" went inside the office of the convict and the
convict gave the ROR to the complainant and after receipt of ROR, the complainant gave the money
and then he(PW2) gave the signal and the Vigilance staff rushed to the spot. The aforesaid evidence
of PW2 does not reveal conspicuously any demand made by the convict for bribe just before the
payment of bribe of Rs.50/- to him, rather PW2 introduced one new "theory" that another person
who had come with the complainant had been to the office which was not the prosecution case and,
therefore, it can be surely said that the prosecution has also withhold some material facts in this
case because not only PW2 has stated about presence of another witness with the complainant, but
also the evidence of PW4 discloses the presence of PW6-Raghunath Amanatya in the raiding party.
Above being the evidence of important witnesses, this Court now embarks upon the evidence other
witnesses, like PW6-Raghu Amanatya who has not supported the prosecution case, but it appears
from the prosecution case that the convict had asked bribe of Rs.50/- from PW6 who had also
admitted in cross examination that no witness noted down the seized notes number in his presence.
The seizure notes were not tested in any solution in his presence. It is, therefore, very clear that the
prosecution has not been able to prove the demand of bribe by the convict from the decoy beyond all
reasonable doubt through admissible evidence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123450771/ 7
Dibakar Sethi vs State Of Orissa on 5 February, 2024
15. Yet, another point is that the learned trial Court has raised presumption U/S.20 of the Act
against the convict, but law is clearly well settled that to draw presumption U/S.20 of the Act, the
prosecution has to establish that the convict has not only demanded, but also accepted the bribe
from the complainant-decoy. Even otherwise, if the acceptance has not been established, the
presumption cannot be raised U/S.20 of the Act. It is no more res-integra that the initial burden of
establishing the demand and acceptance of bribe by the accused from the complainant is required to
be established before raising presumption U/S.20 of the Act and the prosecution is not relieved of
such duty. In other words, it is only when the initial burden regarding demand and acceptance of
illegal gratification is successfully discharged by the prosecution, the burden of discharging such
presumption shifts upon the defence to explain the money accepted by the convict is not the bribe or
is not accepted as illegal gratification towards motive or reward, since the proof of demand of illegal
gratification is the foundation of offence U/S.7 of the Act. It is also not in dispute that mere receipt
or recovery of the amount by the accused from the complainant without anything more is not
sufficient to fasten the guilt upon him in absence of any evidence of demand and acceptance of bribe
as a illegal gratification. Further, the statutory presumption raised U/S.20 of the Act can be
discharged by the defence in bringing evidence in support of him by examining defence witnesses or
by eliciting evidence from the mouth of prosecution witness in their cross examination. In this case,
there is absolutely no dispute with regard to recovery of some tainted GC notes from the convict, but
the specific plea of the convict is that he had received such amount towards Red Cross fund which is
also very clear from the detection report under Ext.2 which must have been prepared at the spot
immediate after detection of the case. Further, the detection report also discloses not only about
such plea of the convict, but also seizure of Red Cross receipt book bearing No.3504762350500 with
last receipt issued in favour of Mr. R.N. Nayak for Rs.10/- on 15.02.1995 and signed by the convict,
but the learned trial Court has whimsically and arbitrarily refused to consider the plea of the convict
as found from the judgment. The evidence of PW2, the overhearing witness in cross examination
also discloses that the complainant gave money by inserting the same in the chest pocket of the shirt
of the convict and by doing so, he informed him by nodding his(PW1) head and after which, he gave
prearrange signal. Further, the decoy has also admitted in cross examination that he does not know,
if the convict was in-charge of collection of Red Cross donation. Similarly, PW8 has also stated in
cross examination that on being asked, the convict told him that the complainant paid some money
towards donation to Red Cross society and the Vigilance Inspector also seized the Red Cross receipt
book and the convict also told the Vigilance Inspector that before drawing the receipt towards
payment of Red Cross donation, he(Vigilance Inspector) caught hold of his(convict) hand. However,
PW9, the IO-cum-TLO has denied to the suggestion of defence that the convict had taken the plea
that when he was going to grant a token of receipt of money on behalf of Red Cross, he was caught
hold off by the vigilance staff, but it is quite palpable from the detection report that the convict had
taken the plea that he was receiving the donation from the complainant.
16. From analysis of above evidence, it goes to show that the convict from the very beginning had
taken the plea of receiving the money towards Red Cross which he had reiterated in his statement
U/S.313 of Cr.P.C. as also brought out from the evidence of PW8. When the aforesaid evidence is
considered on the face of the evidence stated by PW9 in cross examination that he has not directed
investigation to ascertain, if the convict had been authorized by Red Cross Authorities to collect
donation, it only goes to show that the convict has established his plea on the touchstone of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123450771/ 8
Dibakar Sethi vs State Of Orissa on 5 February, 2024
preponderance of probabilities. On coming to the impugned judgment, it transpires that according
to the learned trial Court, PWs.4 and 7 to 9, the other official witnesses and officers of Vigilance
Department have categorically stated in their evidence that the convict had demanded bribe of
Rs.50/- from the decoy for supplying the certified copy of ROR, but such observation of the learned
trial Court appears to be in contrary to the evidence led by the prosecution since PW4 has stated
that the complainant and his brother-in-law Raghunath Amanatya disclosed before the official
witnesses that the Record Keeper of Borigumma Tahasil was demanding Rs.50/- as bribe, whereas
PW7 says that the complainant told before him and others that someone whose name he does not
know ask him to pay bribe of Rs.50/-. When the aforesaid evidence is compared and analyzed with
the evidence of PW2-overhearing witness, it unambiguously appears that PW2 has not at all said
about the initial demand disclosed by the complainant before him in the preparatory meeting before
proceeding to trap the convict and his admission in cross examination that the complainant inserted
the money in the pocket of the convict itself negates the demand of bribe by the convict. Further, the
evidence of PW9 also reveals that the official witnesses compared the numbers, but he being the
TLO-IO was supposed to reveal as to who was the official witness who had compared the numbers
recovered from the convict. In the aforesaid situation and analysis of evidence on record, it can be
safely said that the convict even otherwise has successfully discharged the presumption as raised
U/S.20 of the Act against him. In the sequence of events and taking into consideration the totality of
evidence on record, this Court also finds that the evidence led by the prosecution was not reliable or
of such character to act upon such evidence, but on the other hand, when the evidence on record is
considered, only proof of recovery of some tainted GC notes is found, which in the circumstance is
not sufficient to prove the charge against the convict in view of the dictum of Apex Court in Suraj
Mal vs. The State (Delhi Administration); (1979) 4 SCC 725, wherein it has been held that mere
recovery by itself cannot prove the charge of the prosecution against the appellant, in absence of any
evidence to prove payment of bribe or to show that appellant voluntarily accepted the money.
17. On a conspectus of evidence on record and discussion made hereinabove, this Court has no
hesitation to hold that the prosecution was unable to lead clear, cogent and acceptable evidence to
establish the charge against the convict beyond all reasonable doubt for demanding and accepting
bribe, so as to make him liable for offence U/Ss.7/13(1)(d) read with Section 13(2) of the Act and,
therefore, the conviction of the convict being unsustainable in the eye of law, the convict is entitled
to a clean acquittal.
18. In the result, the appeal stands allowed on contest, but no order as to cost. Consequently, the
judgment of conviction and order of sentence dated 27.10.2006 passed by the learned Special Judge
(Vigilance), Berhampur, Ganjam in G.R. Case No.7 of 1995 (V) are hereby set aside. The convict is
accordingly acquitted of the charge.
19. Since the convict is on bail upon appeal, he is discharged of his bail bonds.
(G. Satapathy) Judge Reason: Authentication Orissa High Court, Cuttack, Dated the 5th day of
February, 2024/Subhasmita Location: High Court of Orissa Date: 06-Feb-2024 14:57:25
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123450771/ 9
