Dikshit vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
Dikshit vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
Author: Vivek Varma
Bench: Vivek Varma
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:68024
Court No. - 69
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION U/S 482 BNSS No. - 3132 of 2025
Applicant :- Dikshit
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Rajeev Kumar Tiwari
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Vivek Varma,J.
1. Heard learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Raj Shekhar Srivastava, learned A.G.A. for the
State. Perused the material placed on record.
2. The present application has been filed with the prayer to grant anticipatory bail to the applicant in
Case Crime No.322 of 2024, under Sections 115(2), 352, 351(3), 110 B.N.S., P.S. Syohara, District
Bijnor.
3. Counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant has been falsely implicated in the present
case. As per the allegations in the first information report, the applicant along with three accused
are alleged to have assaulted the informant. As per the medical report the injuries sustained by the
injured were found simple in nature. Further, during the course of investigation, the applicant was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16595012/ 1
Dikshit vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
granted benefit of Section 35 B.N.S.S. Investigation has been completed. Charge-sheet has been
filed. The applicant had cooperated in the investigation. No custodial interrogation is required. The
applicant has been summoned by the concerned court. Counsel for applicant further contends that
the maximum sentence provided for the alleged offences is upto seven years. He submits that in
view of the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central
Bureau of Investigation and another, (2021) 10 SCC 773, the applicant is entitled to be enlarged on
anticipatory bail. The applicant has no criminal antecedents. The applicant has apprehension of his
arrest in the above mentioned case. In case, the applicant is released on anticipatory bail, he will not
misuse the said liberty.
4. Learned Brief Holder for the State opposed the prayer for anticipatory bail but could not
satisfactorily dispute the aforesaid submissions from the record.
5. The Supreme Court in the case of Satender Kumar Antil (supra) has laid down the guidelines with
regard to enlargement of an accused on bail. The guidelines provided category/type of offences. One
of the category being Category-A are offences punishable with imprisonment of seven years or less.
The Supreme Court in paragraph-3 of the aforesaid judgment has laid down the guidelines that after
the filing of the charge sheet/cognizance ordinary the summons are required to be issued permitting
the appearance of the accused through Lawyer and the bail applications of the accused persons on
appearance are to be decided without the accused being taken into custody or by granting interim
bail. A perusal of the aforesaid guidelines would demonstrate that the liberty of an individual has
been recognized by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgment in term of Article 21 of the
Constitution of India.
6. It is further to be noted that as per Section 35 B.N.S.S. also during investigation the liberty of an
individual is protected in respect of an offence where the maximum punishment provided is upto
seven years.
7. It is not the case of the opposite party that applicant was arrested for the alleged offences during
investigation and it is also not the case of the opposite party that the applicant had not co-operated
in the investigation. Once no apprehension has been raised with regard to the conduct of the
applicant and the applicant has been charge-sheeted and summoned in respect of offence in which
punishment provided is upto seven years, then in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Satender Kumar Antil (supra), the liberty of the individual is required to be protected.
8. It is not shown by learned AGA that the nature and gravity of allegations are such that the same
would dis-entitle the applicant for relief of anticipatory bail. No material, facts, circumstances or
concern been shown by learned AGA for the State that the accused may tamper with the evidence or
witnesses or accused is of such character that his mere presence at large would intimidate the
witnesses or that accused will use his liberty to subvert justice or tamper with the evidence.
9. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused. No
material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or thwarting
the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or intimidating
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16595012/ 2
Dikshit vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
witnesses and the like have been shown by learned AGA for the State.
10. Having regard to the submissions made by counsel for the applicants, considering the nature of
accusations, antecedents of the applicants and the fact that as per the medical report the injuries
sustained by the injured were found simple in nature, the fact that during the course of
investigation, the applicant was granted benefit of Section 35 B.N.S.S., the fact that the offences
against the applicant are punishable up to seven years and adhering to the guidelines provided in
the judgment of the Supreme Court in Satender Kumar Antil (supra), charge-sheet has been filed,
the applicant had cooperated in the investigation and no custodial interrogation is required, without
commenting on merits of the case, I am of the opinion that the applicant is entitled to be enlarged
on anticipatory bail.
11. In the event of arrest, the applicant- Dikshit be released on anticipatory bail during pendency of
trial, on furnishing a personal bond of Rs. 50,000/- with two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) the applicant shall make himself available on each date fixed in the matter by the
court concerned;
(ii) the applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade from
disclosing such facts to the Court;
(iii) the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court
and if he has passport the same shall be deposited by him before the concerned court.
12. In default of any of the conditions, the court concerned is at liberty to pass appropriate orders for
enforcing and compelling the same.
13. The application stands disposed of.
Order Date :- 30.4.2025 T.S.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16595012/ 3
