Dileepsingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 April, 2017
Dileepsingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 April, 2017
1
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH : BENCH AT INDORE
SINGLE BENCH : HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE S.C. SHARMA
WP No.910/2015
Sanjay Patidar
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.2420/2015
Guddu
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.2646/2015
Sonibai
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.4621/2015
Salakram
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.4622/2015
Shivram
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.4623/2015
Bhagiram
vs.
State of M.P
.
WP No.4624/2015
Yashwant
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.6674/2015
Abdul Majid
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.686/2016
Govind
vs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165124420/ 1
Dileepsingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 April, 2017
State of M.P.
WP No.688/2016
Omprakash
vs.
State of M.P.
2
WP No.747/2016
Mohan
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.796/2016
Pannalal
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.3949/2016
Kaluram
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.4258/2016
Mansingh
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.5818/2016
Bagsingh
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.6452/2016
Sitaram
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.7158/2016
Smt Gulab Bai Malviya
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.7920/2016
Devram
vs.
State of M.P.
WP No.1149/2017
Dileep Singh
vs.
State of M.P.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165124420/ 2
Dileepsingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 April, 2017
Mr B.A. Chitale, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Mr Vivek Patwa, learned counsel for the respondents No.2 and 3.
Mr Sunil Jain, Additional Advocate General for the respondents
State.
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
JUDGMENT
( Delivered on this 25th day of April, 2017 ) Regard being had to the similar controversy involved in
above cases, they have been heard analogously together with the consent of the parties and a
common order is being passed in the matter. Facts of WP No.910/2015 are narrated as under:-
02. The petitioner before this court has filed this present petition stating that he is
the owner of the Agriculturalist land situated at Khasra No. 105/1/2 in Gram
Bhawariya, Tehsil Kukshi, District Dhar admeasuring 2 hectares.
03. The petitioner's contention is that the Project Affected Family's (PAF), land is
situated within the submergence area of the Sardar Sarovar Project. The petitioner
himself in this writ petition has categorically stated that a notification was issued u/s
4 of the Land Acquisition Act, 1894 on 02-04-1993 for acquiring his agricultural land
and in some of the connected cases the petitioners are owners of Dwelling Houses.
An award was finally passed on 30-05-1996 and there is no reference in the writ
petition nor in the reply that a reference was made to the Collector or before the
District Judge. Meaning thereby, since 1996 to 2017 there are no proceedings under
the Land Acquisition Act before the Collector or before the District Judge.
04. Learned counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance upon a judgment delivered
in the case of Pune Municipal Corporation Vs. Harakchand Misirimal Solanki
reported in 2014(3) SCC 183 and his contention is that in light of Section 24(2) of the
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation
and Resettlement Act, 2013 ('the Act of 2013'), the entire acquisition goes and in case
State Government wants the possession of the land then in that case the State
Government will have to pass a fresh award and to pay compensation in terms of the
Act of 2013.
05. Shri Patwa at the outset has drawn the attention of this court towards the
judgment passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Narmada Bachao
Andolan Vs. Union of India and others in Writ Petition (C) No.328/2202 dated
08-02-2017, which reads as under :-
"We have heard this matter over a number of days. The instant exercise is being
carried out, so as to arrive at an equitable settlement, for the rehabilitation of the
'project affected families', consequent upon the implementation of the Sardar Sarovar
Project. The figures, which we will indicate in our order, may be treated as tentative.
It will be open to others similarly situate, to seek the same relief, by establishing their
credentials (before the Grievance Redressal Authority).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165124420/ 3
Dileepsingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 April, 2017
2. We are informed, that rehabilitation packages, had to be offered to 4998 'project affected families'
in the State of Madhya Pradesh. Out of these 'project affected families', 4774 families opted for the
'Special Rehabilitation Package', namely, they would accept cash payment as compensation, and
would purchase land out of the said payment. The aforestated payment was to be made in two
installments. The first installment would be spent as earnest money, and the second installment
would constitute the final payment for executing the sale deed. Out of the 4774 families, who had
opted for the 'Special Rehabilitation Package', 4264 families are stated to have accepted, both
installments. Out of the 4998 'project affected families', according to the learned Attorney General
(and the other learned counsel representing the concerned State Governments), 4264 have been
fully compensated. These 4264 'project affected families' are not entitled to any further
compensation.
3. Out of those, who had opted for the 'Special Rehabilitation Package', 386 families were extended
the first installment only, and could not be favoured with the second installment. They are
disputants before this Court. In addition to these disputants, there were 120 families, who did not
accept any money whatsoever, and another 4 families which were in litigation with reference to the
compensation payable. Calculated in terms of the figures, indicated hereinabove, 510 (386 + 120 +
4) 'project affected families', are still entitled to compensation, as they had not been extended full
compensation. This position has been acknowledged by the Union of India (as also, the concerned
State Governments).
4. Besides those who opted for the 'Special Rehabilitation Package', there were some families who
had sought land in lieu of land, and not cash payment, under the 'Special Rehabilitation Package'. In
fact, we are informed, there were 224 such families. Out of those 224 families, 53 families accepted
the land offered to them, without any objection. These 53 project affected families, according to the
learned Attorney General (and other learned counsel representing the concerned State
Governments), have been fully compensated, and as such, their claim cannot be treated as a
surviving claim. The remaining 171 families, have not been compensated, even though they are
'project affected families'. These 171 'project affected families' are admittedly entitled to their
rehabilitation claim.
5. Based on the figures, depicted in the foregoing two paragraphs, it is apparent, that 681 families
are yet to be extended compensation (510 'project affected families', which had originally opted for
the 'Special Rehabilitation Package' + 171 families which had claimed land in lieu of land).
6. During the course of our deliberations, it came to be accepted at one stage, that compensation to
these 681 families should be determined under the provisions of the Land Acquisition Act, 2013.
However, based on the suggestions made at the behest of the learned counsel for the applicants, that
the land value in the vicinity ranges from Rupees fifteen lakhs per hectare, to Rupees eighty lakhs
per hectare, we were of the view, that it would be more appropriate to finally determine the
compensation, here and now. The average suggested payment at the behest of the learned counsel
for the applicants would be in the range of Rupees thirty lakhs per hectare, and as such, every
affected family would be entitled to approximately, Rupees sixty lakhs, in terms of their entitlement
(for two hectares of land) as compensation. Mr. Mukul Rohatgi, learned Attorney General for India
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165124420/ 4
Dileepsingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 April, 2017
suggested, that the agreed figure be, fixed at Rupees forty five lakhs, in lieu of two hectares of land to
which they are entitled, and that, the matter be concluded here and now itself.
7. Having given our thoughtful consideration to the suggestions made at the behest of the learned
counsel for the rival parties, we are satisfied in directing the concerned authority, to pay
compensation to the 681 'project affected families', who have yet to receive compensation, and who
have been fully described above, at the rate of Rupees sixty lakhs per family, as a matter of full and
final settlement. An undertaking in this behalf should be obtained, before the amount of
compensation is released.
8. It is also apparent, that a large number of families, out of the 4264 families which had received
both installments, under the 'Special Rehabilitation Package', were duped. The number of duped
'project affected families', indicated in the Justice S.S. Jha Commission's Report, is 1358.
This number is affirmed by the learned Attorney General for India, and confirmed by the respective
State counsel. Referring to these 1358 families, the Jha Commission in its report of January, 2016,
had observed as under:
"(29) Poor oustees particularly tribals have been looted by middlemen. They have lost
their livelihood and are not daily wagers. Their installments have been siphoned off
by the middlemen. When oustees appeared before the Commission were not even
having clothes to wear. They have wrapped small cloth or towel round their waist
when they appeared before the Commission."
(emphasis is ours) It is in the above circumstances, that the Jha Commission recorded the following
conclusions, in its report:
"CONCLUSION
1. The reason for fake sale deeds is a faulty SRP policy of the Government. The
Government was not having sufficient irrigated agricultural lands in their Land
Banks near the R & R sites. The Policy itself is against Narmada Award, and the
judgment of the Supreme Court. Supreme Court has observed that the PAFs and
PAPs should live better life has been frustrated by this Policy.
(i). By not allowing any scrutiny of the sale deeds and free hand has been given to the
Rehabilitation Officers and Land Acquisition Officers in disbursing the compensation
which resulted into large number of fake sale deeds.
(ii) The free access to middlemen in the Office of NVDA in getting the money
withdrawn of the oustees also reflects about the interest of middlemen and nexus
with NVDA officials. Though evidence is not received against the NVDA officials all
the oustees have stated that they were made to sit outside the NVDA office and their
work was done by the middlemen and they were made to sign on the papers without
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165124420/ 5
Dileepsingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 April, 2017
explaining the contents discloses that NVDA officials had obtained signatures or
thumb impressions of the oustees without explaining the contents demonstrate
irregularity on their part and they are prima facie responsible for large number of
fake registries.
2. The quality of construction was very poor without any planning. No geographical mapping was
done before selecting the R & R sites whereby cultivable good black cotton soil is converted into
house building sites for residential plots. There was a faulty policy of not establishing a laboratory to
test the soil for carrying out constructions on the black cotton soil. The construction was done on the
R & R sites on common maps and designs of the building. Superior officers had never cared to visit
R & R sites to examine the construction work. The Government has found 40 engineers responsible
for substandard quality of construction, but has not cared to rectify the defect after finding the
substandard construction.
Most of the places the expenditure on construction has gone waste as the R & R sites are not
occupied by the oustees or they are occupied by very few PAPs and PAFs. Thus, the expenditure on
these sites is waste of money.
3. The NVDA has not maintained proper records relating to livelihood grants and alternative
livelihood which itself demonstrate that there was large scale corruption in the livelihood grants and
alternative livelihood.
The officers of NVDA involved in allotment of house plot sites have not followed the Rules framed
by the Government in allotting the plots. They have allotted the plots in an arbitrary matter and
usurp the power of changing the allotment which was not vested with them. Thus, this shows their
corrupt intention. Any arbitrary action attracts the vice of mala fide. The officers involved in
allotment of plots are wholly responsible or irregularities and corruption in allotment and change of
plots."
(emphasis is ours)
9. We are of the considered view, that even though the above-mentioned 1358 project affected
families were paid both installments, they need to be further compensated, so as to alleviate their
hardship, as they have not been able to purchase land in lieu of land, not because of their own fault
or lapse, but because they were duped. This would enable them to purchase alternative land at the
lesser rate suggested by the learned counsel for the applicants. It is in the above view of the matter,
that we hereby direct the concerned authorities, to pay these 1358 project affected families, a sum of
rupees fifteen lakhs per family. While making the instant payment, earlier installments made to
such families, shall be deducted (from out of the sum of Rupees fifteen lakhs). At the time of making
the above payment, the concerned authority shall obtain an undertaking from the concerned 'project
affected family', that the instant payment would be as a matter of final settlement of their claim,
arising out of the implementation of the Sardar Sarovar Project. Any such claimant, who fails to
furnish the above undertaking, would not be entitled to any payment of compensation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165124420/ 6
Dileepsingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 April, 2017
10. The above order takes into consideration the issue of compensation, towards all 'project affected
families'.
11. We have not addressed the issue of the amenities, that needed to have been extended to the
concerned families, in terms of the Narmada Water Disputes Tribunal Award, dated 12.12.1979. In
order to address any such grievance (with reference to the amenities postulated under the Tribunal's
award, referred to above), we permit such of the 'project affected families', who have any grievance,
to raise the same, before the concerned Grievance Redressal Authority, within one month from
today. In case such a representation is made, and is accepted by the concerned Grievance Redressal
Authority, the concerned State Government shall implement the recommendation, as expeditiously
as possible, without raising any unnecessary objection. In case, any of the "project affected families"
is not satisfied with the recommendations made by the Grievance Redressal Authority (on the
representation, or alternatively, if no decision is taken thereon, within three months of registration
of such representation), it shall be open to such family, to pursue its cause before a Court of
competent jurisdiction, in consonance with law.
12. All connected petitions/applications are disposed of in the above terms. Payment in consonance
with the instant order, (to the 681 'project affected families', referred to above) by the concerned
State Government shall first be released to the Narmada Valley Development Authority (for short
'NVDA'), which in turn shall deposit the compensation payable to the 681 'project affected families',
in the account of the Grievance Redressal Authority, within two months from today. The above
amount shall positively be released, to the concerned 681 project affected families, within one
month thereafter. The same procedure is directed to be followed with respect to the 1358 project
affected families, which are stated to have been duped.
13. All the occupants including all the 'project affected families' shall vacate the submergence area
under reference, on or before 31.07.2017, and in case there are individuals in the submergence area,
after the aforesaid deposit has been made into the account of the Grievance Redressal Authority,
after 31.07.2017, it shall be open to the State Government to remove all such individuals forcibly.
14. The order passed hereinabove, is exclusively directed towards the resettlement and
rehabilitation of the 'project affected families', in the State of Madhya Pradesh. We hereby direct the
States of Gujarat and Maharashtra to conclude all the commuted resettlement and rehabilitation
activities, in the respective States, within three months from today.
15. In view of the consolidated order passed by us today, all pending litigations, civil and criminal,
emerging out of the recommendations made by the Jha Commission, in the report dated January,
2016, shall come to an end.
16. The instant order has been passed by us in exercise of our jurisdiction under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India, and with the tacit consent of the Union of India (and the concerned State
Governments), and shall not ever be treated as a precedent, or be cited for similar claims for
compensation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165124420/ 7
Dileepsingh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 25 April, 2017
Disposed of in the aforesaid terms."
06. Mr Vivek Patwa, learned counsel for the N.V.D.A has categorically stated before this court that
this Hon'ble High Court does not have any other choice except to follow the judgment passed by the
apex court and in case the petitioners are aggrieved in the matter they do have a remedy of seeking
clarification from the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Mr Chitale, learned counsel for the petitioner has
argued before this court that issue of compensation keeping in view the Act of 2013 was earlier never
raised before this court or before the Hon'ble Supreme Court.
07. Mr Patwa has placed reliance upon Paragraph-13 of the order passed by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of Narmada Bachao Andolan (supra) and the same reveals that the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has directed the State Government to remove all individuals forcefully after
depositing the amount as referred in the order with Grievance Redressal Authority upto 31-07-2017.
Meaning thereby, the State Government can remove all individuals after 31-07-2017 after depositing
the amount.
08. This court has considered the rival contentions of the parties and is of the considered opinion
that once the Hon'ble Supreme Court has directed the respondents to deposit the amount with the
Grievance Redressal Authority on or before 31-07-2017 and the Government has been permitted to
remove all the individuals forcefully after 31-01-2017, this court cannot interfere in the matter.
09. In the present petition also, this court cannot pass any order permitting the petitioner to
continue in the area in question which is certainly a part of submergence area of the Sardar Sarovar
Project. Another important aspect of the case is that the petitioner has not approached Grievance
Redressal Authority. Resultantly, the present petition stands disposed of with a liberty to the
petitioners to approach Grievance Redressal Authority raising their claims, if any and the Grievance
Redressal Authority shall decide the same, in accordance with law.
10. This court has passed an interim order restraining the respondents from evicting the petitioners.
There is already an order in respect of Project Affected Families passed by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in Narmada Bachao Andolan (supra) and, therefore, eviction of the petitioners shall be
governed as per Paragraph-13 of the order passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Narmada
Bachao Andolan (supra).
11. No case for interference is made out in the matter. The admission is declined.
12. Admission in respect of all connected Writ petitions also stands declined.
No order as to costs.
Certified copy as per rules.
(S. C. SHARMA) JUDGE Rashmi
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165124420/ 8
