Dileep Kumar Batham vs State Of Up And 4 Others on 2 January, 2025
Dileep Kumar Batham vs State Of Up And 4 Others on 2
January, 2025
Author: Saurabh Shyam Shamshery
Bench: Saurabh Shyam Shamshery
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:185
Court No. - 10
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 15625 of 2024
Petitioner :- Dileep Kumar Batham
Respondent :- State Of Up And 4 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Arvind Srivastava III
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Nand Lal Pandey,Suyash Pandey
Hon'ble Saurabh Shyam Shamshery,J.
1. Heard Sri Arvind Srivastava, learned counsel for petitioner, Sri Harikant, learned Standing
Counsel for State-Respondents and Sri Suyash Pandey, Advocate for Respondent-College.
2. It is not in dispute that petitioner before this Court and Respondent-5 were appointed as Class-IV
employee in Chaudhary Vishambhar Singh Bhartiya Vidyalaya Inter College, Auraiya on same date
as well as Respondent-5 is elder to present petitioner. However, since petitioner was given joining at
the first instance, therefore, Respondent-5 remained always junior to him.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/112871835/ 1
Dileep Kumar Batham vs State Of Up And 4 Others on 2 January, 2025
3. Above position remained for a long time and present dispute arose when an occasion arose for
promotion from Class-IV to Class-III and when on basis of a representation of Respondent-5, he
being elder to petitioner, was proposed for promotion.
4. Learned counsel for petitioner submits that an objection was raised by petitioner that since he is
senior to Respondent-5, therefore, he was entitled for consideration at the first instance. Matter was
reached upto District Inspector of Schools, Auraiya and said officer vide communication dated
12.09.2024 has sought report from College concerned on the issue.
5. Learned counsel appearing for Respondent-College refers a supplementary affidavit (which ought
to be a counter affidavit) that a proposal has been adopted by College in the meeting of Committee
of Management dated 07.01.2024 that in terms of established principle, in such circumstances the
elder person is to be considered senior, therefore, Respondent-5 was put ahead of petitioner in
seniority list and a reply is being submitted that matter is still seized with District Inspector of
Schools, Auraiya.
6. Learned counsel for petitioner refers a judgment passed by this Court in Virendra Singh vs. State
of U.P. and others, 2013(2) ADJ 761 and submits that Respondent-5 was not even qualified when
vacancy for Class-III arose. He, however, fairly submits that this issue has not been raised earlier
possibly due to no such exigency arose.
7. Learned counsel appearing for Respondent-College and learned Standing Counsel submit that
since matter is still pending before District Inspector of Schools, Auraiya, who will take an
appropriate decision and if necessary both parties may also be heard.
8. In aforesaid circumstances, since matter is seized with District Inspector of Schools, Auraiya,
therefore, this writ petition is disposed of with observation that said Officer may take a reasoned
decision within a period of four weeks from today and if necessary petitioner and Respondent-5 may
be heard.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 AK
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/112871835/ 2
