Dilip S/O Vithal Jadhav vs Nitin Jain S/O Bheru Lal Jain on 7 October, 2020
Dilip S/O Vithal Jadhav vs Nitin Jain S/O Bheru Lal Jain on 7
October, 2020
Author: S.Sunil Dutt Yadav
Bench: S.Sunil Dutt Yadav
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
KALABURAGI BENCH
R
DATED THIS THE 7TH DAY OF OCTOBER 2020
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE S.SUNIL DUTT YADAV
AND
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P. KRISHNA BHAT
MISCELLANEOUS FIRST APPEAL NO.200139/2018 (MV)
Between:
Dilip S/o Vithal Jadhav
Aged: 23 years
Occ: Music band Musician &
Mason (Goundi, now nil)
R/o H.No.7-102
Ishwar Nagar, Kaikadi Galli
Basavakalyan
Now residing at Vidya Nagar Colony
Jewargi, Dist: Gulbarga
(Now R/o H.No.5/383, Brahmapur
Gulbarga)-585101
... Appellant
(By Sri Sanjeev Patil, Advocate)
And:
1. Nitin Jain S/o Bheru Lal Jain
Age: Major, Occ: Owner of Lorry
No.RJ/06/GA/3535
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175188631/ 1
Dilip S/O Vithal Jadhav vs Nitin Jain S/O Bheru Lal Jain on 7 October, 2020
R/o Biles T.P. Nagar, Bhilwara
Rajasthan-311001
2
2. Cholamandalam M.S. Gen.
Insurance Co. Ltd.
Regional Officer, I Floor
V.A. Kalaburagi Square
Desai Cross, Deshpande Nagar
Hubli-580029
Represented by its
Regional Manager
3. Deepak S/o Manohar
Age: Major, Occ: Owner of Piaggo Auto
No.KA 39/4583
R/o H.No.24/56, Eshwar Nagar
Basavakalyan, Dist: Bidar-585401
4. United India Insurance Co. Ltd.,
Divisional Office, Dr. Jawali Complex
Super Market, Gulbarga-585101
Represented by its Divisional Manager
... Respondents
(By Sri Subhash Mallapur, Advocate for R2;
Sri Manvendra Reddy, Advocate for R4;
Notice to R1 & R3 dispensed with V/o dated 7.10.2020)
This Miscellaneous First Appeal is filed under Section
173 (1) of Motor Vehicles Act, 1988, praying to modify the
Judgment & Award dated 01.09.2017 passed by the
I-Additional Senior Civil Judge & MACT at Kalaburagi in
MVC No.765/2012 and to allow the appeal and award the
compensation as prayed in the claim petition holding the
liability against the respondents No.1, 2 and 4.
This appeal coming on for orders this day, P.Krishna
Bhat J., delivered the following:
3
JUDGMENT
Sri Sanjeev Patil, learned counsel for the appellant files a memo seeking dispensation of notice to
respondent Nos.1 & 3. Memo is allowed and notice to respondent Nos.1 & 3 is dispensed with.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175188631/ 2
Dilip S/O Vithal Jadhav vs Nitin Jain S/O Bheru Lal Jain on 7 October, 2020
Even though this matter is listed for orders, with the consent of learned counsel on both sides, the
appeal is taken up for final disposal.
2. This is a claimant's appeal calling in question the correctness of the Judgment & Award dated
01.09.2017 in MVC No.765/2012 by the learned I-Additional Senior Civil Judge and MACT,
Kalaburagi. In the nature of the dispute raised in the appeal, we feel it unnecessary to refer to the
facts of the case in detail.
3. Claim petition was filed on the allegation that on 10.07.2011 while the claimant was proceeding in
auto rickshaw bearing Reg.No.KA-39/4583 from Kurkota to Basavakalyan with musical instruments
at about 6.00 p.m., when the vehicle reached near Navadagi village, on account of rash and
negligent driving of the auto rickshaw, it dashed to a truck bearing Reg.No.RJ-06/GA-3535 which
was parked by the side of the road, resulting in serious injuries to the claimant-appellant, which led
to amputation of his left leg below the knee.
4. The only contention urged on behalf of the appellant is that the learned Tribunal was in error in
absolving the Insurer of the offending vehicle, only on the ground that the offending vehicle was
having permit to ply only within the territorial jurisdiction of Humnabad Municipal area and at the
time of the accident the offending vehicle had moved outside the said jurisdiction and accident had
taken place in the district of Kalaburagi where it had no permit to ply. In support of the said
contention, learned counsel for the appellant places reliance on the observations of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Amrit Paul Singh and Anr. Vs. Tata AIG General Insurance Company
Limited & Ors. reported in (2018) 7 SCC
558.
5. Learned counsel for the Insurer of the offending vehicle Sri Manvendra Reddy vehemently
contends that while he has no dispute about the proposition of law laid down in Amrit Paul Singh's
case, the learned Tribunal ought to have held that there was contributory negligence on the part of
the truck which was parked by the side of the road without displaying signals as required under
Sections 122 & 126 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988.
6. A perusal of the judgment and award impugned herein shows that learned Tribunal, on
appreciation of the evidence, has come to the conclusion that accident in question had taken place at
6.00 p.m. on 10.07.2011 which obviously would indicate that there was enough daylight at the time
of the accident. The injured claimant has examined himself as PW-1 who is an eyewitness. Learned
Tribunal has also placed reliance on the charge sheet which is at Ex.P-3. The respondents have not
taken any steps to examine either the driver of the offending auto rickshaw or the driver of the truck
involved in the accident. In that view of the matter, since the finding of the learned Tribunal being
based upon the evidence placed before it, no fault could be found with the view which it has taken
that the accident has resulted on account of rash and negligent driving of the offending auto
rickshaw by its driver. Therefore, we uphold the said finding and reject the contention of the learned
counsel for the respondent No.4 herein in this behalf.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175188631/ 3
Dilip S/O Vithal Jadhav vs Nitin Jain S/O Bheru Lal Jain on 7 October, 2020
7. The offending auto rickshaw undoubtedly had a valid permit to ply within the limits of Town
Municipality of Humnabad. The accident had taken place outside the said jurisdiction and in the
neighbouring district Kalaburagi. The law is fairly well settled to the effect that whenever there is
violation of the policy conditions by the insured, not involving playing fraud upon the Insurer, the
Insurer cannot avoid its primary obligation of satisfying the award, albeit, with the right to recover
the same subsequently from the owner of the offending vehicle. It is necessary to refer to the
observations of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Amrit Paul's case at para-24, which reads as under:
"24. In the case at hand, it is clearly demonstrable from the materials brought on
record that the vehicle at the time of the accident did not have a permit. The
appellants had taken the stand that the vehicle was not involved in the accident. That
apart, they had not stated whether the vehicle had temporary permit or any other
kind of permit. The exceptions that have been carved out under Section 66 of the Act,
needless to emphasise, are to be pleaded and proved. The exceptions cannot be taken
aid of in the course of an argument to seek absolution from liability. Use of a vehicle
in a public place without a permit is a fundamental statutory infraction. We are
disposed to think so in view of the series of exceptions carved out in Section 66. The
said situations cannot be equated with absence of licence or a fake licence or a licence
for different kind of vehicle, or, for that matter, violation of a condition of carrying
more number of passengers. Therefore, the principles laid down in Swaran Singh and
Lakhmi Chand in that regard would not be applicable to the case at hand. That apart,
the insurer had taken the plea that the vehicle in question had no permit. It does not
require the wisdom of the "Tripitaka", that the existence of a permit of any nature is a
matter of documentary evidence. Nothing has been brought on record by the insured
to prove that he had a permit of the vehicle. In such a situation, the onus cannot be
cast on the insurer. Therefore, the Tribunal as well as the High Court had directed
that the insurer was required to pay the compensation amount to the claimants with
interest with the stipulation that the insurer shall be entitled to recover the same
from the owner and the driver. The said directions are in consonance with the
principles stated in Swaran Singh and other cases pertaining to pay and recover
principle."
As could be made out from the above, in the case before the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the offending
vehicle had no permit at all. In the instant case, the offending vehicle did have a permit but in
violation of the restricted zone of the permit, it was taken beyond its operative limits at the time of
the accident. Thus, the principle of 'pay and recover' should apply with equal vigor in this case as
well.
8. In view of the above, the finding of the learned Tribunal that respondent No.4 is not liable to pay
the compensation is incorrect and the said finding is required to be modified with the observation
that respondent No.4 shall first satisfy the award amount and thereafter it shall recover the same
from the respondent No.3. Hence, the following:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175188631/ 4
Dilip S/O Vithal Jadhav vs Nitin Jain S/O Bheru Lal Jain on 7 October, 2020
ORDER The appeal is allowed. In modification of the direction in the award,
respondent No.4 shall in the first instance satisfy the award amount with interest
thereon and thereafter shall recover the same from respondent No.3 in accordance
with law.
Respondent No.4 shall deposit the award amount with interest thereon within a
period of eight weeks from the date of receipt of certified copy of the judgment.
SD/-
JUDGE SD/-
JUDGE swk
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175188631/ 5
