Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
ORISSA HIGH COURT : CUTTACK
I.A. No.3691 of 2022
in
W.A. No.1572 of 2022
In the matter of an Application to condone the delay
in filing Appeal under Article 4 of
the Odisha High Court Order, 1948
read with
Clause 10 of the Letters Patent constituting
the High Court of Judicature at Patna
and
Rule 6 of Chapter-III and Rule 2 of Chapter-VIII
of the Rules of the High Court of Odisha, 1948
***
1. Director Horticulture, Orissa Bhubaneswar.
2. Administrative Officer, Horticulture Directorate of Horticulture Bhubaneswar District: Khordha.
3. Horticulturist, Cuttack At/P.O./District:Cuttack. ... Appellants (Opposite parties in the Writ
Petition).
-VERSUS-
Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty, Aged about 49 years Son of Surendranath Mohanty, Resident of
Village:Barasara P.O.: Gobardhanpur P.S.: Kujang, District: Jagatisinghpur. ... Respondent
(Petitioner in the Writ Petition).
Counsel appeared for the parties:
For the Appellants : Mr. Partha Sarathi Nayak, Additional Government Advocate For
the Respondent : Mr. Tarun Kanta Pattanayk, Advocate P R E S E N T:
HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE SANGAM KUMAR SAHOO AND HONOURABLE
MR. JUSTICE MURAHARI SRI RAMAN Date of Hearing : 26.03.2025 :: Date of
Order : 26.03.2025 O RDER The question for consideration in the interlocutory
application filed praying therein to condone the delay in filing the intra-Court appeal
under the provisions of Appeal under Article 4 of the Odisha High Court Order, 1948
read with Clause 10 of the Letters Patent constituting the High Court of Judicature at
Patna and Rule 6 of Chapter-III and Rule 2 of Chapter-VIII of the Rules of the High
Court of Odisha, 1948:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 1
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
Whether this intra-Court of appeal is liable to be entertained by condoning delay of
320 days in filing the writ appeal by the functionaries of the Government of Odisha,
being aggrieved by Order dated 07.12.2021 passed in WPC (OAC) No.2862 of 2002,
whereby and whereunder allowing the writ petition invoking power under Articles
226 and 227 of the Constitution of India a learned Single Judge of this Court directed
the appellants herein (the opposite parties in the writ proceeding), to consider the
case of the respondent herein (the petitioner in the writ petition) in terms of the
judgment dated 17.08.2021 passed in Mamata Manjari Mohanty Vrs.
State of Odisha, WPC (OAC) No. 3077 of 20I4?
2. As it appears, the order impugned has been passed on 07.12.2021 and the writ appeal has been
filed on 22.11.2022 and in the meantime more than eleven months have elapsed. Therefore, it is to
be examined whether the appeal suffers from delay and laches as inordinate delay has occurred in
preferring the remedy and this Court is called upon to investigate whether "sufficient cause" has
been shown to condone the delay of 320 days in preferring the writ appeal.
3. Mr. Partha Sarathi Nayak, learned Additional Government Advocate for the appellants placed the
fact leading to delay in preferring the appeal by stating that after receipt of the copy of the Order
under challenge in the writ appeal on 13.12.2021, the claim of the respondent was examined and the
Director of Horticulture on 13.01.2022 requested the Government in Agriculture and Farmers(cid:128)
Empowerment Department to impart necessary instructions. The matter was sent to the Law
Department for views. After receipt of the views on 19.05.2022, step was taken to file writ appeal.
The writ appeal could be filed on 21.11.2022.
3.1. The decision in Mamata Manjari Mohanty Vrs. State of Odisha, WPC (OAC) No.3077 of 20141
being not applicable to the present facts-situation, it is vehemently contended by Sri Partha Sarathi
Nayak, learned Additional Government Advocate that the writ appeal is required to be considered
inasmuch as the order of the learned single judge warrants interference. It is, therefore, urged that
considering the merit in the appeal, the eventual delay of 175 days, as reflected in the prayer of the
interlocutory application, though registry has pointed out delay of 320 days, deserves to be
condoned for consideration of the writ appeal on merits.
4. Mr. Tarun Kanta Pattanayak, learned Advocate for the respondent submitted that the learned
Additional Standing Counsel who made appearance before the learned Single Judge was given
ample opportunity to 1 Being disposed of on 17.08.2021, challenge is made against it in W.A. No.688
of 2022, which got disposed of by Division Bench of this Court vide Judgment dated 15.05.2024.
examine whether the decision of learned Single Judge rendered in Mamata Manjari Mohanty
(supra) squarely covers the case of the respondent. The learned Single Judge had, in the Order dated
07.12.2021, observed that "despite opportunity given, Mr. H.K. Panigrahi, learned Additional
Standing Counsel for the State had not obtained instructions". Since the matter was old case relating
to the year 2002, the learned Single Judge proceeded to dispose of the matter.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 2
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
4.1. It is further submitted by Mr. Tarun Kanta Pattanayak, learned Advocate that the State does not
enjoy special status in order to confer itself benefit of approaching the Court to question is veracity
of the order of this Court by way of intra-Court appeal at its sweet-will. It is trite that
State/Government and the private party in the matter of consideration of petition for condonation
of delay are treated equally. Since inordinate delay of 320 days has not been explained, much less
delay of 175 days as per computation reflected in the "prayer" in the interlocutory application, by the
appellants sufficiently and mere placing certain dates would not entail condonation of delay.
4.2. He would submit that this Court in many cases has not shown inclination to entertain writ
appeal filed belatedly as the same suffers from delay and laches following the view expressed in the
judgment/order in the case of State of Odisha Vrs. Surama Manjari Das, W.P.(C) No.15763 of 2021,
dismissed on 16.07.2021, challenge against said order got dismissed vide Order dated 05.04.2023 by
the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court of India in SLP (C) Diary No.9259 of 2023.
5. On perusal of the record, it is revealed that the respondent has filed an affidavit dated 31.08.2024
stating therein that the cases of employees like Mamata Manjari Mohanty (supra) and one Sangram
Das, retrenched without following due process of law, were considered favourably.
5.1. It is the requirement of law that for consideration of petition for condonation delay the party
seeking relief is required to demonstrate "sufficient cause"/"good cause".
6. The nomenclature of cause title of the petition for condonation of delay is styled as "An
application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act". Strictly speaking, such a petition filed under the
Limitation Act, 1963, is not maintainable inasmuch as for the purpose of considering condonation of
delay in filing writ appeal, special provision is available under the Rules of the High Court of Orissa,
1948.
6.1. The writ appeal before this Court has been filed invoking provisions of Clause 10 of the Letters
Patent Constituting the High Court of Judicature at Patna, which stands thus:
"Civil Jurisdiction of the High Court
9. And We do further ordain that the High Court of Judicature at Patna shall have
power to remove and to try and determine, as a Court of extraordinary original
Jurisdiction, any suit being or falling within the jurisdiction of any Court subject to
its superintendence, when the said High Court may think proper to do so, either on
the agreement of the parties to that effect, or for purposes of justice, the reasons for
so doing being recorded on the proceedings of the said High Court.
10. And We do further ordain that an appeal shall lie to the said High Court of
Judicature at Patna from the judgment (not being a judgment passed in the exercise
of appellate jurisdiction in respect of a decree or order made in the exercise of
appellate jurisdiction by a Court subject to the superintendence of the said High
Court, and not being an order made in the exercise of revisional jurisdiction and not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 3
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
being a sentence or order passed or made in the exercise of the power of
superintendence under the provisions of Section 107 of the Government of India Act,
or in the exercise of criminal jurisdiction) of one Judge of the said High Court or one
Judge of any Division Court, pursuant to Section 108 of Government of India Act and
that notwithstanding anything hereinbefore provided an appeal shall lie to the said
High Court from a judgment of one Judge of said High Court or one Judge of any
Division Court, pursuant to Section 108 of the Government of India Act, made (on or
after the first day of February one thousand nine hundred and twenty nine) in the
exercise of appellate jurisdiction in respect of a decree or order made in the exercise
of appellate jurisdiction by a Court subject to the superintendence of the said High
Court where the Judge who passed the judgment declares that the case is a fit one for
appeal; but that the right of appeal from other judgments of Judges of the said High
Court or of such Division Court shall be to us, Our Heirs or Successors in Our or
Their Privy Council, as hereinafter provided."
6.2. Article 4 of the Odisha High Court Order, 1948 stands as follows:
"The High Court of Orissa shall have, in respect of the territories for the time being
included in the Province of Orissa, all such original, appellate and other jurisdiction
as under the law in force immediately before the prescribed day is exercisable in
respect of the said territories or any part thereof by the High Court in Patna."
6.3. Relevant provisions contained in Chapter-III and Chapter-VIII of the Rules of the High Court of
Orissa, 1948, are given hereunder:
"Chapter-III
6. Appeals to the High Court under Article 4 of the Orissa High Court Order, 1948
read with Clause 10 of the Letters Patent Constituting the High Court of Judicature at
Patna from the Judgment of a Bench confirming the judgment of a lower Court under
Section 98 of the Code of Civil Procedure shall be heard by a Bench consisting of at
least three Judges including both or either of the Judges of the Bench from whose
Judgment the appeal is preferred and, if from the judgment of one Judge or a Bench
of two Judges, it shall be heard by a Bench consisting of at least two Judges other
than the Judge from whose judgment the appeal is preferred.
Chapter-VIII
2. (1) Subject to Article 12 of the Orissa High Court Order, 1948 every appeal to the
High Court under Article 4 thereof read with Clause 10 of the Letters Patent
Constituting the High Court of Judicature at Patna from the judgment (not being a
judgment passed in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction in respect of a decree or
order made in the exercise of appellate jurisdiction by a Court subject to the
Superintendence of the High Court and not being an order made in the exercise of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 4
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
revisional jurisdiction, and not being a sentence or order passed or made in the
exercise of criminal jurisdiction) of one Judge of the High Court or one Judge of any
Division Court pursuant to Article 225 of the Constitution, shall be presented to the
Registrar within thirty days from the date of the judgment appealed from unless a
Bench in its discretion, on good cause shown, shall grant further time. The Registrar
shall endorse on the memorandum the date of presentation and after satisfying
himself that the appeal is in order and is within time shall cause it to be laid before a
Bench for orders at an early date. It shall be accompanied by a certified copy of the
judgment appealed from together with a neatly typed second copy thereof.
(2) Subject to Article 12 of the Orissa High Court Order, 1948 every application for a
Certificate under Article 4 thereof read with Clause 10 of the Letters Patent
Constituting the High Court of Judicature at Patna in the case of a judgment of a
Single Judge of the Court deciding a second appeal shall be made orally to the Judge
in question immediately after the judgment is delivered. No subsequent application
will be entertained unless upon a duly stamped special application supported by
affidavit filed within thirty days and not more from the date of the judgment the
Judge is satisfied that circumstances existed rendering an immediate application
impossible.
(3) If the Judge certifies that the case is a fit one for appeal a duly stamped
memorandum of appeal may be presented to the Registrar within a period not
exceeding sixty days from the date of the judgment unless the Judge in his discretion
on good cause shown shall grant further time for its presentation.
(4) The memorandum of appeal need not be accompanied by a copy of the judgment
of decree appealed from."
6.4. Above provisions would go to indicate that the writ appeal under Article 4 of the Orissa High
Court Order, 1948 read with Clause 10 of the Letters Patent constituting the High Court of
Judicature at Patna is required to be presented before this Court within thirty days from the date of
the judgment appealed from as provided for in Rule 2 of Chapter-VIII of the Rules of the High Court
of Orissa, 1948. In the event the appeal is not preferred within the said stipulated period, it is the
Bench which is empowered to use its "discretion" to "grant further time", subject to, of course,
appreciation of "good cause".
6.5. Nevertheless, with the contents contained in the petition, bearing I.A. No.3691 of 2022, praying
therein to condone "the delay caused in filing the writ appeal", this Court now examines whether
with the available material on record as provided by the State of Odisha in said petition "discretion"
can be exercised to condone the delay in preferring intra-Court appeal for "good cause" shown by
the appellants. Finding good cause shown, this Court by exercising discretion may condone the
delay in filing the writ appeal by granting "further time".
6.6. May it is in general connotation the word "discretion"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 5
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
means „prudence(cid:128), „individual choice or judgment(cid:128), „power of free decision(cid:128) and „freedom to act
according to one(cid:128)s own judgment(cid:128), but in legal parlance, it is confined to the exercise of freedom to
act; squeezes one(cid:128)s individual choice. It prescribes direction to the authority upon whom discretion
is vested to act in conformity with statutory provisions and rule of law. It follows that the judgment
of the delegatee of power, who is vested with discretion, is his own application of reasonable,
conscience mind and thought unguided and uncontrolled by opinion/judgment of others. Discretion
is the power delegated specially or implied from the wordings of the statute is oft coupled with
responsibility and duty.
6.7. Conspectus of propositions of catena of decisions rendered by different Courts indicates that
"discretion" means use of private and independent thought. When anything is left to be done
according to one(cid:128)s discretion the law intends it to be done with sound discretion and according to
law. Discretion is discerning between right and wrong and one who has power to act at discretion is
bound by rule of reason. Discretion must not be arbitrary. The very term itself stands unsupported
by circumstances imports the exercise of judgment, wisdom and skill as contra-distinguished from
unthinking folly, heady violence or rash injustice. When applied to a Court of Justice or Tribunal or
quasi judicial body, it means sound discretion guided by law. It must be governed by rule, not by
humour; it must not be arbitrary, vague and fanciful but legal and regular. Discretion must be
exercised honestly and in the spirit of the statute. It is the power given by a statute to make choice
among competing considerations. It implies power to choose between alternative courses of action.
It is not unconfined and vagrant. It is canalized within banks that keep it from overflowing. It is to
be, not arbitrary, vague, and fanciful, but legal and regular. And it must be exercised within the
limit, to which an honest man competent to the discharge of his office ought to confine himself.
[See, Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vrs. Girja Shankar Pant, (2001) 1 SCC 182; K.K. Gopalan &
Co. Vrs. Assistant Commissioner (Assessment), (2000) 118 STC 111 (Ker)].
6.8. In this regard, therefore, the interpretation of the expression "sufficient cause" as found in
Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963, has bearing on the question that is involved in the instant case.
6.9. It needs to be discussed the connotation of "good cause"
vis-à-vis "sufficient cause". In Arjun Singh Vrs. Mohindra Kumar, (1964) 5 SCR 946,
these two terms have been considered as follows:
"Before proceeding to deal with the arguments addressed to us by Mr. Setalvad--
learned counsel for the appellant, it would be convenient to mention a point, not
seriously pressed before us, but which at earlier stages was thought to have
considerable significance for the decision of this question viz., the difference between
the words „good cause(cid:128) for non-appearance in Order IX, Rule 7 and „sufficient
cause(cid:128) for the same purpose in Order IX, Rule 13 as pointing to different criteria of
„goodness(cid:128) or „sufficiency(cid:128) for succeeding in the two proceedings, and as therefore
furnishing a ground for the inapplicability of the rule of res judicata. As this ground
was not seriously mentioned before us, we need not examine it in any detail, but we
might observe that we do not see any material difference between the facts to be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 6
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
established for satisfying the two tests of „good cause(cid:128) and „sufficient cause(cid:128). We are
unable to conceive of a „good cause(cid:128) which is not „sufficient(cid:128) as affording an
explanation for non-appearance, nor conversely of a „sufficient cause(cid:128) which is not a
good one and we would add that either of these is not different from „good and
sufficient cause(cid:128) which is used in this context in other statutes. If, on the other hand,
there is any difference between the two it can only be that the requirement of a „good
cause(cid:128) is complied with on a lesser degree of proof than that of „sufficient cause(cid:128) and
if so, this cannot help the appellant, since assuming the applicability of the principle
of res judicata to the decisions in the two proceedings, if the court finds in the first
proceeding, the lighter burden not discharged, it must a fortiori bar the consideration
of the same matter in the later, where the standard of proof of that matter is, if
anything, higher."
6.10. The meaning of „sufficient(cid:128) is „adequate(cid:128) or „enough(cid:128), inasmuch as may be necessary to
answer the purpose intended. Therefore, word „sufficient(cid:128) embraces no more than that which
provides a platitude which when the act done suffices to accomplish the purpose intended in the
facts and circumstances existing in a case and duly examined from the view point of a reasonable
standard of a cautious man. „Sufficient cause(cid:128) means that the party had not acted in a negligent
manner or there was a want of bona fide on its part in view of the facts and circumstances of a case
or the party cannot be alleged to have been „not acting diligently(cid:128) or „remaining inactive(cid:128).
However, the facts and circumstances of each case must afford sufficient ground to enable the Court
concerned to exercise discretion for the reason that whenever the Court exercises discretion, it has
to be exercised judiciously. While deciding whether there is sufficient cause or not, the Court must
bear in mind the object of doing substantial justice to all the parties concerned and that the
technicalities of the law should not prevent the Court from doing substantial justice and doing away
the illegality perpetuated on the basis of the judgment impugned before it. "Sufficient cause" is thus
the cause for which the defendant could not be blamed for his absence. Therefore, the applicant
must approach the Court with a reasonable defence. Sufficient cause is a question of fact and the
Court has to exercise its discretion in the varied and special circumstances in the case at hand. There
cannot be a straitjacket formula of universal application. [Ref.: Ramlal, Motilal and Chhotelal Vrs.
Rewa Coalfields Ltd., AIR 1962 SC 361 = (1962) 2 SCR 762; Lonard Grampanchayat Vrs. Ramgiri
Gosavi, AIR 1968 SC 222; Surinder Singh Sibia Vrs. Vijay Kumar Sood, (1992) 1 SCC 70; Orinental
Aroma Chemical Industries Ltd. Vrs. Gujarat Industrial Development Corporation, (2010) 5 SCC
459; Parimal Vrs. Veena, (2011) 3 SCC 545; Sudarshan Sareen Vrs. National Small Industries
Corporation Ltd., 2013 SCC OnLine Del 4412; State of Bihar Vrs. Kameshwar Prasad Singh, (2000)
9 SCC 94; Madanlal Vrs. Shyamlal, (2002) 1 SCC 535; Davinder Pal Sehgal Vrs. Partap Steel Rolling
Mills (P) Ltd., (2002) 3 SCC 156; Ram Nath Sao Vrs. Gobardhan Sao, (2002) 3 SCC 195, Kaushalya
Devi Vrs. Prem Chand, (2005) 10 SCC 127, Srei International Finance Ltd. Vrs. Fairgrowth Financial
Services Ltd., (2005) 13 SCC 95; Reena Sadh Vrs. Aniana Enterprises, (2008) 12 SCC 589].
6.11. "Sufficient cause" has to be construed as an elastic expression for which no hard-and-fast
guidelines can be prescribed. The Courts have a wide discretion in deciding the sufficient cause
keeping in view the peculiar facts and circumstances of each case. The "sufficient cause" for
non-appearance refers to the date on which the absence was made a ground for proceeding ex parte
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 7
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
and cannot be stretched to rely upon other circumstances anterior in time. If "sufficient cause" is
made out for non-appearance of the defendant on the date fixed for hearing when ex parte
proceedings were initiated against him, he cannot be penalised for his previous negligence which
had been overlooked and thereby condoned earlier. In a case where the defendant approaches the
Court immediately and within the statutory time specified, the discretion is normally exercised in
his favour, provided the absence was not mala fide or intentional. For the absence of a party in the
case the other side can be compensated by adequate costs and the lis decided on merits. [Ref.: G.P.
Srivastava Vrs. R.K. Raizada, (2000) 3 SCC 54; A. Murugesan Vrs. Jamuna Rani, (2019) 20 SCC
803]. The Court, in its discretion, has to consider the „sufficient cause(cid:128) in the facts and
circumstances of every individual case. Although in interpreting the words „sufficient cause(cid:128), the
Court has wide discretion but the same has to be exercised in the particular facts of the case. See,
Hira Sweets & Confectionary Pvt. Ltd. Vrs. Hira Confectioners, 2021 SCC OnLine Del 1823.
6.12. In Balwant Singh Vrs. Jagdish Singh, (2010) 8 SCR 597 the ingredients of "sufficient cause" for
the purpose of condonation of delay has been discussed as follows:
"7. *** However, in terms of Section 5, the discretion is vested in the Court to admit an appeal or an
application, after the expiry of the prescribed period of limitation, if the appellant shows „sufficient
cause(cid:128) for not preferring the application within the prescribed time. The expression „sufficient
cause(cid:128) commonly appears in the provisions of Order 22 Rule 9(2), CPC and Section 5 of the
Limitation Act, thus categorically demonstrating that they are to be decided on similar grounds. The
decision of such an application has to be guided by similar precepts.
***
8. In the case of P.K. Ramachandran Vrs. State of Kerala, (1997) 7 SCC 556 where there was delay of
565 days in filing the first appeal by the State, and the High Court had observed, „taking into
consideration the averments contained in the affidavit filed in support of the petition to condone the
delay, we are inclined to allow the petition". While setting aside this order, this Court found that the
explanation rendered for condonation of delay was neither reasonable nor satisfactory and held as
under:
„3. It would be noticed from a perusal of the impugned order that the court has not
recorded any satisfaction that the explanation for delay was either reasonable or
satisfactory, which is an essential prerequisite to condonation of delay.
4. That apart, we find that in the application filed by the respondent seeking
condonation of delay, the thrust in explaining the delay after 12.5.1995 is:
„*** at that time the Advocate General(cid:128)s office was fed up with so many arbitration
matters (sic) equally important to this case were pending for consideration as per the
directions of the Advocate General on 2.9.1995.(cid:128)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 8
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
5. This can hardly be said to be a reasonable, satisfactory or even a proper
explanation for seeking condonation of delay. In the reply filed to the application
seeking condonation of delay by the appellant in the High Court, it is asserted that
after the judgment and decree was pronounced by the learned Sub-Judge, Kollam on
30.10.1993, the scope for filing of the appeal was examined by the District
Government Pleader, Special Law Officer, Law Secretary and the Advocate General
and in accordance with their opinion, it was decided that there was no scope for filing
the appeal but later on, despite the opinion referred to above, the appeal was filed as
late as on 18.1.1996 without disclosing why it was being filed. The High Court does
not appear to have examined the reply filed by the appellant as reference to the same
is conspicuous by its absence from the order. We are not satisfied that in the facts and
circumstances of this case, any explanation, much less a reasonable or satisfactory
one had been offered by the respondent-State for condonation of the inordinate delay
of 565 days.
6. Law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but it has to be applied with all its rigour
when the statute so prescribed and the courts have no power to extend the period of limitation on
equitable grounds. The discretion exercised by the High Court was, thus, neither proper nor
judicious. The order condoning the delay cannot be sustained. This appeal, therefore, succeeds and
the impugned order is set aside. Consequently, the application for condonation of delay filed in the
High Court would stand rejected and the miscellaneous first appeal shall stand dismissed as barred
by time. No costs.(cid:128) ***
10. Another Bench of this Court in a recent judgment of Katari Suryanarayana Vrs. Koppisetti Subba
Rao, AIR 2009 SC 2907 again had an occasion to construe the ambit, scope and application of the
expression „sufficient cause(cid:128). The application for setting aside the abatement and bringing the legal
heirs of the deceased on record was filed in that case after a considerable delay. The explanation
rendered regarding the delay of 2381 days in filing the application for condonation of delay and
2601 days in bringing the legal representatives on record was not found to be satisfactory. Declining
the application for condonation of delay, the Court, while discussing the case of Perumon Bhagvathy
Devaswom Vrs. Bhargavi Amma, (2008) 8 SCC 321 in its para 9 held as under:
„11. The words „sufficient cause for not making the application within the period of
limitation(cid:128) should be understood and applied in a reasonable, pragmatic, practical
and liberal manner, depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case, and the
type of case. The words „sufficient cause(cid:128) in Section 5 of Limitation Act should
receive a liberal construction so as to advance substantial justice, when the delay is
not on account of any dilatory tactics, want of bona fides, deliberate inaction or
negligence on the part of the appellant.(cid:128) ***
15. We feel that it would be useful to make a reference to the judgment of this Court
in Perumon Bhagvathy Devaswom Vrs. Bhargavi Amma, (2008) 8 SCC 321.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 9
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
In this case, the Court, after discussing a number of judgments of this Court as well as that of the
High Courts, enunciated the principles which need to be kept in mind while dealing with
applications filed under the provisions of Order 22, CPC along with an application under Section 5,
Limitation Act for condonation of delay in filing the application for bringing the legal
representatives on record. In paragraph 13 of the judgment, the Court held as under:
„(i) The words „sufficient cause for not making the application within the period of
limitation(cid:128) should be understood and applied in a reasonable, pragmatic, practical
and liberal manner, depending upon the facts and circumstances of the case, and the
type of case. The words „sufficient cause(cid:128) in Section 5 of the Limitation Act should
receive a liberal construction so as to advance substantial justice, when the delay is
not on account of any dilatory tactics, want of bona tides, deliberate inaction or
negligence on the part of the appellant.
(ii) In considering the reasons for condonation of delay, the courts are more liberal
with reference to applications for setting aside abatement, than other cases. While
the court will have to keep in view that a valuable right accrues to the legal
representatives of the deceased respondent when the appeal abates, it will not punish
an appellant with foreclosure of the appeal, for unintended lapses. The courts tend to
set aside abatement and decided the matter on merits. The courts tend to set aside
abatement and decide the matter on merits, rather than terminate the appeal on the
ground of abatement.
(iii) The decisive factor in condonation of delay, is not the length of delay, but
sufficiency of a satisfactory explanation.
(iv) The extent or degree of leniency to be shown by a court depends on the nature of
application and facts and circumstances of the case. For example, courts view delays
in making applications in a pending appeal more leniently than delays in the
institution of an appeal. The courts view applications relating to lawyer's lapses more
leniently than applications relating to litigant's lapses. The classic example is the
difference in approach of courts to applications for condonation of delay in filing an
appeal and applications for condonation of delay in re-filing the appeal after
rectification of defects.
(i) Want of „diligence(cid:128) or „inaction(cid:128) can be attributed to an appellant only when
something required to be done by him, is not done. When nothing is required to be
done, courts do not expect the appellant to be diligent. Where an appeal is admitted
by the High Court and is not expected to be listed for final hearing for a few years, an
appellant is not expected to visit the court or his lawyer every few weeks to ascertain
the position nor keep checking whether the contesting respondent is alive. He merely
awaits the call or information from his counsel about the listing of the appeal. ***
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 10
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
16. Above are the principles which should control the exercise of judicial discretion
vested in the Court under these provisions. The explained delay should be clearly
understood in contradistinction to inordinate unexplained delay. Delay is just one of
the ingredients which has to be considered by the Court. In addition to this, the Court
must also take into account the conduct of the parties, bona fide reasons for
condonation of delay and whether such delay could easily be avoided by the applicant
acting with normal care and caution. The statutory provisions mandate that
applications for condonation of delay and applications belatedly filed beyond the
prescribed period of limitation for bringing the legal representatives on record,
should be rejected unless sufficient cause is shown for condonation of delay. The
larger benches as well as equi benches of this Court have consistently followed these
principles and have either allowed or declined to condone the delay in filing such
applications. Thus, it is the requirement of law that these applications cannot be
allowed as a matter of right and even in a routine manner. An applicant must
essentially satisfy the above stated ingredients; then alone the Court would be
inclined to condone the delay in the filing of such applications."
6.13. In the case of Pundlik Jalam Patil Vrs. Executive Engineer, Jalgaon Medium Project, (2008) 17
SCC 448, it is observed as under:
"The laws of limitation are founded on public policy. Statutes of limitation are
sometimes described as "statutes of peace". An unlimited and perpetual threat of
limitation creates insecurity and uncertainty; some kind of limitation is essential for
public order. The principle is based on the maxim "interest reipublicae ut sit finis
litium", that is, the interest of the State requires that there should be end to litigation
but at the same time laws of limitation are a means to ensure private justice
suppressing fraud and perjury, quickening diligence and preventing oppression. The
object for fixing time-limit for litigation is based on public policy fixing a lifespan for
legal remedy for the purpose of general welfare. They are meant to see that the
parties do not resort to dilatory tactics but avail their legal remedies promptly.
Salmond in his Jurisprudence states that the laws come to the assistance of the
vigilant and not of the sleepy."
6.14. It is significant to notice the decision of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court of India rendered in the
case of Sheo Raj Singh (deceased) through Legal Representatives Vrs. Union of India, (2023) 10 SCC
531 wherein while explaining the term "sufficient cause", the nature of approach of the Court and
the methodology in deciding the application for condonation of delay have been discussed with
reference to earlier precedents. The said Court in the mentioned reported case held as follows:
"30. Considering the aforementioned decisions, there cannot be any quarrel that this
Court has stepped in to ensure that substantive rights of private parties and the State
are not defeated at the threshold simply due to technical considerations of delay.
However, these decisions notwithstanding, we reiterate that condonation of delay
being a discretionary power available to Courts, exercise of discretion must
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 11
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
necessarily depend upon the sufficiency of the cause shown and the degree of
acceptability of the explanation, the length of delay being immaterial.
31. Sometimes, due to want of sufficient cause being shown or an acceptable
explanation being proffered, delay of the shortest range may not be condoned
whereas, in certain other cases, delay of long periods can be condoned if the
explanation is satisfactory and acceptable. Of course, the Courts must distinguish
between an „explanation(cid:128) and an „excuse(cid:128). An „explanation(cid:128) is designed to give
someone all of the facts and lay out the cause for something. It helps clarify the
circumstances of a particular event and allows the person to point out that something
that has happened is not his fault, if it is really not his fault. Care must however be
taken to distinguish an „explanation(cid:128) from an „excuse(cid:128). Although people tend to see
„explanation(cid:128) and „excuse(cid:128) as the same thing and struggle to find out the difference
between the two, there is a distinction which, though fine, is real.
32. An „excuse(cid:128) is often offered by a person to deny responsibility and consequences
when under attack. It is sort of a defensive action. Calling something as just an
„excuse(cid:128) would imply that the explanation proffered is believed not to be true. Thus
said, there is no formula that caters to all situations and, therefore, each case for
condonation of delay based on existence or absence of sufficient cause has to be
decided on its own facts. At this stage, we cannot but lament that it is only excuses,
and not explanations, that are more often accepted for condonation of long delays to
safeguard public interest from those hidden forces whose sole agenda is to ensure
that a meritorious claim does not reach the higher Courts for adjudication.
***
34. The order under challenge in this appeal is dated 21st December 2011. It was
rendered at a point of time when the decisions in Mst. Katiji (supra), Ramegowda
(supra), Chandra Mani (supra), Tehsildar (LA) Vrs. K.V. Ayisumma, (1996) 10 SCC
634 and State of Nagaland Vrs. Lipok AO, (2005) 3 SCC 752 were holding the field. It
is not that the said decisions do not hold the field now, having been overruled by any
subsequent decision. Although there have been some decisions in the recent past
[State of M.P. Vrs. Bherulal, (2020) 10 SCC 654 is one such decision apart from
University of Delhi Vrs. Union of India, (2020) 13 SCC 745] which have not accepted
governmental lethargy, tardiness and indolence in presenting appeals within time as
sufficient cause for condonation of delay, yet, the exercise of discretion by the High
Court has to be tested on the anvil of the liberal and justice oriented approach
expounded in the aforesaid decisions which have been referred to above.
***
40. We can also profitably refer to State of Manipur Vrs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 12
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
Koting Lamkang, (2019) 10 SCC 408 ... where the same Bench of three Hon(cid:128)ble
Judges of this Court which decided University of Delhi Vrs. Union of India, (2020) 13
SCC 745 was of the view that the impersonal nature of the State(cid:128)s functioning should
be given due regard, while ensuring that individual defaults are not nit-picked at the
cost of collective interest. The relevant paragraphs read as follows:
„7. But while concluding as above, it was necessary for the Court to also be conscious
of the bureaucratic delay and the slow pace in reaching a Government decision and
the routine way of deciding whether the State should prefer an appeal against a
judgment adverse to it. Even while observing that the law of limitation would harshly
affect the party, the Court felt that the delay in the appeal filed by the State, should
not be condoned.
8. Regard should be had in similar such circumstances to the impersonal nature of
the Government(cid:128)s functioning where individual officers may fail to act responsibly.
This in turn, would result in injustice to the institutional interest of the State. If the
appeal filed by the State are lost for individual default, those who are at fault, will not
usually be individually affected.(cid:128)
41. Having bestowed serious consideration to the rival contentions, we feel that the
High Court(cid:128)s decision to condone the delay on account of the first respondent(cid:128)s
inability to present the appeal within time, for the reasons assigned therein, does not
suffer from any error warranting interference. As the aforementioned judgments
have shown, such an exercise of discretion does, at times, call for a liberal and
justice-oriented approach by the Courts, where certain leeway could be provided to
the State. The hidden forces that are at work in preventing an appeal by the State
being presented within the prescribed period of limitation so as not to allow a higher
court to pronounce upon the legality and validity of an order of a lower court and
thereby secure unholy gains, can hardly be ignored.
Impediments in the working of the grand scheme of governmental functions have to be removed by
taking a pragmatic view on balancing of the competing interests."
6.15. It is reported in the decision of Privy Council in Montreal Street Railway Company Vrs.
Normandin, (1917) AC 170 that:
"*** The question whether provisions in a statute are directory or imperative has very
frequently arisen in this country, but it has been said that no general rule can be laid
down, and that in every case the object of the statute must be looked at. The cases on
the subject will be found collected in Maxwell on Statutes, 5th Edn., page 596 and the
following pages. When the provisions of a statute relate to the performance of a
public duty and the case is such that to hold null and void acts done in neglect of this
duty would work serious general inconvenience, or injustice to persons who have no
control over those entrusted with the duty, and at the same time would not promote
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 13
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
the main object of the Legislature, it has been the practice to hold such provisions to
be directory only, the neglect of them, though punishable, not affecting the validity of
the acts done."
6.16. The aforesaid observation has also been followed by the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in L. Hazari
Mal Kuthiala Vrs. ITO, (1961) 41 ITR 12 (SC) = AIR 1961 SC 200.
6.17. In Bhavnagar University Vrs. Palitana Sugar Mill P. Ltd.
AIR 2003 SC 511 it has been observed that:
"23. It is the basic principle of construction of statute that the same should be read as
a whole, then chapter by chapter, section by section and words by words. Recourse to
construction or interpretation of statute is necessary when there is ambiguity,
obscurity, or inconsistency therein and not otherwise. An effort must be made to give
effect to all parts of the statute and unless absolutely necessary, no part thereof shall
be rendered surplusage or redundant."
6.18. In "Crawford on the Construction of Statutes" at page 516, it is stated that, "The question as to
whether a statute is mandatory or directory depends upon the intent of the Legislature and not upon
the language in which the intent is clothed. The meaning and intention of the Legislature must
govern, and these are to be ascertained, not only from the phraseology of the provision, but also by
considering its nature, its design, and the consequences which would follow from construing it the
one way or the other."
6.19. The expression "satisfies the Court" employed in Section 5 of the Limitation Act has
significance. "Satisfaction" before completion of the proceedings under the Act is a condition
precedent for the exercise of jurisdiction. It is the satisfaction of the Court in the course of the
proceedings regarding the delay in approaching the Court with sufficient reason, which constitutes
the basis and foundation of the proceedings for consideration of condonation of delay. There must
be something which shows from the record itself that in the course of the proceedings the Court was
satisfied that there was sufficiency of reason for not approaching the Court in stipulated period and,
therefore, it is a case in which the appeal deserves to be admitted for hearing on merit. To be
satisfied with a state of things means to be honestly satisfied in one(cid:128)s own mind. Satisfaction is
essentially a condition of the mind. It means that there is a substantial ground for the conclusion on
the material available The phrase „satisfied(cid:128) means, makes up its mind; actual persuasion; a mind
not troubled by doubt or a mind which has reached a clear conclusion.
6.20. In Ramlal, Motilal and Chhotelal Vrs. Rewa Coalfields Ltd., (1962) 2 SCR 762 it has been
succinctly stated:
"Section 5 of the Limitation Act provides for extension of period in certain cases. It
lays down, inter alia, that any appeal may be admitted after the period of limitation
prescribed therefor when the appellant satisfies the Court that he had sufficient cause
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 14
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
for not preferring the appeal within such period. This section raises two questions for
consideration. First is, what is sufficient cause; and the second, what is the meaning
of the clause „within such period(cid:128)?"
*** In construing Section 5·it is relevant to bear in mind two important considerations. The first
consideration is that the expiration of the period of limitation prescribed for making an appeal gives
rise to a right in favour of the decree-holder to treat the decree as binding between the parties. In
other words, when the period of limitation prescribed has expired the decree-holder has obtained a
benefit under the law of limitation to treat the decree as beyond challenge, and this legal right which
has accrued to the decree-holder by lapse of time should not be light, heartedly disturbed. The other
consideration which cannot be-ignored is that if sufficient cause for excusing delay is shown
discretion is given to the Court to condone delay and admit the appeal. This discretion has been
deliberately conferred on the Court in order that judicial power and discretion in that behalf should
be exercised to advance substantial justice. As has been observed by the Madras High Court in
Krishna Vrs. Chattappan, 1890 ILR 13 Mad 269:
„Section 5 gives the Court a discretion which in respect of jurisdiction is to be
exercised in the way in·which judicial power and discretion ought to be exercised
upon principles which are well understood; the words „sufficient cause(cid:128) receiving a
liberal construction so as to advance substantial justice when no negligence nor
inaction nor want of bona fide is imputable to the appellant.(cid:128) Now, what do the
words „within such period(cid:128) denote? It is possible that the expression „within such
period(cid:128) may sometimes mean during such period. But the question is:
Does the context in. which the expression occurs in Section 5 justify the said
interpretation? If the Limitation Act or any other appropriate statute prescribes
different periods of limitation either for appeals or applications to which Section 5
applies that normally means that liberty is given to the party intending to make the
appeal or to file an application to act within the period prescribed in that behalf. It
would not be reasonable to require a party to take the necessary action on the very
first day after the cause of action accrues. In view of the period of limitation
prescribed the party would be entitled to take its time and to file the appeal on any
day during the said period and so prima facie it appears unreasonable that when the
delay has been made by the party in filing the appeal it should be called upon to
explain its conduct during the whole of the period of limitation prescribed. In our
opinion, it would be immaterial and even irrelevant to invoke general considerations
of diligence of parties in construing the words of Section 5. The context seems to
suggest that „within such period(cid:128) means within the period which ends with the last
day of limitation prescribed. In other words, in all cases falling under Section 5 what
the party has to show is why he did not file an appeal on the last day of limitation
prescribed. That may inevitably mean that the party will have to show sufficient cause
not only for not filing the appeal on the last day but to explain the delay made
thereafter day by day. In other words, in showing sufficient cause for condoning the
delay the party may be called upon to explain for the whole of the delay covered by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 15
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
the period between the last day prescribed for filing the appeal and the day on which
the appeal is filed. To hold that the expression „within such period(cid:128) means during
such period would, in our opinion, be repugnant in the context. We would
accordingly hold that the learned Judicial Commissioner was in error taking the view
that the failure of the appellant to account for its non-diligence during the whole of
the period of limitation prescribed for the appeal necessarily disqualified it from
praying for the condonation of delay, even though the delay in question was only for
one day; and that too was caused by the party(cid:128)s illness.
*** It is, however, necessary to emphasise that even after sufficient cause has been
shown a party is not entitled to the condonation of delay in question as a matter of
right. The proof of a sufficient cause is a condition precedent for the exercise of the
discretionary jurisdiction vested in the court by Section 5. If sufficient cause is not
proved nothing further has to be done; the application for condoning delay has to be
dismissed on that ground alone. If sufficient cause is shown then the court has to
enquire whether in its discretion it should condone the delay. This aspect of the
matter naturally introduces the consideration of all relevant facts and it is at this
stage that diligence of the party or its bona fides may fall for consideration; but the
scope of the enquiry while exercising the discretionary power after sufficient cause is
shown would naturally be limited only to such facts as the court may regard as
relevant. It cannot justify an enquiry as to why the party was sitting idle during all the
time available to it. In this connection we may point out that considerations of bona
fides or due diligence are always material and relevant when the court is dealing with
applications made under Section 14 of the Limitation Act. In dealing with such
applications the Court is called upon to consider the effect of the combined
provisions of Sections 5 and 14. Therefore, in our opinion, considerations which have
been expressly made material and relevant by the provisions of Section 14 cannot to
the same extent and in the same manner be invoked in dealing with applications
which fall to be decided only under Section 5 without reference to Section 14. ***"
6.21. The discretionary exercise of power amounts to something that is not
compulsory, but it is left to the discretion of the person or authority involved, such as
a discretionary grant. It is opposite to "mandatory".
Therefore, "discretionary" is a term which involves an alternative power, i.e., a power to do or
refrain from doing a certain thing. In other words, it would be power of free decision or choice
within certain legal bounds.
6.22. In S.P. Road Link Vrs. State of Tripura, (2006) 144 STC 380 (Gau) reference has been made to
Kumaon Mandal Vikas Nigam Ltd. Vrs. Girja Shankar Pant, (2001) 1 SCC 182 to observe that
"discretion" means when it is said that something is to be done within the discretion of the
authorities, that something is to be done according to the rules of reason and justice, not according
to private opinion, according to law, and not humour. It is to be, not arbitrary, vague, and fanciful,
but legal and regular.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 16
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
And it must be exercised within the limit, to which an honest man competent to the discharge of his
office ought to confine himself.
6.23. The following observations made in Lanka Venkateswarlu Vrs. State of Andhra Pradesh, (2011)
3 SCR 217 are pertinent to be referred to:
"21. In the case of Sardar Amarjit Singh Katra (dead) by LRs Vrs. Pramod Gupta
(dead) by LRs., (2002) Suppl.5 SCR 350 = (2003) 3 SCC 272, this Court again
emphasized that provisions contained in the Order 22 CPC were devised to ensure
continuation and culmination in an effective adjudication and not to retard further
progress of the proceedings. The provisions contained in the Order 22 are not to be
construed as a rigid matter of principle, but must ever be viewed as a flexible tool of
convenience in the administration of justice. It was further observed that laws of
procedure are meant to regulate effectively, assist and aid the object of doing a
substantial and real justice and not to foreclose even adjudication on merits of
substantial rights of citizen under personal, property and other laws. In the case of
Mithailal Dalsangar Singh Vrs. Annabai Devram Kini, (2003) 10 SCC 691, this Court
again reiterated that inasmuch as abatement results in denial of hearing on the
merits of the case, the provision of an abatement has to be construed strictly. On the
other hand, the prayer of setting aside abatement and the dismissal consequent upon
abatement had to be considered liberally. It was further observed as follows:
„The Courts have to adopt a justice oriented approach dictated by the uppermost
consideration that ordinarily a litigant ought not to be denied an opportunity of
having a lis determined on merits unless he has, by gross negligence, deliberate
inaction or something akin to misconduct, disentitled himself from seeking
the·indulgence of the court.(cid:128)
22. The concepts of liberal approach and reasonableness in exercise of the discretion
by the Courts in condoning delay, have been again stated by this Court in the case of
Balwant Singh (dead) Vrs. Jagdish Singh, (2010) 8 SCR 597 = (2010) 8 SCC 685 as
follows:
„25. We may state that even if the term „sufficient cause(cid:128) has to receive liberal
construction, it must squarely fall within the concept of reasonable time and proper
conduct of the party concerned. The purpose of introducing liberal construction
normally is to introduce the concept of „reasonableness(cid:128) as it is understood in its
general connotation.
26. The law of limitation is a substantive law and has definite consequences on the
right and obligation of party to arise. These principles should be adhered to and
applied appropriately depending on the facts and circumstances of a given case. Once
a valuable right has accrued in favour of one party as a result of the failure of the
other party to explain the delay by showing sufficient cause and its own conduct, it
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 17
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
will be unreasonable to take away that right on the mere asking of the applicant,
particularly when the delay is directly a result of negligence, default or inaction of
that party. Justice must be done to both parties equally. Then alone the ends of
justice can be achieved. If a party has been thoroughly negligent in implementing its
rights and remedies, it will be equally unfair to deprive the other party of a valuable
right that has accrued to it in law as a result of his acting vigilantly.(cid:128) ***
24. Having recorded the aforesaid conclusions, the High Court proceeded to condone
the delay. In our opinion, such a course was not open to the High Court, given the
pathetic explanation offered by the respondents in the application seeking
condonation of delay.
25. This is especially so in view of the remarks made by the High Court about the
delay being caused by the inefficiency and ineptitude of the Government pleaders.
The displeasure of the Court is patently apparent from the impugned order ·itself. In
the opening paragraph of the impugned order the High Court has, rather
sarcastically, dubbed the Government pleaders as without merit and ability.
Such an insinuation is clearly discernable from the observation that „This is a classic case, how the
learned Government pleaders appointed on the basis of merit and ability are discharging their
function protecting the interest of their clients.(cid:128) Having said so, the High Court, graphically
narrated the clear dereliction of duty by the concerned Government pleaders in not pursuing the
appeal before the High Court diligently. The High Court has set out the different stages at which the
Government pleaders had exhibited almost culpable negligence in performance of their duties. The
High Court found the justification given by the Government pleaders to be unacceptable. Twice in
the impugned order, it was recorded that in the normal course, the applications would have been
thrown out without having a second thought in the matter. Having recorded such conclusions,
inexplicably, the High Court proceeds to condone the unconscionable delay.
26. We are at a loss to fathom any logic or rationale, which could have impelled the High Court to
condone the delay after holding the same to be unjustifiable. The concepts such as „liberal
approach(cid:128), „justice oriented approach(cid:128), „substantial justice(cid:128) cannot be employed to jettison the
substantial law of limitation. Especially, in cases where the Court concludes that there is no
justification for the delay. In our opinion, the approach adopted by the High Court tends to show the
absence of judicial balance and restraint, which a Judge is required to maintain whilst adjudicating
any lis between the parties. We are rather pained to notice that in this case, not being satisfied with
the use of mere intemperate language, the High Court resorted to blatant sarcasms. The use of
unduly strong intemperate or extravagant language in a judgment has been repeatedly disapproved
by this Court in a number of cases. Whilst consideiing applications for condonation of delay under
Section 5 of the Limitation Act, the Courts do not enjoy unlimited and unbridled discretionary
powers.
All discretionary powers, especially judicial powers, have to be exercised within reasonable bounds,
known to the law. The discretion has to be exercised in a systematic manner informed by reason.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 18
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
Whims or fancies; prejudices or predilections cannot and should not form the basis of exercising
discretionary powers."
6.24. In Pathupati Subba Reddy (died) by Lrs. Vrs. The Special Deputy Collector (LA), (2024) 4 SCR
241 = 2024 INSC 286, having taken review of relevant earlier decisions, the principles for
consideration of condonation of delay have been expounded in the following terms:
"6. The moot question before us is whether in the facts and circumstances of the case,
the High Court was justified in refusing to condone the delay in filing the proposed
appeal and to dismiss it as barred by limitation.
***
9. Section 3 of the Limitation Act in no uncertain terms lays down that no suit, appeal
or application instituted, preferred or made after the period prescribed shall be
entertained rather dismissed even though limitation has not been set up as a defence
subject to the exceptions contained in Sections 4 to 24 (inclusive) of the Limitation
Act.
***
12. In view of the above provision, the appeal which is preferred after the expiry of
the limitation is liable to be dismissed. The use of the word „shall(cid:128) in the aforesaid
provision connotes that the dismissal is mandatory subject to the exceptions. Section
3 of the Act is peremptory and had to be given effect to even though no objection
regarding limitation is taken by the other side or referred to in the pleadings. In other
words, it casts an obligation upon the Court to dismiss an appeal which is presented
beyond limitation. This is the general law of limitation. The exceptions are carved out
under Sections 4 to 24 (inclusive) of the Limitation Act but we are concerned only
with the exception contained in Section 5 which empowers the Courts to admit an
appeal even if it is preferred after the prescribed period provided the proposed
appellant gives „sufficient cause(cid:128) for not preferring the appeal within the period
prescribed. In other words, the Courts are conferred with discretionary powers to
admit an appeal even after the expiry of the prescribed period provided the proposed
appellant is able to establish „sufficient cause(cid:128) for not filing it within time. The said
power to condone the delay or to admit the appeal preferred after the expiry of time
is discretionary in nature and may not be exercised even if sufficient cause is shown
based upon host of other factors such as negligence, failure to exercise due diligence
etc.
13. It is very elementary and well understood that Courts should not adopt an
injustice-oriented approach in dealing with the applications for condonation of the
delay in filing appeals and rather follow a pragmatic line to advance substantial
justice.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 19
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
***
17. It must always be borne in mind that while construing „sufficient cause(cid:128) in
deciding application under Section 5 of the Act, that on the expiry of the period of
limitation prescribed for filing an appeal, substantive right in favour of a
decree-holder accrues and this right ought not to be lightly disturbed. The
decree-holder treats the decree to be binding with the lapse of time and may proceed
on such assumption creating new rights.
***
26. On a harmonious consideration of the provisions of the law, as aforesaid, and the
law laid down by this Court, it is evident that:
(i) Law of limitation is based upon public policy that there should be an end to
litigation by forfeiting the right to remedy rather than the right itself;
(ii) A right or the remedy that has not been exercised or availed of for a long time
must come to an end or cease to exist after a fixed period of time;
(iii) The provisions of the Limitation Act have to be construed differently, such as
Section 3 has to be construed in a strict sense whereas Section 5 has to be construed
liberally;
(iv) In order to advance substantial justice, though liberal approach, justice-oriented approach or
cause of substantial justice may be kept in mind but the same cannot be used to defeat the
substantial law of limitation contained in Section 3 of the Limitation Act;
(v) Courts are empowered to exercise discretion to condone the delay if sufficient cause had been
explained, but that exercise of power is discretionary in nature and may not be exercised even if
sufficient cause is established for various factors such as, where there is inordinate delay, negligence
and want of due diligence;
(vi) Merely some persons obtained relief in similar matter, it does not mean that others are also
entitled to the same benefit if the Court is not satisfied with the cause shown for the delay in filing
the appeal;
(vii) Merits of the case are not required to be considered in condoning the delay; and
(viii) Delay condonation application has to be decided on the parameters laid down for condoning
the delay and condoning the delay for the reason that the conditions have been imposed,
tantamounts to disregarding the statutory provision."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 20
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
6.25. It may be of benefit to have reference to Esha Bhattacharjee Vrs. Managing Committee of
Raghunathpur Nafar Academy, (2013) 9 SCR 782, wherein the following principles are culled out:
"15. From the aforesaid authorities the principles that can broadly be culled out are:
(i) There should be a liberal, pragmatic, justice- E oriented, non-pedantic approach
while dealing with an application for condonation of delay, for the courts are not
supposed to legalise injustice but are obliged to remove injustice.
(ii) The terms „sufficient cause(cid:128) should be understood in their proper spirit,
philosophy and purpose regard being had to the fact that these terms are basically
elastic and are to be applied in proper perspective to the obtaining fact-situation.
(iii) Substantial justice being paramount and pivotal the technical considerations
should not be given undue and uncalled for emphasis.
(iv) No presumption can be attached to deliberate causation of delay but, gross
negligence on the part of the counsel or litigant is to be taken note of.
(v) Lack of bona fides imputable to a party seeking condonation of delay is a
significant and relevant fact.
(vi) It is to be kept in mind that adherence to strict proof should not affect public
justice and cause public mischief because the courts are required to be vigilant so that
in the ultimate eventuate there is no real failure of justice.
(vii) The concept of liberal approach has to encapsule the conception of
reasonableness and it cannot be allowed a totally unfettered free play.
(viii) There is a distinction between inordinate delay and a delay of short duration or
few days, for to the former doctrine of prejudice is attracted whereas to the latter it
may not be attracted.
That apart, the first one warrants strict approach whereas the second calls for a liberal delineation.
(ix) The conduct, behaviour and attitude of a party relating to its inaction or negligence are relevant
factors to be taken into consideration. It is so as the fundamental principle is that the courts are
required to weigh the scale of balance of justice in respect of both parties and the said principle
cannot be given a total go by in the name of liberal approach.
(x) If the explanation offered is concocted or the grounds urged in the application are fanciful, the
courts should be vigilant not to expose the other side unnecessarily to face such a litigation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 21
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
(xi) It is to be borne in mind that no one gets away with fraud, misrepresentation or interpolation by
taking recourse to the technicalities of law of limitation.
(xii) The entire gamut of facts are to be carefully scrutinized and the approach should be based on
the paradigm of judicial discretion which is founded on objective reasoning and not on individual
perception.
(xiii) The State or a public body or an entity representing a collective cause should be given some
acceptable latitude.
16. To the aforesaid principles we may add some more guidelines taking note of the present day
scenario. They are:
(a) An application for condonation of delay should be drafted with careful concern
and not in a half hazard manner harbouring the notion that the courts are required to
condone delay on the bedrock of the principle that adjudication of a lis on merits is
seminal to justice dispensation system.
(b) An application for condonation of delay should not be dealt with in a routine
manner on the base of individual philosophy which is basically subjective.
(c) Though no precise formula can be laid down regard being had to the concept of
judicial discretion, yet a conscious effort for achieving consistency and collegiality of
the adjudicatory system should be made as that is the ultimate institutional motto.
(d) The increasing tendency to perceive delay as a non-serious matter and, hence,
lackadaisical propensity can be exhibited in a non-challant manner requires to be
curbed, of course, within legal parameters."
6.26. In Amalendu Kumar Bera Vrs. State of West Bengal, (2013) 4 SCC 52 the
consideration of "sufficient cause"
qua official business has been perceived in the following manner:
"There is no dispute that the expression "sufficient cause"
should be considered with pragmatism in justice oriented approach rather than the technical
detection of "sufficient cause" for explaining every day(cid:128)s delay. However, it is equally well settled
that the courts albeit liberally considered the prayer for condonation of delay but in some cases the
court may refuse to condone the delay inasmuch as the Government is not accepted to keep watch
whether the contesting respondent further put the matter in motion. The delay in official business
requires its pedantic approach from public justice perspective. In a recent decision in Union of India
Vrs. Nripen Sarma, (2013) 4 SCC 57 = AIR 2011 SC 1237 the matter came up against the order
passed by the High Court condoning the delay in filing the appeal by the appellant-Union of India.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 22
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
The High Court refused to condone the delay on the ground that the appellant-Union of India took
their own sweet time to reach the conclusion whether the judgment should be appealed or not. The
High Court also expressed its anguish and distress with the way the State conducts the cases
regularly in filing the appeal after the same became operational and barred by limitation."
6.27. Having thus discussed the gamut of "sufficient cause"
vis-à-vis "good cause" with reference to the parameters of consideration of germane
grounds for condonation of delay in preferring appeal, this Court feels expedient to
observe that in State of M.P. Vrs. Pradeep Kumar, (2000)
7 SCC 372, the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court held that if an appeal is time barred, the Court should either
return the memorandum of appeal to the appellant to submit it along with an application under
Section 5 of the Limitation Act or should provide a chance to file application for condonation of
delay. The Court cannot, under such circumstances, dispose of the appeal on merit. In S.V. Matha
Prasad Vrs. Lalchand Meghraj, (2007) 14 SCC 722, it has been clearly held that while dealing with
an application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act, the Court cannot dispose of an appeal on merit
and such a course has been disapproved by the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court of India. However, in O.P.
Kathpalia Vrs. Lakhmir Singh, AIR 1984 SC 1744, it is held that if the refusal to condone the delay
results in grave miscarriage of justice, it would be a ground to condone the delay.
6.28. One of the grounds as agitated by the learned Additional Government Advocate is pandemic,
which cannot constitute, in view of this Court, to be "good cause". In State of Himachal Pradesh Vrs.
Gorkha Ram, Special Leave Petition (Criminal) Diary No. 27426 of 2020, vide Order dated
23.08.2021, the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court made the following observation:
"The SLP has been filed with a delay of 636 days. On our query as to what is the
reason, learned counsel seeks to contend it is because of COVID. The order was
passed on 05.12.2018 and thus, we asked the counsel as to which year was the world
affected by Covid 2019 or 2020 to which learned counsel(cid:128)s answer initially was 2019,
possibly to cover the delay but realizing that it was 2020, he states that the papers
were not received by him. To say the least, we are shocked at the conduct of the
petitioner-State and the manner of conduct the litigation in such a sensitive matter.
There is not even a semblance of explanation for delay. We however, would not like to
dismiss the petition on limitation because of the seriousness of the issue involved.
But that is no excuse why the State should not be made accountable of such
inordinate delay and the persons responsible for the same. We thus, condone the
delay but subject to imposition of costs of Rs.25,000/- to be deposited with the
Supreme Court Group „C(cid:128) (Non- Clerical) Employees Welfare Association within
four weeks with a direction to hold the enquiry, fix responsibility and recover the
amount from the officers concerned. The certificate of recovery should be filed before
this Court within the same period of time. The application for condonation of delay is
allowed in the aforesaid terms."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 23
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
In the instant case nothing is brought on record by the learned Additional Government Advocate
that responsible officer(s) has been proceeded with to fix accountability.
6.29. The Supreme Court of India in State of Madhya Pradesh Vrs. Bherulal, (2020) 10 SCC 654,
made it clear that, "5. A preposterous proposition is sought to be propounded that if there is some
merit in the case, the period of delay is to be given a go-by. If a case is good on merits, it will succeed
in any case. It is really a bar of limitation which can even shut out good cases. This does not, of
course, take away the jurisdiction of the Court in an appropriate case to condone the delay.
6. We are also of the view that the aforesaid approach is being adopted in what we have categorised
earlier as "certificate cases". The object appears to be to obtain a certificate of dismissal from the
Supreme Court to put a quietus to the issue and thus, say that nothing could be done because the
highest Court has dismissed the appeal. It is to complete this formality and save the skin of officers
who may be at default that such a process is followed. We have on earlier occasions also strongly
deprecated such a practice and process. There seems to be no improvement. The purpose of coming
to this Court is not to obtain such certificates and if the Government suffers losses, it is time when
the officer concerned responsible for the same bears the consequences. The irony is that in none of
the cases any action is taken against the officers, who sit on the files and do nothing. It is presumed
that this Court will condone the delay and even in making submissions, straightaway the counsel
appear to address on merits without referring even to the aspect of limitation as happened in this
case till we pointed out to the counsel that he must first address us on the question of limitation.
7. We are thus, constrained to send a signal and we propose to do in all matters today, where there
are such inordinate delays that the Government or State authorities coming before us must pay for
wastage of judicial time which has its own value. Such costs can be recovered from the officers
responsible."
6.30. Taking note of State of Madhya Pradesh Vrs. Bherulal, (2020) 10 SCC 654, in the cases of State
of Odisha Vrs. Sunanda Mahakuda, (2021) 11 SCC 560; State of Gujarat Vrs. Tushar Jagdish
Chandra Vyas, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 3517; State of U.P. Vrs. Sabha Narain, (2022) 9 SCC 266; Union
of India Vrs. Central Tibetan Schools Admin, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 119; Union of India Vrs. Vishnu
Aroma Pouching Pvt. Ltd., (2022) 9 SCC 263; Commissioner of Public Instruction Vrs.
Shamshuddin, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 3518 identical view has been expressed by the Supreme Court
of India.
7. Thus being delineated legal perspective for consideration of petition for condonation of delay, the
decisions of the Courts as referred to supra, it is to be seen whether the petition under consideration
filed by the State suggests for condonation of delay in filing writ appeal.
7.1. The cause shown by the appellants for the delay as stated in the petition, I.A. No.3691 of 2022, is
quoted hereunder:
"2. That, the order dated 07.12.2021 was received by the office of the Director of
Horticulture on 13.12.2021 (the date of knowledge).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 24
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
3. That, on receipt of the order on 13.12.2021 the claim of the petitioner/respondent
was examined and after examination of the matter, the Govt. in Agriculture &
Farmers(cid:128) Empowerment Deptt. was requested to communicated necessary
instruction/ order for taking further action on the matter on dt.13.01.2022 by the
Director of Horticulture. Then the Govt. in A&FE Deptt. forwarded the matter to the
Law Deptt. for their views.
4. Thereafter, the Govt. in A&FE Deptt. communicated the view of Law Deptt. on
dt.19.05.2022 to file Writ appeal. Accordingly, the draft writ appeal has been
submitted to the Advocate General, Odisha on dt.10.06.2022.
5. That the Office of Advocate General during that period was functioning with
limited staffs owing to COVID-19 guidelines issued by the Government from time to
time. Many of the Govt. Counsels and the staff of the office also suffered from
COVID19 and this seriously hampered and affected the efficiency.
Discussions/meetings and exchange of necessary documents were being carried out
in a restrictive manner. In such situation delay was caused in preparing and finalizing
the writ appeal, which is filed on 21.11.2022.
6. That, the delay in filing the appeal was on account of procedural delay, i. e. in
obtaining approval from the higher authority. The delay caused is not intentional or
deliberate."
7.2. Cursory glance at the information given in the petition with regard to delay does not explain as
to the cause of delay during 13.12.2021 (date of receipt of the impugned order) and referring the
matter to the Government in the Agriculture & Farmers(cid:128) Empowerment Department on 13.01.2022
by the Director of Horticulture. Thereafter, there is also no indication of any explanation as to the
period taken for the Government in the Agriculture & Farmers(cid:128) Empowerment Department to
communicate the view of Law Department on 19.05.2022 suggesting to file Writ appeal. There was a
further delay post-COVID-19 pandemic in the year 2022 as the contention of paucity of staff in the
Office of the learned Advocate General, Odisha after 19.05.2022 is unwholesome.
7.3. The position of law as discussed with regard to condonation of delay in Office of the Chief Post
Master General Vrs. Living Media India Ltd., (2012) 1 SCR 1045 = 2012 INSC 105 may throw light
on the issue at hand. In the said case the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court of India was considering with
respect to inordinate delay of around 427 days caused by functionaries of the Government in filing
SLPs and the said Hon(cid:128)ble Court held as follows:
"12. It is not in dispute that the person(s) concerned were well aware or conversant
with the issues involved including the prescribed period of limitation for taking up
the matter by way of filing a special leave petition in this Court. They cannot claim
that they have a separate period of limitation when the Department was possessed
with competent persons familiar with court proceedings. In the absence of plausible
and acceptable explanation, we are posing a question why the delay is to be condoned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 25
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
mechanically merely because the Government or a wing of the Government is a party
before us. Though we are conscious of the fact that in a matter of condonation of
delay when there was no gross negligence or deliberate inaction or lack of bona fide, a
liberal concession has to be adopted to advance substantial justice, we are of the view
that in the facts and circumstances, the Department cannot take advantage of various
earlier decisions. The claim on account of impersonal machinery and inherited
bureaucratic methodology of making several notes cannot be accepted in view of the
modern technologies being used and available. The law of limitation undoubtedly
binds everybody including the Government.
13. In our view, it is the right time to inform all the Government bodies, their
agencies and instrumentalities that unless they have reasonable and acceptable
explanation for the delay and there was bona fide effort, there is no need to accept the
usual explanation that the file was kept pending for several months/years due to
considerable degree of procedural red-tape in the process. The Government
departments are under a special obligation to ensure that they perform their duties
with diligence and commitment. Condonation of delay is an exception and should not
be used as an anticipated benefit for government departments. The law shelters
everyone under the same light and should not be swirled for the benefit of a few.
Considering the fact that there was no proper explanation offered by the Department
for the delay except mentioning of various dates, according to us, the Department has
miserably failed to give any acceptable and cogent reasons sufficient to condone such
a huge delay. Accordingly, the appeals are liable to be dismissed on the ground of
delay."
7.4. This Court in Radharaman Store Vrs. Odisha Sales Tax Tribunal and Another, 1997 SCC OnLine
Ori 98 = 85 (1998) CLT 657 = (1998) 108 STC 284 (Ori) has been pleased to make following
observation for non-furnishing plausible explanation by the Government:
"9. The question remains whether any plausible or acceptable reason was indicated
by the Revenue while seeking condonation, and whether the Tribunal considered the
matter in its proper perspective. The reasons indicated in the petition filed by the
Revenue extracted in its entirety reads as follows:
„That the delay in filing of the appeal is non- deliberate. The delay was due to the
process of decision-making in Government office.(cid:128) The Tribunal(cid:128)s order in its
entirety reads as follows:
„Heard the learned Addl. S.R. for the State and the learned advocate for the assessee.
The 1st appeal orders were received in the office of the Commissioner of Sales Tax on
December 14, 1993 and due date of filing of the appeals was February 12, 1994, but
the appeals have been filed on April 4, 1994 causing a delay of 50 days. In the petition
for condonation of delay it has been explained that the delay in filing of the appeal
was due to process of decision-making for filing of the second appeals. On a perusal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 26
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
of the administrative file it appears that the file was endorsed to the Addl. S.R. for his
opinion on December 31, 1993 and decision was made on March 30, 1994 for filing of
the second appeal. Thereafter the appeals were filed on April 4, 1994. So, the delay of
50 days in filing the second appeal in decision-making which was considered
sufficient cause for not filing the second appeal in time. Hence, the petition is allowed
and the delay is condoned. Register the appeals.(cid:128)
10. The factual backdrop and few relevant facts need to be noted. It is an accepted
position that the file was endorsed to the Addl. S.R. for opinion on December 31,
1993, and he passed an order on March 30, 1994 for filing of the second appeal. No
cause has been indicated as to why the Addl. S.R. took such a long time, and what
transpired during that period.
In fact no explanation whatsoever has been offered. Tribunal(cid:128)s reasoning is that there was delay in
decision-making process and that was considered to be sufficient cause. The conclusion does not
stand to reason. On the contrary, it shows non-application of mind to the germane issue. Even
though a liberal approach has to be adopted, that does not mean that any plea without any plausible
or acceptable basis, and not even hearing semblance of rationality has to be accepted, and delay has
to be condoned. That shall be against the very spirit of law. Prescription of timelimit for filing
appeals would become meaningless in such event. Merely because State is involved, that does not
mean that any lethargic or supine inaction has to be condoned or ignored, and even if no reason is
indicated that would be inconsequential. The subject-matter was not very complex and rather the
grounds of appeal filed appear to be of very routine nature. As has been observed by this Court in
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited, Koraput Division v. State of Orissa [1976] 38 STC 538, delay caused
by the concerned officer in giving his opinion, without any explanation whatsoever does not
constitute sufficient ground for condonation of delay. In the aforesaid premises, the inevitable
conclusion is that the Tribunal has not applied its judicial mind to the question whether delay was to
be condoned.
Certain interesting and relevant features are noticed on perusal of the administrative file produced.
Up to end of page 2, the proposed grounds of appeal have been written in hand. Interestingly from
page 3, they are typed. Except that portion, next are hand written. This aspect assumes greater
importance because in the margin of page 2, the following endorsement has been made on March
25, 1994 "signature is wanting". Whose signature was wanting and who detected it on March 25,
1994 remains a mystery. If the file was with the Addl. S.R. till March 30, 1994, how another officer
handled it to notice absence of signature.
That has not been explained. If records have been manipulated, it is a very serious matter and needs
an enquiry by the Commissioner of Sales Tax, Orissa."
7.5. As is apparent from the above explanation, the appellants have not given material particulars
with sufficient reasons for the delay. Furthermore, there is no explanation whatsoever is placed on
record to show as to why there was delay during the prescribed period of limitation in terms of the
provisions for filing writ appeal under the Rules of the High Court of Orissa, 1948. In this regard,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 27
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
State of Madhya Pradesh Vrs. Ramkumar Choudhary, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 3612 deserves to be
noticed, wherein the following observations have been made by the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court of
India:
"5. The legal position is that where a case has been presented in the Court beyond
limitation, the petitioner has to explain the Court as to what was the "sufficient
cause" which means an adequate and enough reason which prevented him to
approach the Court within limitation. In Majji Sannemma Vrs. Reddy Sridevi 2021
SCC OnLine SC 1260, it was held by this Court that even though limitation may
harshly affect the rights of a party, it has to be applied with all its rigour when
prescribed by statute. A reference was also made to the decision of this Court in Ajay
Dabra Vrs. Pyare Ram, 2023 SCC OnLine SC 92 wherein, it was held as follows:
„13. This Court in the case of Basawaraj Vrs.
Special Land Acquisition Officer, (2013) 14 SCC 81 while rejecting an application for
condonation of delay for lack of sufficient cause has concluded in Paragraph 15 as
follows:
„15. The law on the issue can be summarised to the effect that where a case has been
presented in the court beyond limitation, the applicant has to explain the court as to
what was the "sufficient cause" which means an adequate and enough reason which
prevented him to approach the court within limitation. In case a party is found to be
negligent, or for want of bona fide on his part in the facts and circumstances of the
case, or found to have not acted diligently or remained inactive, there cannot be a
justified ground to condone the delay. No court could be justified in condoning such
an inordinate delay by imposing any condition whatsoever. The application is to be
decided only within the parameters laid down by this Court in regard to the
condonation of delay. In case there was no sufficient cause to prevent a litigant to
approach the court on time condoning the delay without any justification, putting any
condition whatsoever, amounts to passing an order in violation of the statutory
provisions and it tantamounts to showing utter disregard to the legislature.(cid:128)
14. Therefore, we are of the considered opinion that the High Court did not commit
any mistake in dismissing the delay condonation application of the present
appellant.(cid:128) Thus, it is crystal clear that the discretion to condone the delay has to be
exercised judiciously based on facts and circumstances of each case and that, the
expression „sufficient cause(cid:128) cannot be liberally interpreted, if negligence, inaction
or lack of bona fides is attributed to the party.
5.1. In Union of India Vrs. Jahangir Byramji Jeejeebhoy (D) through his legal heir,
2024 SCC OnLine SC 489 = 2024 INSC 262, wherein, one of us (J.B. Pardiwala, J)
was a member, after referring to various decisions on the issue, it was in unequivocal
terms observed by this Court that delay should not be excused as a matter of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 28
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
generosity and rendering substantial justice is not to cause prejudice to the opposite
party. The relevant passage of the same is profitably extracted below:
„24. In the aforesaid circumstances, we made it very clear that we are not going to
look into the merits of the matter as long as we are not convinced that sufficient cause
has been made out for condonation of such a long and inordinate delay.
25. It hardly matters whether a litigant is a private party or a State or Union of India
when it comes to condoning the gross delay of more than 12 years. If the litigant
chooses to approach the court long after the lapse of the time prescribed under the
relevant provisions of the law, then he cannot turn around and say that no prejudice
would be caused to either side by the delay being condoned. This litigation between
the parties started sometime in 1981. We are in 2024. Almost 43 years have elapsed.
However, till date the respondent has not been able to reap the fruits of his decree. It
would be a mockery of justice if we condone the delay of 12 years and 158 days and
once again ask the respondent to undergo the rigmarole of the legal proceedings.
26. The length of the delay is a relevant matter which the court must take into
consideration while considering whether the delay should be condoned or not. From
the tenor of the approach of the appellants, it appears that they want to fix their own
period of limitation for instituting the proceedings for which law has prescribed a
period of limitation. Once it is held that a party has lost his right to have the matter
considered on merits because of his own inaction for a long, it cannot be presumed to
be non-deliberate delay and in such circumstances of the case, he cannot be heard to
plead that the substantial justice deserves to be preferred as against the technical
considerations. While considering the plea for condonation of delay, the court must
not start with the merits of the main matter. The court owes a duty to first ascertain
the bona fides of the explanation offered by the party seeking condonation. It is only
if the sufficient cause assigned by the litigant and the opposition of the other side is
equally balanced that the court may bring into aid the merits of the matter for the
purpose of condoning the delay.
27. We are of the view that the question of limitation is not merely a technical
consideration. The rules of limitation are based on the principles of sound public
policy and principles of equity. We should not keep the „Sword of Damocles(cid:128) hanging
over the head of the respondent for indefinite period of time to be determined at the
whims and fancies of the appellants.
***
34. In view of the aforesaid, we have reached to the conclusion that the High Court committed no
error much less any error of law in passing the impugned order. Even otherwise, the High Court was
exercising its supervisory jurisdiction under Article 227 of the Constitution of India.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 29
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
35. In a plethora of decisions of this Court, it has been said that delay should not be excused as a
matter of generosity. Rendering substantial justice is not to cause prejudice to the opposite party.
The appellants have failed to prove that they were reasonably diligent in prosecuting the matter and
this vital test for condoning the delay is not satisfied in this case.
36. For all the foregoing reasons, this appeal fails and is hereby dismissed. There shall be no order
as to costs.(cid:128) Applying the above legal proposition to the facts of the present case, we are of the
opinion that the High Court correctly refused to condone the delay and dismissed the appeal by
observing that such inordinate delay was not explained satisfactorily, no sufficient cause was shown
for the same, and no plausible reason was put forth by the State. Therefore, we are inclined to reject
this petition at the threshold.
6. At the same time, we cannot simply brush aside the delay occurred in preferring the second
appeal, due to callous and lackadaisical attitude on the part of the officials functioning in the State
machinery. Though the Government adopts systematic approach in handling the legal issues and
preferring the petitions/applications/appeals well within the time, due to the fault on the part of the
officials in merely communicating the information on time, huge revenue loss will be caused to the
Government exchequer. The present case is one such case, wherein, enormous delay of 1788 days
occasioned in preferring the second appeal due to the lapses on the part of the officials functioning
under the State, though valuable Government lands were involved. Therefore, we direct the State to
streamline the machinery touching the legal issues, offering legal opinion, filing of cases before the
Tribunal/Courts, etc., fix the responsibility on the officer(s) concerned, and penalize the officer(s),
who is/are responsible for delay, deviation, lapses, etc., if any, to the value of the loss caused to the
Government. Such direction will have to be followed by all the States scrupulously.
7. There is one another aspect of the matter which we must not ignore or overlook. Over a period of
time, we have noticed that whenever there is a plea for condonation of delay be it at the instance of a
private litigant or State the delay is sought to be explained right from the time, the limitation starts
and if there is a delay of say 2 years or 3 years or 4 years till the end of the same. For example if the
period of limitation is 90 days then the party seeking condonation has to explain why it was unable
to institute the proceedings within that period of limitation. What events occurred after the 91st day
till the last is of no consequence. The court is required to consider what came in the way of the party
that it was unable to file it between the 1st day and the 90th day. It is true that a party is entitled to
wait until the last day of limitation for filing an appeal. But when it allows the limitation to expire
and pleads sufficient cause for not filing the appeal earlier, the sufficient cause must establish that
because of some event or circumstance arising before the limitation expired it was not possible to
file the appeal within time. No event or circumstance arising after the expiry of limitation can
constitute such sufficient cause. There may be events or circumstances subsequent to the expiry of
limitation which may further delay the filing of the appeal. But that the limitation has been allowed
to expire without the appeal being filed must be traced to a cause arising within the period of
limitation. (See: Ajit Singh Thakur Singh Vrs. State of Gujarat, (1981) 1 SCC 495 = AIR 1981 SC
733)."
7.6. In Vedabai @ Vaijayanatabai Baburao Patil Vrs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 30
Director vs Sudhanshu Mohan Mohanty on 26 March, 2025
Shantaram Baburao Patil, AIR 2001 SC 2582, the Hon(cid:128)ble Court observed that, "A distinction must
be made between a case where the delay is inordinate and a case where the delay is of a few days.
Whereas in the former case the consideration of prejudice to the other side will be a relevant factor
so the case calls for a more cautious approach but in the latter case no such consideration may arise
and such a case deserves a liberal approach. No hard and fast rule can be laid down in this regard.
The Court has to exercise the discretion on the facts of each case keeping in mind that in construing
the expression „sufficient cause(cid:128) the principle of advancing substantial justice is of prime
importance."
7.7. It needs to be emphasised age-old maxim "Vigilantibus Et Non Dormientibus Jura Subveniunt",
meaning thereby equity avails to the vigilant, not the person who sleeps over his right. The Courts
will not help the person who sleeps over their rights but help those who are aware of their rights. A
person is said to be liable for laches when he comes to the Court to affirm rights after a reasonable
delay in that respect.
7.8. To a query from the Court, Sri Partha Sarathy Nayak, learned Additional Government Advocate
denied that there is glaring question of law having wide ramification involved in the writ appeal.
7.9. In the case at hand as pointed out by Sri Tarun Kanta Pattanayak, learned Advocate that even
though Registry of this Court pointed out delay of 320 days, no plausible explanation has been
proffered by the appellants as to seeking condonation of delay of 175 days. This Court may take
cognizance of the fact that the Order dated 07.12.2021 has been passed in WPC (OAC) No.2862 of
2002 in open Court proceeding in presence of Additional Standing Counsel representing the State
and the counsel for the respondent herein.
7.10. In the aforesaid enunciation of well-settled legal position, this Court has come to the
irresistible conclusion that stating the dates of movement of file would not be construed as
"sufficient cause"/"good cause" so as to warrant consideration of condonation of delay in filing writ
appeal.
8. Under the above premises, the petition for condonation of delay does not demonstrate
sufficient/good cause; as such, this Court does not deem it a fit case deserving condonation of
inordinate delay in filing writ appeal.
9. In view of the above discussions on the facts and the law, the interlocutory application, being I.A.
No.3691 of 2022, is dismissed. Consequently, the writ appeal bearing W.A. No.1572 of 2022 stands
dismissed.
(SANGAM KUMAR SAHOO) JUDGE (MURAHARI SRI RAMAN) JUDGE Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed High Court of Orissa, Cuttack Signed by: LAXMIKANT MOHAPATRA The 26th
March, 2025//MRS/Laxmikant Designation: Senior Stenographer Reason: Authentication
Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134417308/ 31
