Divinder Kour & Anr vs Ut Of J&K on 9 August, 2023
Divinder Kour & Anr vs Ut Of J&K on 9 August, 2023
Author: Rahul Bharti
Bench: Rahul Bharti
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRM(M) no. 808/2022
Divinder Kour & anr ....Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr Vishal Kapur, Advocate.
V/s
UT of J&K ....Respondent(s)
Through :-
Coram: HON(cid:128)BLE MR. JUSTICE RAHUL BHARTI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Through the present case, this Court is seizing an occasion and opportunity to examine the legal
position that it is not possible/feasible for a complainant wife and an accused husband in a given
criminal case under trial for the commission of offence under section 498-A Indian Penal Code and
other related offences, to join together and call upon the Public Prosecutor conducting the
prosecution to exercise his authority to withdraw from the prosecution so as to sub-serve the
interest of justice when a complainant/wife amicably reconciles her matrimonial differences and
grievances with and against her accused husband and his relatives thereby intend to end the
criminal case initiated upon her complaint/first information report before the very criminal court
seized of the trial of the case.
2. By filing the present petition invoking the inherent power of this court available under Section
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (in short, „CrPC(cid:128)), the petitioners no. 1 and 2, being
wife and husband, have joined together for seeking quashment of a criminal case under trial, based
upon the police report no. 57 of 2020 submitted by the Police Station, Janipur, Jammu, against the
petitioner no. 2- husband and his relatives, for alleged commission of offences under section 498-A
and 406 Indian Penal Code (in short 'IPC') which is pending trial before the Court of Municipal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106661135/ 1
Divinder Kour & Anr vs Ut Of J&K on 9 August, 2023
Magistrate, Jammu.
3. It is an FIR no. 64 of 2020 dated 19.08.2020 registered by the Police Station, Janipur, Jammu
that resulted in presentation of a final Police Report no. 57 of 2020 dated 30.12.2020 under section
498-A and 406 IPC against the named accused who being the petitioner no. 2 (husband) and his
relatives before the court of Municipal Magistrate Jammu.
4. The alleged commission of offences had occasioned from the matrimonial relationship obtaining
between the petitioners on account of the marriage solemnized between them on 03.11.2019 at
Amritsar and out of which no issue came to be born to the petitioner no. 1.
5. In this state of matrimonial discord, a course of cross litigation came to be set into effect against
each other by the petitioners, some of which got initiated in Jalandhar being the place of the
parental residence of the petitioner no. 2 (Husband) and in Jammu being the parental place of the
petitioner no. 1 (Wife).
6. During the pendency of the aforesaid proceedings, better sense prevailed to the petitioners and
their respective relatives to amicably end the acrimony afflicting both sides and to let the petitioners
opt for a marital separation in an amicable manner so as to relieve each other from the burden of
matrimonial bond and burden.
7. This resulted in presentation of a petition for dissolution of marriage by decree of divorce by
mutual consent under Section 13-B of the Hindu Marriage Act, 1955 before the Principal Family
Court, Jammu. This petition came to be presented by the petitioners on 05.02.2022 in terms
whereof the petitioners came to settle modalities of their separation to end their marriage and one of
the outcomes of the said mutual understanding is to end said criminal case going on against the
petitioner no. 2-husband and his family members before the Court of Municipal Magistrate, Jammu.
8. It is for this purpose that the petitioners were constrained to approach this Court with the present
petition for seeking quashment of the aforesaid criminal case having no other option and forum at
their disposal to end the aforesaid criminal case particularly by making a plea to the trial court of
Municipal Magistrate, Jammu given the fact that while the offence under section 406 IPC though
compoundable at the instance of the complainant, that being the petitioner no. 1-wife, requiring the
permission of the criminal court seized of the trial but the offence under section 498-A IPC being
non-compoundable leaves no option for trial court to entertain the settlement arrived at between
the parties and end the criminal case mid way so as to set them free from the rigmarole of litigation.
9. This Court has examined the parties present in person along with their respective counsel. This
Court is satisfied that both the petitioners have amicably settled their differences and have acted
upon the compromise so effected between them and as such, this Court is accepting the present
petition and is hereby quashing the criminal case so pending trial before the court of Municipal
Magistrate, Jammu with respect to final Police Report no. 57 of 2020 dated 30.12.2020 of the Police
Station, Janipur, Jammu.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106661135/ 2
Divinder Kour & Anr vs Ut Of J&K on 9 August, 2023
10. Before parting with this judgment, this Court is constrained to take a cognizance that in cases
where husbands and wives are suffering matrimonial litigation and also criminal litigation in the
context of offence under Section 498-A IPC and other related offences and reside at such places and
courts which are far away from easy reach to this Court, be it Jammu wing or Srinagar wing, then for
them to seek quashment of a criminal case under Section 498-A IPC and other related offences in
the wake of an amicable settlement between them is a matter of great expense, both in terms of
money and energy, constraining them to journey to this Court and ask for the last ritual of ending
the criminal litigation so going on at the instance of one against other.
11. It is in this scenario that this court sees a positive role amounting to an obligation resting upon
the Public Prosecutor, conducting the prosecution before the concerned court to exercise his
authority vested under Section 321 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (Cr.P.C in short)
pertaining to withdrawal from prosecution so as to end the given criminal case in that very court
itself rather than getting the reconciliating parties to make a call to this court for getting needful
done by seeking exercise of jurisdiction under section 482 Cr.P.C .
12. Section 321 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 reads as under:
"321. Withdrawal from prosecution.- The Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public
Prosecutor in charge of a case may, with the consent of the Court, at any time before
the judgment is pronounced, withdraw from the prosecution of any person either
generally or in respect of any one or more of the offences for which he is tried; and,
upon such withdrawal,-
(a) if it is made before a charge has been framed, the accused shall be discharged in
respect of such offence or offences;
(b) if it is made after a charge has been framed, or when under this Code no charge is
required, he shall be acquitted in respect of such offence or offences:
Provided that where such offence-
(i) was against any law relating to a matter to which the executive power of the Union
extends, or
(ii) was investigated by the Delhi Special Police Establishment under the Delhi
Special Police Establishment Act, 1946 (25 of 1946 ), or
(iii) involved the misappropriation or destruction of, or damage to, any property
belonging to the Central Government, or
(iv) was committed by a person in the service of the Central Government while acting
or purporting to act in the discharge of his official duty, and the Prosecutor in charge
of the case has not been appointed by the Central Government, he shall not, unless he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106661135/ 3
Divinder Kour & Anr vs Ut Of J&K on 9 August, 2023
has been permitted by the Central Government to do so, move the Court for its
consent to withdraw from the prosecution and the Court shall, before according
consent, direct the Prosecutor to produce before it the permission granted by the
Central Government to withdraw from the prosecution."
13. Public prosecutor is a person who is a three in one representative of the Society, State and
Sovereign to conduct a prosecution of a criminal case against person/s accused of commission of
penal offences and is a person entrusted with an independent authority and personality in the
matter of conduct of the prosecution of the assigned criminal case/s.
14. The Code of Criminal Procedure, 1908 vests this exceptional power in favour of the Public
Prosecutor to withdraw from prosecution of any person either generally or in respect of any one or
more of the offences for which he is being tried. The role of the Public Prosecutor, in the context of
withdrawal from prosecution, has been thoroughly examined by the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India
in its constitution bench judgment in the case of 'Sheonandan Paswan Vs. State of Bihar and Ors(cid:128)
reported in (1987) 1 SCC 288. What has been stated and settled with respect to purport and purpose
of section 321 Cr.P.C by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in paragraphs 22, 28, 44, 78 and 79 in the said
judgment makes a compulsive reading and are as under:
"22........ This Court has, therefore, despite fluctuating opinions delivered in different
cases, laid down the broad principle and consistently acted upon it, namely, that the
power to apply for withdrawal from the prosecution can be exercised only in
furtherance of justice. It was pointed out by this Court in M. N. Sankaranarayanan
Nair v. P. V. Balakrishnan, (1972) 2 SCR 599 : ( AIR 1972 SC 496 ), "the essential
consideration which is implicit in the grant of the power is that it should be in the
interest of administration of justice." So also, one of us, (Bhagwati, J. as he then was)
said in State of Orissa v. C. Mohapatra, (1977) 1 SCR 335: ( AIR 1977 SC 903 ) - "the
ultimate guiding consideration must always be the interest of administration of
justice." That is the broad principle under which the Public Prosecutor must bring his
case in order to be able to justify his application for withdrawal from the prosecution.
What are the different grounds which may possibly come within this principle is a
matter which we shall presently discuss but whatever be the grounds on which the
application is made it can be sustained only if these grounds are relatable to
furtherance of public justice."
"28. Now let us consider the question as to what are the grounds on which the Public
Prosecutor can apply for withdrawal from the prosecution. These grounds have been
variously stated in the decisions of this Court but the basic principle underlying all
these grounds is that the withdrawal can be sought only for furthering the cause of
public justice. If we may repeat what we have said before the paramount
consideration must always be the interest of administration of justice. That is the
touchstone on which the question must be determined whether an application for
withdrawal of the prosecution can be sustained. This Court tried to formulate several
instances where the cause of public justice would be served better by withdrawal from
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106661135/ 4
Divinder Kour & Anr vs Ut Of J&K on 9 August, 2023
the prosecution. It was observed by this Court in M. N. Sankaranarayanan v. P. V.
Balakrishnan, ( AIR 1972 SC 496 ) (supra) that an application for withdrawal from
the prosecution may be made on the ground that "it will not be possible to produce
sufficient evidence to sustain the charge or that subsequent information before
prosecuting agency would falsify the prosecution evidence or in any other similar
circumstances which it is difficult to predicate as they are dependent entirely on the
facts and circumstances of each case. This Court also pointed out in State of Orissa v.
C. Mohapatra, ( AIR 1977 SC 903 ) (supra) that "it is not sufficient for the Public
Prosecutor merely to say that it is not expedient to proceed with the prosecution. He
has to make out some ground which would show that the prosecution is sought to be
withdrawn because inter alia the prosecution may not be able to produce sufficient
evidence to sustain the charge or that the prosecution does not appear to be well
founded or that there are other circumstances which clearly show that the object of
administration of justice would not be advanced or furthered by going on with the
prosecution." It was also emphasised by this Court in Subhash Chander v. State, (
AIR 1980 SC 423 ) (supra) that "justice cannot be allowed to be scuttled by the Public
Prosecutor or the State because of hubris affection or other noble or ignoble
considerations." This Court also observed in R. K. Jain v. State, ( AIR 1980 SC 1510 )
(supra) :
"In the past we have often known how expedient and necessary it is in the public
interest for the Public Prosecutor to withdraw from prosecutions arising out of mass
agitations, communal riots, regional disputes, industrial conflicts, student unrest, etc.
Wherever issues involve the emotions and there is a surcharge of violence in the
atmosphere it has often been found necessary to withdraw from prosecutions in
order to restore peace, to free the atmosphere from the surcharge of violence, to bring
about a peaceful settlement of issues and to persist with prosecutions where emotive
issues are involved in the name of vindicating the law may even be utterly counter
productive. An elected Government, sensitive and responsive to the feelings and
emotions of the people, will be amply justified if for the purpose of creating an
atmosphere of goodwill or for the purpose of not disturbing a calm which has
descended it decides not to prosecute the offenders involved or not to proceed further
with prosecutions already launched."
It will thus be seen that the Public Prosecutor cannot maintain an application for withdrawal from
the prosecution on the ground that the Government does not want to produce evidence and proceed
with the prosecution against the accused or that the Government considers that it is not expedient to
proceed with the prosecution. The Public Prosecutor has to make out some ground which would
advance or further the cause of public justice. If the Public Prosecutor is able to show that he may
not be able to produce sufficient evidence to sustain the charge, an application for withdrawal from
the prosecution may be legitimately made by him. But there are two clarifications which we would
like to introduce where the prosecution is sought to be withdrawn on this ground."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106661135/ 5
Divinder Kour & Anr vs Ut Of J&K on 9 August, 2023
"44. I respectfully agree with the legal position flowing from S. 321 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure as explained by Krishna Iyer and Chinnappa Reddy, JJ. in
respect of cases relating to Bansi Lal and Fernandes in R. K. Jain v. State through
Special Police Establishment, (1980) 3 SCR 982 : ( AIR 1980 SC 1510 ). In that case
Chinnappa eddy, J. has summarised the true legal position thus :
"1. Under the scheme of the Code prosecution of an offender for a serious offence is
primarily the responsibility of the Executive.
2. The withdrawal from the prosecution is an executive function of the Public
Prosecutor.
3. The discretion to withdraw from the prosecution is that of the Public Prosecutor
and none else, and so, he cannot surrender that discretion to someone else.
4. The Government may suggest to the Public Prosecutor that he may withdraw from
the prosecution but none can compel him to do so.
5. The Public Prosecutor may withdraw from the prosecution not merely on the
ground of paucity of evidence but on other relevant grounds as well in order to
further the broad ends of public justice, public order and peace. The broad ends of
public justice will certainly include appropriate social, economic and, political
purposes sans Tammany Hall enterprise.
6. The Public Prosecutor is an officer of the Court and responsible to the Court.
7. The Court performs a supervisory function in granting its consent to the
withdrawal.
8. The Court's duty is not to reappreciate the grounds which led the Public Prosecutor
to request withdrawal from the prosecution but to consider whether the Public
Prosecutor applied his mind as a free agent, uninfluenced by irrelevant and
extraneous considerations. The Court has a special duty in this regard as it is the
ultimate repository of legislative confidence in granting or withholding its consent to
withdrawal from the prosecution.
We may add it shall be the duty of the Public Prosecutor to inform the Court and it
shall be the duty of the Court to apprise itself of the reasons which prompt the Public
Prosecutor to withdraw from the prosecution.. The Court has a responsibility and a
stake in the administration of criminal justice and so has the Public Prosecutor, its
'Minister of Justice'. Both have a duty to protect the administration of criminal
justice against possible abuse or misuse by the Executive by resort to the provisions
of S. 321, Criminal Procedure Code. The independence of the judiciary requires that
once the case has travelled to the Court, the Court and its officers alone must have
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106661135/ 6
Divinder Kour & Anr vs Ut Of J&K on 9 August, 2023
control over the case and decide what is to be done in each case."
"78. The section gives no indication as to the grounds on which the Public Prosecutor
may make the application, or the considerations on which the Court is to grant its
consent, The initiative is that of the Public Prosecutor and what the Court has to do is
only to give its consent and not to determine any matter judicially. The judicial
function implicit in the exercise of the judicial discretion for granting the consent
would normally mean that the Court has to satisfy itself that the executive function of
the Public Prosecutor has not been improperly exercised, or that it is not an attempt
to interfere with the normal course of justice for illegitimate reasons or purposes."
"79. The Court's function is to give consent. This section does not obligate the Court
to record reasons before consent is given. However, I should not be taken to hold that
consent of the Court is a matter of course. When the Public Prosecutor makes the
application for withdrawal after taking into consideration all the materials before
him, the Court exercises its judicial discretion by considering such materials and on
such consideration, either gives consent or declines consent. The section should not
be construed to mean that the Court has to give a detailed reasoned order when it
gives consent. If on a reading of the order giving consent, a higher Court is satisfied
that such consent was given on an overall consideration of the materials available, the
order giving consent has necessarily to be upheld.
15. The understanding of section 321 Cr.P.C has been carried forward towards clarity by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of "V.L.S Finance Limited Vs. S.P. Gupta and anr" (2016) 3 SCC 736 in
the following paras reproduced herein next:-
"37. Regard being had to the language employed in Section 321 Cr.P.C., we may refer
to the Constitution Bench decision in Sheonandan Paswan v. State of Bihar and
others[6] wherein the Court referred to Section 333 of the old Code and after taking
note of the language employed under Section 321 of the present Code came to hold
that Section 321 enables the Public Prosecutor, in charge of the case to withdraw
from the prosecution of any person at any time before the judgment is pronounced,
but the application for withdrawal has to get the consent of the court and if the court
gives consent for such withdrawal the accused will be discharged if no charge has
been framed or acquitted if charge has been framed or where no such charge is
required to be framed. It clothes the Public Prosecutor to withdraw from the
prosecution of any person, accused of an offence, both when no evidence is taken or
even if entire evidence has been taken. The outer limit for the exercise of this power is
„at any time before the judgment is pronounced(cid:128). It has also been observed that the
judicial function implicit in the exercise of the judicial discretion for granting the
consent would normally mean that the court has to satisfy itself that the executive
function of the Public Prosecutor has not been improperly exercised, or that it is not
an attempt to interfere with the normal course of justice for illegitimate reasons or
purposes. The Constitution Bench after referring to the authorities in Bansi Lal v.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106661135/ 7
Divinder Kour & Anr vs Ut Of J&K on 9 August, 2023
Chandan Lal and others[7], Balwant Singh v. State of Bihar[8], Subhash Chander v.
State (Chandigarh Admn.)[9], Rajender Kumar Jain v. State[10] and the principles
stated in State of Bihar v. Ram Naresh Pandey case.
"99. All the above decisions have followed the reasoning of Ram Naresh Pandey case
(supra) and the principles settled in that decision were not doubted.
100. It is in the light of these decisions that the case on hand has to be considered. I
find the application for withdrawal by the Public Prosecutor has been made in good
faith after careful consideration of the materials placed before him and the order of
consent given by the Magistrate was also after due consideration of various details, as
indicated above. It would be improper for this Court, keeping in view the scheme of
Section 321, to embark upon a detailed enquiry into the facts and evidence of the case
or to direct retrial for that would be destructive of the object and intent of the
section."
"39. In Rahul Agarwal v. Rakesh Jain and another[13], the Court while dealing with
the application under Section 321 Cr.P.C. referred to certain decisions wherein the
earlier decision of the Constitution Bench in Sheonandan Paswan (supra) was
appreciated, and thereafter ruled thus:-
"10. From these decisions as well as other decisions on the same question, the law is
very clear that the withdrawal of prosecution can be allowed only in the interest of
justice. Even if the Government directs the Public Prosecutor to withdraw the
prosecution and an application is filed to that effect, the court must consider all
relevant circumstances and find out whether the withdrawal of prosecution would
advance the cause of justice. If the case is likely to end in an acquittal and the
continuance of the case is only causing severe harassment to the accused, the court
may permit withdrawal of the prosecution. If the withdrawal of prosecution is likely
to bury the dispute and bring about harmony between the parties and it would be in
the best interest of justice, the court may allow the withdrawal of prosecution. The
discretion under Section 321, Code of Criminal Procedure is to be carefully exercised
by the court having due regard to all the relevant facts and shall not be exercised to
stifle the prosecution which is being done at the instance of the aggrieved parties or
the State for redressing their grievance. Every crime is an offence against the society
and if the accused committed an offence, society demands that he should be
punished. Punishing the person who perpetrated the crime is an essential
requirement for the maintenance of law and order and peace in the society.
Therefore, the withdrawal of the prosecution shall be permitted only when valid
reasons are made out for the same."
"40. In Bairam Muralidhar v. State of A.P., while dealing with the said provision it
has been laid down that:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106661135/ 8
Divinder Kour & Anr vs Ut Of J&K on 9 August, 2023
"18... it is the obligation of the Public Prosecutor to state what material he has
considered. It has to be set out in brief. The court as has been held in Abdul Karim
case, is required to give an informed consent. It is obligatory on the part of the court
to satisfy itself that from the material it can reasonably be held that the withdrawal of
the prosecution would serve the public interest. It is not within the domain of the
court to weigh the material. However, it is necessary on the part of the court to see
whether the grant of consent would thwart or stifle the course of law or cause
manifest injustice. A court while giving consent under Section 321 of the Code is
required to exercise its judicial discretion, and judicial discretion, as settled in law, is
not to be exercised in a mechanical manner. The court cannot give such consent on a
mere asking. It is expected of the court to consider the material on record to see that
the application had been filed in good faith and it is in the interest of public interest
and justice. Another aspect the court is obliged to see is whether such withdrawal
would advance the cause of justice. It requires exercise of careful and concerned
discretion because certain crimes are against the State and the society as a collective
demands justice to be done. That maintains the law and order situation in the society.
The Public Prosecutor cannot act like the post office on behalf of the State
Government. He is required to act in good faith, peruse the materials on record and
form an independent opinion that the withdrawal of the case would really subserve
the public interest at large. An order of the Government on the Public Prosecutor in
this regard is not binding. He cannot remain oblivious to his lawful obligations under
the Code. He is required to constantly remember his duty to the court as well as his
duty to the collective."
"41. In this context, reference to a two-Judge Bench decision in Vijaykumar Baldev
Mishra alias Sharma v. State of Maharashtra would be fruitful. In the said case, the
Court held that Section 321 Cr.P.C. provides for withdrawal from prosecution at the
instance of the Public Prosecutor or Assistant Public Prosecutor. Indisputably
therefore the consent of the Court is necessary. Application of mind on the part of the
Court, therefore, is necessary in regard to the grounds for withdrawal from the
prosecution in respect of any one or more of the offences for which the appellant is
tried. The Public Prosecutor in terms of the statutory scheme laid down under the
Cr.P.C. plays an important role. He is supposed to be an independent person. While
filing such an application, the Public Prosecutor also is required to apply his own
mind and the effect thereof on the society in the event such permission is granted."
"42. We have enumerated the principles pertaining to the jurisdiction of the Court
while dealing with an application preferred under Section 321 Cr.P.C. and also
highlighted the role of the Public Prosecutor who is required to act in good faith,
peruse the materials on record and form an independent opinion that the withdrawal
from the prosecution would really subserve the public interest at large. The
authorities referred to hereinabove clearly spell out that Public Prosecutor is not
supposed to act as a post office and he is expected to remember his duty to the Court
as well as his duty to the collective."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106661135/ 9
Divinder Kour & Anr vs Ut Of J&K on 9 August, 2023
16. Keeping in view the essence and essentiality with which the provision of withdrawal from
prosecution under Section 321 Cr.P.C. has been invested, this Court is of the view that its application
is to be more readily expedient and available in cases of offences born out of troubled matrimonial
relationship between husband and wife when the two come together reconciling and sinking their
differences and discords either for the purpose of resumption of a better matrimonial relationship or
to end it in an amicable manner to rest their personal agony.
17. It is in this scenario that the pendency of a criminal case with respect to a non-compoundable
offence like 498-A IPC shall not be allowed to be a hiccup in implementing their decision-making for
each other's betterment.
18. Thus, this Court holds and declares that, as and when in any given case involving commission of
offence under Section 498-A IPC and other offences related there with pending trial before a
criminal court, the wife, as being the complainant, and husband and his relatives, as being the
accused, join together for the purpose of ending said criminal case, then they shall be entitled to
present a written application to the criminal court seized of the case thereby seeking the Public
Prosecutor conducting the prosecution for making withdrawal of the prosecution by stating the facts
and circumstances of the case under which the wife and the husband are seeking withdrawal of the
prosecution.
19. The application duly supported by the respective affidavits of all the concerned when presented
to the Public Prosecutor on the file of a case shall be given due consideration by the Public
Prosecutor for the purpose of lending his assent to withdraw from prosecution. The criminal court,
seized of the criminal case upon its due satisfaction that the parties involved in the case have acted
in a good faith to end the criminal case involving commission of offence under section 498-A IPC
along with other related offences, compoundable or non- compoundable, and that the Public
Prosecutor has lend his assent to withdraw from the prosecution, shall allow the withdrawal of the
prosecution so as to save the parties i.e. the husband and wife from the ordeal of approaching this
Court for the purpose of doing what could otherwise be got done by the parties before the very court
which is seized of the trial of a criminal case involving them as complainant and accused.
20. In view of what has been stated above, this petition is allowed and the criminal case no.
1356/2021 based upon final Police Report no. 57 of 2020 dated 30.12.2020 in FIR no. 64 of 2020 of
the Police Station, Janipur, Jammu pending trial before Municipal Magistrate, Jammu is hereby
quashed.
21. A copy of this order be sent by the Registrar General of this Court to all the Sessions Judges and
Chief Judicial Magistrates of the UT of Jammu & Kashmir and the UT of Ladakh for their notice.
22. Disposed of accordingly.
(Rahul Bharti) Judge JAMMU 09.08.2023 NARESH/Secy.
Whether the order is reportable: Yes Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106661135/ 10
