Dr. Archana Kanungo vs State Of Odisha And Another on 28 March, 2024
Dr. Archana Kanungo vs State Of Odisha And Another on 28
March, 2024
Author: S. K. Sahoo
Bench: S. K. Sahoo
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.A. No.2999 of 2023
Dr. Archana Kanungo .... Appellant
-versus-
State of Odisha and another .... Respondents
Advocates appeared in the cases:
For Appellant : In person
For Respondents : Ms. Sumitra Mohanty, Advocate
for Odisha Public Service
Commission
CORAM:
THE CHIEF JUSTICE
JUSTICE S. K. SAHOO
JUDGMENT
28.03.2024 Chakradhari Sharan Singh, CJ.
1. The appellant has put to challenge a judgment dated 24.11.2023 rendered by a learned Single
Judge of this Court in W.P.(C) No.36916 of 2022 filed by the appellant under Articles 226 and 227 of
the Constitution of India, whereby the said writ petition has been dismissed.
2. The short facts, which are not in dispute, are that the Odisha Public Service Commission (in short
'OPSC') had come out with an advertisement on 08.10.2021 inviting applications from eligible
candidates for recruitment to 606 posts of Assistant Professors (Stage-I) in different disciplines in
Group-A of Odisha Education Service (College Branch) of Government Degree Colleges in the State.
1% of the total posts were reserved for the sportspersons. 03.12.2021 was the last date for
submission of online applications. The appellant is said to have submitted her application online,
but was not called for interview. The appellant approached this Court by filing a writ petition giving
rise to W.P.(C) No.21038 of 2022 raising grievance against non- inclusion of her PPSAN number in
the list of candidates called for verification of documents for selection to the post of Assistant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101401722/ 1
Dr. Archana Kanungo vs State Of Odisha And Another on 28 March, 2024
Professors (Stage-I) Sociology. The appellant is a National Level Taekwondo player recognized by
the Directorate of Sports, Government of Odisha. She claimed that she had a brilliant academic
credentials with Master Degree in Sociology from Utkal University, M.phil Degree from Delhi
University and Ph.D Degree with Institutional Research Fellowships of ICSSR in 2012 and 2014. In
the said writ proceeding, the OPSC took a stand that the appellant had failed to make necessary
entries in her online application. The learned Single Judge of this Court, by an order dated
20.10.2022, disposed of the said writ petition i.e. W.P.(C) No.21038 of 2022 with an observation for
considering the appellant's application sympathetically and allowing her for the verification of the
documents. The OPSC was directed to fix a date for document verification. While passing the said
order, learned Single Judge noted that the petitioner had represented in sports at the National Level
and that the Government of Odisha was promoting sportspersons of different sports categories and
promoting sustainable employment opportunities also to them.
3. The appellant's documents were verified and she was allowed to participate in the interview held
on 12.12.2022.
4. The OPSC thereafter published a list of successful candidates in which the appellant's name did
not figure. With a claim that the appellant had performed very well and her API score was 102 as per
the UGC Regulations on Minimum Qualifications for Appointment of Teachers and Other Academic
Staff in Universities and Colleges and Measures for the Maintenance of Standards in Higher
Education, 2018 (in short 'UGC Regulations'), she approached this Court by filing writ petition
giving rise to W.P.(C) No.36916 of 2022. She also alleged that the principle of horizontal reservation
for sports persons was not followed by the OPSC.
5. The OPSC in its counter affidavit in the writ proceeding controverted the statement of the
appellant that the UGC guidelines were not followed in the selection process. OPSC also took a plea
that since the appellant could not qualify in the original merit (vertical) list of unreserved (Women)
candidates, there was no question of applying horizontal reservation. A specific stand was taken on
behalf of the OPSC that the appellant did not secure minimum qualifying marks of 50% in the
interview. The OPSC also denied the appellant's claim of having secured 102 marks under the API
score since as per the UGC Guidelines, maximum API score could be 100 against which the
appellant had scored 73 only.
6. The appellant argued before the learned Single Judge that one post i.e. 1% of the 12 vacancies in
Sociology discipline ought to have been earmarked for sportspersons as per the advertisement,
which the OPSC had not done. Secondly, she being a brilliant scholar with several research
publications to her credit, had performed very well in the interview but was deliberately given less
marks. She questioned the correctness of determination of her API score and reiterated that her API
score ought to have been taken as 102. She also alleged that OPSC had illegally fixed the cutoff
marks in the interview though the same was never mentioned in the advertisement.
7. The OPSC took a stand in the writ proceeding that 1% of total posts advertised were reserved for
the sportspersons. In accordance with the said policy, 6 sportspersons in all could be appointed
depending upon the discipline against which each of them had applied. However, such appointment
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101401722/ 2
Dr. Archana Kanungo vs State Of Odisha And Another on 28 March, 2024
could only be considered if the concerned candidate had qualified in the original merit list of the
candidates in the concerned discipline. The petitioner secured only 40 marks, which is less than the
marks secured by the last person in the discipline of Sociology in the unreserved (in short 'UR')
category. Only three persons had applied under the sportspersons category, one each in the
disciplines of Commerce, Odia and Sociology. The petitioner could have been considered under the
sportspersons category only if she had qualified in the original merit list prepared for UR candidates
in Sociology discipline.
8. We have heard the appellant, who has appeared in person.
9. Learned Single Judge noticed the admitted fact that all the 12 UR posts of Sociology discipline,
which were advertised, were already filled up based on the said selection. In such view of the matter,
learned Single Judge opined that the appellant's relief as sought in the writ petition could be
entertained only by cancelling appointment of at least one of the selected candidates against the said
12 posts of Sociology discipline. Learned Single Judge has noted in the impugned judgment that the
appellant was not inclined to implead the persons already appointed under UR category as parties
despite the opportunity granted to her. Paragraph-8 of the judgment under challenge is relevant,
which is reproduced hereinbelow:
"8. It goes without saying that the persons who would be adversely affected by such
challenge to the selection process ought to be made parties and be given opportunity
of hearing in the case. At least one person or the last person in the list of six UR
category candidates ought to have been impleaded as he/she is a necessary party in
the absence of whom, the lis cannot be effectively adjudicated. There being only six
posts, all of which have already been filled up, if the petitioner's prayer as quoted in
the beginning of this order were to be allowed then one out of the six selected
candidates would have to give way. Keeping this in view, this Court granted
opportunity to the petitioner to implead the persons already appointed under UR
category as parties to the writ application. However, the petitioner for reasons best
known to her was not inclined to do so by submitting that she is not competing
against them. But then, as already stated, the petitioner's prayer cannot be allowed
without adversely affecting at least one of the selected candidates. Law is well settled
that persons likely to be vitally affected by the judgment/order of the Court are
necessary parties and therefore, no order can be passed in their absence."
10. After having held as above, the learned Single Judge reached a conclusion that since number of
posts notified was fixed, granting relief to the appellant as claimed, would entail quashing the
selection of at least one selected candidate, which could not be validly done in his/her absence. The
appellant's writ petition has been dismissed mainly on the ground of non-joinder of necessary party,
relying on the Supreme Court's decision in case of Prabodh Verma v. State of U.P., reported in
(1984) 4 SCC 251.
11. During the course of hearing of the present appeal, we offered the appellant for appointment of
an Amicus Curiae to plead her case. She, however, declined and argued her case herself.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101401722/ 3
Dr. Archana Kanungo vs State Of Odisha And Another on 28 March, 2024
12. It is a fact not in dispute that the appellant had applied against the post of Assistant Professor in
Sociology. She belongs to UR category and claimed horizontal reservation against 1% of the posts
reserved for the sportspersons. There were 12 posts in unreserved category of Assistant Professor in
Sociology. All the 12 UR posts have already been filled up. Without disturbing someone, who has
been appointed against the aforesaid 12 unreserved posts, relief as sought by the appellant could not
have been granted to her. We concur with the view taken by the learned Single Judge relying on the
Supreme Court's decision in case of Prabodh Verma (supra) that the writ petition deserved to be
dismissed on the ground of non-joinder of necessary party alone. The Supreme Court's decision in
case of Prabodh Verma (supra) has been consistently followed in subsequent decisions.
Illustratively, in case of All India SC & ST Employees' Association and another v. A. Arthur Jeen and
others, reported in (2001) 6 SCC 380, the Supreme Court has held in paragraph-13 as under:
"13. Although the candidates included in the panel showing their provisional selection do not get
vested right to appointment, they will be surely interested in protecting and defending the select list.
It is an admitted position that before the Tribunal the successful candidates whose names were
included in the panel of selection were not made parties. The argument of the learned counsel that
since the names and particulars of the successful candidates included in the panel were not given,
they could not be made parties, has no force. The applicants before the Tribunal could have made
efforts to get the particulars; at least they ought to have impleaded some of the successful
candidates, maybe, in a representative capacity; if the large number of candidates were there and if
there was any difficulty in service of notices on them, they could have taken appropriate steps to
serve them by any one of the modes permissible in law with the leave of the Tribunal. This Court in
Prabodh Verma v. State of U.P. [(1984) 4 SCC 251 : 1984 SCC (L&S) 704] has held that in writ
petitions filed against the State questioning the validity of recruitment of a large number of persons
in service could not be proceeded with to hear and take decision adverse to those affected persons
without getting them or their representatives impleaded as parties. In para 50 of the said judgment,
summarizing the conclusions this Court in regard to impleading of the respondents has stated that:
(SCC pp. 288-89) "A High Court ought not to hear and dispose of a writ petition under Article 226
of the Constitution without the persons who would be vitally affected by its judgment being before it
as respondents or at least some of them being before it as respondents in a representative capacity if
their number is too large to join them as respondents individually, and, if the petitioners refuse to so
join them, the High Court ought to dismiss the petition for non-joinder of necessary parties."
13. In case of Ranjan Kumar and others v. State of Bihar and others reported in (2014) 16 SCC 187,
the Supreme Court has taken note of various precedents while holding that as the appointees were
not impleaded, writ petition was defective and no relief could have been granted. The paragraps-4 to
13 of the said decision in case of Ranjan Kumar (supra) are being reproduced hereinbelow:
"4. On a perusal of the orders impugned, we find that only 40 persons were made
respondents before the High Court and hardly a few appointees filed applications for
intervention. It is well settled in law that no adverse order can be passed against
persons who were not made parties to the litigation. In this context, we may refer
with profit to the authority in Prabodh Verma v. State of U.P. [Prabodh Verma v.
State of U.P., (1984) 4 SCC 251 : 1984 SCC (L&S) 704] , wherein a three-Judge Bench
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101401722/ 4
Dr. Archana Kanungo vs State Of Odisha And Another on 28 March, 2024
was dealing with the constitutional validity of two Uttar Pradesh Ordinances which
had been struck down by the Division Bench of the Allahabad High Court on the
ground that the provisions therein were violative of Articles 14 and 16(1) of the
Constitution of India. In that context, a question arose whether the termination of the
services of the appellants and the petitioners therein as secondary school teachers
and intermediate college lecturers following upon the High Court judgment was valid
without making the said appointees as parties. The learned Judges observed that the
writ petition filed by the Sangh suffered from two serious, though not incurable,
defects; the core defect was that of non-joinder of necessary parties, for respondents
to the Sangh's petition were the State of Uttar Pradesh and its officers concerned and
those who were vitally concerned, namely, the reserve pool teachers, were not made
parties -- not even by joining some of them in a representative capacity, considering
that their number was too large for all of them to be joined individually as
respondents. Thereafter the Court ruled thus:
(Prabodh Verma case [Prabodh Verma v. State of U.P., (1984) 4 SCC 251 : 1984 SCC
(L&S) 704] , SCC pp. 273-74, para 28) "28. ... The matter, therefore, came to be
decided in their absence. A High Court ought not to decide a writ petition under
Article 226 of the Constitution without the persons who would be vitally affected by
its judgment being before it as respondents or at least by some of them being before it
as respondents in a representative capacity if their number is too large, and,
therefore, the Allahabad High Court ought not to have proceeded to hear and dispose
of the Sangh's writ petition without insisting upon the reserve pool teachers being
made respondents to that writ petition, or at least some of them being made
respondents in a representative capacity, and had the petitioners refused to do so,
ought to have dismissed that petition for non-joinder of necessary parties."
5. In the case at hand neither was any rule nor any regulation challenged. In fact, we have been
apprised that at the time of selection and appointment there was no rule or regulation. A procedure
used to be adopted by the administrative instructions. That apart, it was not a large body of
appointees but only 182 appointees. Quite apart from that the persons who were impleaded, were
not treated to be in the representative capacity. In this regard, it is profitable to refer to some
authorities.
6. In Indu Shekhar Singh v. State of U.P. [Indu Shekhar Singh v. State of U.P., (2006) 8 SCC 129 :
2006 SCC (L&S) 1916] it has been held thus: (SCC p. 151, para
56) "56. There is another aspect of the matter. The appellants herein were not joined as parties in
the writ petition filed by the respondents. In their absence, the High Court could not have
determined the question of inter se seniority."
7. In Rashmi Mishra v. M.P. Public Service Commission [Rashmi Mishra v. M.P. Public Service
Commission, (2006) 12 SCC 724 : (2007) 2 SCC (L&S) 345] , after referring to Prabodh Verma
[Prabodh Verma v. State of U.P., (1984) 4 SCC 251 : 1984 SCC (L&S) 704] and Indu Shekhar Singh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101401722/ 5
Dr. Archana Kanungo vs State Of Odisha And Another on 28 March, 2024
[Indu Shekhar Singh v. State of U.P., (2006) 8 SCC 129 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 1916] , the Court took
note of the fact that when no steps had been taken in terms of Order 1 Rule 8 of the Code of Civil
Procedure or the principles analogous thereto all the seventeen selected candidates were necessary
parties in the writ petition. It was further observed that the number of selected candidates was not
many and there was no difficulty for the appellant to implead them as parties in the proceeding.
Ultimately, the Court held that when all the selected candidates were not impleaded as parties to the
writ petition, no relief could be granted to the appellant therein.
8. In Tridip Kumar Dingal v. State of W.B. [Tridip Kumar Dingal v. State of W.B., (2009) 1 SCC 768 :
(2009) 2 SCC (L&S) 119] , this Court approved the view expressed by the tribunal
which had opined that for absence of selected and appointed candidates and without
affording an opportunity of hearing to them, the selection could not be set aside.
9. In Public Service Commission v. Mamta Bisht [Public Service Commission v. Mamta Bisht, (2010)
12 SCC 204 : (2011) 1 SCC (L&S) 208] this Court, while dealing with the concept of necessary parties
and the effect of non-implementation of such a party in the matter when the selection process is
assailed, observed thus: (SCC pp. 207-08, para 9) "9. ... in Udit Narain Singh Malpaharia v. Board of
Revenue [Udit Narain Singh Malpaharia v. Board of Revenue, AIR 1963 SC 786] , wherein the Court
has explained the distinction between necessary party, proper party and pro forma party and further
held that if a person who is likely to suffer from the order of the court and has not been impleaded as
a party has a right to ignore the said order as it has been passed in violation of the principles of
natural justice. More so, proviso to Order 1 Rule 9 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter
called 'Code of Civil Procedure') provides that non-joinder of necessary party be fatal. Undoubtedly,
provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure are not applicable in writ jurisdiction by virtue of the
provision of Section 141 of the Code of Civil Procedure but the principles enshrined therein are
applicable. (Vide Gulabchand Chhotalal Parikh v. State of Gujarat [Gulabchand Chhotalal Parikh v.
State of Gujarat, AIR 1965 SC 1153] , Babubhai Muljibhai Patel v. Nandlal Khodidas Barot
[Babubhai Muljibhai Patel v. Nandlal Khodidas Barot, (1974) 2 SCC 706] and Sarguja Transport
Service v. STAT [Sarguja Transport Service v. STAT, (1987) 1 SCC 5 : 1987 SCC (Cri) 19] .)"
10. In J.S. Yadav v. State of U.P. [J.S. Yadav v. State of U.P., (2011) 6 SCC 570 : (2011)
2 SCC (L&S) 140] , it has been held that: (SCC p. 583, para 31) "31. No order can be
passed behind the back of a person adversely affecting him and such an order, if
passed, is liable to be ignored being not binding on such a party as the same has been
passed in violation of the principles of natural justice."
It was further held that: (SCC p. 583, para 31) "31. ... The litigant has to ensure that the necessary
party is before the court, be it a plaintiff or a defendant, otherwise the proceedings will have to fail.
In service jurisprudence if an unsuccessful candidate challenges the selection process, he is bound to
implead at least some of the successful candidates in representative capacity."
11. In Vijay Kumar Kaul v. Union of India [Vijay Kumar Kaul v. Union of India, (2012) 7 SCC 610 :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101401722/ 6
Dr. Archana Kanungo vs State Of Odisha And Another on 28 March, 2024
(2012) 2 SCC (L&S) 491] it has been ruled thus: (SCC p. 619, para 36) "36. Another
aspect needs to be highlighted.
Neither before the Tribunal nor before the High Court, Parveen Kumar and others were arrayed as
parties. There is no dispute over the factum that they are senior to the appellants and have been
conferred the benefit of promotion to the higher posts. In their absence, if any direction is issued for
fixation of seniority, that is likely to jeopardise their interest. When they have not been impleaded as
parties such a relief is difficult to grant."
12. Recently in State of Rajasthan v. Ucchab Lal Chhanwal [State of Rajasthan v. Ucchab Lal
Chhanwal, (2014) 1 SCC 144 : (2014) 1 SCC (L&S) 34] , it has been opined that: (SCC p. 149, para 14)
"14. ... Despite the indefatigable effort, we are not persuaded to accept the aforesaid proponent, for
once the respondents are promoted, the juniors who have been promoted earlier would become
juniors in the promotional cadre, and they being not arrayed as parties in the lis, an adverse order
cannot be passed against them as that would go against the basic tenet of the principles of natural
justice."
13. In view of the aforesaid enunciation of law, we are disposed to think that in such a case when all
the appointees were not impleaded, the writ petition was defective and hence, no relief could have
been granted to the writ petitioners."
14. Similar view has been expressed in cases of Sanjay Prakash and others v. Union of India and
others, reported in (2021) 9 SCC 79 and Poonam v. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, reported in
(2016) 2 SCC 779.
15. Considering the judicial pronouncements as noted above, in our opinion, the learned Single
Judge has rightly declined to entertain the appellant's writ petition for non-joinder of necessary
parties, despite opportunity having been given to her to implead some of the appointed persons,
even in their representative capacity.
16. Accordingly, we do not find any merit in the appeal, which is accordingly dismissed. There shall
be no order as to the costs.
(Chakradhari Sharan Singh) Chief Justice (S. K. Sahoo) Judge M. Panda Signed by:
MRUTYUNJAYA PANDA Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 28-Mar-2024 16:36:26
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101401722/ 7
