Dr. Amarjeet Singh Bhalla vs Sajad Mohip-Ud-Din Banday on 14 August, 2023
Dr. Amarjeet Singh Bhalla vs Sajad Mohip-Ud-Din Banday on 14
August, 2023
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Sr. No.1
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on : 26.07.2023
Pronounced on: 14 .08.2023
CRTA No.10/2019
Dr. Amarjeet Singh Bhalla ....Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. Rahul Pant, Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Arushi Shukla, Advocate
V/s
Sajad Mohip-ud-Din Banday ....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. Lawanya Sharma, Advocate
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. By this application, transfer of complaint filed by the respondent against the petitioner under
Section 500 Ranbir Penal Code, CNR No.JKBA/03- 001727-2018, registration No.1/2018 titled
Sajad Mohi-ud-Din Banday vs. Dr. Amarjeet Singh Bhalla pending before the Court of learned
Judicial Magistrate Ist Class ( Munsiff) Baramulla to any Court of competent jurisdiction at Jammu
is sought on the ground that that the petitioner is a member of Rajiv Gandhi Education Society (for
brevity 'the Society') having its office at Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi.
2. It is stated that the petitioner is also a Member of the Managing Committee of the Society and the
same is registered with the Registrar of Societies, Government of N.C.T of Delhi under Registration
Act, XXI, 1860 since the year 2005 and that the Society is also running a School i.e Delhi Public
School Gwalior which has a strength of about 3000 students and the petitioner is one of the
Directors of the aforesaid School i.e Delhi Public School, Gawalior.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124410710/ 1
Dr. Amarjeet Singh Bhalla vs Sajad Mohip-Ud-Din Banday on 14 August, 2023
3. It is stated that the petitioner has made huge investment from his personal account for
establishing the Delhi Public School in Gwalior as the said school is a joint venture of the Society
and the petitioner. As a matter of fact, petitioner was made Member of the Society only after the
petitioner decided to invest in the Society and had invested hefty amount. The school being operated
by the society has different accounts in the different banks in Gwalior and the Executive Committee
of the society used to operate and run the schools being run by the society.
4. It is further stated that some of the Members of the Society embezzled the money of the Society
thus, forcing the petitioner to lodge an FIR in the Police Station, Purani Chawni, Gwalior. It is stated
that because of the personal influence of the accused, there was delay in the registration of the FIR
and the petitioner had to even move an application before the Learned Judicial Magistrate, Gwalior
and as on today the investigation is being supervised by the learned Judicial Magistrate Ist Class,
Gwalior, however, FIR No. 284/2018 came to be registered on 09.10.2018 with the Police Station,
Purani Chawni, Gwalior for commission of offence under Sections 420, 406, 467, 468 and 471 IPC.
In the complaint filed by the petitioner for registration of FIR, respondent herein was one of the
accused. It is stated that the accused persons initially tried to rope the petitioner in a false case in
New Delhi as a complaint against him came to be filed by one of the accused, namely, Abhishek Dutt
before the Police Station Lajpat Nagar, New Delhi. After the petitioner was put to notice, petitioner
explained the entire facts and circumstances to the Incharge of the said Police Station, as such, no
action was taken against him.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that after the accused failed to somehow harass the
petitioner in New Delhi, a false and frivolous complaint has been filed by the respondent against the
petitioner before the Ld. Judicial Magistrate Ist Class (Munsiff), Baramulla and the said learned
Magistrate issued the process little realizing that it had no jurisdiction as even if one goes by the
complaint, Court at Baramulla has no jurisdiction at all, but nonetheless by a non-speaking order,
summoning process was initiated. The petitioner was surprised to see that with a view to harass him
further, a false and frivolous complaint had been filed and simultaneously petitioner started
receiving threats that in case he goes to Baramulla, he will not come back alive. Petitioner is stated
to have immediately rushed to the Police Station, Gwalior and brought the matter to the notice of
the town Inspector, Police Station Jhansi Road, Gwalior and again on 18.02.2019 an FIR was
registered i.e., FIR No.0070 dated 18.02.2019.
6. Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that the petitioner is otherwise also a protected
person being Member of the Madhya Pradesh State Minority Commission and is having a status of
Ministry of State in the State of Madhya Pradesh and deliberately a false and frivolous complaint has
been filed against the petitioner in Baramulla in order to coerce the petitioner to go to Baramulla
where he has serious threat to his life, for which, the matter is already under investigation and FIR
has also been registered. The situation and security environment in the Valley is not conducive for
the petitioner to attend the Court before the learned Judicial Magistrate Ist Class (Munsiff)
Baramulla as in Baramulla the situation is even worse. The petitioner has serious risk to his life as
respondent is a very influential persons and petitioner cannot be in a position to defend the
complaint in a proper manner before the Court of Ld. Judicial Magistrate Ist Class (Munsiff)
Baramulla. It is stated that the very purpose of filing the complaint before the learned Judicial
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124410710/ 2
Dr. Amarjeet Singh Bhalla vs Sajad Mohip-Ud-Din Banday on 14 August, 2023
Magistrate Ist Class (Munsiff) Baramulla is to harass the petitioner and put the life of the petitioner
at risk, thus, in view of the facts stated hereinabove, it is clear that the petitioner is not in a position
to appear before the Ld. Judicial Magistrate Ist Class (Munsiff) Baramulla. It is stated that as
compared to petitioner`s appearing to Baramulla, respondent can easily appear before the Court in
Jammu as respondent otherwise also is residing in Delhi and has deliberately chosen to file a
complaint in Baramulla and that the petitioner has a prima facie case in his favour and balance of
convenience is also in his favour for transferring the case to Jammu. It is prayed that the complaint
against the petitioner titled Sajad-Mohi-ud-Din Banday vs Dr. Amarjeet Singh Bhalla pending
disposal before the Court of Ld. Judicial Magistrate Ist Class (Munsiff) Baramulla be transferred to
any competent Court at Jammu. Along with the application copy of the FIR No.284/ 2018, copy of
the complaint filed by the respondent before Ld. Judicial Magistrate Ist Class (Munsiff) Baramulla
and copy of FIR No.0070 dated 18.02.2019 have also been placed on record.
7. The application is opposed by other side on the grounds that the petitioner has filed a petition
under Section 482 Cr.P.C bearing CRM(M) No.76/2020 titled Amarjeet Singh Bhalla vs Sajad Mohi
Ud Din Banday before the Srinagar wing of this High Court seeking the quashment of the complaint
that is subject matter of this instant transfer petition and, therefore, seeking transfer of a complaint
while the said complaint is also sought to be quashed in a parallel proceeding, is not maintainable
under law. It is stated that the petitioner has tried to project a case before this Court that the
complaint filed by the respondent against the petitioner, which is subject matter of this instant
transfer petition was a counter blast, however, the respondent was not involved in the said FIR, as
he has been falsely alleged in the later paragraphs of the petition. It is further submitted that the
said FIR No.284/2018 dated 09.10.2018 registered with the Police Station Purani Chawni, Gwalior
came to be closed by the concerned Police authorities and a closer report/Final Form report was
filed before the Court of learned Judicial Magistrate First Class, Gwalior and that the petitioner has
tried to mislead the Court by stating that the respondent was one of the accused in the said FIR
No.284/2018. The respondent filed the said complaint against the petitioner as the petitioner had
defamed the respondent and lowered his reputation in the eyes of his kin and neighbors by accusing
him of being involved in the criminal activities, when the same was not at all true. The petitioner has
very conveniently tried to validate his unlawful actions of defaming the respondent and moreover
the petitioner has not denied the allegations in the complaint in this entire transfer petition even
once which counts as an admission of guilt on his part. It is stated that the offence has taken place in
Baramulla and other areas of the country and further the consequences of the illegal act of the
petitioner has ensued in Baramulla district where the respondent resides. The order of learned
Judicial Magistrate Ist Class (Munsiff), Baramulla dated 12.12.2018 is a speaking order and the
satisfaction of the learned Magistrate has been recorded in the said order.
8. According to learned counsel for the respondent It is further submitted that learned Magistrate
has followed the procedure laid down in the Code of Criminal Procedure before issuance of the said
order and the statement of the complainant/respondent has also been taken on record before
issuing the process in the matter. The petitioner has approached this Court with a prayer of
transferring of the said complaint and has not challenged the said order in any respect whatsoever.
If the petitioner is aggrieved of the legal validity of the said order then he ought to have moved a
petition under Section 561-A of the Code of Criminal Procedure,1933 or under Section 482 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124410710/ 3
Dr. Amarjeet Singh Bhalla vs Sajad Mohip-Ud-Din Banday on 14 August, 2023
Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 as the case may be. The validity of the order dated 12.12.2018
cannot be brought into question in a transfer petition as is being tried by the petitioner. It is stated
that the petitioner had not received any letter from the respondent and moreover this act can be
inquired into by the concerned Police authorities. The petitioner in order to further defame the
respondent has tried to rope him in yet another false case, the latter received by the petitioner was
from one Farooq Ahmed, however the petitioner in his complaint before the concerned police
authorities has stated that he suspects that the respondent has sent him the letter. The respondent
has nothing to do with the said letter and the same is being used by the petitioner to make up a case
of threat so as to evade the due process of law. The petitioner has also gotten several news articles
published in local and National Newspapers wherein he has directly named the respondent to
further malign his image and reputation in society at large and that to the knowledge of the
respondent the petitioner is not a member of Madhya Pradesh State Minority Commission at the
time of filing of these objections. The petitioner cannot be absolved of any offence committed or
allowed to evade the due process of law even if he is a privileged person.
9. According to learned counsel for the respondent, the petitioner is liable to face trial before the
Court of law like any other accused and no special treatment can be given to him. It is further
submitted that the petitioner has failed to make out any case for grant of relief for transfer of case
and, as such, he cannot be allowed to delay the course of justice. It is stated that the petitioner has
not even pleaded a single ground as to why the case should be transferred to Jammu. The
respondent is a Government employee and cannot be made to come to Jammu to seek justice for the
wrong done to him merely for the convenience of the petitioner. Along with the objections copy of
the Final Form Report filed before the Court of Ld. Judicial Magistrate First Class, Gwalior and
copies of news articles published in Dainik Bhaskar dated 21.3.2019 & Nai Dunia dated 22.02.2019
have been enclosed.
10. I have heard the Ld. Counsels for the parties and perusal the material on record.
11. Perusal of the trial Court record tends to show that vide order dated 12.12.2018, the learned
Judicial Magistrate Ist Class (Munsiff) Baramulla has taken cognizance of the offence punishable
under Section 500 RPC, however, the petitioner has not appeared in the said Court. It is the case of
the petitioner that he has serious threat to his life in case he attends the Court at Baramulla as the
situation and security environment in the Valley is not conducive. It is further the case of the
petitioner that he had received a threatening letter whereby threat has been extended to him in case
he does not takes his steps back otherwise he will not go back. On the basis of this threatening letter
received by the petitioner he has lodged the report with Police Station Jhansi Road Gwalior on the
basis of which FIR No. 0070/2019 under Sections 387, 506 IPC has been registered, which is being
investigated. The said threatening letter and the FIR in question make it clear that the apprehension
of the petitioner is bonafide, genuine and sufficient. The grounds, thus, taken in the instant
application which are substantiated by the record placed along with the application makes out a case
for transfer of the complaint from the Court of learned Judicial Magistrate Ist Class Baramulla to
any other Court at Jammu.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124410710/ 4
Dr. Amarjeet Singh Bhalla vs Sajad Mohip-Ud-Din Banday on 14 August, 2023
12. Learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his contention has relied upon a judgment of
Hon'ble Supreme Court titled Dr. Subramanyam Swami vs Ramakrishan Hagde reported in 1990
AIR 113.
13. Learned counsel for the respondent in support of his objection to the instant transfer application
has relied upon the judgments of Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled Samaira Choudhary vs.
Javed Iqbal and others, reported in 2015 Supreme (J&K) 607 and Parmeshwar Gope vs. The State of
Jharkhand and another, reported in 2017 0 Supreme (Jhk) 580, but the facts in the present case are
different, as such, in the facts and circumstances the said judgments do not lend any support to the
objection raised by the respondent for transfer.
14. In the present case the transfer is sought mainly on the ground that petitioner has a threat to his
life which is substantiated by the record on the file placed by him and for the threat which he has
received, FIR has already been registered with the Police of Police Station Jhanshi, Gwalior under
No.0070 /2019, therefore, it would not be safe for him in case he is asked to face the trial of the
complaint at Baramulla. Thus, the petitioner has made out a strong case for transfer of the case
registration No.1/2018.
15. For the reasons stated hereinabove, the complaint titled Sajad Mohi-ud-
Din Banday vs. Dr. Amarjeet Singh Bhalla pending disposal before the Court of learned Judicial
Magistrate Ist Class, Munsiff, Baramulla is ordered to be transferred from the said Court to the
Court of learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu, who shall either try the complaint himself or
transfer the same to some other Court of competent jurisdiction. The parties to appear before the
transferee Court on 25.09.2023. The Court of learned Judicial Magistrate Ist Class, Munsiff,
Baramulla shall transfer the file directly to the Court of learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jammu,
well before the date fixed.
( Vinod Chatterji Koul ) Judge Jammu 14.08.2023 Bir
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124410710/ 5
