Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur
Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
[1]
SHOUGRA Digitally
by
signed
KPAM SHOUGRAKPAM
DEVANANDA
DEVANAN SINGH
Date: 2023.02.27 IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
DA SINGH 13:48:39 +05'30'
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh, aged about 61 years, son of Late
Ch. Ibopishak Singh, resident of Kwakeithel Laishram Leirak, P.O.
& P.S. Imphal, District Imphal West, Manipur - 795001.
...Petitioner
-Versus -
1. The State of Manipur represented by Commissioner/ Secretary
(Education-S), Government of Manipur, Secretariat, P.O. & P.S.
Imphal, Imphal West District, Manipur - 795001.
2. The Joint Secretary (Education-S), Government of Manipur,
Secretariat, P.O. & P.S. Imphal, Imphal West District, Manipur -
795001 a nd
3. Shri Tkhellambam Ojit Singh, aged about 56 years, S/o (Late)
Th. Tobe Singh, resident of Chingamakha Ningthoujam Leikai,
P.O. & P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West District, Manipur - 795008
.... Respondents
B E F O R E HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH For the petitioner :: Shri N.
Ibotombi, Sr. Advocate asstd. by Mr. A. Rommel, Advocate For the respondents :: Mr. M.
Devananda, Addl. AG asstd. by Ms. Jyotsana, Advocate & Mr. N. Kumarjit, Sr. Advocate asstd. by
Mr. N. Zequeson, Advocate Date of Hearing :: 14-02-2023 Date of Judgment & Order :: 27-02-2023
JUDGMENT & ORDER [1] Heard Mr. N. Ibotombi, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. A.
Rommel, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, Mr M. Devananda, WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022
Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 1
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
learned Addl. Advocate General assisted by Ms. Jyotsana, learned counsel appearing for the
respondents No. 1 and 2 and Mr. N. Kumarjit, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. N. Zequeson,
learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 3.
The present writ petition had been filed assailing the appointment of the respondent No. 3 as the
Chairman of the Council of Higher Secondary Education, Manipur along with the prayer for
directing the respondents No. 1 and 2 to appoint the petitioner as Chairman of the Council of Higher
Secondary Education, Manipur (hereinafter referred to as "COHSEM", for short).
[2] The brief facts of the present case is that both the petitioner and the respondent No. 3 were
initially appointed as Lecturer of Government Colleges. Subsequently on the recommendation of a
Selection Committee associated with the Manipur Public Service Commission, the Governor of
Manipur was pleased to accord sanction to the placement of both the petitioner and respondent No.
3 in the senior scale of pay w.e.f. 27-07-1998, vide order dated 01-12-2004 issued by the
Commissioner (Hr. Edn), Government of Manipur. Subsequently in pursuance of the UGC's
guidelines for Career Advancement Scheme and on the recommendation of the Selection Committee
associated with the MPSC, the Governor of Manipur was pleased to order placement of both the
petitioner and respondent No. 3 in the grade of Lecturer (Selection Grade) w.e.f. 27-07-2003, vide
order dated 31-07-2007 issued by the Joint Secretary (Hr. Edn.), Government of Manipur. In the
said order, it was also mentioned that in respect of the petitioner, the date of his placement in the
grade of WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
Lecturer (Selection Grade) shall be w.e.f. 27-07-2003 notionally and the effective date for cash
payment will be w.e.f. 16-08-2005. [3] By an order dated 12-07-2022 issued by the Deputy Secretary
(Education-S), Government of Manipur, the petitioner was appointed as Chairman of COHSEM on
in-charge basis till a regular Chairman is appointed. While the petitioner was holding the post of
Chairman of COHSEM on in-charge basis, the Secretariat: Education (S) Department issued a
Notification dated 18-08-2022 inviting applications from willing candidates for appointment of
Chairman, COHSEM on deputation basis. In response to the said Notification, three candidates
including the petitioner and respondent No. 3 submitted their applications. Subsequently by an
order dated 16-12-2022 issued by the Joint Secretary (Education- S), Government of Manipur, the
respondent No. 3 was appointed as Chairman of COHSEM on deputation for a term not exceeding
three years. Having been aggrieved, the petitioner approached this court by filing the present writ
petition with a prayer for quashing and setting aside the said order dated 16-12-2022.
[4] Mr. N. Ibotombi, learned senior counsel submitted that under the amended provisions of section
12(2) of the Manipur Higher Secondary Education Act, 1992 (hereinafter referred to as the "said
Act", for short), it is, inter alia, provided that a Selection Grade Lecturer in a Government College
with 18 years of experience as a Selection Grade is eligible for appointment as the Chairman of
COHSEM. By drawing the attention of this court to the amended provisions of section 12(2) of the
said Act and the order dated 13-07-2007 issued by the Government ordering the placement of the
petitioner in the grade of Lecturer (Selection Grade) w.e.f.
WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 2
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
27-07-2003, it has been submitted by the learned senior counsel that the petitioner is eligible and
qualified for appointment as the Chairman of COHSEM since the petitioner has more than 18 years
of experience as a Selection Grade Lecturer. For ready reference, the amended provisions of section
12(2) of the said Act is reproduced hereunder:-
"12.2. The Governor shall appoint on deputation an officer who is working as the
Director of Education (U) or the Director of Education (S) or as a Principal of a
Government College with a minimum 15 years' service as a Reader/ Selection Grade
Lecturer or an Additional Director, Education (U) or the Additional Director of
Education (S) or a Reader/ Selection Grade Lecturer in a Government College with 18
years of experience as a Reader or Selection Grade Lecturer as the Chairman of the
Council for the term not exceeding three years which may be shortened or extended
by one year at a time subject to the condition that the total length of deputation shall
not exceed five years.
Provided that he or she will not continue beyond the date of his or her
superannuation."
[5] The learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner strenuously submitted that even though
the petitioner is quite eligible and qualified to be appointed as Chairman of COHSEM, the
authorities wrongly rejected his candidature on the ground that the petitioner did not possess the
eligibility criteria for appointment as the Chairman of COHSEM as prescribed under the provisions
of section 12(2) of the said Act. It has also been submitted that without examining the relevant
records in respect of the petitioner's qualification, the authorities came to the conclusion that the
petitioner is not eligible for appointment as Chairman, COHSEM while in fact the petitioner is
eligible for appointment as Chairman of COHSEM as per section 12 of the said Act.
WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
[6] The learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner
submitted that since a notification had been issued inviting applications from willing candidates for
appointment on deputation to the post of Chairman, COHSEM and since the petitioner and
respondent No. 3 along with another candidate have applied by submitting necessary applications,
the authorities are under an obligation and are duty bound to consider the case of all the candidates,
including the petitioner, and to select the most suitable and deserving candidate on the basis of
merit. However, in the present case there is nothing on record to show that the authorities have also
considered the case of the petitioner and selected the respondent No. 3 on the basis of merit. It has
also been submitted that in the counter affidavit filed by the official respondents nothing is
mentioned that the case of the petitioner was considered and that the authorities have failed to give
valid and cogent reasons as to how the respondent No. 3 had been appointed, when the petitioner is
also very much eligible to be appointed as Chairman, COHSEM as provided under section 12(2) of
the said Act. The learned senior counsel vehemently submitted that the authorities appointed the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 3
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
respondent No. 3 as Chairman, COHSEM without considering the case of the petitioner in a very
arbitrary and discriminatory manner and in colourable exercise of power and accordingly the
impugned order is liable to be quashed and set aside.
[7] The stand taken by the authorities in their counter affidavit is that the petitioner was appointed
as Chairman, COHSEM on in-charge basis as a stop gap arrangement in order to fill up the gap
between the release of the previous Chairman till the appointment of a regular Chairman and that
on the appointment of the respondent No 3 as a regular Chairman, the WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022
Contd.../-
in-charge arrangement given to the petitioner came to an end. It has also been stated that on
examination of the official records, based on which decision for appointment of a regular Chairman,
COHSEM was taken, it was observed that both the petitioner and respondent No. 3 were found to
have been eligible on completion of eighteen years of service and that the appointment of the
Chairman, COHSEM is a policy decision of the State Government and the Government appointed
the respondent No. 3 in exercise of its statutory power given under section 12(2) of the said Act. In
the additional affidavit filed by respondents No. 1 and 2, it has been explained that the Government
policy decision is just to mean that the appointment of the respondent No 3 was made by the
Government in accordance with the rules regarding appointment of Chairman COHSEM as per
section 12 (2) of the said Act.
Mr M. Devananda learned Addl. AG appearing for the official respondents submitted that on the last
date for submission of applications i.e., on 02-09-2022, as notified under the Notification dated
18-08-2022, the petitioner has not completed eighteen years of experience as a Selection Grade
Lecturer and as such he was not qualified and eligible for appointment as Chairman, COHSEM
whereas the respondent No. 3 had already completed eighteen years of experience as a Selection
Grade Lecturer, accordingly, the authorities appointed the respondent No. 3 as the Chairman of
COHSEM. The Addl. AG further submitted that the petitioner was appointed as in-charge Chairman
on stop gap arrangement till a regular Chairman is appointed and that as the Government have
appointed the respondent No. 3 as the new Chairman in exercise of the statutory power provided
under section 12(2) of the said Act, the petitioner WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
has no valid right to challenge the appointment of respondent No. 3 specially when the petitioner is
not qualified for such appointment. The learned Addl. AG accordingly submitted that the present
writ petition is without any merit and the same is liable to be dismissed. [8] Mr. N. Kumarjit,
learned senior counsel appearing for the respondent No. 3 submitted that the petitioner challenged
the impugned order dated 16-12-2022 only on the following grounds:-
a) The respondents have not examined the relevant records in respect of the
petitioner and came to the conclusion that the petitioner is not eligible for
appointment as Chairman, COHSEM;
b) An ineligible person i.e., the respondent No. 3 has been appointed as Chairman,
COHSEM;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 4
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
c) The petitioner is more qualified than the respondent No. 3; and
d) No reason has been assigned by the State Government for appointing an ineligible
person as Chairman, COHSEM.
[9] With regard to the first ground, it has been submitted by the learned senior counsel for the
respondent No. 3 that at para 7 of the counter affidavit filed by the respondents No. 1 and 2, it has
been stated that on re-consideration and re-examination of the official records based on which
decision for appointment of a regular Chairman, COHSEM was taken, it was observed that both the
petitioner and respondent No. 3 were found to have been eligible having completed eighteen years
of service as Selection Grade Lecturer. It has been submitted that from the above stand taken by the
Government, it is clear that the authorities have duly WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
re-considered and re-examined the relevant records including the petitioner's qualification and
came to the conclusion that the petitioner and respondent No. 3 are eligible for appointment as
Chairman, COHSEM and that such stand of the authorities clearly shows that the case of the
petitioner was also duly considered by the authorities along with the case of the respondent No. 3 for
appointment as Chairman, COHSEM. [9.1] With regard to the second ground, it has been submitted
that as there is no dispute with regard to the fact that the respondent No. 3 is qualified and eligible
for appointment as Chairman, COHSEM, there is no substance in the second ground raised by the
petitioner. [9.2] By drawing the attention of this court to various documents produced by the
respondent No. 3 in connection with his educational qualification and administrative experience,
the learned senior counsel elaborately submitted that the respondent No. 3 has higher educational
qualification and better administrative experience than the petitioner and that on examination of
the records, it can be safely concluded that the respondent No. 3 is more qualified than the
petitioner for appointment as Chairman, COHSEM. The learned senior counsel accordingly
submitted that there is no merit on the third ground raised by the petitioner. [9.3] With regard to
the fourth ground raised by the petitioner, it has been submitted by the learned senior counsel
appearing for the respondent No. 3 that it has been noted in the relevant Government file that both
the petitioner and respondent No. 3 are eligible for appointment as Chairman, COHSEM and that
from the entries made and reflected in the Government file, it is crystal clear that the case of both
the petitioner WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
and respondent No. 3 pertaining to their qualification, experience, etc. have been duly examined
and verified by the State authorities and came to the conclusion that the respondent No. 3 is more
suitable/ meritorious for appointment to the post of Chairman, COHSEM and after obtaining due
approval from the concerned authority, the respondent No. 3 was appointed as Chairman,
COHSEM. According to the learned senior counsel, such noting in the Government file shows that
sufficient reason has been assigned and that no further reasons are required to be given. [9.4] The
learned senior counsel submitted that the authorities have not committed any illegality or
irregularity in appointing the respondent No. 3 as Chairman, COHSEM and that the present writ
petition is devoid of merit and the same is liable to be dismissed. The learned senior counsel cited
the following case laws in support of his contention:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 5
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
1. 1992 Supp (2) SCC 481 "National Institute of Mental Health and Neuro Sciences v.
Dr. K. Kalyana Raman & ors."
"5. The Selection Committee after interview and assessment of relative merits of the
candidates recommended a panel of names for appointment as Professor. Dr. Gauri
Devi was placed first in the panel of names. Dr. Kalyana Raman was the second. Dr.
Gauri Devi was eventually appointed as Professor. Her appointment was challenged
by Dr. Kalyana Raman in the High Court of Karnataka by means of a writ petition."
"6. The High Court allowed the writ petition in the judgment which is impugned in
this appeal. The High Court has quashed the proceedings of the Selection Committee
and the consequent appointment of Dr. Gauri Devi to the post of Professor of
Neurology. The High Court appears to make two points: (i) that it was not possible to
say with any degree of confidence that Dr. Kalyana Raman's case has received a fair
and reasonable consideration at the hands of the Selection Committee; and (ii) that
the Selection Committee has not given any reason, however brief, to establish any
rational WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
nexus between the facts said to have been considered by the Selection Committee and
the conclusion drawn by it on the basis of those facts, and the proceedings of the
Selection Committee cannot, withstanding the eminence of its personnel be upheld."
"7. We will first consider the second point. In the first place, it must be noted that the
function of the Selection Committee is neither judicial not adjudicatory. It is purely
administrative. The High Court seems to be in error in stating that the Selection
Committee ought to have given some reasons for preferring Dr. Gauri Devi as against
the other candidate. The selection has been made by the assessment of relative merits
of rival candidates determined in the course of the interview of candidates possessing
the required eligibility. There is no rule or regulation brought to our notice requiring
the Selection Committee to record reasons. In the absence of any such legal
requirement the selection made without recording reasons cannot be found fault
with. The High Cout in support of its reasoning has however, referred to the decision
of this Court in Union of India v. Mohan Lal Capoor. That decision proceeded on a
statutory requirement. Regulation 5(5) which was considered in that case required
the Selection Committee to record its reasons for superseding a senior member in the
State Civil Service. The decision in Capoor case was rendered on September 26, 1973.
In June 1977, Regulation 5(5) was amended deleting the requirement of recording
reasons for the supersession of senior officers of the State Civil Services. The Capoor
case cannot, therefore, be construed as an authority for the proposition that there
should be reason formulation for administrative decision. Administrative authority is
under no legal obligation to record reasons in support of its decision. Indeed, even
the principles of natural justice do not require an administrative authority or a
Selection Committee or an examiner to record reasons for the selection or
non-selection of a person in the absence of statutory requirement. This principle has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 6
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
been stated by this Court in R.S. Dass v. Union of India in which Capoor Case was
also distinguished."
"8. As to the first point we may state at the outset that giving of reasons for decision is
different from, and in principle distinct from, the requirements of procedural
fairness. The procedural fairness is the main requirement in the administrative
action.
WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
The 'fairness' or 'fair procedure' in the administrative action ought to be observed.
The Selection Committee cannot be an exception to this principle. It must take a
decision reasonably without being guided by extraneous or irrelevant consideration.
But there is nothing on record to suggest that the Selection Committee did anything
to the contrary. The High Court however, observed, that Dr. Kalyana Raman did not
receive a fair and reasonable consideration by the Selection Committee. The
inference in this regard has been drawn by the High Court from the statement of
objections dated 18 February, 1980 filed on behalf of the Selection Committee. It
appears that the Selection Committee took the stand that Dr. Kalyana Raman did not
satisfy the minimum requirement of experience and was not eligible for selection.
The High Court went on to state that it was somewhat extraordinary for the Selection
Committee after calling him for the interview and selecting him for the post by
placing him second, to have stated that he did not satisfy the minimum qualifications
prescribed for eligibility. According to the High Court the stand taken by the
Selection Committee raises serious doubts as to whether the deliberations of the
Selection Committee were such as to inspire confidence and reassurance as to the
related equality and justness of an effective consideration of this case. It is true that
selection of the petitioner and the stand taken by the Selection Committee before the
High Court that he was not eligible at all, are, indeed, antithetical and cannot
co-exist. But the fact remains that the case of Dr. Kalyana Raman was considered and
he was placed second in the panel of names. It is not shown that the selection was
arbitrary or whimsical or the Selection Committee did not act fairly towards Dr.
Kalyana Raman. The fact that he was placed second in the panel, itself indicates that
there was proper consideration of his case and he has been treated fairly. It should
not be lost sight of that the Selection Committee consisted of experts in the subject
for selection. They were men of high status and also of unquestionable impartiality.
The Court should be slow to interfere with their opinion."
2. (2008) 14 SCC 306 "B.C. Mylarappa Alias Dr. Chikkamylarappa v. Dr. R. Venkatasubbaiah & ors."
"24. There is another aspect of this matter which is also relevant for proper decision
of this appeal. We have already indicated WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 7
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
earlier that the Board of Appointment was constituted with experts in this line by the
University Authorities. They have considered not only the candidature of the
appellant and his experience as a Lecturer and Research Assistant along with others
came to hold that it was the appellant who was the candidate who could satisfy the
conditions for appointment to the post of Professor. Such being the selection made by
the expert body, it is difficult for us to accept the judgments of the High Court when
we have failed to notice any mala fides attributed to the members of the expert body
in selecting the appellant to the said post."
"25. In University of Mysore vs. C.D. Govinda Rao, while dealing with the selection of
candidates for academic matters by a Board of experts appointed by the University
for the post of Reader and the recommendation of the Board, this Court at para 13 of
the aforesaid decision observed:- (AIR pp. 496-
97) "13. ...Boards of Appointments are nominated by the universities and when
recommendations made by them and the appointments following on them, are
challenged before courts, normally the court should be slow to interfere with the
opinions expressed by the experts.
There is no allegation about mala fides against the experts who constituted the present Board; and
so, we think, it would normally be wise and safe for the court to leave the decisions of academic
matter to experts who are more familiar with the problems they face than the courts generally can
be. The criticism made by the High Court against the report made by the Board seems to suggest
that the High Court thought that the Board was in the position of an executive authority, issuing an
executive fiat, or was acting like a quasi-judicial tribunal, deciding disputes referred to it for its
decision. In dealing with complaints made by citizens in regard to appointments made by academic
bodies, like the universities, such an approach would not be reasonable or appropriate. In fact, in
issuing the writ, the High Court has made certain observations which show that the High Court
applied tests which would legitimately be applied in the case of writs of certiorari. In the judgment,
it has been observed that the error in this case is undoubtedly a manifest error. That is a
consideration which is more WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
germane and relevant in a procedure for a writ of certiorari. What the High Court should have
considered is whether the appointment made by the Chancellor had contravened any statutory or
binding rule or ordinance, and in doing so, the High Court should have shown due regard to the
opinion expressed by the Board & its recommendations on which the Chancellor has acted. In this
connection, the High Court has failed to notice one significant fact that when the Board considered
the claims of the respective applicants, it examined them very carefully and actually came to the
conclusion that none of them deserved to be appointed a Professor. These recommendations made
by the Board clearly show that they considered the relevant factors carefully and ultimately came to
the conclusion that Appellant 2 should be recommended for the post of Reader. Therefore, we are
satisfied that the criticism made by the High Court against the Board and its deliberations is not
justified."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 8
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
"26. Admittedly, there is nothing on record to show any mala fides attributed against
the members of the expert body of the University. The University Authorities had also
before the High Court in their objections to the writ petition taken a stand that the
appellant had fully satisfied the requirement for appointment. In this view of the
matter and in the absence of any mala fides either of the expert body of the University
or of the University Authorities and in view of the discussions made herein above, it
would be difficult to sustain the orders of the High Court as the opinion expressed by
the Board and its recommendations cannot be said to be illegal, invalid and without
jurisdiction."
"27. Again in M.V. Thimmaiah v. Union Public Service Commission, this Court clearly
held that in the absence of any mala fides attributed to the expert body, such plea is
usually raised by an interested party (in this case the unsuccessful candidate) and,
therefore, court should not draw any conclusion on the recommendation of the
expert body unless allegations are substantiated beyond doubt. That apart, the
challenge to the selection made by the expert body and approved by the University
Authorities was made by the respondent 1 and 2 who were unsuccessful candidates
and were not selected for appointment to the post of Professor in the Department of
Sociology."
WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
"28. In National Institute of Mental Health & Neuro Sciences v.
Dr. K. Kalyana Raman, this Court considered in detail the role of an expert body in
deciding the candidature for selection to a particular post. While doing so, this Court
at SCC pp. 484-85, para 7 of the said decision observed as follows:
"7. ...In the first place, it must be noted that the function of the Selection Committee
is neither judicial nor adjudicatory. It is purely administrative. The High Court seems
to be in error in stating that the Selection Committee ought to have given some
reasons for preferring Dr. Gauri Devi as against the other candidate. The selection
has been made by the assessment of relative merits of rival candidates determined in
the course of the interview of candidates possessing the required eligibility. There is
no rule or regulation brought to our notice requiring the Selection Committee to
record reasons. In the absence of any such legal requirement the selection made
without recording reasons cannot be found fault with. The High Court in support of
its reasoning has, however, referred to the decision of this Court in Union of India
v.Mohan Lai Capoor. That decision proceeded on a statutory requirement. Regulation
5(5) which was considered in that case required the Selection Committee to record its
reasons for superseding a senior member in the State Civil service. The decision in
Capoor case was rendered on 26-9-1973. In June, 1977, Regulation 5(5) was amended
deleting the requirement of recording reasons for the supersession of senior officers
of the State Civil services. The Capoor case cannot, therefore, be construed as an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 9
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
authority for the proposition that there should be reason formulation for
administrative decision. Administrative authority is under no legal obligation to
record reasons in support of its decision. Indeed, even the principles of natural
justice do not require an administrative authority or a Selection Committee or an
examiner to record reasons for the selection or non- selection of a person in the
absence of statutory requirement. This principle has been stated by this Court in R. S.
Dass v. Union of India in which Capoor case was also distinguished."
WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
Keeping this observation in our mind and considering the facts and circumstances of
the present case, we find that there was no dispute in this case that the selection was
made by the assessment of relative merit of rival candidates determined in the course
of the interview of the candidates and after thoroughly verifying the experience and
service of the respective candidates selected the appellant to the post of the Professor
in the said Department."
"29. It is not in dispute that there is no rule or regulation requiring the Board to
record reasons. Therefore, in our view, the High Court was not justified in making the
observation that from the resolution of the Board selecting the appellant for
appointment, no reason was recorded by the Board. In our view, in the absence of
any rule or regulation requiring the Board to record reasons and in the absence of
mala fides attributed against the members of the Board, the selection made by the
Board without recording reasons cannot be faulted with."
"30. Before we conclude, at the risk of repetition, we may reiterate that the Chairman,
Department of Sociology, University of Bangalore submitted his scrutiny and
verification report in which it was stated as under:
"On my scrutiny, I am satisfied that the candidate under reference fulfils all the
requirements as laid down in the University Notification under reference and the
candidate may be invited for the interview. If the candidate is not eligible, please
furnish the details."
"31. A reading of the scrutiny report which was extracted by the learned Single Judge
in his order would clearly show that the Chairman found only four persons eligible
for the post and invited the appellant and the respondent 1 and 2 and one more
candidate for interview. After being satisfied and after verifying the report of the
eligibility and the requirements for appointment to the post of Professor in the
Sociology Department of the University, the scrutiny and verification report was filed
by the Chairman and on the basis of which the appellant was selected and appointed
in the post of Professor in the University. That being the position and in view of our
discussions made herein above, we are of the view that the Division Bench as well as
the learned Single Judge ought not to have exercised the writ jurisdiction and WP(C)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 10
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
interfered with the selection of the expert committee of the University for the reasons
made in the order and particularly when the selection of the appellant was not
challenged on the ground of mala fides."
"32. For the reasons aforesaid, we are inclined to set aside the orders of the High
Court. Accordingly the impugned orders of the High Court are set aside and the writ
petition filed by the respondents is hereby rejected. In view of the fact that we have
already found that the appointment of the appellant is legal, the University is directed
to re-instate the appellant within two months from the date of supply of a copy of this
order. The appeal is allowed. There will be no order as to costs."
[10] I have heard the arguments advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the parties at length
and also examined the materials available on record. I have also carefully examined the relevant
Government file produced by the learned Government Advocate. The only grievance raised on
behalf of the petitioner is that even though the petitioner is qualified and eligible for appointment as
Chairman of COHSEM in terms of the provisions of section 12(2) of the said Act, the authorities
appointed the respondent No. 3 without at all considering the case of the petitioner. In view of the
specific grievances raised by the petitioner, this Court needs to examine whether the case of the
petitioner was examined by the authorities at the time of appointment of the respondent No. 3 as
Chairman, COHSEM.
In the counter affidavit as well as in the additional affidavit filed by the official respondents, nothing
is mentioned that the case of the petitioner was also considered along with the case of the
respondent No.
3. There is also no materials available on record to show that the comparative merits of both the
petitioner and the respondent No. 3 were WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
examined or evaluated. The process for selection and appointment of the respondent No. 3 as the
Chairman, COHSEM are recorded in Note Nos. 10 to 12 of the relevant Government file which are
reproduced hereunder for ready reference:-
"Note # 10 The proposal has been re-examined as per Notification No.
2/60/2009-Leg/I dated 17th March, 2010 of the Manipur Higher Secondary
Education (Second Amendment) Act, 2010 of Section 12(2) "Reader/Selection Grade
Lecturer of Government College with 18 years can be chairman of COHSEM".
1. Shri T. Ojit Singh who was promoted to Selection Grade on 27/07/2003 Govt. vide order No.
7(2)/5/2005- S/HE(I) dated 31st July, 2007, completed 18 years and Shri. Dr. Ch. Sarat Singh got
promoted to Selection grade on dated 1-12-2004 completed 17 years 8 months on the date of
notification. However as now Shri. Ch. Sarat Singh also completed 18 years.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 11
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
2. As on this date both are eligible for the Chairman of COHSEM.
3. Submitting for further necessary action please. 16/12/2022 04:24 PM HMANGTE LERTE KOM
JOINT SECRETARY (EDN-S) Note # 11 As discussed may kindly approve the appointment of Shri T.
Ojit Singh as Chairperson CoHSEM.
16/12/2022 04:28 PM GYAN PRAKASH COMMISSIONER (EDN-S) Note # 12 Approved
16/12/2022 04:40 PM THOUNAOJAM BASANTA SINGH MINISTER"
[11] On careful examination of the above quoted notings recorded in the relevant
Government file, it is clearly revealed that the concerned WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022
Contd.../-
authorities were of the opinion that the respondent No. 3 had completed eighteen
years as Selection Grade Lecturer whereas the petitioner had completed only
seventeen years and eight months as on the date of issuance of the notification dated
18-08-2022 and that the petitioner completed eighteen years as Selection Grade
Lecturer only on the date of recording Note No. 10 i.e., 16-12-2022, meaning thereby
that the authorities considered the petitioner not qualified for appointment as
Chairman, COHSEM. It is also clearly revealed that on the basis of the notings under
the aforesaid Note No. 10, the authorities selected the respondent No. 3 and
approved the appointment of respondent No. 3 as Chairman, COHSEM.
[12] In my considered view, the authorities wrongly treated the petitioner as not
qualified for appointment as Chairman, COHSEM and the authorities selected and
appointed the respondent No. 3 without considering and evaluating the comparative
merits of the petitioner and the respondent No. 3. The view of this court is fortified by
the submission made by the learned Addl. AG that the petitioner is not qualified for
appointment as Chairman, COHSEM since the petitioner did not complete eighteen
years as Selection Grade Lecturer as on the last date of submission of applications as
notified under the notification dated 18-08-2022. In view of the above, this Court is
of the considered view that the authorities rejected the candidature of the petitioner
without proper examination of his qualifications and without proper application of
mind and that the petitioner had been able to make out a case for interfering with the
impugned order dated 16-12-2022.
WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
So far as case laws cited on behalf of the respondent No. 3 are concerned, this Court
is in total agreement with the principle of law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court,
however, this Court is of the considered view that the said case laws are of no help to
the respondent No. 3 since the ratio laid down therein have no application in the facts
and circumstances of the present case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 12
Dr. Chingangbam Sarat Singh vs The State Of Manipur Represented By ... on 27 February, 2023
In the result, the present writ petition is allowed by quashing and setting aside the
impugned order dated 16-12-2022. The respondents are further directed to
re-consider both the cases of the petitioner and respondent No. 3 by evaluating their
comparative merits and to appoint the suitable candidate as Chairman of COHSEM.
With the aforesaid directions, the present writ petition is disposed of. Parties are to
bear their own cost.
JUDGE
FR/NFR
Devananda
WP(C) No. 1086 of 2022 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45826541/ 13
