Dr Ganesh Nayak vs V Shamanna on 14 January, 2022
Dr Ganesh Nayak vs V Shamanna on 14 January, 2022
Author: Krishna S.Dixit
Bench: Krishna S.Dixit
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
R
DATED THIS THE 14TH DAY OF JANUARY, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE KRISHNA S.DIXIT
WRIT PETITION NO.21688 OF 2009 (GM-RES)
BETWEEN:
DR GANESH NAYAK,
S/O.LATE H K NAYAK,
AGED ABOUT 66 YEARS,
R/AT.NO.8, 7TH CROSS,
JAKKASANDRA BLOCK,
KORAMANGALA, BANGALORE - 560 034.
...PETITIONER
(BY SRI. PALECANDA M CHINNAPPA, FOR
SMT. ANUPAMA HEBBAR, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. V SHAMANNA,
S/O LATE VENKATASWAMAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 65 YEARS,
R-1 DIED ON 12/03/2013
REP BY HIS LR.
1(A) S NAGARAJ,
S/O V SHAMANNA,
AGED ABOUT 59 YEARS,
NO.46, 6TH CROSS,
CAMBRIDGE LAYOUT,
HALSOOR, BENGALURU - 560 008.
AMENDED V.C.O DATED 14.01.2022.
2. KARNATAKA MEDICAL COUNCIL,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152407180/ 1
Dr Ganesh Nayak vs V Shamanna on 14 January, 2022
#70, 2ND FLOOR, VAIDYAKEEYA BHAVANA,
K R ROAD, BASAVANAGUDI,
BANGALORE - 560 004.
2
REPRESENTED BY ITS PRESIDENT.
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI. P JAGANNATHAN, ADVOCATE FOR R1(A);
SRI. D S HOSMATH, ADVOCATE FOR R2)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226 &
227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO QUASH THE
IMPUGNED ORDER DATED 07.05.2009, PASSED BY THE R2 IN
ENQ.NO.7 OF 2008 VIDE ANNEX-N.
THIS PETITION COMING ON FOR ORDERS THROUGH
VIDEO CONFERENCING, THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE
FOLLOWING:-
ORDER
A delinquent medical practitioner is knocking at the doors of Writ Court for assailing the order
dated 7.5.2009 made by the second respondent Karnataka Medical Council, a Statutory Body under
the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, at Annexure-N whereby, he was administered the punishment
of 'warning' for the alleged occupational lapse namely some procedural breach in accomplishing
angioplasty to an aged & ailing lady.
2. The Karnataka Medical Council has entered appearance through its Panel Counsel who remained
absent when the matter was taken up for consideration twice i.e., in the morning and afternoon
sessions; the first respondent Complainant having died, his son is permitted to come on record to
prosecute the defence in the Writ Petition; his counsel too is absent; however, the absence of the
counsel cannot interdict the disposal of this decade old case on merits, without unnecessarily
prolonging its pendency.
3. Having heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and having perused the bulky Petition Papers,
this court is inclined to grant indulgence in the matter for the following reasons:
(a) The vehement submission of learned counsel for the petitioner that the patient
namely Smt.Yellamma was suffering from multiple ailments including diabetes,
Neuropathy, Nephropathy, etc., and that she was being treated by several other
doctors in different hospitals at different times, is substantiated from the perusal of
material on record; however, the allegation is made only against the petitioner and no
explanation is offered as to why others who had treated her before were not even
issued a show cause notice asking for their views; this happens to be the first error
apparent on the face of the record.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152407180/ 2
Dr Ganesh Nayak vs V Shamanna on 14 January, 2022
(b) The records reveal that the patient Smt.Yellamma was already aged 65 years and
she was suffering from ailments natural to declining age of life; it is a common
knowledge that the evening of life, some diseases come and stay with beings, be it
humans or other, as inevitable guests;
an aged person suffering from ailments of the kind, is visited by yet another disease more
particularly affecting the functioning of heart, the degree of mortality increases; the records reveal
that the patient had some significant problem with Cardio Vascular Vein since long and therefore,
she had undergone angiogram at the hands of the petitioner; however, the medical records including
the impugned order prima facie show that the cause of death is the serious bacterial infection later
contracted; there is huge time gap between accomplishment of angioplasty by the petitioner and the
demise of the patient; there is nothing on record to show that the alleged deficiency in professional
service accelerated the process of health deterioration that eventually resulted into her death; some
positive evidentiary material was necessary to eliminate the possible nova causa interveniens;
therefore, there is no reasonable connect or nexus between the medical procedure done by the
petitioner and death of the patient vide ARUN KUMAR MANGLIK VS. CHIRAYU HEALTH AND
MEDICARE PRIVATE LTD 2019 (7) SCC 401.
(c) It does not need research to show that more often than not, the cases of medical negligence are
launched recklessly by the patients and their relatives; 'compensation culture' which obtains in other
jurisdictions is gradually gaining entry to the field of medical services in our society affecting a
healthy relationship of doctor & patient; it is tritely said "faith heals and not the medicine"; faith
here means the one reposed in the treating doctor; courts have been nowadays observing that an
unscrupulous section of the people are prone to use the slightest opportunity to sue the doctors and
hospitals, in the hope of making fast buck; the motivation of people bringing actions for medical
negligence are more complicated: some sue for money; others sue for getting an acceptance of guilt;
some others do it to ensure that errors would not be repeated; but a large chunk of cases does not
involve bonafide claims, cannot be much disputed; the 'compensation culture' be it truth or a myth
in varying degrees, has given rise to risk aversion; medical professionals having a complaint made
against them gather an impression that there is an unjustifiable attack on their professional integrity
and reputation; this may lead to a defensive response of the medicos ultimately resulting into
enormous cost escalation in medical services; if the public servants can be legally protected for the
bonafide errors in their action, there is no reason to extend for not extending such a protection to
the medical professionals.
(d) It is said the realm of medicine is an ever growing branch of uncertain knowledge; William Osler
(1849-1919), a Canadian Physician, more than a century ago had said that "medicine is a science of
uncertainty and an art of probability", a host of un-assessable factors entering the fray of diagnosis
& treatment; the advancement of science & technology has to some extent reduced the level of such
uncertainty and enhanced the degree of probability, is also true; however, it cannot be disputed that
the medical field is still in a fluid state; a great Indian sage Ramakrishna Paramahamsa had said:
"God laughs on two occasions. He laughs when the physician says to the patient's mother, 'Don't be
afraid...; I shall certainly cure your boy.' God again laughs, saying to Himself, 'I am going to take his
life, and this man says, he will save it!..." Even if it is shown that a drug or a procedure did cause an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152407180/ 3
Dr Ganesh Nayak vs V Shamanna on 14 January, 2022
injury, it is difficult to ascertain whether this is because of the drug or the procedure; for example, it
might be that the drug or the procedure is not defective if it provides a cure for the vast majority of
people, although it has undesirable consequences for a small number of people; if a patient is of the
unlucky few, there will be difficulty in concluding that the drug or the procedure was actionably
defective; this is only to highlight the uncertain causation obtaining in the realm of medical liability;
this aspect ought to have animated the decision making process that culminated into the impugned
order of penalty; however, that having not happened, the impugned order suffers from another legal
infirmity.
(e) Before parting with this case, it needs to be observed that: medical and paramedical
professionals are inevitable for a healthy society; Vedic literature lauds medical practitioner and
medicine as 'vaidyo naaraayano harihi', nearly meaning that a true doctor as a healer is God and that
a true medicine is like the sacred water from the river Ganga; during COVID pandemic, how the
doctors and paramedics served our society does not fade away from the public memory; society has
to gratefully appreciate the valuable services rendered by the medicos; however, at times, being the
victims, the medicos are made to apologize to the attackers and this led to the State enacting the
Prevention of Violence Against Doctors, Medical Professionals and Medical Institutions Act, 2018;
having said all this, this court hastens to add that the doctors' is a profession wherein service ought
to be the motto and not the profit; as any professionals, they too are not immuned from legal action
for medical negligence, as observed by the Apex Court in INDIAN MEDICAL ASSOCIATION VS.
V.P.SHANTHA (2005) 6 SCC 1.
In the above circumstances, this Writ Petition succeeds; a Writ of Certiorari issues quashing the
impugned order; the petitioner doctor is absolved from the allegations.
This court places on record its appreciation for the assistance rendered by Mr.Faiz Afsar Sait, Law
Clerk cum Research Assistant.
Costs made easy.
SD/-
JUDGE cbc
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152407180/ 4
