Dr. Hemam Priyosakhi Devi vs The Union Of India on 19 December, 2022
Dr. Hemam Priyosakhi Devi vs The Union Of India on 19
December, 2022
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
W.P. (C) No. 867 of 2022
Dr. Hemam Priyosakhi Devi, aged about 63 years, W/o Dr.
Sinam Rajendra Singh, resident of Chingmeirong East,
P.O. Lamlong, P.S. Lamphel, District Imphal East, Manipur
- 785010
...... Petitioner/s
- Versus -
1. The Union of India, through the Secretary, Ministry of
Health & Family Welfare, Government of India, Nirman
Bhawan, New Delhi - 110001.
2. The Under Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry
of Health and Family Welfare, Nirman Bhawan, New Delhi
- 110001.
3. The Regional Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS),
Imphal, through its Director (RIMS), P.O. Imphal, P.S.
Lamphel, District Imphal West, Manipur - 795004.
4. The Deputy Director (Admn.), Regional Institute of
Medical Sciences (rims), Imphal, P.O. Imphal, P.S.
Lamphel, District Imphal West, Manipur - 795004.
......Official Respondents
5. Dr. L. Ranjit Singh, Prof., Obst & Gynae, RIMS, Imphal, Manipur, through the Deputy Director,
Regional Institute of Medical Sciences, P.O. Imphal, P.S. Lamphel, District Imphal West, Manipur -
795004.
........Private Respondent/s
WP(C) No. 867 of 2022 Page 1
B E F O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135122216/ 1
Dr. Hemam Priyosakhi Devi vs The Union Of India on 19 December, 2022
For the Petitioners : Mr. BP Sahu, Sr. Adv.
For the respondents : Mr. HS. Paonam, Sr. Adv.
& Kh. Samarjit, DSGI.
Date of Hearing : 01.12.2022
Date of Judgment : 19.12.2022
Judgment
(CAV)
[1] Heard Mr. BP. Sahu, learned senior counsel appearing for
the petitioner, Mr. Kh. Samarjit, learned DSGI appearing for respondent Nos. 1 to 4 and Mr. HS.
Paonam, learned senior counsel appearing for respondent No. 5.
[2] The present writ petition had been filed assailing the order dated 12.10.2022 issued by the Under
Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, entrusting additional
charge for the post of Director, RIMS to the respondent No. 5 for a period of 6 months, i.e., upto
11.04.2023 or till regular appointment of Director, RIMS or till further orders whichever is the
earliest, coupled with a prayer for directing the official respondents to allow the petitioner to hold
the post of Director, RIMS, Imphal, pending regular appointment.
[3] The facts of the present case in a nutshell is that just prior to issuance of the impugned order
dated 12.10.2022, one Dr. Ahanthem Santa Singh was appointed to the post of Director, Regional
Institute of Medical Sciences (RIMS), Imphal on deputation basis for a period of 5 years with effect
from 09.11.2018, vide order dated 28.07.2021 issued by the Under Secretary to the Government of
India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. Before completion of his tenure of 5 years as Director of
RIMS, Dr. Ahanthem Santa Singh was repatriated prematurely from the post of Director, RIMS to
his parent WP(C) No. 867 of 2022 Page 2 cadre, i.e., North Eastern Indira Gandhi Regional Institute
of Health & Medical Sciences, Shillong with effect from 12.10.2022, vide order dated 18.07.2022
issued by the Joint Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare. After
repatriation of the said Dr. Ahanthem Santa Singh and pending the process for appointment of
Director of RIMS on regular basis, the authorities of RIMS issued the impugned order dated
12.10.2022 entrusting the additional charge for the post of Director, RIMS to the respondent No. 5
for a period of 6 months or till regular appointment of Director, RIMS or till further orders
whichever is the earliest.
According to the petitioner, as per the applicable rules, if such additional charge is to be given, the
same should be given to the senior most Officer in the next lower grade and since the petitioner is
the senior most officer in the next lower grade, she is entitled to get such additional charge and that
entrusting such additional charge of Director, RIMS to the respondent No. 5, who is junior to the
petitioner, is ultra-vires the applicable rules and not sustainable in the eyes of law. Hence, the
present case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135122216/ 2
Dr. Hemam Priyosakhi Devi vs The Union Of India on 19 December, 2022
[4] Mr. BP. Sahu, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner, submitted that the post of
Director, RIMS become vacant with effect from 13.10.2022 due to the sudden and premature
repatriation of Dr. Ahanthem Santa Singh to his parent cadre before completion of his tenure of 5
years as Director of RIMS. According to the learned senior counsel if such unanticipated vacancy is
to be filled up by in-charge arrangement pending regular appointment, such in- charge arrangement
should be done in terms of the provisions under Rule 12(1)(iii) of the Rules and Regulations of
RIMS, Imphal, wherein it is provided that in respect of unanticipated vacancies the Administrative
Ministry may, with the approval of the Minister in charge, order additional charge arrangement
subject to maximum period of 6 months with effect from the date of occurrence of the vacancy and
also subject WP(C) No. 867 of 2022 Page 3 to the condition that the officer to whom the additional
charge is assigned is the senior most officer in the next lower grade and is clear from vigilance angle.
[5] Mr. BP. Sahu, learned senior counsel, submitted that the petitioner obtained the
inter-se-seniority list of Professors of RIMS from the concerned authorities of RIMS through RTI
application and in the said inter-se-seniority list of Professors, the name of the petitioner is at Serial
No. 3 while the name of respondent No. 5 is at Serial No. 5. It is also submitted by the learned senior
counsel that since the Professors at Serial No. 1 & 2 of the said inter-se-seniority list have already
retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation, the petitioner is presently the senior
most Professor in RIMS and the respondent No. 5 is junior to her. The learned senior counsel
vehemently submitted that at the time of entrusting the additional charge of Director, RIMS to the
respondent No. 5, the authorities did not consider the case of the petitioner and other Professors
who are senior to the respondent No. 5 and that the authorities have allowed the respondent No. 5
to hold the charge of Director, RIMS in an arbitrary and in a pick and choose manner and in
complete violation of the provisions of Rule 12(1)(iii) of the Rules and Regulations of RIMS, Imphal.
According to the learned senior counsel such arbitrary and illegal action of the authorities are liable
to be interfered with by this Court by quashing and setting aside the impugned order dated
12.10.2022 and by directing the authorities to allow the petitioner to hold the additional charge of
Director, RIMS pending regular appointment.
[6] Mr. Kh. Samarjit, learned DSGI appearing for respondents No. 1 to 4, submitted that the
inter-se-seniority seniority list of Professors of RIMS relied on by the petitioner is not yet approved
by the Executive Council of RIMS and that the inter-se-seniority of Professor of RIMS is yet to be
finalized and accordingly, the claim of the petitioner that she is the senior most Professor in RIMS is
unfounded and without any basis.
WP(C) No. 867 of 2022 Page 4 It has been submitted by the learned DSGI that as the process for
filling up the post of Director, RIMS on regular basis is going to take some time and as the said post
of Director cannot be kept vacant, the Honb'le Minister of Health & Family Welfare, Govt. of India,
by resorting to the provisions of Rule 12(1)(iii) of the Rules and Regulations of RIMS entrusted the
additional charge for the post of Director, RIMS to the private respondent No. 5 as a stop gap
arrangement for a period of 6 months or till such time a regular Director is appointed, whichever is
the earliest, taking into consideration the larger interest of the public and importance attached to
such an important medical institute which not only catered to the needs of the State of Manipur but
also to the entire North Eastern Region. It has been strenuously submitted that such action of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135122216/ 3
Dr. Hemam Priyosakhi Devi vs The Union Of India on 19 December, 2022
authorities cannot be faulted with specially when the respondent No. 5 have already assumed
additional charge as Director of RIMS with effect from 13.10.2022. Mr. Kh. Samarjit, learned DSGI,
further submitted that as the final approval for entrusting of additional charge of Director, RIMS to
respondent No. 5 vests with the Appointment Committee of Cabinet (ACC), the Ministry has
forwarded an Office Memorandum dated 27.10.2022 to the ACC seeking for ex-post facto approval
and decision thereof is still awaited. The learned DSGI lastly submitted that the present writ petition
is without any merit and the same deserves to be dismissed outright.
[7] Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel appearing for respondent No. 5, submitted that the
inter-se-seniority list of Professors of RIMS produced by the petitioner and enclosed as Annexure -
A/1 to the present writ petition has not been approved by the Executive Committee of RIMS and
therefore, the said seniority list is an unauthenticated seniority list on the basis whereof no claim
can be made by the writ petitioner. The learned senior counsel also vehemently contested the claim
of the petitioner that she is senior to WP(C) No. 867 of 2022 Page 5 the respondent No. 5 in the
grade of Professor. In this regard, it has been submitted that both the petitioner and the respondent
No. 5 were appointed as Professors in RIMS on the same date, i.e., on 01.02.2009 by issuing
different orders and without indicating inter-se merit. It has also been submitted that in such a
situation and in terms of the seniority rules and guidelines and the law applicable for determination
of inter- se-seniority of incumbents who have been appointed or promoted on the same date without
indicating merit, the respondent No. 5 would be senior to the writ petitioner, inasmuch as, the
respondent No. 5 is senior in age to the petitioner. In support of his contention, the learned senior
counsel relied on the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of "D.P. Das vs.
Union of India & Ors." reported in (2011) 8 SCC 115 wherein it has been held as under:-
"25. In the premises aforesaid the seniority of the officers who were recommended on
the same date must be decided by their respective age. The contrary view taken by the
High Court of fixing seniority on the basis of the date of interview, being wholly
fortuitous, cannot be accepted."
"27. For the reasons aforesaid this Court holds that for determination of seniority of
the officers who were recommended on the same date, age is the only valid and fair
basis; as such, their seniority should be decided on the basis of age of the candidates
who have been recommended."
[8] Mr. HS. Paonam, learned senior counsel, lastly submitted that as the inter-se-seniority between
the petitioner and respondent No. 5 is yet to be finalized and as the respondent No. 5 has better
claim of seniority over the petitioner in terms of the judgment rendered by the apex court in the case
of "D.P. Das" (Supra) and since the Minister in charge of the Administrative Department of the
Central Government has the power and authority for ordering/assigning additional charge
arrangement in respect of the post of Director of RIMS under Rule 12(1)(iii) of the Rules and
Regulations of RIMS, no irregularity or WP(C) No. 867 of 2022 Page 6 illegality had been
committed by the authorities in issuing the impugned order thereby entrusting the additional
charge of Director of RIMS to the respondent No. 5 and accordingly, there is no merit in the present
writ petition and the same deserves to be dismissed outright as being devoid of merit.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135122216/ 4
Dr. Hemam Priyosakhi Devi vs The Union Of India on 19 December, 2022
[9] Before considering the merits and demerits of the rival submissions advanced by the learned
counsel appearing for the parties, this Court is of the considered view that it will be appropriate to
examine the relevant provisions of Rule 12(1)(iii) of the Rules and Regulations of RIMS, Imphal,
which provides for making in-charge arrangement in respect of unanticipated vacancy in the post of
Director of RIMS, Imphal. The said provisions are reproduced hereunder for ready reference:-
"12. Director of the Institute 12(1)
(iii) Notwithstanding anything contained hereinabove, the President, RIMS may
appoint a person to officiate as director either during temporary absence of the
regular incumbent or where the office of Director falls vacant for any reason for a
period not exceeding six months at a time within the concurrence of the Central
Government. However, in respect of unanticipated vacancies (the regular
appointments to which require ACC approval) the administrative ministry may, with
the approval of the Minister in charge, order additional charge arrangements subject
to maximum period of six months, with effect from the date of occurrence of the
vacancy and also subject to the condition that the officer to whom the additional
charge is assigned is the senior most officer in the next lower grade and is clear from
vigilance angle."
WP(C) No. 867 of 2022 Page 7
[10] On careful examination of the provisions of Rule 12(1)(iii)
quoted hereinabove, it is crystal clear that in respect of unanticipated vacancies in the
post of Director, RIMS, the administrative ministry may, with the approval of the
Minister in charge, order additional charge arrangements subject to maximum period
of 6 months, with effect from the date of occurrence of the vacancy and also subject to
the condition that the officer to whom the additional charge is assigned is senior most
officer in the next lower grade and is clear from the vigilance angle.
[11] In the present case on careful examination and perusal of the O.M. dated 27.10.2022 of the
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, Government of India, containing the proposal for seeking
ex-post facto approval of the ACC for entrustment of additional charge of Director, RIMS to
respondent No. 5, which is enclosed as Annexure - C/4 to the additional affidavit dated 24.11.2022
filed by respondents No. 1 to 4, and the letter dated 28.11.2022 of the Under Secretary to the
Government of India, Ministry of Health & Family Welfare, addressed to the Director, RIMS,
Imphal, enclosing therein the tentative inter-se- seniority list of Professor of RIMS as on
01.07.2022, which was placed before this Court in terms of the direction given by this Court, it is
found that the respondent No. 5, whose name is at Serial No. 4 of the said tentative
inter-se-seniority list of Professor, RIMS, had been entrusted with the additional charge of the
Director, RIMS, Imphal in terms of the provisions of Rule 12(1)(iii) of the Rules and Regulations of
RIMS and the DoPT O.M. dated 05.01.2015 of the Central Government. This Court also found that
in the said tentative inter-se-seniority list of Professors relied on by the authorities, the name of the
petitioner is at Serial No. 2, thereby showing that the petitioner is senior to respondent No. 5 in the
grade of Professor. The said Rule 12(1)(iii) of the Rules and Regulations of RIMS and points (ii) of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135122216/ 5
Dr. Hemam Priyosakhi Devi vs The Union Of India on 19 December, 2022
the aforesaid DoPT's O.M. dated 05.01.2015, inter-alia, provides for making interim in-charge
arrangement in respect of unanticipated vacancies subject to the condition that the officer to whom
the additional charge is assigned is WP(C) No. 867 of 2022 Page 8 the senior most officer in the next
lower grade and is clear from vigilance angle.
[12] In the present case, the respondents have not been able to show before this Court any material
whatsoever to indicate that at the time of assigning additional charge of Director of RIMS to the
respondent No. 5, the authorities have also considered the case of the petitioner and other senior
Professors who are placed above the respondent No. 5 in the said tentative inter-se-seniority list of
Professors, RIMS relied on by the authorities. Faced with such undisputed facts, this Court is
constrained to hold that the authorities have entrusted additional charge of Director of RIMS,
Imphal to the respondent No. 5 arbitrarily and in a pick and choose manner and in complete
violation of the provisions of Rule 12(1)(iii) of the Rules and Regulations of RIMS, Imphal.
Accordingly, this Court has no hesitation to hold that the official respondents have acted arbitrarily
and illegally in issuing the impugned order dated 12.10.2022.
[13] It will be pertinent to mention here that in the case of "Government of A.P. & Anr. Vs. A.V.
Venugopala Rao" reported in (1995) 1 SCC 179, the Hon'ble Apex Court has held that interim in-
charge arrangement given to senior most employee in the tentative seniority list of the promotional
post pending finalization of seniority list to avoid administrative hardship or heartburning among
rival candidates had a rational and reasonable basis.
In the present case, as the inter-se-seniority of the Professors of RIMS are yet to be finalized, the
authorities have relied on the tentative inter-se-seniority list of Professors of RIMS for assigning
additional charge of Director, RIMS as an interim arrangement and this Court did not find any fault
with it. The only unacceptable thing is about assigning such additional charge of Director, RIMS to
the respondent No. 5, without considering the cases WP(C) No. 867 of 2022 Page 9 of the senior
Professor, including the present petitioner, who are placed above the respondent No. 5 in the said
tentative seniority list.
[14] In so far as the contention advanced by the learned senior counsel appearing for respondent
No. 5 is concerned, it has to be pointed out that as the validity and correctness of the said tentative
inter-se-seniority list of Professor, RIMS has not been questioned or challenged by anybody and as
such issue is not before this Court in the present proceeding, this Court is of the considered view
that it will not be just and proper to entertain and decide the points and contentions raised by the
learned senior counsel appearing for respondent No. 5 in the present proceedings. Accordingly, this
Court declined to do so.
For the findings and reasons given hereinabove, the present writ petition is hereby allowed by
quashing and setting aside the impugned order dated 12.10.2022. Quashing of the impugned order
will not preclude the official respondents from making fresh interim in- charge arrangement in
respect of the vacant post of Director, RIMS, Imphal strictly in terms of the provisions of Rule
12(1)(iii) of the Rules and Regulations of RIMS.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135122216/ 6
Dr. Hemam Priyosakhi Devi vs The Union Of India on 19 December, 2022
With the aforesaid directions, the present writ petition is disposed of without any order as to cost.
JUDGE FR/NFR joshua KH. JOSHUA Digitally signed by KH.
JOSHUA MARING
MARING Date: 2022.12.19
13:08:02 +05'30'
WP(C) No. 867 of 2022 Page 10
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135122216/ 7
