Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal vs Ut Of J&K on 8 July, 2025
Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal vs Ut Of J&K on 8 July, 2025
WP(C)1186/2025
Page |1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
Reserved on : 04.06.2025
Pronounced on: 08.07.2025
WP(C) No. 1186/2025
CM No. 3124/2025
1. Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal, age 73 years
S/o. Abdul Rehman
2. Dr. Shahnaz, age 57 years
W/o. Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal
Both Residents of Naseem Bagh, Habak, Hazratbal,
Srinagar, Kashmir UT of J&K
Petitioners....
Through: MR. S. H. Thakur, Adv.
Vs.
1. UT of J&K, through Principal Secretary to Govt.
Home Department, Civil Secretariat Srinagar.
2. Director General of Police (DGP)
UT of J&K, PHQ Peerbagh, Srinagar Kashmir.
3. Senior Superintendent of Police (Sr. S.P.)
District Srinagar, Kashmir, UT of J&K.
4. Sub District Police Officer (SDPO)
Hazratbal, Srinagar.
Through: Mr. Mohsin Qadiri, Sr. AAG with Ms. Nadiya Abdullah, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE WASIM SADIQ NARGAL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. The instant writ petition has been filed on behalf of the petitioners under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India read with section 528 of the BNSS praying for the following reliefs:-
a. Quash the order of closure of investigation by the Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Srinagar in the protest petition by the order dated 29- 01-2025 and quash the same
as illegal and against the policy of the law.
b. Direct for a Denovo/Fresh investigation in the matter (FIR 35/2022) through any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7892174/ 1
Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal vs Ut Of J&K on 8 July, 2025
another reliable and credible investigating
1|Page WP(C)1186/2025 Page |2 agency of the State so that all concerned including
the actual culprits are brought to justice along with the persons who have misdirected
the investigation, so that the justice is done to the petitioners who are teaching the
law to the future and aspiring lawyers of the society.
c. Direct to deliver all the stolen articles to the petitioners after recovering the same
from the actual culprits after proper identification and receipt as per the mandate of
law (Sec 516,523 of CrPC)
2. In order to understand the controversy in the instant petition, it is necessary to first provide a
summary of the facts of the case:
FACTUAL MATRIX OF THE CASE:
3. That on 7th April 2022 both the petitioners went for Umrah after putting locks on their residence
leaving everything at home, including the gold ornaments (worth more than 75.00 lacs then) and
cash of Rs 4.5 lacs. On 9 April 2022, the petitioners were informed by their relatives who live in the
neighbourhood that an untoward incident has taken place at their residence, and an FIR No.
35/2022 under Sections 457 and 380 of the Indian Penal Code, was registered by their relatives at
Police Station Nigeen.
4. Aggrieved by the manner in which the investigation which was being conducted by concerned
Police, an application came to be filed by the petitioners in terms of Section 153-C of Criminal
Procedure Code before the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, seeking monitoring of investigation.
An order was passed in the aforesaid application on 23- 11-2022, wherein the SDPO was directed to
appear before the court along with CD file.
5. That finally the respondents filed the challan of the case by producing some accused persons,
however as per the petitioners, no satisfactory investigation was conducted in the matter, and the
Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate closed the proceeding on the basis of statement given by the
Prosecuting Officer.
6. Being aggrieved of the performance of the Special Investigation Team (SIT) and the performance
shown by the police during investigation, the petitioners filed a Protest Petition on 21-12-2023,
which was
2|Page WP(C)1186/2025 Page |3 entertained by the court as there were glaring defects in the
investigation conducted by the Special Investigation Team (SIT) as per the petitioners.
7. It is specific case of the petitioners that the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate (CJM) heard the
matter in absence of the counsel for the petitioners and closed the proceedings; vide order dated
29-01-2025 by observing that court has no powers to order for investigation by CBI or any other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7892174/ 2
Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal vs Ut Of J&K on 8 July, 2025
reliable agency in terms of Section 173(8) CRPC.
8. The petitioner is now aggrieved of the order passed by the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate
(CJM) Srinagar dated 29-01-2025, declining the relief with regard to further investigation by
another agency including CBI.
Legal Analysis:
9. Heard learned Counsel for the petitioners and also Mr. Mohsin Showkat Qadiri, Learned Sr.
Additional Advocate General on behalf of the respondents and also perused the record.
10. Without delving into the controversy of the instant case, this Court is aware of the established
legal principle regarding the scope of investigation.
11. The courts primary objective is to ensure a fair, credible and impartial investigation to secure the
ends of justice. The transfer of case to CBI is a complex issue and the courts have laid down
guidelines, for when such a transfer is appropriate. Generally, it is not a routine matter and should
be considered only in exceptional cases, such as when there are serious allegation of corruption, bias
or a failure of the state police to conduct a fair investigation.
12. Cases where investigation can be ordered to be transferred to CBI:
i) Exceptional circumstances where there is a demonstrable need for an independent
investigation;
ii) Need for specific evidence of the inadequacy or bias of the current investigating
agency;
3|Page WP(C)1186/2025 Page |4
iii) Public confidence; In high profile cases or those involving public interest;
iv) Malafide intention or biasness against investigating agency;
13. Although, the power of transfer from one Investigating Agency to another Investigating Agency
like CBI can only be done by the Constitutional courts and not by the Trial Courts. It has also been
held that even the power of constitutional court to transfer such investigation must be in rare and
exceptional cases, where the courts find it necessary. With a view to facilitate this court, reliance has
been placed on K.V.Rajendran v. Superintendent of Police, CBCID South Zone, Chennai, (2013) 12
SCC 480. The relevant para 13 and 17 are reproduced as under:
"13.......This Court has time and again dealt with the issue under what circumstances
the investigation can be transferred from the State investigating agency to any other
independent investigating agency like CBI. It has been held that the power of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7892174/ 3
Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal vs Ut Of J&K on 8 July, 2025
transferring such investigation must be in rare and exceptional cases where the court
finds it necessary in order to do justice between the parties and to instil confidence in
the public mind, or where investigation by the State police lacks credibility and it is
necessary for having "a fair, honest and complete investigation", and particularly,
when it is imperative to retain public confidence in the impartial working of the State
agencies.
"17 ....the Court could exercise its Constitutional powers for transferring an
investigation from the State investigating agency to any other independent
investigating agency like CBI only in rare and exceptional cases. Such as where high
officials of State authorities are involved, or the accusation itself is against the top
officials of the investigating agency thereby allowing them to influence the
investigation, and further that it is so necessary to do justice and to instil confidence
in the
4|Page WP(C)1186/2025 Page |5 investigation or where the investigation is prima
facie found to be tainted/biased."
14. In view of the above, the law can be summarised to the effect that the Court could exercise its
Constitutional powers for transferring an investigation from the State investigating agency to any
other independent investigating agency like CBI only in rare and exceptional cases, with a view to do
justice and to instil confidence in the investigation or where, the investigation is prima facie found
to be tainted/biased.
15. Even the law has been settled by the Apex Court that one cannot insist that an offence be
investigated by a particular agency. This Court is fortified by view taken in case titled CBI v/s Rajesh
Gandhi, 1997 Cri LJ 63, that no one can insist that an offence be investigated by a particular agency.
The relevant para of the judgment is reproduced as under:
"........The decision to investigate or the decision on the agency which should
investigate, does not attract principles of natural justice. The accused cannot have a
say in who should investigate the offences he is charged with."
16. It goes without saying that the power of the constitutional courts cannot be exercised by
transferring the investigation just for the asking nor is transfer directed only to satisfy the ego or
vindicate prestige of a party interested for such investigation. It is not a case where the petitioners
are invoking the power of the constitutional court to refer the investigation to CBI, rather, it is a
case, where, the petitioners are challenging the order of the Learned Magistrate in declining relief
for transferring the investigation to CBI. Even the Hon'ble Apex Court has held that the power of the
constitutional court has also limited and has to be exercised sparingly and not on the mere asking of
the someone. This court is fortified by the observations made by the Hon'ble Apex Court in case
titled Mithilesh Kumar vs. State of Rajasthan & Ors. (2015) 9 SCC 795, wherein it has been held as
under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7892174/ 4
Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal vs Ut Of J&K on 8 July, 2025
5|Page WP(C)1186/2025 Page |6 "Even so the availability of power and its exercise
are two distinct matters. This Court does not direct transfer of investigation just for
the asking nor is transfer directed only to satisfy the ego or vindicate the prestige of a
party interested in such investigation. The decision whether transfer should or should
not be ordered rests on the Court's satisfaction whether the facts and circumstances
of a given case demand such an order. No hard and fast rule has been or can possibly
be prescribed for universal application to all cases. Each case will obviously depend
upon its own facts. What is important is that the Court while exercising its
jurisdiction to direct transfer remains sensitive to the principle that transfers are not
ordered just because a party seeks to lead the investigator to a given conclusion. It is
only when there is a reasonable apprehension about justice becoming a victim
because of shabby or partisan investigation that the Court may step in and exercise
its extra ordinary powers. The sensibility of the victims of the crime or their next of
kin is not wholly irrelevant in such situations. After all transfer of investigation to an
outside agency does not imply that the transferee agency will necessarily much less
falsely implicate anyone in the commission of the crime. That is particularly so when
transfer is ordered to an outside agency perceived to be independent of influences,
pressures and pulls that are common place when State police investigates matters of
some significance. The confidence of the party seeking transfer in the outside agency
in such cases itself rests on the independence of that agency from such or similar
other considerations. It follows that unless the Court sees any design behind the
prayer for transfer, the same must be seen as an attempt only to ensure that the truth
is discovered. The hallmark of a transfer is the perceived independence of the
transferee more than any other consideration. Discovery of truth is
6|Page WP(C)1186/2025 Page |7 the ultimate purpose of any investigation and who
can do it better than an agency that is independent."
17. In the instant case, the Learned Trial Court, in its order dated 29-01- 2025, while disposing of
the application, has declined the prayer of the petitioners to direct the investigating agency to
continue with the further investigation by a differently constituted professional team other than the
present Special Investigation Team (SIT) preferably by an impartial agency viz CID or CBI. The
relevant extract of the Order of the Trial Court is reproduced as under: -
"4. Heard and perused.
5. It is the beaten law that the court of magisterial level do not have powers to order
investigation by CBI and even if the court comes assumingly to the conclusion that
the investigation in the matter has been conducted properly, this court cannot order
further investigation in terms of section 173 (8) of Cr.PC to be conducted by the CBI.
6. So being the situation and keeping in view the report submitted by the SIT the
application in hand needs no further adjudication before this court and is accordingly
disposed of which shall after due completion shall form part of the record."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7892174/ 5
Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal vs Ut Of J&K on 8 July, 2025
18. The procedure with regard to completion of investigation and the filing of the report has been
provided under Section 173 of Criminal Procedure Code 1973. As per the mandate of Section 173(8)
of the Code supra, the Magistrate has been empowered to direct further investigation after the
report has been submitted by the investigating agency. The relevant part of the section 173(8) of
CrPC is reproduced as under:
"173. Report of police officer on completion of investigation. (8) Nothing in this
section shall be deemed to preclude further investigation in respect of an offence
after a report under subsection (2) has been forwarded to the Magistrate and, where
upon such investigation, the officer in charge of the police station obtains further
evidence, oral or documentary, he shall forward to the Magistrate a further report or
reports
7|Page WP(C)1186/2025 Page |8 regarding such evidence in the form prescribed; and
the provisions of sub- sections (2) to (6) shall, as far as may be, apply in relation to
such report or reports as they apply in relation to a report forwarded under
subsection (2)."
19. Perusal of order dated 29-01-2025 transpires that the Trial Court was right in saying that the
court of magisterial level do not have powers to transfer the investigation to CBI on mere asking
because it is settled principle of law, that the courts subordinate to the High Court do not have the
powers to transfer the investigation to CBI and, therefore, this court is of the view that the Trial
court has exercised its jurisdiction within the four corners of the Criminal Procedure Code.
20. The issue at hand is whether a Chief Judicial Magistrate (CJM) is vested with the authority
under the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) to direct an investigation by an independent agency
such as the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) or Crime Branch/CID. The answer, based on
well-settled principles of law and judicial precedents, is in the negative.
21 Under Section 156(3) CrPC, a Magistrate may direct the officer in charge of a police station to
investigate a cognizable offence. This provision does not extend to empower Magistrate to order an
investigation by specialized investigating agencies such as the CBI. The rationale behind this
limitation is rooted in the principle of separation of powers and the structure of investigative
hierarchy under Indian criminal law.
22 Furthermore, Hon'ble supreme Court in case titled Central Bureau of Investigation vs. State of
Rajasthan and anr., reported as (2001) 3 SCC 333. The Hon'ble court has observed as under:
"Section 156(3) of the Code empowers Magistrate to direct such officer in charge of
the police station to investigate any cognizable case over which such Magistrate has
jurisdiction. Though a Magistrate under Section 156(3) can only direct an officer in
charge of a police station to conduct such investigation and not a superior police
officer, nevertheless, when such an order is passed, any police officer superior in rank
of such officer,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7892174/ 6
Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal vs Ut Of J&K on 8 July, 2025
8|Page WP(C)1186/2025 Page |9 can as well exercise the power to conduct an
investigation, and all such investigations would then be deemed to be the
investigation conducted by the officer incharge of a police station. Section 36 of the
Code is not meant to substitute the magisterial power envisaged in Section 156(3) of
the Code, though it could supplement the powers of an officer in charge of a police
station. It is permissible for any superior officer of police to take over the
investigation from such officer in charge of the police station either suo motuo on the
direction of the superior officer or even that of the Government. However, the
magisterial power cannot be stretched under Section 156(3) beyond directing the
officer incharge of a police station to conduct the investigation. A Magistrate cannot
direct CBI to conduct investigation in exercise of his powers under Section 156(3) of
the Code."
23 This Court also in the case titled "Kewal Krishan Vs Union Territory CRM (M) N0. 157/2023
reported as 2024 SCC Online J&K 442 has observed as under:
" ....The investigating agency and/or a court exercise their jurisdiction conferred on
them only in terms of the provisions of the Code. The courts subordinate to the High
Court even do not have any inherent power under Section 482 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure or otherwise. The pre-cognizance jurisdiction to remand vested
in the subordinate courts, therefore, must be exercised within the four corners of the
Code."
24 The Hon'ble Apex Court in catena of judgements has held that inherent power vested in
constitutional courts has to be exercised sparingly in exceptional cases and with caution only when
necessary to secure justice. The Hon'ble Apex Court in M/S Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. Vs.
Md Sharaful Haque & Anr reported as 2005(1) SCC 122 has reaffirmed the guidelines of the
celebrated case of Bhajan Lal, relevant extract of the aforesaid judgment is reproduced as under:
"8....Exercise of power under Section 482 of the Code in a case of this nature is the
exception and not the rule. The Section does not confer any new powers on the High
Court. It only saves the inherent
9|Page WP(C)1186/2025 P a g e | 10 power which the Court possessed before the
enactment of the Code. It envisages three circumstances under which the inherent
jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code,
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of
justice. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible rule which
would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative enactment dealing
with procedure can provide for all cases that may possibly arise. Courts, therefore,
have inherent powers apart from express provisions of law which are necessary for
proper discharge of functions and duties imposed upon them by law. That is the
doctrine which finds expression in the section which merely recognizes and preserves
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7892174/ 7
Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal vs Ut Of J&K on 8 July, 2025
inherent powers of the High Courts. All courts, whether civil or criminal possess, in
the absence of any express provision, as inherent in their constitution, all such
powers as are necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong in course of
administration of justice on the principle "quando lex aliquid alicui concedit,
concedere videtur et id sine quo res ipsae esse non potest" (when the law gives a
person anything it gives him that without which it cannot exist).
While exercising powers under the section, the court does not function as a court of appeal or
revision. Inherent jurisdiction under the section though wide has to be exercised sparingly, carefully
and with caution and only when such exercise is justified by the tests specifically laid down in the
section itself. It is to be exercised ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the
administration of which alone courts exist. Authority of the court exists for advancement of justice
and if any attempt is made to abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power to
prevent abuse. It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would result in
injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercise of the powers court would be justified to
quash any proceeding if it finds that initiation/continuance of it amounts to abuse of the process of
court or quashing of these proceedings would otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is
disclosed by the complaint, the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought
to be quashed, it is permissible to 10 | P a g e WP(C)1186/2025 P a g e | 11 look into the materials to
assess what the complainant has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations
are accepted in toto.
25 CONCLUSION:
In view of the discussion above, it is manifest that the Learned Chief Judicial
Magistrate has exercised jurisdiction strictly within the parameters of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973. The power to order further investigation under Section
173(8) CrPC is confined to directing the officer in charge of the concerned police
station to undertake such investigation. Equally, the power under Section 156(3) of
Criminal Procedure Code is similarly circumscribed and does not extend to
commanding specialized agencies such as the Central Bureau of Investigation or the
Crime Branch to investigate.
26. In the instant matter, the petitioner's grievance primarily arises from their dissatisfaction with
the investigation conducted by the Special Investigation Team and the conclusion drawn in the final
report. However, mere dissatisfaction with the manner in which the investigation was conducted,
without any demonstrable perversity, illegality, or procedural impropriety, can not by itself furnish a
ground to invoke the extraordinary inherent jurisdiction of this Court under Section 482 Criminal
Procedure Code to quash the proceedings or to direct reinvestigation by a different agency. The
power under Section 482 Criminal Procedure Code and section 528 of BNSS of 2023 is to be
exercised sparingly, with caution, and only in exceptional circumstances to prevent manifest
miscarriage of justice or to secure the ends of justice, none of which have been established on the
record before this Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7892174/ 8
Dr. Noor Mohammad Bilal vs Ut Of J&K on 8 July, 2025
27. Further, as correctly observed by the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, the courts subordinate
to the High Court do not possess inherent jurisdiction similar to that vested in the High Court under
Section 482 CrPC. The Magistrate, therefore, rightly declined to traverse beyond the statutory
powers conferred by the Code.
11 | P a g e WP(C)1186/2025 P a g e | 12
28. Having regard to the entirety of the factual matrix and the settled principles of law, this Court is
of the considered opinion that no error of law or jurisdiction arising from the impugned order dated
29.01.2025 warranting interference by this Court in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction. This Court
finds no good ground to hold that the petitioners have been subjected to any prejudice that goes to
the root of the proceeding or that the impugned order has resulted in miscarriage of justice.
29. Thus, the writ petition is devoid of any merit and is accordingly dismissed. The impugned order
dated 29.01.2025 passed by the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Srinagar, is hereby upheld.
(WASIM SADIQ NARGAL) JUDGE SRINAGAR 08.07 .2025 G. Nabi/Secy i. Whether the Judgment
is Reportable: Yes/No ii. Whether the Judgment is Speaking: Yes /No 12 | P a g e
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/7892174/ 9
