Dr. Narendra Singh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 March, 2019
Dr. Narendra Singh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya
Pradesh on 13 March, 2019
1 CRA-1902-2019
The High Court Of Madhya Pradesh
CRA-1902-2019
(DR. NARENDRA SINGH RAGHUWANSHI Vs THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH)
2
Jabalpur, Dated : 13-03-2019
Shri Manish Datt, learned Senior Advocate with Shri Deepak Raghuwanshi and Shri
Pradeep Hazari, Advocate for the appellant -accused.
Shri Som Mishra, Govt. Advocate for the respondent no.1 /State.
Shri Siddharth Radhelal Gupta, Advocate for respondent no.2 / complainant. IA No.2715/2019 filed
by the complainant is taken on record.
Heard.
This is an appeal filed under Section 14-A (1) of the SC / ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act against the
impugned order dated 9.2.2019 passed by the Special Judge under the SC/ST (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, Bhopal, District Bhopal in bail application no. 401/19 whereby the court below has
dismissed the application filed by the appellant under Section 438 of the Cr.P.C.
The appellant is apprehending his arrest in connection with Crime No. 1/19 Police Station A.J.K.,
Bhopal, offences registered under section 294 of I.P.C. and under Section 3 (1) (da) r/w Sec. 3 (1)
(dha) of the SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act.
On behalf of the appellant -accused it is contended that against the appellant on the basis of the
application filed under Section 156 (3) of CrPC before the Special Judge, SC/ST (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act Bhopal, a FIR of the aforesaid offences has been registered and the appellant is
apprehending to be arrested on the strength of the application filed under Section 156 (3) of CrPC,
in which it is stated that the appellant is working as a Director in Maulana Azad National Institute of
Technology, Bhopal and the complainant is working as an Assistant Professor of Computer Science
and Technology Department of the said Institute and belongs to scheduled caste community, the
benefit of promotion given earlier was withdrawn illegally, about which, he submitted so many
representations to the Directors of the Institute including the appellant. On 24.9.2018 when he went
to meet the appellant he was told to come after two days then he again went on 26.9.2018 to his
office and disclosed his grievance. The appellant despite considering his grievance shows his
angriness and said that do not waste his time nothing can be done in his case and used filthy
language denoting his caste to humiliate him. When he resisted, the appellant again started abusing
with derogatory remarks using his caste and threatened to kill him and to take his service. The
aforesaid obscene language was used by the appellant out of the chamber near the gate in public
view and the incident was witnessed by one Sunil. About the aforesaid conduct of the appellant, he
filed a complaint before the Police AJK, Bhopal and also reported the matter to the Superintendent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144532528/ 1
Dr. Narendra Singh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 March, 2019
of Police, Bhopal and other higher authorities but no action has been taken by the police, therefore,
the application has been filed for issuing direction to register the FIR against the appellant and
investigate the matter.
It is further submitted that on account of failing in legal litigation to restore his promotion the
complainant has made false allegation against the appellant maliciously to take revenge from the
appellant. While the complaint was made by the complainant to the police, the police made inquiry
and found that the allegations are false and just to create pressure on the Director with regard to the
dispute of the promotion pending before this court as written by the In-charge Police Station AJK,
Bhopal vide letter dated 6.12.2018 to the S. P, 2 CRA-1902-2019 Bhopal (AJK) and without
disclosing the consequences of the inquiry, application under Section 156 (3) of CrPC was filed.
Consequently, learned Special Judge in absence of the fact of this inquiry has ordered to register the
case. Mere registration of the case is not amount that the prosecution has prima facie case against
the appellant. Inquiry report prepared after taking all the relevant witnesses exonerated the
appellant. Therefore, merely on the application direction has been given by the learned Special
Judge. It cannot be said that there is a prima facie case against the appellant to commit the offence
punishable under the SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act. Looking to the facts and circumstances
of the case, there is no need to arrest the appellant as no purpose will be served except to tarnish his
image or support unscrupulous complainant to settle their score by ways of malicious criminal
proceedings. Hence, the appellant is entitled to be enlarged on anticipatory bail. Therefore, this
appeal be accepted and he be enlarged on anticipatory bail.
Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondent no. 2/ complainant and the learned Govt.
Advocate opposed the aforesaid contentions vehemently contending that in view of the opinion of
the learned Special Judge with regard to having prima facie case against the appellant under the
SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act no further scrutiny is required to see the fact that whether
there is a prima facie case or not against the appellant. It is also contended that the complainant has
been continuously harassed and subjected to unnecessary litigation with a view to deprive him of the
benefit of promotion and when he went to meet the appellant to settle his point of view about the
dispute, the appellant dealt him with inhuman manner and defamed and harassed by abusing with
the words of his caste. The appellant is the person occupying higher post, such type of behavior is
not forgettable and he deserves to be arrested. Further submitted that the appellant is trying to
influence the witnesses and material witness Sunil has been threatened. This circumstance shows
that the appellant is interfering with the investigation. Hence, he is not entitled to get the benefit of
anticipatory bail and prayed for rejection of the appeal.
Having considered the contentions of learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of the record, in
view of the inquiry report submitted by In-charge of the Police Station AJK, Bhopal with regard to
the complaint of the complainant, prima facie establishes that there is no case against the appellant.
About the same allegation, the case has been registered on the direction of the learned Special
Judge, hiding the consequence of the inquiry for the purpose of deciding whether the prima facie
case is made out or not. Mere statement of one Sunil is not sufficient. Whole result of the inquiry
shows the background of the incident and cause of the incident and probability with regard to
veracity of the allegations and looking to the background of the incident, possibility of false
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144532528/ 2
Dr. Narendra Singh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 March, 2019
allegation cannot be ruled out. Therefore, in this case, at present stage it cannot be said that
prosecution has prima facie case against the appellant with regard to commission of offence
punishable under the SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act. Therefore, bar under Section 18 of the
SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act is not attracted here.
Learned counsel for the respondent no. 2 / complainant has placed reliance on a judgment of the
Apex court in Manju Devi vs. Onkarjit Singh Ahluwalia @ Omkarjeet Singh and others, (2017) 13
SCC 439 in which in paragraph 21 of the judgment it is held that when the Magistrate and Sessions
Judge and the High Court itself fond that there is a prima facie case in connection with taking
cognizance of the offence then at the stage of application under Section 438 of CrPC it cannot be
said that there is no prima facie case made out. Therefore, the application for anticipatory bail was
rejected.
But so far as the present case is concerned, the facts and circumstances are different here. With
regard to complaint of the complainant primarily inquiry was made by the Police 3 CRA-1902-2019
and concluded that prima facie no case is made out. Having concealed the aforesaid facts
registration of the FIR on the direction given by the Special Judge under the SC/ST (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act under Section 156 (3) of CrPC having regard the observation that there is prima face
offence is made out from the averment of the application, it cannot be said that this finding is
binding on this court while considering anticipatory bail application. At the stage of hearing of the
application under Section 438 of CrPC all the material available on record on the date of hearing is
required to be considered. Mere finding or observation by the Special Judge or the Magistrate is not
sufficient to arrive at a conclusion that prima facie offence punishable under the SC/ST (Prevention
of Atrocities) Act is made out or not. Hence, in view of this court, it cannot be said that the
prosecution has established its case prima facie against the appellant. Therefore, the bar under
Section 18 of the SC/ST (Prevention of Atrocities) Act is not attracted here.
So far as the observation made with regard to threatening to witness Sunil is concerned, in his
complaint he has not named the appellant as the person who threatened him. He has simply stated
that some unknown person threatened him on the phone in connection with the statement given by
him in the case. Such type of objection which is vague or may be created falsely, it cannot be said
that the appellant is involved in interfering with the investigation. Apart from it, the statement of
Sunil has already been recorded by the police earlier, therefore, there was no occasion to give any
threat to him. Hence, this contention has no merit.
In view of the facts and the circumstances of the case, there is no need to arrest the appellant and on
behalf of the State, it is not contended that his arrest is required for effective investigation or he is
not cooperating in the investigation. Therefore, no purpose will be served from the arrest of the
appellant except to tarnish his image. In view of the discussion made herein above, the appellant is
entitled to get the benefit of anticipatory bail. Hence, this appeal is allowed and the impugned order
is set-aside. It is ordered that if the appellant - accused Dr. Narendra Singh Raghuwanshi
surrenders before the concerned police station within 15 days from today or arrested by the
Investigating officer / Arresting Authority, he shall be released on bail on his furnishing a bail bond
and surety bond each for a sum of Rs.25,000/- (Rs. Twenty Five Thousand only). If he failed to do
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144532528/ 3
Dr. Narendra Singh Raghuwanshi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 March, 2019
so, the effect of this order shall be vacated automatically.
The appellant accused is directed to join the investigation immediately and fully co- operate with the
investigation. He shall further abide by the other conditions enumerated in sub-section (2) of
Section 438 of Cr.P.C.
It is made clear that any observation made in the order shall not influence the proceeding of the trial
court in any way.
CC as per rules.
(J. P. GUPTA) JUDGE JP Date: 2019.03.13 19:21:45 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/144532528/ 4
