Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23
December, 2021
Author: V.Bhavani Subbaroyan
Bench: V.Bhavani Subbaroyan
S.A.(MD)No.116 of 2009
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 23.12.2021
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MRS. JUSTICE V.BHAVANI SUBBAROYAN
S.A.(MD)No.116 of 2009
1. Dr. R. Palaniappa
2. M. Ashok ... Appellants/ Respondents /Plaintiffs
Vs.
1. S.H.N.E. School Committee
through its President,
S.H.N. Edward Higher Secondary
School, Main Road, Sattur,
Virudhunagar District
2. S.H.N.E. School Committee
through its Secretary,
S.H.N. Edward Higher Secondary
School, Main Road, Sattur,
Virudhunagar District ... Respondents/Appellants/Plaintiffs
1/31
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 1
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
(cid:12) S.A.(MD)No.116 of 2009
PRAYER: Second Appeal is filed under Section 100 of Civil Procedure
Code, against the judgment and decree, dated 14.09.2007 made in A.S.No.
29 of 2006 on the file of the Subordinate Judge, Sivakasi, reversing the
Judgment and decree, dated 20.06.2006, made in O.S.No.64 of 2001, on the
file of the District Munsif, Sattur.
For Appellants : Mr. S. Subbiah, Senior Counsel for
Ms. Jeesi Jeeva Priya
For Respondents : Mr. J. Baradhan for
Mr. T. R. Jayapalan
JUDGMENT
The appeal is directed against the judgment and decree, dated 14.09.2007 made in A.S.No.29 of
2006, on the file of the learned Subordinate Judge, Sivakasi, reversing the judgment and decree,
dated 20.06.2006, made in O.S.No.64 of 2001, on the file of the learned District Munsif, Sattur.
2. For the sake of convenience, the parties are referred to, as described before the trial Court.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
3. The averments made in the plaint, in brief, are as follows:-
3(a). The first defendant 'Sattur Hindu Nadars Edward School Committee' is
registered under the Companies Act in the year 1919 with an object of advancing
education, literary, technical and physical activities and to inculcate sound moral
principles in the pupils in order to make them efficient citizens. With this avowed
object, the Articles of Association and Memorandum of Association were registered
on 15.3.1919 itself before the Registrar of Companies at Madras.
3(b). To achieve the above object, the generous and philanthropic minded people
from Hindu Nadar community were contributing funds and other resources to the
first-defendant-committee. Thus, the first-defendant- school grew from an
elementary school to a Higher Secondary School level, educating hundreds of pupils
every year. Now, the Government of Tamil Nadu is also extending aid to this
defendant-school.
3(c). The first-defendant-school-committee consists of 24 members, out of them 20
members shall be selected directly from ;the General Body of Voters maintained by
the first-defendant-committee. The remaining four members to be elected indirectly
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 2
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
by those 20 elected members from among https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the
voters list maintained by the first-defendant. There will be six board of directors, out
of them three will be ex-officio board of directors, who will act as President,
Vice-President and Secretary and the remaining three will be elected from among the
committee members. As per clause V of the Articles of Association, all the adult
males, who are above the age of 18, from the Hindu Nadar community of Sattur are
eligible for membership of the committee with voting right. It is significant to note
that an application from an adult male member of the Hindu Nadar Community of
Sattur is a condition precedent to enlist him as a member of the first-defendant
committee. This condition is prescribed by the founding fathers of the committee in
order to maintain a transparency in the membership and also make large-scale of
male members of Hindu Nadars of Sattur to have active participation in the
committee, thereby serving the avowed object for which the school-committee was
formulated.
3(d). The grievance of the plaintiffs is that for the past two decades, people with
vested interests have got control of the committee and have given a go-by to the
democratic methods to be followed in the election of members, on the other hand
engaged their own yes-men. Thus the present https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
President and Secretary are the inheritors of such persons with vested interests and
the present committee members are thus selected through back-door methods with
foul means.
3(e). The further grievance of the plaintiffs is that resultant effect of the
mismanagement with rampant corruption is that the educational institutions of the
school-committee lost their stature and there is disharmony among its teachers and
employees leading to chaotic atmosphere. The school campus which was known for
conducting tournaments, has now become a den of immorality and being led by
people with vested interests who have hijacked the school-committee and keeping it
as their captive and thereby the noble object of the committee to inculcate sound
moral principles among the pupils is lost.
3(f). The plaintiffs state that the first plaintiff is a doctor by profession and the second
plaintiff is a business man with equally good qualification. Both of them are with
reputation and respect in Sattur. They along with other reputed Hindu nadars of
Sattur approached the committee several times requiring them to conduct election
and maintain transparency in the membership, as per the terms of the Articles and
Memorandum of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Association, but those requests
gone to the deaf years. Therefore, the first plaintiff, supported by 105 eligible Hindu
Nadars of Sattur, together with the second plaintiff, had issued legal notices dated
23.9.2000 to all the six Directors of the Committee requiring them to refrain from
improperly conducting the affairs of the Committee, but it was not heeded to.
Thereafter, the first plaintiff had sent complaints dated 6.5.2001 to the District
Collector, Virudhunagar and Tahsildar of Sattur in public interest, seeking their
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 3
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
intervention for retrieving the School-Committee from the illegal clutches of the
defendants and their minions. In view of this, a Conciliarly meeting was held on
18.6.2021 with the participation of DSP and Tahsildar of Sattur, the first plaintiff and
the defendants herein, the minutes of which was reduced in writing, signed by all
participated, wherein, the defendants herein had promised that they would conduct
elections to the members of the Committee before 17.7.2001, as per the terms of the
Articles and Memorandum of Association, but despite their written promise, the
defendants continued their illegal course of action. Therefore, finally the plaintiffs
individually had sent applications on 31.8.2001 through registered post to the
first-defendant seeking to register https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis their names as
voters in the electoral rolls of the Committee and to permit them to participate in the
ensuing election. It is learnt that some other eligible Hindu Nadars of Sattur also had
applied to the first defendant for being registered as voters. Despite receiving all the
applications, the first-
defendant did not care to comply with the demand or even to give a reply to the applicants.
3(g). The grievance of the plaintiffs is that due to the illegal attitude and conduct of defendants,
hundreds of eligible members of the Sattur Hindu Nadar community, including the plaintiffs, are
deprived of their inalienable right of becoming electors and get elected to the Committee, which is
ensured to them by the Memorandum and Articles of Association and the Rules laid thereunder.
Hence the suit for declaration that the plaintiffs and the others, whom they represent, are qualified
voters to get entry in the Register of Voters and for a mandatory injunction directing the defendants
to include the names of the plaintiffs and the others whom they represent in the Register of Voters
as per the election Rules of Articles of Association.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
4. The averments made in the written statement, in brief, are as follows:- Sattur Hindu Nadars
Edward School Community is a company registered under the Companies Act, 1913. The Articles of
Association of the company was amended on 16.05.2001. If any adult Hindu Nadar of Sattur is
willing to become a member of the institution, he has to make an application to the Secretary of the
school. The executive committee of the institution will decide about the eligibility of the applicant to
become a member of the institution. The plaintiffs have not made any application to the company
for their membership. The suit has been filed on the basis of old Memorandum and Articles of
Association and hence not maintainable.
4 (a). It is incorrect to state that all the adult male members of Hindu Nadars who are above 18 years
will automatically become members, for the reason that the adult hindu Nadars of Sattur who are
residents of Sattur, residing at Sattur for the last three years and above and who are willing to
become the members of the committee have to make applications for membership and their
eligibility to become members will be decided https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis only by the
executive committee. As per articles VI (b) and ©, the executive committee will form the election
committee to conduct the election. All the members of the company, whose names are entered in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 4
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
register of members, shall automatically become eligible to attend and vote at the general body
meeting. There is no register of voters, on the other hand there is only a register of membership. Any
suit against a company can be filed in the High Court or a District Court, which is empowered by
High Court and therefore the Trial Court before which the suit was filed has no jurisdiction.
4(b). As per the Articles of Association only the members of the company can pass resolution and it
does not permit intervention of any outsiders in the affairs of the company. Therefore, the plaintiffs
being outsiders, will not and cannot be permitted to enter into the affairs of the company at any
level. Further, the Articles of Association clearly mentions about the procedure for voting and
conducting election. Hence, neither the President nor the Secretary of the School committee can act
against these norms for the convenience of the plaintiffs or for the convenience of the defendants
either. It is only the Board of Directors of the company who can https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
question about the affairs of the company. If the members think that the affairs of the company are
prejudicial to the public, they can convene General Body Meeting and remove the Board of Directors
and restrict the powers of the Board. Therefore, the general public, the District Collector or the
Tahsildar cannot interfere in the affairs of the company, because they are not the appropriate
persons to interfere in the matter. The Companies Act regulate the conduct of the company and if
any Member is aggrieved by any act of the company, appropriate forum for redressal is provided in
the Companies Act. The plaintiffs, who are more than 20 in number, when seek relief with respect to
an educational institution, ought to have registered under the Societies Registration Act, 1975,
because an unregistered body cannot maintain a suit representing the members and as such the suit
is not maintainable in law.
5. The plaintiffs, in support of their case, before the trial Court, have examined themselves as P.W.1
and PW3 respectively and one Sankaralingam as P.W.2, and marked Exs.A1 to A18. On the side of
the defendants, D.Ws. 1 to 3 were examined and Exs. B1 to B11 were marked.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
6. On the basis of the above pleadings, the trial Court framed necessary issues viz., '1. Whether the
plaintiffs have become members on submitting applications as per rules?
2. Whether there is right for the plaintiffs and others, who are eligible like plaintiffs, to be included
in the list of voters maintained by the defendants?
Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to the relief of declaration as prayed for in the suit?
3. Whether the plaintiffs are entitled for the relief of mandatory injunction as prayed for in the suit?
4. To what other relief?'
7. The Trial Court, after considering the various aspects of the evidence, both oral and documentary,
held that on the basis of Exs. A2, A3 and A14 the plaintiffs have properly submitted their
applications to the defendants to become members of the School Committee and the plaintiffs have
the right to be included in the list of voters. The Trial court further granted the relief of declaration
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 5
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
as prayed for by the plaintiffs relying upon the documents filed by the plaintiffs and disbelieving the
documents Exs. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis B1 to B11 filed by the defendants and also granted
the relief of mandatory injunction as prayed for and finally decreed the suit as prayed for.
8. Aggrieved by the judgment and decree of the trial Court, the defendants preferred an appeal in
A.S.No.29 of 2006, before the learned Subordinate Judge, Sivakasi. The lower Appellate Court, on
entertaining a very strong doubt with regard to the jurisdiction of the Civil Court in Company Law
matters, framed the following issues:
'1. Whether the plaintiffs are entitled to get the reliefs as prayed for?
2. To what other relief?'
9. Considering the facts of the case, the lower Appellate Court ultimately held that the Civil Court
has no jurisdiction to eschew the Articles of Association, which was already approved by the
Company Law Board. Thus, the lower Appellate Court disagreed with the decision of the trial Court
and consequently set aside the decree of the trial Court and allowed the appeal.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
10. Against the conflicting findings of the courts below, the unsuccessful plaintiffs before the lower
appellate court, have filed the present appeal before this Court.
11. At the time of admission of the Second Appeal on 15.10.2009 the following substantial questions
of law arose for consideration:
'1. whether the provisions of Section 10 of the Companies Act specifically oust the
jurisdiction of the civil court o try and determine a civil nature regarding the
declaratory and mandatory injunction relief?
2. When the declaration regarding the right of the membership does not fall within
the jurisdiction of either this court sitting in the company jurisdiction or district court
or company law board, is not the jurisdiction of the civil court to declare such a right
is barred under Section 10 of the companies Act ?
3. When Section 10 of the Companies Act does not specifically or impliedly bar the
jurisdiction of the civil court regarding the nature of the relief prayed for in the suit.
is not the judgment of the lower appellate court holding that the civil court has no
jurisdiction to try the suit under Section 10 of the Companies Act is correct?
4. Simply because the members to be enrolled would be numerous, is it open to the
court to deny a right to a member of the community who
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis is otherwise eligible and entitled to be enrolled as
members , on the ground of plurality of the members for such enrolment ?'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 6
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
12. The learned counsel appearing for the appellants/plaintiffs would submit that the Civil Court has
got jurisdiction to try the claim made by the appellants on the ground that as per section 10 of the
Companies Act
(a) the High Court has jurisdiction in relation to the place at which the registered office of the
company concerned is situate, except to the extent to which jurisdiction has been conferred on any
District Court or District Courts subordinate to that High Court in pursuance of sub-section (2) and
as per sub-section (2), the Central Government may empower any District Court to exercise all or
any of the jurisdiction conferred by the Act upon the Court, not being the jurisdiction conferred in
respect of companies generally by sections 237, 391, 394, 395 and 397 to 407. The learned counsel
further submitted that for the purpose of jurisdiction to wind up companies, registered office means
the place which has longest been the registered office of the company during the six months
immediately preceding the presentation of the petition for winding up. The learned counsel also
submits that as per the 1956 Act, only three forums are vested with the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis power to decide the disputes, namely High Court, District Court
and Company Law Board and further submits that there is no other provision in the Act, which
confers powers upon any other forum, in relation to the matters other than to which, the High
Court, the District Court and the Company Law Board were vested with the powers to deal with the
same. The High Court is empowered to decide upon the issues covered by sections 391, 394 and 395,
whereas the powers under sections 237 and 397-407 have been conferred upon the Company Law
Board, while limited powers were made available to the District Court, in relation to certain matters
as provided under GSR No.663 dated 29.5.1959 and they can deal with only such matters falling
under sections 89, 113, 118, 144,163,196, 219,234,304, 307 and 614. The learned counsel further
argued that the Company Law Board is also vested with powers to deal with matters arising under
specific provisions. The learned counsel further submits that when there are specific provisions
empowering the three forums, namely, the High Court, District Court and the Company Law Board
with certain matters, and when there is no exclusion of the powers of the Civil Court in relation to
matters, which are not covered by these three forums, certainly, in the absence of specific
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis exclusion, the civil court alone will have definite jurisdiction to
entertain those matters, which do not fall within the ambit of the above three forums. The learned
counsel argued that with regard to the enforcement of the right of the plaintiffs as per the Articles of
Association, as it stood prior to the amendment under Ex.B1, none of the three forums, namely,
High Court, District Court and the Company Law Board were vested with any such power to deal
with directing the company for the enrolment of the members to the committee and the election to
such committee as per the Articles of Association.
12(a). The learned counsel for the appellants submits that under section 9 of the Code of Civil
Procedure, the Courts shall have jurisdiction to try all suits of a civil nature, excepting suits of which
their cognizance is either expressly or impliedly barred. Thus, the learned counsel further argues
that as provided under section 9 of the Code, the jurisdiction of the civil court to decide the issue
involved in the suit has not been ousted either explicitly or impliedly, as there is no other provision
conferring such powers on any other forum.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 7
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 12(b).The learned counsel further submits that there is no limit to
the powers given to the civil Court, though under the Tamil Nadu Civil Court Act, the jurisdiction of
the various Courts have been given relating to the pecuniary and territorial jurisdictions and the
same can be found in sections 10 to 12 of the Tamil Nadu Civil Courts Act. Section 15 of the Code of
Civil Procedure provides that every suit shall be instituted in the Court of lowest grade competent to
try it, while sections 16 to 20 deal with the place of jurisdiction and cause of action. He further
submitted that what is to be decided by a civil court is to be considered in the light of the provisions
contained in the Specific Relief Act. Section 4 of the Specific Relief Act provides that relief can be
granted only for the purpose of enforcing individual civil right and not for the mere purpose of
enforcing any penal law and the civil rights have got to be granted power to try matters as provided
under the Specific Relief Act. The learned counsel further argues that section 34 of the Specific
Relief Act provides for the declaration of status or right, in the following specific terms:
“Discretion of Court as to declaration of status or right:--Any person entitled to any
legal character, or to any right as to any property, may institute a suit against any
person denying, or https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis interested to deny, his title to
such character or right, and the court may in its discretion make therein a declaration
that he is so entitled, and the plaintiff need not in such suit ask for any further relief.
Provided that no court shall make any such declaration where the plaintiff, being able
to seek further relief than a mere declaration of title,. omits to do so.” 12 (c). The
learned counsel for the appellants/plaintiffs further argued that a civil right falling
under section 34 of the Specific Relief Act has got to be made as provided under
section 15 of the Code and the competence of the lowest grade civil court, which is the
District Munsif's Court at Sattur, depends upon its pecuniary and territorial
jurisdiction. As both the defendants are in Sattur town; the registered office of the
defendants is only at Sattur and the relief claimed by the plaintiffs is only against the
defendant-company, within the territorial jurisdiction of District Munsif's Court,
Sattur, the suit filed by the plaintiffs comes within the territorial jurisdiction of
District Munsif's Court at Sattur. The learned counsel further argues that the District
Munsif's Court at Sattur also exercises pecuniary jurisdiction for the reason that the
relief sought for by the plaintiffs does not have any market value as it does not
pertain to any https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis immovable property and accordingly
the value of the relief was adopted at Rs.400/- and court-fee had been paid under
section 25(d) of the Tamil Nadu Court Fees and Suits Valuation Act, 1955. Thus,
according to the learned counsel for the appellants, the finding of the lower appellate
court that the District Munsif's Court at Sattur has no jurisdiction is erroneous and
further submits that in respect of matters not specifically empowered upon the High
Court, District Court or Company Law Board, the powers of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court are not excluded.
13. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents/defendants submitted that Sattur
Hindu Nadars Edward Committee is a company registered under the Companies Act
1913 with registration number 2684.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 8
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
The Articles of Association was amended on 16.5.2001, along with the Memorandum of Association.
As per the amended Memorandum and Articles of Association, if any adult Hindu Nadar of Sattur is
willing to become a member of the institution, he has to make an application to the Secretary of the
institution. The executive committee of the institution will decide about the eligibility of the
applicant to become member of the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis institution. The plaintiffs in
the suit have not individually made any application to the company for their membership, on the
other hand they have filed the suit without any basis. As the suit has been filed on the basis of old
Memorandum and Articles of Association, the same is not maintainable and liable to be dismissed.
13(a). The learned counsel for the respondents/defendants further argued that the approach of the
appellants/plaintiffs that all the adult male members of Hindu Nadars of Sattur, who are above the
age of 18 are eligible for membership of the school committee and every such person has right to
vote in the election of the committee and shall also be eligible to be a member of the committee is
altogether incorrect. On the other hand, apart from being adult Hindu Nadars of Sattur, they ought
to be residents for the last three years and above at Sattur. Further, if they are willing to become the
members of the committee, they have necessarily to make applications for membership and their
eligibility to become members will be decided only by the executive committee. As such it is not
automatic that all the adult male Hindu Nadars who are above 18 years will become the members of
the company as per the Articles of Association.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 13(b). The learned counsel for the respondents/defendants further
argued that as per the Articles of Association, the executive committee will form the election
committee to conduct the election and all the members of the company whose names are entered in
the register of members shall automatically be eligible to attend and vote at the General Body
Meeting. There are no register of voters, as the company has only register of membership.
13(c). The learned counsel further submitted that the District Munsif's court at Sattur has no
jurisdiction to try the present suit against a company, when it can be filed only before the High
Court or a District Court empowered by the High Court. The learned counsel further argued that as
per the Articles of Association only the members of the company can pass resolution and it does not
permit intervention of any outsiders in the affairs of the company and accordingly the plaintiffs who
are outsiders could not be permitted to enter into the affairs of the company. The learned counsel
also argues that the Articles of Association bears the procedure for voting and conduct of election
and therefore neither the President nor the Secretary of the school committee can act against this
ruling for the convenience of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis either the plaintiffs or the
defendants themselves.
13(d). The learned counsel further argued that it is only the Board of Directors of the company who
can question about the affairs of the company. If the members think that the affairs of the company
are prejudicial to the public interest they can convene General Body Meeting and remove the Board
of Directors and restrict the powers of the Board. Therefore, the general public, the District Collector
and the Tahsildar cannot interfere in the affairs of the company, as they are not the appropriate
persons to interfere in the affairs of the company. The Companies Act regulate the conduct of the
company and if any person, who is a member, aggrieved by any act of the company, the Companies
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 9
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
Act provide appropriate forum for redressal.
13(e). The learned counsel also argues that when the plaintiffs seek relief against an educational
institution being more than 20 in number, they ought to have registered themselves under the
Societies Registration Act, 1975, because an unregistered body cannot maintain a suit representing
the members and as such the suit is not maintainable in law. The learned counsel further argued
that the plaintiffs not being members of the company https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis are not
eligible to become voters and accordingly the claim in the suit for such a prayer cannot be granted in
favour of the plaintiffs.
14. I have carefully considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the
Appellants/Plaintiffs as well as the learned counsel for the respondents/defendants and perused the
materials available on record.
15. As per section 10(1)(a) of the Companies Act, 1956, the jurisdiction is conferred on the High
Court in relation to the place at which the registered office of the company concerned is situate,
except to the extent to which jurisdiction has been conferred on any District Court or District Courts
subordinate to that High Court in pursuance of sub-section (2) and as per which, the Central
Government may empower any District Court to exercise all or any of the jurisdiction conferred by
the Act upon the Court, not being the jurisdiction conferred in respect of companies generally by
sections 237, 391, 394, 395 and 397 to 407. As per section 10(3), for the purpose of jurisdiction to
wind up companies, registered office means the place which has longest been the registered office of
the company during https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the six months immediately preceding the
presentation of the petition for winding up. In the Companies Act,1956, only three forums are vested
with the power to decide the disputes, namely High Court, District Court and Company Law Board
and there is no other provision in the Act, which confers powers upon any other forum, in relation to
the matters other than to which, the High Court, the District Court and the Company Law Board
were vested with the powers to deal with matters relating to a company.
15(a). In the case of Aruvipuram Dharma Paripalan Yogam and others Vs. K. Karunakaran reported
in (2012) 2 MLJ 657, learned single Judge of this Court K. Venkataraman,J. has elaborately
discussed about the bar on Civil Court's jurisdiction to entertain suits pertaining to matters of
mal-administration and mis-administration of a company and the binding nature of memorandum
and articles of associations in paragraphs 20 and 21 of the judgment, which is extracted below:
“20. Before adverting to the said issue, it would be useful to re-produce section 10-GB
of the CompaniesAct and the same is extracted hereunder:
“10-GB. Civil Court not to have jurisdiction: (1) No civil Court shall
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or
proceeding in respect of any matter which the Tribunal or the Appellate Tribunal is
empowered to determine by or under this Act or any other law for the time being in
force and no injunction shall be granted by any Court or other authority in respect of
any action taken or to be taken in pursuance of any power conferred by or under this
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 10
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
Act or any other law for the time being in force. The respondent, being a member of
the Chennai SNDP Union, if aggrieved over the mal- administration or
mis-administration respectively of the first-petitioner Yogam and Chennai SNDP
Union, should have approached the Company Law Board under sections 397 and 398
of the Companies Act.........” After extracting sections 397 and 398 of the Companies
Act, the learned Judge has further observed as follows at paragraph 21 of the said
judgment:
“21. Section 36 of the Companies Act envisages that the memorandum and articles
would bind the company and the members thereof. In the case on hand, the
respondent claims to be a member of Chennai SNDP Union and hence, he is also
bound by the memorandum and articles of the first-petitioner. If so, the respondent
should have instituted the suit before the Court of Kollam as per Rule 71(a) of the said
Rules or should have sought for arbitral proceedings as required under Rule 71(a) of
t h e R u l e s . I n f a c t , e a c h o n e o f t h e m e m b e r s i n c l u d i n g
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the respondent has signed the application for
membership of Chennai SDP Union, wherein they have simultaneously taken oath to
abide by SNDP Yogam Rules. Having undertaken to abide by the rules, the
respondent cannot be heard to say that he will bye-pass the rules and file the suit
before the civil Court at Chennai......” 15 (b). From a reading of the above, it is clear
that no civil Court shall have jurisdiction to entertain any suit or proceeding in
respect of any matter pertaining to the affairs of a company, when exclusively the
High Court, District Court and Company Law Board are vested with powers to deal
with those issues and further if members of a company are aggrieved over the
mal-administration or mis-administration of the company, they should approach the
Company Law Board under sections 397 and 398 of the Companies Act.
15(c). In the 1956 Act, only three forums are vested with the power to decide the disputes, namely
High Court, District Court and Company Law Board and there is no other provision in the Act,
which confers powers upon any other forum, and it is incorrect to state that in the absence of
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis specific exclusion, the civil court will have jurisdiction to entertain
matters relating to the affairs of a company.
15(d). It is seen that Sattur Hindu Nadars Edward committee is a company registered under the
Companies Act 1913 with registration number 2684. The Articles of Association was amended on
16.5.2001, along with the Memorandum of Sattur Hindu Nadars School Committee. If any adult
Hindu Nadar of Sattur is willing to become a member of the institution, he has to make an
application to the Secretary of the institution. The executive committee of the institution will decide
about the eligibility of the applicant to become member of the institution. The plaintiffs in the suit
have not made any individual application to the company for their membership. It is argued on
behalf of the respondents/defendants that as the suit has been filed on the basis of old
Memorandum and Articles of Association, the same is not maintainable and liable to be dismissed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 11
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
15(e). It is not in dispute that the first-defendant is a company registered under the provisions of the
Companies Act, 1956. It is also not in https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis dispute that Ex.B1 is the
Memorandum and Articles of Association, governing the activities of the first-defendant-company
and it is also not in dispute that the new Memorandum and Articles of Association is in force, with
all its amended clauses with regard to enrolment of membership. As per the new Memorandum and
Articles of Association, if a male Hindu Nadar of Sattur, who has completed the age of 18 years and
more, wants to become a member of the defendant-school-committee, specifically he ought to have
resided at Sattur for a period three years and more and ought to have made an application for the
said purpose. Thus, a male Hindu Nadar residing in Sattur will not automatically become a member
of the defendant- school committee, for the reason, as admitted by the plaintiffs themselves in the
witness box, that it is not exactly known as to the exact number of male hindu nadars in Sattur. It is
to be seen that when the plaintiffs, being more than 20, sought relief against an educational
institution, they ought to have registered themselves under the Societies Registration Act, 1975,
because an unregistered body cannot maintain a suit representing a group of members.
15(f). It is admitted fact that at the time of filing the suit, the plaintiffs
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis were not the members of the company. As per the Articles of
Association, the members are not eligible to vote automatically. Accordingly, the plaintiffs without
getting themselves enrolled as members of the defendant company, cannot expect to have a right to
vote in the General Body. Thus, the plaintiffs, without adopting the due procedure as contemplated
in the Memorandum and Articles of Association to enroll themselves as members, are not
automatically become eligible as voters and accordingly the claim in the suit for such a prayer
cannot be granted in favour of the plaintiffs. As per the Articles of Association only the members of
the company can pass resolution and it does not permit intervention of any outsiders in the affairs of
the company. Thus,the plaintiffs who are outsiders do not become eligible to enter into the affairs of
the company. Further, when the Articles of Association bears the procedure for voting and conduct
of election, every one including the parties to the suit have to adopt only such procedure.
16. In view of the foregoing discussions, all the questions of law are answered against the
appellants/plaintiffs and in favour of the respondents/defendants. In the result, the Second Appeal
is dismissed, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis confirming the judgment and decree, dated
14.09.2007 made in A.S.No.29 of 2006, on the file of the learned Subordinate Judge, Sivakasi and
setting aside the Judgment and decree, dated 20.06.2006, made in O.S.No.64 of 2001, on the file of
the learned District Munsif, Sattur. However, there shall be no order as to costs.
23.12.2021 Index : Yes/No Internet : Yes/No mnr To
1.The Subordinate Judge, Sivakasi.
2.The District Munsif, Sattur.
3.The Record Keeper, Vernacular Section, Madurai Bench of Madras High Court, Madurai.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis V.BHAVANI SUBBAROYAN,J.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 12
Dr. R. Palaniappa vs S.H.N.E. School Committee on 23 December, 2021
mnr JUDGMENT MADE IN 23.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/194364714/ 13
