Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
Author: R.Subramanian
Bench: R.Subramanian
W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
Reserved on Delivered on
19.06.2020 30.06.2020
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE R.SUBRAMANIAN
W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
and connected Miscellaneous Petitions
1. Dr.Sandeep.P.S
S/o. P. Shanmuga Sundaram,
3/148-A, madeshwaranagar Street,
Melappalyam, chennimalai, Erode – 638 051
NEET PG Roll No.2066028840
NEET PG Rank: 4897 .. 1st Petitioner in WP 7720/2020 and
Petitioner in WP 8193/2020
2. Dr.Thenmozhi.R
D/o. Ravikumar 22, Annagalakurichi Street,
Malayandipattinam, Kottur, Coimbatore – 642 114
NEET PG Roll No: 2066148319
NEET PG Rank : 18734
3. Dr.Rahul.M
S/o. Murugesan, No 15/A, kattusalai, Devarmalai,
Pidaramangalam post , Thottiyam Taluk, Trichy – 621 207
NEET PG Roll No.2066096143
NEET PG Rank: 5513 .. Petitioners 2 & 3 in WP 7720/2020
Vs.
1. The Government of India,
Rep. By its Secretary to Government,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Room No.348, 'A' Wing, Nirman Bhavan,
http://www.judis.nic.in
Page 1 of 47
(cid:12) W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
New Delhi – 110 011.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 1
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
2. National Board of Examinations,
Medical Enclave, Ansari Nagar,
Mahatma Gandhi Marg (Ring Road),
New Delhi – 110 029.
3. Medical Council of India
Rep. By its Secretary General,
Pocket 14, Sector – 8,
Dwaraka, New Delhi – 110 077. .. Respondents in both petitions
Prayer in WP 7720/2020: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India praying for Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, calling for
the records relating to the impugned Clause No.4.5 of Handbook for
Admission to DNB Board Speciallty Courses (Post MBBS) 2020 Admission
Session issued by the 2nd respondent dated 8th May 2020 and to quash the same
in so far as it prevents the petitioners opting to freeze their allotment in the
First round of counseling, to participate in the subsequent round of counseling
is concerned and consequently directing the respondents to allow the
petitioners to participate in the Second and subsequent round of counseling for
upgradation of their choice of Course/Institute in the order of fresh choice
filing of all the candidates before starting each round, based on merit in
selection with reference to admission to Diplomate National Board (Post
MBBS) 2020 Admission Session.
Prayer in WP 8193/2020: WRIT OF MANDAMUS forbearing the
Respondents from conducting second round of counseling vide Notice dated
http://www.judis.nic.in
Page 2 of 47
(cid:12) W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
03.06.2020 without rectification of the Clause No.4.5 of Handbook for
Admission to DNB Broad Specialty Courses (Post MBBS) 2020 Admission
Session issued by the 2nd Respondent dated 8 th May 2020, to ensure merit in
selection for DNB Broad Specialty Courses (Post MBBS) 2020 Admission
Session and to pass such further or other orders
For Petitioners : Mr.G.Sankaran
(in both the petitions)
For Respondents : Mr.K.S.Jayaganesh,
(in WP 7720/20) Senior Panel Counsel, for R1
Mr.Maninder Singh, Senior Counsel
along with Kirtiman Singh, Waize Ali Noor,
Prabhas Bajaj, Rohan Anand
for M/s.Anand, Samy and Dhruva for NBE
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 2
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
-2nd Respondent
M/s.V.P.Raman and M.S.Seshadri for MCI
-3rd Respondent
(in WP 8193/20) : Mr.K.S.Jayaganesh,
Senior Panel Counsel, for R1
Mr.Maninder Singh, Senior Counsel
along with Kirtiman Singh, Waize Ali Noor,
Prabhas Bajaj, Rohan Anand
for V.P.Raman and M.S.Seshadri for NBE
-2nd Respondent
M/s.V.P.Raman and M.S.Seshadri for MCI
-3rd Respondent
http://www.judis.nic.in
Page 3 of 47
(cid:12) W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
COMMON ORDER
These cases are taken up for hearing through Video-Conferencing.
1. These two writ petitions relate to counselling for post MBBS diploma courses conducted by the
National Board of Examinations at New Delhi. While the challenge in the first writ petition namely
WP No: 7720 of 2020 is to clause 4.5 of the Handbook for admission issued by the National Board of
Examinations for the academic session 2020-21 the second petition namely WP No: 8193 of 2020
seeks issuance of a writ of mandamus forbearing the respondents from conducting the second round
of counselling without rectifying the said clause. The first petitioner in W.P.No: 7720 of 2020 is the
sole petitioner in W.P.No: 8193 of 2020. The issues involved in both the writ petitions are identical;
hence both the writ petitions were heard together and are disposed of by a common order.
2. The sum and substance of the case of the petitioners is as follows:
The petitioners are MBBS graduates who had taken up the National Eligibility cum
Entrance Test for Postgraduate Medical Education 2020 hereinafter referred to as
NEET-PG-2020. Having secured the required minimum marks, the petitioners
became eligible for admission to postgraduate Medical courses
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 for the academic session
2020-21. The National Board of Examinations an autonomous academic body under
the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare is conducting post - doctoral examinations
in approved specialities and is awarding Postgraduate Diplomate commonly called as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 3
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
DNB. The decree awarded by the second respondent is equivalent to a postgraduate
qualification awarded by any other Indian University and is considered to be a super
speciality degree. The counselling for admissions to the said courses conducted by the
second respondent, in various private as well as government multi-speciality
hospitals, throughout the country is held based on the marks obtained by the
candidates in NEET-PG-2020.
3. The second respondent, the National Board of Examinations, had issued a Handbook detailing
the procedure to be adopted at the counselling. As per the procedure registration and filling up
options/choices of available seats is to be made by 08-05-2020. During the said period candidates
are expected to make their choices of seats and also rank their preferences. The counselling being
done online, seats are allotted to the candidates in accordance with their choices depending on their
marks and preferences. The petitioners are aggrieved by Clause 4.5 of the instructions which
restricts the right of the candidate who has been allotted a seat in the first round of
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 counselling to participate in the second
round of counselling only if he or she relinquishes the seat so allotted. According to the petitioners
the National Board of Examinations had introduced this procedure which was given up by it in 2016
again during this academic year. It is also the further case of the petitioners that all the other
universities and boards which offer postgraduate Medical education under the umbrella of the
Medical Council of India do not restrict participation of the candidates, who were allotted a seat in
the first round of counselling, in the second round of counselling while retaining the seat allotted to
them by paying the required fee. Inspiration is drawn, by the petitioners, from the procedure
adopted by the National Board of Examinations for the academic years 2018-19 and 2019-20 to
contend that the new procedure which curtails the right of the candidates, who freeze their seats
allotted to them in the first round, from participating in the second round of counselling would
deprive them of a right to choose a better course in a better institution if it is available in the second
round of counselling.
4) The relevant clause namely Clause 4.5 reads as follows:
“4.5 Additionally, while a candidate may participate in the various rounds of
counselling in accordance with the specific eligibility criteria there for and various
terms and http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 conditions for each
round of counselling given below, if at any stage a candidate “freezes” his/her
allotment (i.e. confirms that he/she wishes to take the seat allotted to him/her)
he/she will not be permitted to participate in any subsequent rounds of counselling
and shall stand exited from the counselling process. This ineligibility will also be
attracted if, after opting to freeze his/her allotment, he/she either does not pay the
requisite course fee or does not join the Institute concerned within the stipulated
time.” The effect of the above Clause 4.5 is that a candidate with higher marks who is
allotted a seat of his/her choice number five cannot take part in the second round of
counselling even if any of the seats in his/her choices 1 to 4 becomes actually
available for the second round of counselling. According to the petitioners if
candidates who had scored higher marks and allotted seats in the first round of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 4
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
counselling are prevented from participating in the second round of counselling while
preserving the seat allotted to them in the first round of counselling, the seats which
are available in the second round of counselling or the new seats that are added in the
second round of counselling would go to less meritorious candidates who were
unsuccessful in getting an allotment during the first round of counselling. This leads
to merit being sacrificed. http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
Relying upon the notification which states that fresh seats are also likely to be added
during the second round of counselling the petitioners would contend that they
cannot be prevented from having a go at the new seats that are made available during
the second round of counselling merely because they had already been allotted a seat
in the first round of counselling. Claiming that Clause 4.5 is arbitrary and it sacrifices
merit the petitioners would seek a writ of certiorari quashing Clause 4.5 and direct
the second respondent, National Board of Examinations to resort to the practice that
was followed during the previous academic year and enable the candidates who are
allotted seats in the first round of counselling to retain those seats and participate in
the second round of counselling. Even during the pendency of the first writ petition
the first round of counselling was completed and this necessitated the second writ
petition which is for a simple mandamus forbearing the second respondent from
proceeding with the second round counselling without rectifying Clause 4.5.
5. The claim of the petitioners is opposed by the second respondent, National Board
of Examinations, mainly on two grounds. The second respondent would contend that
this court does not have jurisdiction to entertain the writ petitions since Clause 4.13
of the Handbook specifically http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
provides that jurisdiction will be confined to New Delhi only. Class 4.13 reads as
follows:
“Jurisdiction for disputes, if any, shall be at New Delhi only” Relying upon the above
clause the second respondent would contend that this court cannot exercise
jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India when no part of the cause
of action had arisen within the territorial jurisdiction of this court. The second
respondent would also contend that the writ petitions are ill-conceived and the
petitioners cannot be allowed to challenge the Regulations after the process of
admission had begun. It is also the contention of the second respondent that the
petitioners cannot claim that the second respondent should also adopt the same
procedure that is being adopted by other universities and boards which offer
postgraduate medical education. It is also claimed that the second respondent being
an autonomous body is entitled to have its own rules and regulations as far as
admission to the diplomate courses conducted by it is concerned. It is the further
contention of the second respondent that it is not bound by the Regulations of the
Medical Council of India and there are pronouncements of the Delhi High Court
which conclude that the second respondent namely the National Board of
Examinations being an autonomous and independent body is not bound by the
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 Medical Council of India's
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 5
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
regulations.
6. It is also pointed out that the court which lacks the expertise cannot sit in
judgement over the actions of the authorities particularly those dealing with
education in matters relating to standard of education and the procedure for
admission unless it is shown that such procedure is in violation of any Statute or
Rules. Certain factual statistics has also been placed before the Court to show that if
the candidates who were allotted seats in the first round of counselling are allowed to
retain those seats by paying a fee for the first year and participate in the second
round of counselling more number of seats end up in the mop up round of
counselling and they go to candidates with lesser comparative merit.
7. The third respondent namely the Medical Council of India would in effect support
the claim of the second respondent. The third respondent had made it very clear that
the Post Graduate Regulations, 2000 framed by it would not apply to the Post MBBS
diploma courses offered by the second respondent/National Board of Examinations.
It is also pointed out that though this court by an interim order dated 26/05/2020
had permitted the petitioners 1&2 in WP 7720 of 2020 to participate in the second
round of counselling http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 even
after freezing their choice in the first round of counselling they had not chosen to
avail themselves the benefit of the interim directions instead both of them had
relinquished their seats that were allotted to them in the first round of counselling
and had chosen to participate in the second round of counselling. Therefore
according to the third respondent the petitioners are not entitled to any relief in these
writ petitions.
8. I have heard Mr.G.Sankaran, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in both
the writ petitions, Mr.K.S.Jayaganesh, Senior Panel Counsel for the first respondent,
Mr Maninder Singh, Senior Advocate assisted by M/s.Kirtiman Singh, Waize Ali
Noor, Prabhas Bajaj and Rohan Anand for the second respondent and
M/s.V.P.Raman and M.S.Seshadri for the third respondent.
9. I shall first deal with the question of jurisdiction raised by Mr.Maninder Singh,
learned Senior Counsel appearing for the second respondent. Mr. Maninder Singh,
would contend that this court does not have jurisdiction to entertain the writ
petitions basically on two grounds. Placing reliance on Clause 4.13 of the 2020
Handbook issued by the National Board of Examinations the learned Senior Counsel
would contend that the said http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
clause restricts the jurisdiction, in case of disputes, to New Delhi only and therefore
this court cannot exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
In support of the said submission he would rely upon the judgements of the
Honourable Supreme Court in ABC Laminart (P) Ltd & another –Vs- A.P.Agencies,
reported in (1989) 2 SCC 163 and Angile insulations-Vs-Davy Ashmore India Ltd,
reported in (1995) 4 SCC 153. It is also claimed that the petitioners having accepted
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 6
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
the said clause found in the Handbook cannot now turn around and invoke the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
10. Of course, it is open to the parties to agree upon or to choose a particular court as
a jurisdictional court in matters of contract when two or more Courts would have
jurisdiction. Both the judgements, cited supra, are cases arising out of commercial
contracts where the parties had consciously agreed upon or submitted themselves to
the jurisdiction of a particular court to the exclusion of others. The cases on hand are
not matters of contract where the parties had equal bargaining power. The Handbook
is a unilateral document issued by the second respondent and any stipulation therein
particularly with reference to jurisdiction of courts cannot be said to be absolutely
binding on the petitioners. Apart from the above the petitioners
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 have invoked the
extraordinary jurisdiction of this court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
It is fundamental position of law that even the legislature cannot abridge or take
away the jurisdiction of a High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
That being so, I do not think, the second respondent can effectively, by its unilateral
act, exclude or prevent this court from exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India which has been held to be a part of the basic structure of the
Constitution of India in L.Chandrakumar –Vs- Union of India, reported in (1997) 3
SCC
261. In view of the above the first limb of the contention relating to jurisdiction
stands rejected.
11. Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the second respondent
would however contend that this court does not have jurisdiction to entertain the writ
petitions since no part of the cause of action had arisen within the jurisdiction of this
court. He would submit that the second respondent being a small organisation with
limited staff having its office at New Delhi alone cannot be drawn to contest
litigations all over India particularly when no relief is sought in such writ petitions
against any of the local authorities. He would also contend that the principles of
“forum conviniens” would apply and any petition challenging the action of the second
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 respondent could be filed only
before the Honourable Courts at New Delhi. In support of his submission the learned
Senior Counsel would also draw my attention to the lack of pleadings in the writ
petitions with reference to the cause of action having arisen within the jurisdiction of
this court. He would also rely upon the judgement of the Honourable Supreme Court
in Oil and Natural Gas Commission –Vs- Utpal Kumar Basu reported in (1994) 4 SCC
711. Drawing my attention to paragraph 6 of the said judgement Mr. Maninder Singh,
would contend that the Supreme Court having regard to the amended provisions of
Article 226 had made it obligatory for the High Courts, while examining the question
of jurisdiction, to necessarily examine the pleadings with reference to cause of action
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 7
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
and also consider the objections relating to territorial jurisdiction. He would
vehemently argue that there is no pleading in the writ petitions to the effect that any
part of the cause of action had arisen within the jurisdiction of this court to enable
this court entertain the writ petitions. Citing the lack of pleadings the learned Senior
Counsel would persuade me to refuse to entertain the writ petitions and direct the
petitioners to approach the courts at New Delhi. Reliance in this regard is also placed
on Union of India and others –Vs- Adani Exports Ltd and another, reported in
(2002) 1 SCC 567 and Union of India and others –Vs- Sure Safety Solutions
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 (P) Ltd and another, reported
in (2019) 1 GLR 57. It is also further contended that even if I am to come to the
conclusion that a fraction of the cause of action had arisen within the jurisdiction of
this court the principal of “forum conviniens” should be applied and I should refuse
to exercise the jurisdiction.
Reliance in this regard is placed on the following judgements of the Honourable Supreme Court.
a. Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd. Vs. Union of India – (2004) 6 SCC 254. b. Sterling Agro Industries
(P) Ltd. Vs. Union of India & Ors. – 2011 SCC Online Del 3162.
c. Bharat Bhogilal Patel Vs. Union of India – 2014 (6) CTC 285. d. Nawal Kishore Sharma Vs. Union
of India & Ors. – (2014) 9 SCC 329.
12. Responding to the contentions of Mr Maninder Singh, on the question of jurisdiction,
Mr.G.Sankaran, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners would submit that the second
respondent, though a society registered under the Societies Registration Act at New Delhi, is
entrusted with the job of imparting quality postgraduate Medical education all over India and as
such has a Pan- India presence. Its actions are likely to affect aspirants to postgraduate Medical
education all over India. He would also point out that the second respondent offers postgraduate
Medical education in hospitals http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 situate
throughout the length and breadth of the country and as such it cannot be said that the second
respondent is confined only to New Delhi solely on the ground that it has its office at New Delhi. It is
the further contention of Mr.G.Sankaran that the petitioners being residents of the State of Tamil
Nadu, affected by the actions of the second respondent, are entitled to invoke the jurisdiction of this
Court in as much as a part of the cause of action, however minuscule it may be, had arisen within the
jurisdiction of this court. He would also rely upon the judgement of the full bench of this court in
B.Stalin –Vs- The Registrar, Supreme Court of India and others, reported in 2012-3-LW
489. He would also draw my attention to the observations in some of the judgements relied upon by
Mr. Maninder Singh, in support of his contention that if it is shown that a part of the cause of action
had arisen within the jurisdiction of this court this court can entertain the writ petitions. I have
considered the rival submissions.
13. Before adverting to the judgements cited at the bar it will be useful to refer to the language of
Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Article 226 of the Constitution of India reads as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 8
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
“226. Power of the High Courts to issue certain writs:
(1) Notwithstanding anything in Article 32 every High Court http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 shall have power, throughout the territories in relation
to which it exercises jurisdiction, to issue to any person or authority including in
appropriate cases, any government within those territories directions, orders or
writs, including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, mandamus, prohibition, quo
warranto and certiorari or any of them, for the enforcement of any of the rights
conferred by part III and for any other purpose.
(2) The power conferred by clause (1) to issue directions, orders or writs to any
government, authority or any person may also be exercised by any High Court
exercising jurisdiction in relation to the territories within which the cause of action,
wholly or in part, arises for the exercise of such power, notwithstanding that the seat
of such government or authority or the residence of such person is not within those
territories.” (Clauses 3 and 4 of Article 226 or not very germane for our purposes)
Clause 2 of Article 226 empowers the High Courts to issue writs even against
Government or Authority or Persons whose seat or residence is not within the
territorial jurisdiction of the concerned High Court. The only condition being
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 that a part of the cause of
action should have arisen within the jurisdiction of the High Court concerned. It has
also been held by the Honourable Supreme Court that the principle of “forum
conveniens” would apply to the exercise of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India. Therefore, it has to be seen as to whether any part of the cause
of action for these writ petitions had arisen within the jurisdiction of this Court and
what should be the basis for applying the principle of “forum conveniens” in the case
on hand, should the Court look into the convenience of the petitioners or that of the
second respondent in deciding the said question. Mr. Maninder Singh, learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the second respondent would vehemently contend that there is
no pleading in the writ petitions to the effect that a part of the cause of action had
arisen within the jurisdiction of this court and therefore this court must refuse to
exercise the jurisdiction. No doubt, true, that the petitioners in the writ petitions have
not specifically alleged that this court would have jurisdiction in view of the fact that
a part of the cause of action had arisen within the jurisdiction of this court. It is
settled law that strict rules of pleadings applicable to civil proceedings cannot be
extended to pleadings in a writ petition. If the cumulative effect of the allegations
made in the affidavits filed in support of these writ petitions show that a part of the
cause of action had arisen within the jurisdiction of the this court, this court would be
justified http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 in entertaining the
writ petitions. I am unable to subscribe to the contention of the learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the second respondent that a microscopic examination of the
pleadings should be made before this Court exercises its jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India. After all courts exist for providing remedy and not
for throwing out writ petitions on hyper- technical grounds.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 9
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
14. In M.K.Ranganathan -Vs- Madras Electric Tramways, reported in AIR 1952 MADRAS 659,
Honourable Mr.Justice Subba Rao considered the scope of the jurisdiction under Article 226 to
issue a writ of certiorari. While dealing with the challenge to an order of the Labour Appellate
Tribunal of India situate at Bombay (now known as Mumbai) the Honourable Judge held as follows:
“The jurisdiction to issue a writ does not depend upon the mere location of a tribunal
but depends upon the subject matter and the parties to a dispute in regard to which
such a tribunal purports to exercise jurisdiction. To put in other words though the
tribunal is situated outside the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court if it purports
to exercise jurisdiction in regard to the parties or the subject matter which are within
the territorial http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 jurisdiction of
the High Court the tribunal must be deemed to function within the jurisdiction of the
High Court. The jurisdiction conferred by Article 226 of the Constitution is to protect
the fundamental and other rights of the parties within the jurisdiction of the High
Court. The Article does not expressly say that the authority or tribunal interfering
with such rights should reside physically within the territorial jurisdiction.” This
judgement was rendered prior to the amendment of Article 226. The scenario after
the amendment is vastly different and there is a express provision enabling High
Courts to issue writs even against Governments or Authorities whose seat is situate
outside the territorial jurisdiction of the concerned High Court. In Oil and Natural
Gas Commission-Vs- Utpal Kumar Basu, reported in (1994) 4 SCC 711, the
Honourable Supreme Court had an occasion to consider the scope of the jurisdiction
of the High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution of India with reference to the
cause of action. The Honourable Supreme Court while restating the law that the term
cause of action is a bundle of facts which are to be proved by a party to enable such
party to succeed in the suit are proceeding, concluded that whatever was stated as
cause of action in the said writ petition was wholly insufficient to
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 constitute cause of action in
order to enable the Calcutta High Court to exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India. The Honourable Supreme Court also reiterated the settled
position of law that the averments made in the writ petition should form the basis for
determination of the question as to the territorial jurisdiction of the High Court
without embarking upon an enquiry as to the correctness or otherwise of such
averments. On the facts of the said case the Honourable Supreme Court found that
the Calcutta High Court did not have jurisdiction to entertain the writ petition as no
part of the cause of action had arisen within the jurisdiction of the Calcutta High
Court. Very strong reliance is placed by Mr.Maninder Singh, learned Senior Counsel
appearing for the second respondent, on the judgement of the Supreme Court in
Union of India and others -Vs- Adani Exports Ltd and another, reported in (2002) 1
SCC 567. The question of territorial jurisdiction in the said case arose in a proceeding
before the Gujarat High Court which was initiated by the respondents before the
Honourable Supreme Court claiming benefits of the passbook scheme found in the
import- export policy introduced with effect from 1-4-1995. Objection was taken to
the jurisdiction of the Gujarat High Court on the ground that the passbook in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 10
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
question, the benefit of which the respondents sought in the writ petitions, was
issued by an authority stationed at Chennai. The entries in the passbook under
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 the scheme concerned were
made by authorities at Chennai. The export of prawns made by the respondents and
the import of inputs, benefit of which the respondents had sought in the applications,
also were to be made through Chennai. It was under the said circumstances the
Honourable Supreme Court came to the conclusion that the Gujarat High Court
would not have territorial jurisdiction since no part of the cause of action had arisen
within its territories even though the respondent had its registered office at
Ahmadabad. Here again it was found that none of the facts which are projected as
ones that would cloth the Gujarat High Court writ jurisdiction were found to
constitute the cause of action. After referring to Utpal Kumar Basu, supra, the
Honourable Supreme Court concluded that unless it is shown that part of the cause of
action had arisen within the jurisdiction of the High Court concerned it will not be
proper for the High Court to entertain a writ petition particularly against respondents
who are either residing or having their office outside the territorial jurisdiction of the
said High Court.
15. However, subsequently the in Kusum Ingots & Alloys Ltd -Vs- Union of India and others, the
Honourable Supreme Court considered the question of territorial jurisdiction. While doing so the
Honourable Supreme Court pronounced on the scope of a challenge to a parliamentary legislation
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 before a High Court as follows:
“A parliamentary legislation when it receives the assent of the President of India and
is published in the official Gazette, unless specifically excluded, will apply to the
entire territory of India. If passing of legislation gives rise to a cause of action a writ
petition questioning the constitutionality thereof can be filed in any High Court of the
country. It is not so done because a cause of action will arise only when the provisions
of the Act or some of them which were implemented shall give rise to civil or evil
consequences to the petitioner.” It was further observed “Therefore a writ petition
questioning the constitutionality of a parliamentary act shall not be maintainable in
the High Court of Delhi only because the seat of the Union of India is in Delhi.” The
Honourable Supreme Court went on to conclude that a decision of the High Court on
the constitutional validity of a parliamentary enactment will have effect throughout
the territory of India subject of course to the applicability of the Act. It would be
pertinent to point out at this juncture that the Honourable Supreme Court had also
noticed the change in law after the amendment introducing clause (2) to Article 226
of the Constitution of India. http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
16. In Om Prakash Srivatsava -Vs- Union of India, reported in (2006) 6 SCC 207, the Honourable
Supreme Court while considering the scope of Clause 2 of Article 226 had held as follows:
“The question whether or not cause of action wholly or in part for filing a writ
petition has arisen within the territorial limits of any High Court has to be decided in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 11
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
the light of the nature and character of the proceedings under Article 226. In order to
maintain a writ petition a writ petitioner has to establish that a legal right claimed by
him has prima facie either been infringed or is threatened to be infringed by the
respondents within the territorial limits of the Court’s jurisdiction and such
infringement may take place by causing him actual injury or threat thereof.” In
Alchemist limited versus State Bank of Sikkim, reported in (2007) 11 SCC 344, the
scope of the term ‘cause of action’ was again considered by the Honourable Supreme
Court. After referring to various cases on the issue the Honourable Supreme Court
had said “In our judgement, the test is whether a particular fact
(s) is (are) of substance and can be said to be a material, integral or essential part of
the lis between the parties. If it is, http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of
2020 it forms a part of cause of action. If it is not it does not form part of cause of
action. It is also well settled that in determining the question the substance of the
matter and not the form thereof has to be considered.” It was further observed that
“It is no doubt true that even if a small fraction of the cause of action arises within the
jurisdiction of the court the court would have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the
suit/petition.”(Emphasis Supplied) In Rajendran Chingeravelu –Vs- R.K.Mishra,
Additional Commissioner of Income Tax and others, reported in (2010)1 SCC 457,
the Honourable Supreme Court held that the High Court of Andhra Pradesh would
have jurisdiction to entertain a writ petition in a case where the Genesis for the entire
episode of search, seizure and detention stemmed out of the action of the intelligence
officials at Hyderabad airport who alerted their counterparts at Chennai even though
the actual search and seizure were carried out at Chennai. Referring to clause 2 of
Article 226 of the Constitution of India the Honourable Supreme Court held that part
of the cause of action namely the genesis for the search, seizure and detention having
taken place at Hyderabad airport in Andhra Pradesh the High Court of Andhra
Pradesh was not justified http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 in
refusing to exercise jurisdiction. In Nawal Kishore Sharma –Vs- Union of India and
others reported in (2014) 9 SCC 329 the Honourable Supreme Court pointed out that
in order to maintain a writ petition the petitioner has to establish that his legal right
has been infringed by the respondents within the territorial limits of the High Court’s
jurisdiction. On facts the Honourable Supreme Court concluded that the fact that the
appellant was residing in Bihar and all correspondence with reference to disability
compensation was addressed by him from his native place at Bihar and all replies
were received by him at the address in Bihar would cloth the Patna High Court with
jurisdiction to decide the question of disability compensation even though the
respondent namely Shipping Corporation of India did not have any office within the
jurisdiction of the Patna High Court.
17. Adverting to the plea of forum conviniens raised by Mr.Maninder Singh, in support of which he
seeks to rely upon the judgement of a Division Bench of this court in Bharat Bhogilal Patel -Vs-
Union of India and others, reported in 2014-5-LW 289, I must at once point out that the Division
Bench had in fact held that in deciding the question of forum conviniens the choice would be,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 12
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
normally of the litigant approaching the court as to where he would http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 initiate the litigation if there are two High Courts which would have
jurisdiction. After referring to almost all the decisions cited at the bar, in the case on hand, and
other cases also the Honourable Division Bench concludes as follows:
“8 Conclusion.
On an analysis of the aforesaid judgements, the principles which emerge can be
summarised as under:-
i) In view of the 42nd constitutional amendment and the wordings of clause (2) of
Article 226 of the Constitution of India even a part of cause of action would confer
jurisdiction on the court.
ii) The choice would be normally of the litigant approaching the court as to where he
would initiate the litigation if there were two High Courts which would have
jurisdiction
iii) Merely because the original order was passed within the jurisdiction of another
court it would not exclude the jurisdiction of the court which is the situs of the
appellate authority.
iv) The principle of forum conviniens though applicable to international law as a
principle of comity of nations, would http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193
of 2020 apply to the discretionary remedy under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India.” After having observed as above the Honourable Division Bench had held, on
the peculiar facts of that case, that it would be the High Court of Bombay which
would be the forum conviniens taking into account the fact that both the parties were
from Bombay and the dispute relating to a trademark was decided by the Intellectual
Property Appellate Board at Chennai by an agreement of parties for early disposal of
the case. The narration will not be complete if I do not refer to the judgement of the
five judge bench of the Delhi High Court in Sterling Agro Industries Ltd –Vs- Union
of India, reported in AIR 2011 Delhi 174. The said judgement arose out of a reference
made by a full bench of the Delhi High Court to a larger bench since the ratio in New
India Assurance Co Ltd –Vs- Union of India, reported in AIR 2010 Delhi 43 (FB),
was doubted by the full bench. Honourable Justice Deepak Misra, as he then was,
speaking for the bench concluded as follows:
“33. In view of the aforesaid analysis we are inclined to modify the findings and
conclusions of the full bench in new India assurance Co Ltd (supra) and proceed to
state our http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 conclusions in
seriatim as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 13
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
(a) The finding recorded by the full bench that the sole cause of action emerges at the
place or location where the tribunal/appellate authority/revisional authority is
situate and the said High Court (i.e., Delhi High Court) cannot decline to entertain
the writ petition as that would amount to failure of the duty of the court cannot be
accepted inasmuch as such a finding is totally based on the situs of the
tribunal/appellate authority/revisional authority totally ignoring the concept of
forum conviniens.
(b) Even if a minuscule part of the cause of action arises within the jurisdiction of this
court a writ petition would be maintainable before this court, however the cause of
action is to be understood as per the ratio laid down in the case of Alchemist Ltd.
(Supra). (Emphasis Supplied)
(c) An order of the appellate authority constitutes a part of cause of action to make a
writ petition maintainable in the High Court within whose jurisdiction the appellate
authority is situated. Yet the same may not be the single factor to compel the High
Court to decide the matter on merits. The High Court http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 may refuse to exercise its discretionary jurisdiction by
invoking the doctrine of forum conviniens.
(d) The conclusion that where the appellate or revisional authority is located
constitutes the place of forum conviniens as stated in absolute terms by the full bench
is not correct as it will vary from case to case and depend on the lis in question.
(e) The finding that the court may refuse to exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 if
only the jurisdiction is involved in a mala fide manner is too restricted/constricted as
the exercise of power under Article 226 being discretionary cannot be limited or
restricted to the ground of mala fide alone.
(f) While entertaining a writ petition, the doctrine of forum conviniens and the
nature of cause of action are required to be scrutinised by the High Court depending
upon the factual matrix of each case in view of what has been stated in Ambica
Industries (supra) and Adani Exports Ltd (supra).
(g) The conclusion of the earlier decision of the full bench in New India Assurance Co
Ltd (supra) “that since the original order merges into the appellate order, the place
where the http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 appellate authority
is located is also forum conviniens is not correct.
(h) Any decision of this court contrary to the conclusions enumerated herein above
stands over ruled.”
18. The principles that emerge, on an analysis of the aforesaid judgements, can be summarised as
follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 14
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
i) The parties either by agreement or otherwise cannot give up their right to approach
the High Court seeking the constitutional remedy under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
ii) It is not open to any authority, which can be called the state within the meaning of
Article 12 of the Constitution of India, or a limb of the state to prevent any person
from knocking at the doors of a High Court seeking relief under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
iii) When the action of an authority or the state affects an individual citizen he or she
has a right to move the High Court, within whose jurisdiction he or she resides,
seeking redressal.
iv) In view of the specific language of clause 2 of Article 226 jurisdiction of a High
Court is not restricted to its territories only.
v) A High Court can issue writs even against persons or authorities
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 who do not reside or have
their office or seat within its territorial jurisdiction.
vi) The only condition for exercise of such power is that at least a part of the cause of
action must have arisen within the jurisdiction of such High Court.
vii) In order to determine whether any part of the cause of action had arisen within
the jurisdiction of the High Court, the High Court has to look into the substance of
the dispute and not the form.
viii) Strict rules of pleadings applicable to civil proceedings need not be extended to
proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
ix) Once it is found that even a minuscule part of the cause of action had arisen
within the jurisdiction of a particular High Court, the said court may not be justified
in throwing out the cause on the ground that some other High Court will be in a
better position to decide the lis.
x) The principle of forum conveniens could be invoked in respect of proceedings
under Article 226 also.
xi) Normally the choice of the forum would be available to the party who initiates the
action.
19. If we are to analyse the facts of the case on hand in the backdrop of the principles stated supra
there can be no doubt that this court will have http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of
2020 jurisdiction to entertain the writ petitions. As already pointed out the second respondent is an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 15
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
authority entrusted with the functions of imparting super speciality postgraduate Medical
education. It offers such Medical education in hospitals, both government and private, spread all
over the country. Therefore its actions are likely to affect individuals residing throughout the
country. The petitioners are questioning the legality of a particular provision in the handbook,
released by the second respondent, containing the procedure for admission to such postgraduate
courses conducted by the second respondent. As pointed out in Kusum Ingots (supra), if the action
of the Parliament or an authority affects an individual citizen that citizen has got a right to approach
the High Court within whose jurisdiction he or she resides seeking a writ against the organisation or
challenging the parliamentary legislation. Mr.Maninder Singh, learned Senior Counsel appearing for
the second respondent would however stress that there is no pleading in both the writ petitions to
the effect that at least a part of the cause of action had arisen within the jurisdiction of this court. Of
course on facts the learned Senior Counsel is right, but as I had already pointed out such a specific
pleading is wholly unnecessary. The term “cause of action”, as it is normally understood, is a bundle
of facts which are required to be proved by a party initiating the action in order to enable such party
to succeed in the action. If we are to look http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 at
the bundle of facts in the case on hand the grievance of the petitioners is against a particular clause
in the handbook for the year 2020 issued by the second respondent. The petitioners have also
pleaded as to how that clause is likely to affect them or is likely to involve a civil consequence on
their right to seek admission to a postgraduate course conducted by the second respondent. Once
that is pleaded I do not think that it is necessary for the petitioners to aver that because they reside
within the jurisdiction of this court the cause of action had arisen within the jurisdiction of this
court. The fact that the petitioners are residing within the jurisdiction of this court is not denied.
Therefore I am unable to countenance the argument of the learned Senior Counsel for the second
respondent on the absence of relevant pleadings establishing cause of action.
20. For all the foregoing reasons I conclude that this court has got jurisdiction to entertain the writ
petitions.
21. Adverting to the merits of the writ petitions, the challenge in W.P.No:7720 of 2020 is to Clause
4.5 of the handbook containing the procedure for counselling to be conducted for admission for the
postgraduate diploma courses offered by the second respondent. The effect of Clause 4.5 is
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 that a candidate who has been allotted a seat
in the first round of counselling in compliance with his or her choice cannot retain the said seat and
take part in the second round of counselling also. Similarly a candidate who is allotted a seat in the
second round of counselling cannot take part in the third round of counselling while retaining the
seat that was allotted. It is this prohibition against participation in the second or third round of
counselling, according to the petitioners, deprives them of a choice to retain the seat allotted to them
in the first or second round of counselling as the case may be and also participate with the second or
third round of counselling in order to better their chances. It is also contended that such prohibition
sacrifices merit in as much as it prevents meritorious candidates who are able to get a seat allotted
even in the first round of counselling from opting for a better seat or a better institution by
appearing in the second round of counselling while retaining the seat allotted to them in the first
round of counselling. In support of his contentions Mr.G.Sankaran, learned counsel appearing for
the petitioners would rely upon the Post Graduate Regulations 2000 which deal with admission to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 16
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
postgraduate courses offered by other universities and institutions which are subject to the control
of the Medical Council of India as well as the admission procedure adopted by the second
respondent in the previous years. Pointing out that the Regulations framed by the Medical Council
of India which are http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 applied by other
universities and institutions offering postgraduate Medical education enable candidates who are
allotted a seat in the first round of counselling to participate in the second round of counselling even
while retaining the seat allotted in the first round of counselling Mr.G.Sankaran, would vehemently
contend that the second respondent which is also subject to the supervision of the Medical Council
of India is bound to follow the Regulations of the Medical Council of India and any deviation there
from will be in derogation of the powers of the Medical Council of India as a body supervising the
Medical education in the country. It is also the contention of Mr.G.Sankaran, that the main object of
the counselling procedure being adapted for admission, particularly, to professional courses is to
ensure merit. The new procedure that has been initiated by the second respondent which will
deprive the meritorious candidates from participating in the second round of counselling while
retaining the seat allotted to them in the first round of counselling would in fact sacrifice merit. He
would also draw my attention to the following judgements of the Honourable Supreme Court
1) Priya Gupta -Vs- State of Chhattisgarh and others, reported in (2012) 7 SCC 433.
2) Asha -Vs- PT.B.D.Sharma University of Health Sciences and others, reported in (2012) 7 SCC
389.
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
3) State of Uttar Pradesh and others -Vs- Dinesh Singh Chauhan, reported in (2016) 9 SCC 749.
4) DAR-US-SLAM Educational Trust and others -Vs- Medical Council of India.
5) Rachit Sinha and others –Vs- Union of India and others, reported in (2018) 16 SCC 655.
6 S.Krishna Saradha –Vs- State of Andhra Pradesh and others, reported in 2019 SCC Online SC
1609.
Mr.G.Sankaran, would also invite my attention to Sections 10A to 10D of the Indian Medical Council
Act 1956 to contend that the second respondent is bound to follow the guidelines or regulations
issued by the Medical Council of India from time to time.
22. Responding to the said submissions of Mr.G.Sankaran, Mr. Maninder Singh learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the second respondent would vehemently contend that the second
respondent is an independent and autonomous body and it is free to make its own regulations
regarding admissions. He would also highlight the fact that the writ petitions are belated having
been filed after the process had begun. Therefore they are http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 &
8193 of 2020 liable to be dismissed on the short ground of delay. It is the further submission of
Mr.Maninder Singh learned Senior Counsel that the petitioners who have participated in the process
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 17
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
of counselling are precluded from challenging the rules regarding counselling contained in the
handbook published by the second respondent. He would also submit that the procedure for
admission particularly to a postgraduate speciality course is carefully designed by the experts in the
field taking into account the prior experience as well as the current requirements. The courts which
do not have the domain expertise should be slow to interfere with such process of admission. He
would further submit that the Honourable Supreme Court has refused to interfere with the
counselling process for the current year for postgraduate diploma courses conducted by the second
respondent itself in Alapati Jyotsna & others -Vs- Union of India & others. He would also draw my
attention to the stand taken by the Medical Council of India to point out that the second respondent
is free to formulate its own procedure and it is not bound to follow the regulations of the Medical
Council of India. Further arguing, the learned Senior Counsel, would submit that though the
petitioners were given the benefit of participating in the second counselling without forgoing the
seat allotted to them in the first counselling by way of an interim order by this court dated
26-05-2020, the petitioners 1 and 2 in W.P.No:7720 of 2020 had not availed
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 the benefit of the said interim order. They
had in fact relinquished the seats allotted to them in the first round of counselling to enable them to
participate in the second round of counselling. The third petitioner was not allotted any seat in the
first round of counselling and therefore he becomes automatically entitled to participate in the
second round of counselling and hence his challenge to paragraph 4.5 does not survive. He would
add that even as regards the petitioners 1 and 2 since they have surrendered the seats allotted to
them in the first round of counselling they are free to participate in the second counselling and as
such the very challenge in the writ petition does not survive. It is also his contention that the second
writ petition which seeks only a Mandamus cannot be entertained as the regulations are not subject
matter of challenge. He would also invite my attention to the judgement of the Honourable Supreme
Court in Arvind Kumar Kankane -Vs- State of Uttar Pradesh and others, reported in (2001) 8 SCC
355, to buttress the submission that a stipulation in the admission process which is made with an
object of meeting the time bound process cannot be subject to judicial scrutiny. He would also
submit that the Delhi High Court has, on more than one occasion, upheld an identical stipulation
contained in the handbooks issued by the second respondent during the academic years 2002-03
and 2015-16. He would also point out that in its recent pronouncement in Dr Divyesh J. Pathak and
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 others –Vs- National Board of Examination
and another dated 26-05-2020 the Delhi High Court has concluded that the Regulations of the
Medical Council of India are not applicable to the counselling conducted by the second
respondent/NBE as the second respondent is an independent and autonomous body. In support of
his submissions relating to the validity of the stipulation contained in Clause 4.5 of the handbook
Mr. Maninder Singh would rely upon the judgements of the Delhi High Court in a. Reema Chawala
–Vs- University of Delhi MANU/DE/0147/2003 and b. Priyanka Chaudhary & Others –Vs- National
Board of Examinations MANU/DE/2863/2016.
23. Mr. V.P. Raman learned counsel appearing for the Medical Council of India would in effect
support the stand taken by the second respondent namely National board of Examinations. He
would also submit that the National board of Examinations is not bound to seek prior permission of
the Medical Council of India under section 10 A of the Indian Medical Council Act 1956. It is also his
submission that the Post Graduate Regulations 2000 framed by the Medical Council of India will
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 18
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
not be applicable to the diplomates granted by the second respondent though they are deemed to be
equal to the postgraduate qualification offered by other universities. http://www.judis.nic.in
W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
24. I have considered the rival submissions. I must, at the outset, point out that Clause 4.5 of the
handbook which is under challenge does in fact affects the right of candidates who are allotted seats
in the first round of counselling as per their choice to retain the seat and participate in the second
round of counselling also in order to better their chances. The moot question therefore is as to
whether such a provision could be subject matter of challenge by way of a writ petition under Article
226 of the Constitution of India. Various statistics have been relied upon by the respective counsel to
justify their respective stand. Be that as it may, as pointed out by the Honourable Supreme Court in
various decisions the attempt of the court should be to ensure that merit is not sacrificed while
framing rules or procedure for counselling and admission to such super speciality courses
particularly in the field of medicine. While the petitioners would contend that the second
respondent which is offering super speciality postgraduate courses in medicine is bound to follow
the procedure that is suggested by the Medical Council of India for admission to such postgraduate
courses, the second respondent would claim that it is a autonomous body and it is free to adopt its
own procedure.
http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
25. It is settled law that the prospectus is the vital document which governs the admission
procedure. A candidate who participates in the selection process based on the prospectus cannot
turn around and challenge the very prospectus or a clause in the prospectus unless it is shown to be
illegal or irrational. This court had in a number of cases relating to admissions to postgraduate
Medical education has consistently held that the candidates who had applied for admission based on
the conditions set out in the prospectus cannot challenge the conditions. Of course in the case on
hand the petitioners had approached the court before the first round of counselling had
commenced. However the counselling in effect commenced on 01-05-2020 and the candidates were
required to furnish their online choices by 08-05-2020. The first counselling was done on
22-05-2020. The petitioners had filed the first writ petition on 17-05-2020 and were favoured with
an interim order on 26-05-2020. The petitioners were aware of the existence of Clause 4.5 in the
handbook even when they had applied for admission. They had chosen to apply and also indicate
their choices in compliance with the requirements of the instructions in the handbook. Only after
exercising their choices the petitioners chose to challenge Clause 4.5 on 17-05-2020.
Mr.G.Sankaran, would vehemently contend that since the petitioners had approached the court
before the first round of counselling itself, there is no http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193
of 2020 delay and they cannot be non-suited on the ground of delay. I am unable to accept the said
submission of the learned counsel for the petitioner for more than one reason. As rightly pointed out
by the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the second respondent if the petitioners’ challenge is
accepted the entire counselling process will have to be restarted in the sense all the candidates who
had been allotted a seat in the first round of counselling and who had frozen their seats should also
be given an opportunity to take part in the second round of counselling which would necessarily
result in further delay in the process which has already been delayed by the pandemic. There are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 19
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
about 700 candidates who had frozen the seats allotted to them in the first round of counselling. If
Clause 4.5 is tweaked and they are also allowed to participate in the second round of counselling
while retaining the seats allotted to them in the first round those 700 seats should also be shown as
seats available in the second round of counselling. The second respondent in its counter affidavit has
explained as to how this process accumulates more seats in the mop up round of counselling which
go to candidates with lesser comparative merit. The Honourable Supreme Court in Alapati Jyostna
and others (Supra) has considered the prevalent situation and after taking note of the fact that
nearly 700 candidates had been allotted seats and have frozen their seats had refused to issue any
directions for the present year. The http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
Honourable Supreme Court in the said decision has also recorded the assertions made in the
response filed by the Medical Council of India that a common counselling or a single online
counselling in the coming years would definitely take care of the grievances. I am therefore of the
considered view that it would not be appropriate for this court to interfere with the counselling at
this stage for the present year.
26. Even on the merits of the challenge, as pointed out by the Honourable Supreme Court in Arvind
Kumar Kankane, a freak circumstance by which a candidate with a lesser comparative merit gets a
better choice by virtue of operation of Clause 4.5 cannot be the test for reasonableness of the rule
itself. Apart from the above observation of the Honourable Supreme Court, the Delhi High Court in
at least two judgements referred to supra namely in Reema Chawala –Vs- University of Delhi
MANU/DE/0147/2003 and Priyanka Chaudhary & Others -Vs- National Board of Examinations
MANU/DE/2863/2016, has upheld a similar clause found in the handbooks issued by the second
respondent for the relevant academic years. I am unable to persuade myself to disagree with the
reasons assigned by the Honourable Delhi High Court in support of its conclusions reached in the
above two http://www.judis.nic.in W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020 decisions. I must point out that
the decisions relied upon by Mr.G.Sankaran relate to the Rules or Rregulations framed by the
Medical Council of India in respect of admissions to graduate and postgraduate courses offered by
institutions and universities under the control of the Medical Council of India. Therefore the
principles laid down in those decisions cannot be applied to test the reasonableness of the rule
adopted by the second respondent. In Dr Divyesh J. Pathak and others –Vs- National Board of
Examination and another, the Delhi High Court has concluded that the second respondent herein is
an independent body and it cannot be contended that it is bound by the advisories of the Medical
Council of India. It has also been pointed out that the Medical Council of India and the National
Board of Examinations are independent and autonomous bodies, neither can be made bound by the
policy decisions taken by the other. I am therefore constrained to conclude that the challenge to
Clause 4.5 of the handbook cannot succeed and both the writ petitions deserve to be dismissed.
27. In fine both the writ petitions are dismissed however in the circumstances there shall be no
order as to costs. Consequently, the connected miscellaneous petitions are closed.
30.06.2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 20
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
(cid:12) W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
Index : Yes /No
Internet : Yes/No
Speaking order/ Non Speaking order
jv
To
1. The Secretary to Government,
Government of India,
Ministry of Health and Family Welfare,
Room No.348, 'A' Wing, Nirman Bhavan,
New Delhi – 110 011.
2. National Board of Examinations,
Medical Enclave, Ansari Nagar,
Mahatma Gandhi Marg (Ring Road),
New Delhi – 110 029.
3. The Secretary General,
Medical Council of India
Pocket 14, Sector – 8,
Dwaraka, New Delhi – 110 077.
http://www.judis.nic.in
(cid:12) W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
R.SUBRAMANIAN, J.
jv
Pre Delivery Order
W.P.Nos.7720 & 8193 of 2020
and connected Miscellaneous Petitions
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 21
Dr.Sandeep.P.S vs The Government Of India on 8 May, 2020
30.06.2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86285964/ 22
