Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on 13 October, 2025
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on
13 October, 2025
Author: Harish Kumar
Bench: Harish Kumar
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.11558 of 2025
======================================================
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar, Son of Sri Mahesh Chandra Gangwar, Resident
of Kusum Bhavan, B1/34, Sector-G, Jankipuran, Lucknow (UP), 226021.
... ... Petitioner/s
Versus
1. Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agriculture University, Pusa, Samastipur-
848125, through its Registrar.
2. The Registrar, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agriculture University Pusa,
Samastipur-848125, Bihar.
3. The Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agriculture University,
Pusa, Samastipur-848125, Bihar.
4. Dr. P.S. Pandey, name of father not known to the petitioner, presently
functioning as Vice-Chancellor, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agriculture
University, Pusa, Samastipur 848125, Bihar.
5. The Chief Vigilance Officer, Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agriculture
University, Pusa, Samastipur 848125, Bihar.
... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
Appearance :
For the Petitioner/s : Mr. Shivendra Kishore, Sr. Advocate
Mr. Saroj Kumar, Advocate
Mrs. Prisu Snehil, Advocate
For the Respondent/s : Mr. P. K. Shahi, Sr. Advocate
Mr. Vijay Shankar Upadhyay, Advocate
Mr. Piyush Kumar Pandey, Advocate
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE HARISH KUMAR
CAV JUDGMENT
Date : 13-10-2025
Heard learned Senior Advocate Mr. Shivendra
Kishore, along with Mr. Saroj Kumar, learned Advocate for the
petitioner and Mr. P. K. Shahi, learned Senior Advocate, duly
assisted by Mr. Vijay Shankar Upadhyay, learned Advocate for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163615244/ 1
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on 13 October, 2025
the Dr. Rajednra Prasad Central Agriculture University.
2. Invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction of this
Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, challenge
Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025
2/25
in the present writ petition is made to a Memorandum, bearing
no.19, dated 02.04.2025 (Annexure-P/1), issued under the
signature of Chief Vigilance Officer, for and on behalf of the
disciplinary authority Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central Agriculture
University, Pusa (hereinafter referred to as 'the RPCAU') as
also the departmental proceeding whereby and whereunder a
charge-sheet for major penalty under Rule 14 of the Central
Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1965
[hereinafter referred to as 'the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965'] was
proposed to be held against the petitioner on the imputation of
misconduct and misbehaviour set out in the statement of charge.
Challenge is also made to the Memorandum no. 33 dated
09.07.2025
, issued under the signature of Chief Vigilance Officer, for and on behalf of the disciplinary authority
whereby a supplementary charge-sheet for major penalties under Rule 14 of CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965
was proposed to be held against the petitioner on the imputation of misconduct and misbehaviour
mentioned in the article of charges. Since the aforenoted memorandum has been brought to the
knowledge of the petitioner after filing of the present writ application, the same is challenged by
filing an interlocutory application, bearing I.A. No. 1 of 2025.
Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025
3. To appreciate the legal issues raised before this Court, the brief facts, which are relevant for
adjudication of the same, are summarized hereinbelow:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163615244/ 2
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on 13 October, 2025
(i) The petitioner, who was initially appointed to the post of Associate Professor on
contract in the Animal Project Research Institute, Pusa. In the meanwhile,
Advertisement No. 2/2017 dated 04.12.2017 (Annexure-P/2) was issued for
appointment to the post of Programme Coordinator (Senior Scientist and Head) of
Krishi Vigyan Kendra under RPCAU, Pusa.
(ii) The petitioner being found eligible submitted application for the post aforenoted
along with other applicants.
The application forms of the candidates were duly scrutinized and a call letter in favour of the
candidates, including the petitioner, was issued to participate in the selection process. A selection
committee was constituted and after interview the committee recommended the name of the
petitioner for appointment to the post of Programme Coordinator (Senior Scientist and Head). The
recommendation was duly approved by the Vice-chancellor and the Board of Management
whereupon offer of appointment contained in letter dated 18.06.2019 (Annexure-P/4) was issued.
Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025
(iii) On completion of probation period of two years, the services of the petitioner was confirmed
vide letter dated 28.08.2021 (Annexure-P/5) w.e.f. 18.06.2019. On 06.06.2024, a show-cause
notice, duly issued by the Chief Vigilance Officer, RPCAU, Pusa was served upon the petitioner as to
why his services be not terminated, since the services rendered as SRF and Visiting faculty
undertaken by the petitioner do not qualify for counting in experience, as those were project based
contractual appointment. Since the petitioner did not possess the experience in the stipulated pay
structure or for the stipulated period, thus was not eligible for appointment.
(iv) The petitioner made a response to the show- cause on 18.07.2024 refuting the allegation. On
being found it unsatisfactory, the Chief Vigilance Officer issued impugned Memorandum dated
02.04.2025 for major punishment, which is put to challenge in the present writ petition.
4. After filing of the writ petition, the petitioner also came to know that a second memorandum
containing supplementary charge-sheet for major penalty also came to be issued under Memo No.
33 dated 09.07.2025 with a subsequent imputation that the petitioner was not eligible for the post at
the time of submitting application on account of non-fulfillment of Patna High Court CWJC
No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 the essential age limit criteria. The maximum age limit for the post
was 45 years, however, the petitioner at the time of submission of application was 46 years, 7
months and 27 days old. Furthermore, the petitioner was not entitled to any relaxation in age limit,
as he was not a regular employee of RPCAU, Pusa at the time of submitting his application.
5. Mr. Shivendra Kishore, learned Senior Advocate for the petitioner while assailing the impugned
orders as well as initiation of departmental proceeding has urged that the alleged delinquence of the
petitioner, if any, was known to the respondents in the year 2017, but the impugned memo of charge
came to be issued in the year 2025, after a delay of eight years and, as such, belated initiation of
departmental proceeding, besides it caused prejudice, the same is bound to affect his defence and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163615244/ 3
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on 13 October, 2025
thereby causing irreparable prejudice. It is submitted that this is not the case of the respondents or
even the imputation against the petitioner that the documents/certificate submitted by the
petitioner, are not genuine, forged and fabricated or manufactured one, rather the documents and
the certificates were duly scrutinized by the screening committee in the office of RPCAU, Pusa,
leading to issuance of the call letter. The petitioner faced the interview and on being recommended
Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 by the duly constituted selection
committee, he was offered appointment after getting approval of the Vice-chancellor and the Board
of Management of the University.
6. Learned Senior Advocate further urged that the Board of Management of the University in its
meeting held on 06.12.2023 had resolved to proceed for detailed enquiry under the CCS (CCA)
Rules, 1965 for major penalty. After deliberation at length in each case, the Board of Management
has approved that the Vice-chancellor is authorized for approving Enquiry Officers and Presenting
Officers, issuance of charge sheets, taking day-to-day decisions relating with the enquiry
proceedings under CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 and submit enquiry report to the Board of Management
for taking decision in the cases wherein the Board of Management is the disciplinary authority.
7.Referring to the minutes of the meeting, the copy of which is placed as Annexure-R/5 to the
counter affidavit, it is submitted that once the Board of Management has delegated the power to the
Vice-chancellor, the memorandum of charge can only be issued by the Vice-chancellor of the
University itself and non-else. Issuance of the Memorandum containing charge- sheet for major
penalty under the signature of Chief Vigilance Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025
dt.13-10-2025 Officer for and on behalf of the disciplinary authority is wholly without jurisdiction.
Moreover, at delegated power must be conferred by the committee alone. He thus submitted that
where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way, the thing must be done in that way or
not at all. Other modes of performance are necessarily forbidden. Reliance has been placed on
decisions rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of A. K. Roy & Anr. Vs. State of Punjab
& Ors., reported in, AIR 1986 SC 2160, Sahni Silk Mills (P) Ltd. and another vs. Employees' State
Insurance Corporation, reported in, (1994) 5 SCC 346 and Director General, ESI & Anr. Vs. T. Abdul
Razak, reported in, (1996) 4 SCC 708.
8. Taking this Court through the provisions of the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 especially Rule 14(3),
learned Senior Advocate further contended that the charge-sheet must be approved by the
disciplinary authority and in absence thereof issuance of charge-sheet by a person, having no
competence is invalid. It is only the competent authority, who can issue charge- sheet. Since the
charge-sheet was not issued by the Board of Management or Vice-chancellor, but by the Chief
Vigilance Officer, hence the same is also bad in the eyes of law. To bolster his submission, reliance
has been placed on decisions in the case Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 of
Steel Authority of India Vs. Presiding Officer, Labour Court, reported in, (1980) 3 SCC 734,
Registrar, Cooperative Societies, Madras & Anr. Vs. F. X. Fernando, reported in, (1994) 2 SCC 746
and lastly Union of India & Ors. Vs. B.V. Gopinath, reported in, (2014) 1 SCC 351.
9. To buttress his submission, in relation to the issue of inordinate delay in issuing charge memo, he
placed reliance upon the decision rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163615244/ 4
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on 13 October, 2025
M.P. Vs. Bani Singh & Another, reported in, AIR 1990 SC 1308, P.D. Agrawal Vs. State Bank of India
& Ors., reported in, (2006) 8 SCC 776, P. V. Mahadevan Vs. MD, T.N. Housing Board, reported in,
(2005) 6 SCC 636 and further in the case of State of Punjab & Others Vs. Chaman Lal Goyal,
reported in, (1995) 2 SCC 570.
10. Referring to the aforenoted decisions, learned Senior Advocate thus concluded his submission
that the impugned orders are unsustainable in law as well as on facts, inter alia, on the ground of
delay and the same being issued by an authority, who is not competent to do so and the memo of
charge contains no list of witnesses and documents and even if the allegation taken to be true, no
case of misconduct is made out in absence of the allegation of suppression having been Patna High
Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 made by the petitioner and his
testimonials/certificates are found to be forged and fabricated.
11. Mr. P. K. Shahi, learned Senior Advocate dispelling the aforenoted contention has submitted that
as per Section 9(1) of the DRPCAU Act, 2016, the President of India is the Visitor of the University
having all the power to inspection or enquiry. The Visitor may direct the Vice- chancellor regarding
inspection or enquiry. In the present case, on a public complaint made before His Excellency, the
President of India regarding the financial irregularities and administrative corruption in the
RPCAU, Pusa, a letter was sent by the Deputy Secretary, President's Secretariat to the Department
of Agricultural Research and Education (in short 'DARE') regarding the approval of the proposal for
action to be taken on the enquiry report submitted by the enquiry committee. Before initiation of the
proceeding in pursuant to the letter issued by the Under Secretary, Government of India to the
Vice-chancellor, an enquiry committee was constituted and a report was submitted, in which it was
found that the petitioner was not eligible for the post against which he was selected. Finding of the
committee was placed before the Board of Management on 06.12.2023. As per Agenda Item No. 21.8
the proposed action against the Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 petitioner
under the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 was approved. Furthermore, the Board of Management authorized
the Vice- chancellor to do needful, including the appointment of Inquiry Officers and Presenting
Officers, issue charge sheet and make day-to-day decisions related to the inquiry proceedings. The
Vice-chancellor had written a letter to the Secretary DARE, Ministry of Agriculture and Farmers
Welfare, Krishi Bhawan and he has been informed that Hon'ble Visitor had approved to proceed and
to take appropriate action against the University employees.
12. In the aforesaid premise, the petitioner was served with the show-cause notice. However, he
failed to justify his selection/appointment, which resulted into issuance of a charge-sheet on
02.04.2025. The petitioner had already submitted his written statement. The Enquiry Officer as well
as Presenting Officer have already been appointed. Subsequently, a supplementary charge-sheet was
also issued to the petitioner when it was found that the petitioner was also not well within the
prescribed age limit at the time of appointment. It has also been informed that disciplinary action
was also initiated against the member of the screening committee and selection committee, who
were involved in the selection process of the Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025
dt.13-10-2025 petitioner. Besides the action taken against the aforenoted person, a separate
disciplinary action has also been taken against the then Vice-chancellor by the Indian Council of
Agriculture and Research, New Delhi for the selection of the petitioner despite not fulfilling the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163615244/ 5
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on 13 October, 2025
eligibility criteria.
13. Mr. Shahi, learned Advocate representing the RPCAU, Pusa has drawn the attention of this Court
to the memorandum containing charge-sheet and supplementary charge-sheet submitted that the
same has been issued for and on behalf of the disciplinary authority. Thus, there is no dispute that
the charge-sheet and the supplementary charge-sheet have got approval of the disciplinary
authority. The petitioner has failed to make out a case as to what prejudice has been caused to him.
Nonetheless when complaint has been made against the petitioner, an enquiry was duly conducted
by the order of His Excellency and on being found the very appointment of the petitioner was made
dehors the Rules and in collusion with the members of the screening committee and selection
committee, the disciplinary proceeding has been initiated under CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965. The memo
of charge(s), which are questioned herein is only communicated through the Chief Vigilance Officer
for and on behalf of the disciplinary authority and, as Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025
dt.13-10-2025 such, in no circumstances it can be said to be issued by an incompetent person or
without jurisdiction. The submission made by the learned Senior Advocate on behalf of the
petitioner is wholly misconceived. There is no allegation of malafide, moreover, the defence of the
petitioner shall be looked into by the disciplinary authority and thus it should not be nipped in the
bud.
14. This Court has given anxious consideration to the submissions advanced by the learned Senior
Advocates for the petitioner and the University, as also meticulously perused the materials available
on record.
15. Before coming to the facts of this case to answer the issues raised before this Court, inter alia, as
to whether the initiation of the departmental proceeding against the petitioner as also the
charge-memo is bad on account of inordinate delay. The relevant rulings cited by the learned Senior
Advocate for the petitioner are worth benefitting to be noticed. In the case of Bani Singh (supra), a
delay of twelve years in initiating disciplinary proceedings without satisfactory explanation was held
unfair and the enquiry was not permitted to proceed at such a later stage. The apex Court held that
normally, pending or contemplated disciplinary proceedings Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of
2025 dt.13-10-2025 have no impact on an employee's right to be considered for promotion. Only
when charges are framed after a prima facie case is made out, the sealed cover procedure applies.
Where proceedings have not reached that stage, consideration for promotion cannot be withheld
merely due to pendency of such proceedings. In the said case, even a preliminary enquiry on
complaints regarding the officer's integrity had not been completed, so the Screening Committee
was wrong to defer his selection for the selection grade. Inordinate and unexplained delay of twelve
years in initiating disciplinary proceeding renders enquiry unfair, as the pending unframed charges
cannot withhold promotion consideration.
16. In the case of P. D. Agrawal (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that delay in initiating
departmental enquiry does not vitiate proceedings unless the delinquent demonstrates prejudice
caused thereby. In P. V. Mahadevan case (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court noticing the fact that
irregularity committed in the year 1990 led to disciplinary action in the year 2000, though the
explanation that the matter came to light in the year 1994-95 and the audit report was already
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163615244/ 6
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on 13 October, 2025
rejected, but no convincing explanation was given for the inordinate delay. The Court held that a
protracted Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 disciplinary enquiry causing
mental agony and suffering to the employee, the same should be avoided, not only in the interest of
the employee but also in public interest and to inspire confidence among Government servants.
Further in the case of Chaman Lal Goyal (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court unequivocally held
that the delay if long and explained, the Court may quash the charges. However, what constitutes
'too long' depends on the facts of each case. If delay is likely to prejudice, the petitioner defence, the
enquiry must be stopped. Whenever such a plea is raised, the Court must balance the factors for and
against on the totality of circumstances.
17. Coming to the facts of this case, though the advertisement was issued in the year 2017, but the
appointment took place in the year 2019 and thereupon it was confirmed in 2021 after completion of
the probation period. The irregularity, if any found in appointment of the petitioner, noticed by the
authority concerned on a public complaint, which was made for the first time in the year, 2023 and
thereupon an enquiry was conducted and on receipt of the enquiry report the petitioner was served
with the show-cause notice in the year 2024 and on being found his response unsatisfactory, the
memorandum containing charge-sheet and supplementary charge-sheet were issued, Patna High
Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 hence in the opinion of this Court there is no delay in
issuing of memo of charge and initiation of departmental proceeding. The petitioner also failed to
persuade the Court that any prejudice has been caused on account of any alleged delay. The plea of
the petitioner that the memo of charge is bad in law on account of inordinate delay in its issuance
has no substance and accordingly stands rejected.
18. Now coming to the next legal issue that the authority with delegated power cannot sub-delegate
the delegated power unless legislature provides so, is well settled principle. In the case of A. K. Roy
(supra), the Court held that the maxim of delegatus non potest delegare merely indicates that
sub-delegation of powers is not normally allowable though the legislature can always provide for
sub-delegation. Where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way, the thing must be done
in that way or not at all. Other modes of performance are necessarily forbidden. In the said case, the
power to initiate prosecution for offence under Section 20(1) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration
Act, 1954 was delegated by the State Government, through Rule 3, to the Food (Health) Authority,
which was further delegated to Food Inspector. The Court held that the Food Authority had no
power to delegate as Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 rules framed under
the statute cannot go against the provisions of statute.
19. Similarly, in the case of Sahni Silk Mills Pvt Ltd. (supra), the Hon'ble supreme Court held as
follows:
"The Courts are normally rigorous in requiring that statutory power be exercised only
by the persons or bodies authorised by the statute. Delegated power must be
exercised by the conferred authority alone. However, in the present administrative
set-up, extreme judicial aversion to delegation cannot be carried too far. A public
authority may employ agents to exercise its powers, which is why many statutes
authorise delegation either expressly or impliedly. With the enormous rise in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163615244/ 7
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on 13 October, 2025
statutory activities, the maxim delegatus non potestdelegare is not being strictly
applied, especially in cases of administrative discretionary power. It is almost settled
that the legislature may permit any statutory authority to delegate its power to
another authority, provided the statute lays down the policy framework within which
the delegatee must act. The real controversy arises in cases of sub-delegation, since
when Parliament has specifically appointed an authority to discharge a function, it
cannot be readily presumed that the delegate has the freedom to empower another
person or body to act in its place."
Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025
20. In the light of the aforesaid settled legal proposition, now coming to the issue as to whether the
memorandum containing the charge-sheet/supplementary charge-sheet issued by the Chief
Vigilance Officer, for and on behalf of the disciplinary authority is valid or suffers from the vice of
sub-delegation of power dehors the Rule and the decision taken by the Board of Management, who
is the disciplinary authority in the case in hand; but before answering this issue, it would be
pertinent to take note of other decisions.
21. In the case of Steel Authority of India (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court noticed that under the
Company's Discipline and Appeal Rules, only the Personnel Manager as the disciplinary authority to
frame charges and constitute an inquiry committee. Since there was no approved rule authorising
any other head of department for this purpose, charge-sheets issued and inquiry committee
constituted by the Chief Medical Officer was held to be unauthorised. Consequently, the dismissal
order passed by the Personnel Manager on the basis of such inquiry reports by such unauthorized
inquiry committee was held invalid.
22. In the case of F.X. Fernando (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court considering the fact that on the
Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 direction of the State Government, the
Registrar (Head of Department) issued a charge-sheet on 20.03.1989 to a State service officer upon
conferring the power under notification dated 17-3-1988 held the charge-sheet was valid. The Court
further observed that the Registrar though not empowered to impose penalty, could validly issue
charge-sheet and appoint an Enquiry Officer when such power was conferred by State Government
under the notification.
23. The similar issue was also considered in the case of B.V. Gopinath (supra) where the Hon'ble
Supreme Court on being found that the charge-sheet not having been issued by the disciplinary
authority held to be invalid. Under Rule 14(3) of the CCS (CCA) Rules, the disciplinary authority
must draw up or cause to be drawn up the definite and distinct articles of charge. The phrase "cause
to be drawn up" only permits a subordinate authority to prepare a draft, but the charges must be
approved and finalised by the disciplinary authority. Thus, a charge-sheet without such approval is
without authority of law.
24. In the aforesaid settled legal background, this Court notices the facts of this case. It is not in
dispute that the disciplinary proceeding has been initiated under the CCS (CCA) Patna High Court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163615244/ 8
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on 13 October, 2025
CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 Rules, 1965. Rule 14(3) of the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 reads
as follows:
"(3) Where it is proposed to hold an inquiry against a Government servant under this
rule and rule 15, the disciplinary authority shall draw up or cause to be drawn up-
(i) the substance of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour into definite and
distinct articles of charge;
(ii) a statement of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour in support of each
article of charge, which shall contain-
(a) a statement of all relevant facts including any admission or confession made by
the Government servant;
(b) a list of documents by which, and a list of witnesses by whom, the articles of
charge are proposed to be sustained."
25. Bare reading of the aforesaid rule, it is manifest that it is a disciplinary authority,
who shall or shall cause to be prepared the article of charge and statement of
imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour and that memo of charge shall contain a
list of documents/witnesses by whom, the articles of charge are proposed to be
sustained.
26. Admittedly in the case in hand, the Board of Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of
2025 dt.13-10-2025 Management being the disciplinary authority in its meeting as
per Agent Item No. 21.8 authorized the Vice-chancellor to approve appointment of
Inquiry Officers and Presenting Officers, issue charge sheet and make day-to-day
decisions related to the inquiry proceedings under the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965. If
under the Rule, the disciplinary authority is empowered and authorized to issue the
article of charge and statement of imputation of misconduct and misbehaviour, then
the same is required to be done by the disciplinary authority alone and none else.
Even if it is accepted that after deliberation, the Board of Management has authorized
the Vice-chancellor for approving the Inquiry Officer and Presenting Officer for
issuance of charge-sheet and take day-to-day decision relating with the enquiry
proceeding and submitted the enquiry report to the Board of Management for taking
decision, the Memo of charge issued under the signature of Chief Vigilance Officer,
for and on behalf of the disciplinary authority is not unsustainable in law, without its
approval having been done by the Board of Management.
27. It would be worth benefiting to refer the decision rendered by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of B.V. Gopinath (supra) wherein the Court while
emphasizing the Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 Article
311(1) of the Constitution of India, which ensures that no person who is a member of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163615244/ 9
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on 13 October, 2025
a civil service of the Union or an all-India service can be dismissed or removed by an
authority subordinate to that by which he was appointed observed that to effectuate
and ensure compliance with the mandatory requirements of Article 311(2), the
Government of India has promulgated the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965. The disciplinary
proceedings against the delinquent found to be initiated in terms of Rule 14 of the
Rules, 1965. It is further observed that Rule 14(3) clearly lays down that where it is
proposed to hold an inquiry against a government servant under Rule 14 or Rule 15,
the disciplinary authority shall draw up or cause to be drawn up the substance of
imputation of misconduct or misbehaviour into definite and distinct articles of
charges.
28. The Court further ruled that the term "cause to be drawn up" does not mean that
the definite and distinct articles of charges once drawn up do not have to be approved
by the disciplinary authority. The term "cause to be drawn up"
merely refers to a delegation by the disciplinary authority to a subordinate authority to perform the
task of drawing up substance of proposed "definite and distinct articles of charge- sheet". These
proposed articles of charge would only be Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025
finalised upon approval by the disciplinary authority. Rule 14(4) again mandates that the
disciplinary authority shall deliver or cause to be delivered to the government servant, a copy of the
articles of charge, the statement of the imputations of misconduct or misbehaviour and the
supporting documents including a list of witnesses by which each article of charge is proposed to be
proved. It is, therefore, not possible to interpret this provision as providing that once the
disciplinary authority approves the initiation of the disciplinary proceedings, the charge-sheet can
be drawn up by an authority other than the disciplinary authority. This would destroy the
underlying protection guaranteed under Article 311(1) of the Constitution of India. Such procedure
would also do violence to the protective provisions contained under Article 311(2) which ensures
that no public servant is dismissed, removed or suspended without following a fair procedure in
which he/she has been given a reasonable opportunity to meet the allegations contained in the
charge-sheet. Such a charge-sheet can only be issued upon approval by the appointing authority i.e.
Finance Minister.
29. In the case of B.V. Gopinath (supra), the Hon'ble Supreme Court has also underscored the
principle of rule against delegation by explaining the maxim of delegatus Patna High Court CWJC
No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 non potest delegare and referred the decision of Sahni Silk Mills (P)
Ltd. (supra). The relevant paragraph, quoted as follows:
"6. By now it is almost settled that the legislature can permit any statutory authority
to delegate its power to any other authority, of course, after the policy has been
indicated in the statute itself within the framework of which such delegatee (sic) is to
exercise the power. The real problem or the controversy arises when there is a
subdelegation. It is said that when Parliament has specifically appointed authority to
discharge a function, it cannot be readily presumed that it had intended that its
delegate should be free to empower another person or body to act in its place."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163615244/ 10
Dr. Shishir Kumar Gangwar vs Dr. Rajendra Prasad Central ... on 13 October, 2025
30. The Hon'ble Supreme Court finally in the aforenoted case held that the charge-sheet/charge
memo having not been approved by the disciplinary authority is non est in the eye of the law.
31. The two Judges Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of Tamil Nadu Vs.
Promod Kumar, IPS and Another, reported in (2018) 17 SCC 677 clarified the necessity of approval
of initiation of disciplinary proceeding distinguished from approval of charge-sheet. The Hon'ble
Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025 dt.13-10-2025 Supreme Court noticing the decision
rendered in the case of B.V. Gopinath (supra) held that if any authority other than the disciplinary
authority is permitted to draw the charge memo, the same would result in destroying the underlying
protection guaranteed under Article 311(2) of the Constitution of India. The Court unequivocally
held that the rule requires something to be done in particular manner it should be done in the same
manner and not at all.
32. Taking note of mandatory requirement of Rule 8(4) of the All India Services (Discipline and
Appeal) Rules, 1969, the Court observed that since the charge memo being drawn up or caused to be
drawn up by the disciplinary authority is not complied with find no illegality in the order passed by
the High Court on this issue, whereby it quashes the disciplinary proceeding, however, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court further extended liberty to the disciplinary authority to issue a charge memo afresh
after taking approval from the disciplinary authority.
33. In view of the settled legal positing and the discussions made hereinabove, the issue answered
accordingly; The Board of Management, being disciplinary authority, having power of delegation
under the statute may delegate its power to Patna High Court CWJC No.11558 of 2025
dt.13-10-2025 the Vice-chancellor only to the extent of drawing the charge memo, but subject to
approval by the disciplinary authority, before its issuance. Any memo of charge by the Chief
Vigilance Officer without explicitly getting its approval by the Board of Management (Disciplinary
Authority) cannot be held to be valid.
34. This Court finds substance in the writ petition, hence the charge memo, as contained in
Memorandum, bearing no.19, dated 02.04.2025 (Annexure-P/1), as also the supplementary
charge-sheet as contained in Memo No. 33 dated 09.07.2025 are set aside. The matter is remitted to
the disciplinary authority to proceed further in the matter in accordance with law keeping in mind
the specific prescription of the CCS (CCA) Rules, 1965 and the mandate of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of B.V. Gopinath (supra).
35. The writ petition stands allowed.
(Harish Kumar, J) uday/-
AFR/NAFR AFR
CAV DATE 16.09.2025
Uploading Date 14.10.2025
Transmission Date NA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163615244/ 11
