Durgawati Devi @ Heerawati vs State Of U.P. on 31 January, 2025
Durgawati Devi @ Heerawati vs State Of U.P. on 31 January,
2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:14145
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 3008 of 2025
Applicant :- Durgawati Devi @ Heerawati
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Ali Hasan,Asif Hasan
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Ali Hasan, learned counsel for the applicant as well as Sri Anit Kumar Shukla, learned
A.G.A. for the State and perused the record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No.134 of 2024, under Sections 85, 80(2) B.N.S. and 3/4 D.P.
Act, Police Station Rampur, District Jaunpur, during the pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
4. The marriage of the son of the applicant was solemnized with the deceased person as per Hindu
Rites on 24.04.2022. Despite several other gifts, a Hero Splendor motorcycle was also given as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114247230/ 1
Durgawati Devi @ Heerawati vs State Of U.P. on 31 January, 2025
dowry, but the applicant and other family members are stated to have subjected her to cruelty for
demand of a bullet motorcycle instead of the said Hero Splendor motorcycle, thereby administered
her some poisonous material on 25.07.2024 at about 3:00 p.m.
5. The son of the applicant is stated to have narrated the said incident to the informant the same day
and the deceased succumbed to the said poisonous material on 27.07.2024.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT:
6. The applicant is the mother-in-law of the deceased person and has been falsely implicated in the
present case.
7. The FIR is delayed by about two days and there is no explanation of the said delay caused. As far
as the death is concerned, the death had occurred in the morning and the inquest proceedings were
complete by 2:20 p.m. and the FIR has been instituted at 6:20 p.m., as such, it is delayed by four
hours to the inquest proceedings.
8. The informant himself was present as panch witness no.1 in the inquest proceedings and has not
whispered a single word of demand of dowry at the said stage.
9. The instant FIR is just an afterthought.
10. The viscera was preserved as the cause of death could not be ascertained and subsequently
aluminum phosphide was found in her viscera.
11. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against her. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
12. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since
31.10.2024. She is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail, she will not
misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE/OPPOSITE PARTY:
13. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed.
CONCLUSION:
14. The Supreme Court in the case of Niranjan Singh and another vs. Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote
and Others, AIR 1980 SC 785 has avoided detailed examination of the evidence and elaborate
documentation of the merits of the case as no party should have the impression that his case has
been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114247230/ 2
Durgawati Devi @ Heerawati vs State Of U.P. on 31 January, 2025
exploration of the merits in the order itself.
15. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
16. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
17. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that ?bail is a rule and jail is an exception?.
18. Learned A.G.A. could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would warrant denial
of bail to the applicant.
19. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned A.G.A.
20. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
21. Let the applicant- Durgawati Devi @ Heerawati involved in aforementioned case crime number
be released on bail on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against her in accordance
with law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114247230/ 3
Durgawati Devi @ Heerawati vs State Of U.P. on 31 January, 2025
22. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
23. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 31.1.2025 (Ravi Kant) (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114247230/ 4
