Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties
on 16 April, 2025
Author: A.K. Mohapatra
Bench: A.K. Mohapatra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.14548 of 2016
An application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
Dusmanta Samal . Petitioner
Mr. S.K.Dwibedy, Advocate
-versus-
State of Orissa and others . Opp. Parties
Mr. S.C.Dash, A.G.A.
Mr. Bibhudhendra Dash, Advocate for
O.P. No.3
CORAM:
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.K. MOHAPATRA
_____________________________________________________
Date of hearing : 07.03.2025 | Date of Judgment : 16.04.2025
_____________________________________________________
A.K. Mohapatra, J. :
1. The hapless father who lost his son due to electrocution, has approached this court by invoking
the writ jurisdiction under Article- 226 of the Constitution of India. The Petitioner has stated that, it
was the negligence and inaction of the opposite parties in taking proper care of the electric pole
meant for public use, that has made him and his entire family go through this immeasurable agony
and sorrow. The grieving family which has lost a young member has alleged violation of
fundamental right as guaranteed under Article- 21 of the Constitution of India and have also prayed
for adequate compensation from the opposite parties for loss of life, as would be deemed
appropriate by this court. FACTS OF THE CASE
2. Short facts involved herein, as pleaded by the Petitioner, is that the petitioner(cid:128)s 17-year-old son,
Sidhanta Samal, was a +2 Science student at Janata College, Satamaeithi, Dhenkanal. On February
16, 2016, around 2:00 PM to 3:00 PM, on his way to the nearby shop, he accidentally came in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 1
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
contact with a charged electric pole. The passers- by attempted to rescue him using sticks and took
him to Khajuria Kata CHC for treatment, but he was later declared dead at Hindol SDH. A U.D. Case
was registered, and the inquest report as well as the post-mortem confirmed electrocution as the
cause of death. Subsequently, on 8.01.15, an FIR was filed by the uncle of the deceased, against the
Junior Engineer and S.D.O. of ENZEN Company under Sections 285, 304A, and 34 of Indian Penal
Code, 1860. After a thorough investigation by the I.O., chargesheet was submitted before the learned
SDJM, Hindol. The Petitioner has now approached this court, seeking adequate compensation for
the tragic and untimely loss of life of his son due to electrocution. SUBMISSION OF THE
PETITIONER
3. Learned Counsel for the Petitioner, vehemently argued that, it is the statutory duty of the opposite
parties to maintain all electrical apparatus including electric poles used for the purpose of
distribution of electricity, in such a way that, it doesn(cid:128)t lead to loss of life or limb or cause any
damage. However, in this case, the opposite parties have acted negligently and carelessly, which has
led to the death of the Petitioner(cid:128)s son by coming in contact with a charged electric pole. Therefore,
he stated that, though the loss of life of the son of the petitioner cannot be compensated or undone,
however, the Petitioner can avail some respite in the form of monetary compensation, for which the
Petitioner has approached this court.
SUBMISSION OF THE OPPOSITE PARTIES
4. Learned counsel for the opposite parties, on the other hand, by referring to the counter affidavit,
at the outset, denied any allegation of negligence and inaction on their behalf. Both the counsels
appearing for the opposite parties made an attempt to convince this court by referring to documents
that, the deceased had interfered with the installations in the electric pole to repair the domestic
connection which was disconnected due to rain and wind. He took such a step, without any
information to the Opposite party or its agent. While doing this, he came in contact with the live
service wire and died due to electrical shock. To support this claim he placed reliance on the post
mortem report, and pointed out that, injuries other than burn injuries were found on the body of the
deceased. Therefore, he argued that the death of the deceased was caused due to his own fault and
not due to negligence or inaction of the Opposite Parties.
5. He further stated that the Petitioner and the Opposite Parties are putting forth different versions
for the circumstances that lead to the death of the Petitioner(cid:128)s son. In such factual background, it
was further contended that, the case involves disputed facts, therefore, the court doesn(cid:128)t have
jurisdiction to entertain this petition under Article- 226 of the Constitution of India. He supported
this contention by placing reliance on decisions such as SDO, GRID Corporation of Orissa Ltd. and
Others v. Timudu Oram, (2005) 6 SCC 156, Ranjita Palai & Another v. State of Odisha & Others,
W.P. (C) No. 14065 of 2005 decided in 07.09.2017; Abhimanyu Muduli & Others v. CESU, W.P. (C)
4654 of 2004 decided on 10.11.2006; Minati Panigrahi v. CESU and others, W.A. No. 111/2007 and
Suna Dei v. State of Orissa and others, W.P. (C) No. 2784 of 2015 decided on 23.08.2022. It is his
case that, civil court is the appropriate forum to approach, as evidences need to be adduced to prove
the facts due to which the electrocution occurred. REPLY BY PETITIONER
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 2
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
6. Per Contra, learned counsel for the Petitioner, strenuously opposed the stance taken by the
opposite parties. He argued that, the opposite parties have failed to produce any material on record
to support their contention with regard to the deceased(cid:128)s own fault in happening of his death.
Therefore, he claims that in absence of any material on record, the claim becomes unsustainable. He
further stated that, the contention of the opposite parties that as it involves disputed facts, the writ
petition is not maintainable, is also unsustainable. On the question of maintainability of the writ
petition, he placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in Chairman, GRIDCO and others
v. Sukamani Das and another reported in AIR 1999 SC 3412, and some decisions of this Court in the
cases of Executive Engineer CESU Ltd. Cuttack Electrical Division v. Hema Sethy reported in 2011
(II) OLR 708; Rama Santa & others v. Chairman cum M.D. GRIDCO Orissa and others reported in
2014 (II) ILR CUT 328; Bhagaban Rout & Anr. v. Executive Engineer, CESCO, Salipur reported in
2023 (I) OLR- 188; CEO, CESU, Bhubaneswar and Another v. Anjana Prusty reported in 2017 (II)
OLR- 112; Bharat Nath and others v. CESCO, represented by the Chief Executive Officer, IDCO
Tower, Bhubaneswar reported in 2007 (Supp-1) OLR-315.
7. Referring to the above noted judgments, he finally stated that in all those cases, court has allowed
the compensation in the favor of claimants on the undisputed fact of death due to electrocution
when materials on record like that police papers and post mortem report supported the fact that the
death of the deceased is due to electrocution. Therefore, he pleads that on basis of investigation
done so far by the I.O. and the post mortem report under Annexure-1 to the writ petition; the
inquest report under Annexure- 2 to the writ petition; final form/ chargesheet submitted by the I.O
Balimi P.S.; and the cognizance order of SDM Hindol dated 07.09.2015 against the Opposite Parties,
the fact of electrocution death prima facie stand proved and thus the writ petition is maintainable
and compensation can very well be awarded in favor of the Petitioner by this court. This is more so,
keeping in view the principle envisaged in Article- 21 of the Constitution of India with regard to
protection of life and liberty of every citizen of this nation.
ANALYSIS OF THE COURT
8. Heard counsels for the respective parties, evaluated the documents submitted and perused the
precedents cited.
9. For being compensated monetarily, the Petitioner is required to prima facie establish that due to
the negligence of the opposite party- electricity distribution company and its agents, be it intentional
or unintentional, loss, harm or injury has been caused to one party by the other and ultimately such
negligence gives rise to a civil liability under "law of tort". The terminology "injury" or "harm" under
the law of tort has been given a very wide interpretation by various judicial pronouncements.
Having said that, this court is required to analyze the factual background of the case as well as its
power to award compensation, before coming to the definite conclusion with regard to the act of
negligence and consequential civil liability under the law of tort. UNDISPUTED FACTS PRESENT
BEFORE THE COURT
10. In order to address the rival contention made by the opposite parties, that when the case
involves disputed facts, thewrit petition is not maintainable, the court finds it necessary to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 3
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
enumerate the observation made in few cases cited by the Petitioner.
In Bhagaban Rout & Anr. v. Executive Engineer, CESCO, Salipur reported in 2023 (I) OLR- 188; the
court held that the writ petition is maintainable and awarded compensation in favor of the
Petitioner for the death of his son due to electrocution, on basis of undisputed fact of death due to
electrocution proven by the postmortem report, inquest report and charge sheet. The court in the
aforesaid case observed that, "5. Considering the rival contentions of the Parties, this Court finds,
undisputedly there is death of the son of the parents appearing as the Petitioner Nos. 1 & 2 on
13.08.2006. It is clear from the inquest report as well as the post mortem report, the death of the
deceased caused due to electrocution, final form also supports the case of the Petitioners no doubt
the case could not be further investigated for there is no ascertainment of involvement of any person
however all the documents such as inquest report, post mortem report as well as the final form are
all in one direction undisputedly suggesting there is death of the deceased on account of
electrocution coming in contact of line wire undisputedly belonging to the CESCO. There should not
be also any dispute that the wire or the poll came in contact with the body of the deceased. It is at
this stage coming to consider the stand of the department, the Opposite Parties, this Court finds, the
Opposite Parties contest herein simply on the basis of disclosures vide document at Annexure-A
which reads as follows:-
xxxx
6. Coming to the argument of counsel for the department questioning the maintainability of the
Petition for there involvement of disputed question of fact, this Court first of all finds, the F.I.R,
inquest report, post mortem report and final form all supports the case of the Petitioner so far their
claim on the death of their son on electrocution, whereas the department even though attempted to
lodge an FIR on allegation of attempt for stealing energy against the deceased there is neither any
following up action for undertaking a legal exercise involving their allegation involves Annexure-A
nor there is even any internal report produced either in counter or additional affidavit bringing in
some material to at least making out a case involving a theft attempt. This Court here finds, the case
of the Petitioner rather gets support of a decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Chairman,
Grid Corporation of Orissa Ltd. (GRIDCO) and others vrs. Sukamani Das and another reported in
AIR 1999 SC 3412. This Court here also finds support of a decision of this Court on the
entertainability of Writ Petition through judgment of this Court in the case of Executive Engineer,
Central Electricity Supply Utility Ltd., Cuttack Electrical Division, Jobra, Cuttack vrs. Hema Sethy
reported in 2011 (II) OLR- 708.
Through AIR 2001 SC 485 vide paragraph-12 therein, the Hon'ble Apex Court came to hold as
follows:-
12. Even if there is no negligence on the part of the driver or owner of the motor
vehicle, but accident happens while the vehicle was in use, should not the owner be
made liable for damages to the person who suffered on account of such accident?
This question depends upon how far the Rule in Rylands v.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 4
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
Fletcher (1861-73 All ER (Reprint)1) (supra) can apply in motor accident cases. The said Rule is
summarized by Blackburn J. thus:
The true rule of law is that the person who, for his own purposes, brings on his land,
and collects and keeps there anything likely to do mischief if it escapes, must keep it
at his peril, and, if he does not do so, he is prima facie answerable for all the damage
which is the natural consequence of its escape. He can excuse himself by showing that
the escape was owing to the plaintiff's default, or, perhaps, or the act of God; but, as
nothing of this sort exists here, it is unnecessary to inquire what excuse would be
sufficient."
This decision also supports the case of the Petitioner here.
7. At this stage taking into consideration the decision taken support by the opponent, this Court
finds the claim of the Petitioner though based on a reporting in the inquest report as well as F.I.R.
and further final form observations involving the F.I.R. at the instance of the parties in loss but
however there is no material establishing the case contrary to the existence in all these records.
Further in spite of involvement of such serious issue, department failed in undertaking the
minimum an enquiry at least coming to a finding by its own people that there is in fact, an attempt
for stealing energy by cutting AB cable.
8. It is in the above background, this Court finds, there is no disputed fact involved herein. In the
circumstance this Court finds, the Petitioners for the undisputed loss of their son at the age of
twenty four years observes, there is great loss to the parents not only on account of death of their
son but there is also loss of mental agony as well as love and affection and Petitioners deserved
appropriate compensation."
11. Similarly, in CEO, CESU, Bhubaneswar and Another v. Anjana Prusty reported in 2017 (II) OLR-
112, the division bench of this court approved the decision of the single judge bench wherein
compensation was awarded to the petitioner in case of death due to electrocution, with the following
observation-
"3. Learned Single Judge, taking into consideration the rival contentions of the
parties and case laws reported in 2015 (I) OLR 637 (T. Bimala Vs. Cuttack Municipal
Corporation, Cuttack and others): AIR 2005 MP 2 (Ramesh Singh Pawar Vs. Madhya
Pradesh Electricity Board and others): AIR 2002 SC 551 (M.P. Electricity Board Vs.
Shail Kumar and others), and 1968 Law Reports (3) HL 330 (Ryland Vs. Fletcher)
held that the opposite parties cannot shirk from their responsibility on trivial
grounds. For the lackadaisical attitude exhibited by the opposite parties, a valuable
life was lost. Keeping in view the age and avocation of the deceased, learned Single
Judge directed the appellants (opposite parties in the writ petition) to pay interim
compensation of Rs. 1,00,000/- within two months, and further permitted the
Petitioner to work out her remedies in the common law forum for higher
compensation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 5
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
xxx
8. In view of the discussions made above, more particularly applying the doctrine of
„strict liability(cid:128), we do not find any infirmity in the impugned judgement. Thus, the
writ appeal being devoid of merit, is accordingly dismissed."
12. Similar observation was made by this court in the case of Bharat Nath and others v. CESCO,
represented by the Chief Executive Officer, IDCO Tower, Bhubaneswar reported in 2007 (Supp-1)
OLR-315, "4. In the light of the rival contentions, it is clear that late Urmila Nath died due to
electrocution coming in contact with bare conductor (live line) which was lying on the agricultural
field in village Andhala which is an undisputed fact. The death due to electrocution being the
undisputed fact, the only question that remains to be decided in this writ application is that whether
the CESCO- licensee can shift its responsibility or liability by raising that unfortunate occurrence
has occurred due to theft of electric conductors by the culprits who have left the (bare conductor)
live line at the site.
The opposite parties have stated that their authorities have lodged F.I.R. in the local Police Station.
While the fact is admitted in the counter affidavit, if there is any negligence on the part of the police
authorities in not taking any action on the F.I.R. lodged by the licensee, it is open to the licensee to
take appropriate steps available to them in law to eliminate the inaction of the police authorities.
But, by merely lodging an F.I.R. against the alleged culprits, cannot in law absolve the licensee of
their responsibility to the general public to maintain their transmission system in the manner so as
not to endanger the public safety.
5. There being no other disputed question of facts in this case, following the ratio of the decision of
this Court in the case of Nirmala Nayak and Ors. v. Chairman-cum-Managing Director, Grid
Corporation of Orissa Ltd. and Anr. OJC No. 6339 of 1997, disposed of on 13.4.2005, we are of the
view that the ends of justice would be better served if a compensation of Rs. 1,50,000/ - (Rupees one
lakh fifty thousand) is awarded in favour of the Petitioners and we order accordingly. The said
compensation shall be paid to the Petitioners with simple interest at the rate of 6% per annum from
the date of death of the deceased till the date of actual payment. This Court further directs the Opp.
Party to make such calculation and deposit the said amount either in cash or by way of cheque with
the Registrar (Judl.) of the Court within a period of four weeks from today. The Registrar (Judl.)
thereupon shall send notice to Petitioner No. 4. The Petitioner No. 4 must produce some material or
evidence to show that he is the husband of the deceased-Urmila Nath. After being satisfied about the
relationship between the deceased and the Petitioners, the Registrar (Judl.) shall disburse the
amount to Petitioner No. 4 on proper identification."
13. In addition to the above cases cited by the Petitioner, the case of Bibekanada Dash and another v.
C.E.O., NESCO (Electrical), Balesore and others, W.P. (C) No. 18039 of 2008 decided on
10.08.2016, also involved similar factual background and similar objection as the present case in
hand, was put forth by the opposite parties. However, the court decided the case in favour of the
Petitioner by granting compensation by making the following observation-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 6
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
"7. On the anvil of the decisions cited supra, the case of the Petitioners may be
examined. Immediately after the occurrence, the matter was reported to the Jajpur
Police Station. Thereafter Jajpur P.S.U.D.Case No.50/97 was registered. After
enquiry, the police submitted the report stating that the cause of death was due to
electric shock. The postmortem report reveals that the deceased was 22 years and the
cause of death was due to electric shock. In view of the clinching material on record,
the conclusion is irresistible that the son of the Petitioners died due to electrocution.
As held above, a person undertaking an activity involving hazardous or risky
exposure to human life is liable under law of torts to compensate for the injury
suffered by any other person, irrespective of any negligence or carelessness on the
part of the managers of such undertakings. The basis of such liability is the
foreseeable risk inherent in the very nature of such activity. Authorities manning
such dangerous commodities have extra duty to chalk out measures to prevent such
mishaps. The opposite parties have taken an evasive plea to exonerate from liability.
The opposite parties cannot shirk their responsibility on trivial grounds. For the
lackadaisical attitude exhibited by the opposite parties, a valuable life was lost. The
deceased was a young man of 22 years at the time of accident. He was the only
earning member of the family. Keeping in view the age of the deceased, this Court
directs the opposite parties to pay interim compensation of Rs.2,00,000/-(Two
lakhs) to the Petitioners within two months leaving the Petitioners to work out their
remedies in the common law forum for higher compensation."
14. Therefore, in the light of above cited precedents and the factual matrix as admitted, the
undisputed facts before this court are that, the Opposite Parties no. 4- 6 i.e. Enzen Global Solutions
Pvt. Ltd, was responsible for maintenance of the LT supply Line in the jurisdiction where the
electrocution occurred. The Post Mortem under report dated 16.02.2014 under Annexure- 1 to the
writ petition, unambiguously discloses the cause of death to be ante- mortem electrocution. The
inquest report under Annexure- 2 to the writ petition, prepared on the day of the death, also reveal
that the cause of death was electric shock and there is no suspicion of any foul play. The chargesheet
/ final report C.S. No. 42 dated 28.06.2015 submitted by investigating officer of Balimi P.S.,
Dhenkanal, pursuant to Balimi PS Case no.- 06 of 2015, states that a prima facie evidence is made
out against Mr. Anshu Kumar, J.E.- cum- Junior Manager, Enzen Global Solutions Pvt. Ltd. and Mr.
Amiya Prasad Mallik, EDO- cum- Deputy Manager, Enzen Global Solutions Pvt. Ltd, for the
commission of offence under Section- 285/304A/34 of Indian Penal Code, 1840. Pursuant to this,
SDJM Hindol by its order dated 07.09.2015, has found that a prima facie case under Section-
285/304A/34 of Indian Penal Code, 1840, is made out against the accused persons and cognizance
has been taken and summons of appearance has also been issued against the accused.
APPLICATION OF THE PRINCIPLE STRICT LIABILTIY
15. The counsels for the opposite parties have strenuously argued that, they did not act negligently
or carelessly and were not responsible for the death caused to the Petitioner(cid:128)s son. In this context
and upon perusal of the case, the court finds it profitable to discuss the principle of strict liability
under the "law of tort". There are many activities which are so hazardous that they constitute
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 7
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
constant danger to person and property of other. The rule of strict liability was propounded by the
English Common Law courts in the celebrated case of Ryland v. Fletcher, reported in 1868 Law
Reports (3) HL 330, where Justice Blackburn had observed thus:
"The rule of law is that the person who, for his own purpose, brings on his land and
collects and keeps there anything likely to do mischief if it escapes, must keep it at his
peril, and if he does so he is prima facie answerable for all the damage which is the
natural consequence of its escape."
16. The doctrine of strict liability is based on the fundamental fact that the undertakers of the
hazardous activities have to compensate for the damages caused, irrespective of any carelessness on
their part. The basis of liability is the foreseeable risk inherent in the very nature of the activities. In
this aspect, the principle of strict liability resembles negligence which is also based on foreseeable
harm. But the difference is that, the concept of negligence comprehends that the foreseeable harm
could be avoided by taking reasonable precaution and so if the defendant did all that which could be
done for avoiding the harm, he cannot be held liable. Such a consideration is not relevant in cases of
strict liability where the defendant is held liable irrespective of whether he could have avoided the
particular harm by taking precautions. The rationale behind strict liability is that the activities
coming within its fold are those entailing extraordinary risk to others, either in the seriousness or
the frequency of the harm threatened.
17. There are seven exceptions formulated through judicial pronoucements to the said doctrine such
as Act of God, act of stranger, plaintiff(cid:128)s own fault, etc. The rule of strict liability has been approved
and adopted in various decisions of the Supreme Court of India such as Charan Lal Sahu v. Union of
India, reported in AIR 1990 SC 1480 and Gujarat Road Transport Corpn. V. Ramanbhai
Prabhatbhai, reported in AIR 1987 SC 1690. Similarly, Supreme Court has extended the principle of
strict liability on the electricity companies engaged in supply and distribution of electricity and has
granted compensation to the victim of electrocution. In the case of M.P. Electricity Board v. Shail
Kumari and others, reported in (2002) 2 SCC 162, by applying the aforesaid principle, Apex Court
awarded compensation to the widow and dependants of the deceased, who died due to electrocution
by coming in contact with a snapped live electric wire lying on the road. The court made the
following observation thus, "7. It is an admitted fact that the responsibility to supply electric energy
in the particular locality was statutorily conferred on the Board. If the energy so transmitted causes
injury or death of a human being, who gets unknowingly trapped into it the primary liability to
compensate the sufferer is that of the supplier of the electric energy. So long as the voltage of
electricity transmitted through the wires is potentially of dangerous dimension the managers of its
supply have the added duty to take all safety measures to prevent escape of such energy or to see
that the wire snapped would not remain live on the road as users of such road would be under peril.
It is no defence on the part of the management of the Board that somebody committed mischief by
siphoning such energy to his private property and that the electrocution was from such diverted line.
It is the lookout of the managers of the supply system to prevent such pilferage by installing
necessary devices. At any rate, if any live wire got snapped and fell on the public road the electric
current thereon should automatically have been disrupted. Authorities manning such dangerous
commodities have extra duty to chalk out measures to prevent such mishaps.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 8
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
8. Even assuming that all such measures have been adopted, a person undertaking an activity
involving hazardous or risky exposure to human life, is liable under law of torts to compensate for
the injury suffered by any other person, irrespective of any negligence or carelessness on the part of
the managers of such undertakings. The basis of such liability is the foreseeable risk inherent in the
very nature of such activity. The liability cast on such person is known, in law, as "strict liability". It
differs from the liability which arises on account of the negligence or fault in this way i.e. the concept
of negligence comprehends that the foreseeable harm could be avoided by taking reasonable
precautions. If the defendant did all that which could be done for avoiding the harm he cannot be
held liable when the action is based on any negligence attributed. But such consideration is not
relevant in cases of strict liability where the defendant is held liable irrespective of whether he could
have avoided the particular harm by taking precautions."
Therefore, with the advent of the doctrine of strict liability and acceptance thereof as a sound legal
principle, the electricity distribution companies cannot escape their liability by merely stating that
they weren(cid:128)t negligent in maintaining the apparatuses used for supply and distribution of
electricity. COURT'S POWER TO AWARD COMPENSATION
18. With regard to the power of court to award compensation in the cases of infringement of
fundamental rights of the citizens, it is necessary to discuss that, one of the most remarkable
features of the Constitution is that it provides an enforceable guarantee of the protection of
fundamental rights incorporated in Part III of the Constitution. The jurisprudence on fundamental
rights has evolved tremendously during the life of the Constitution and the constitutional courts
have not looked away when the peculiar needs of a case necessitated a deviation from the traditional
understanding of the principles. It would be apposite to take note of the pertinent observations of
the Supreme Court, made way back in 1952 in State of Madras v. V.G. Row reported in AIR 1952 SC
196, wherein the court recognised itself as the sentinel on the qui vive i.e. a watchful guardian of
fundamental rights. If any fundamental right, especially Right to life and personal liberty under
Article- 21 is infringed, court has inherent and extraordinary power to see that justice is done.
19. At this juncture, court would like to reflect on the observations made in few judicial
pronouncements, which have discussed the power of the constitutional courts to award
compensation, when there is infringement of fundamental rights.
In T. Bimala v. Cuttack Municipal Corporation, Cuttack and others, reported in 2015(I) OLR-637, it
was observed that, "9. The language of Article 226 of the Constitution does not admit of any
limitation on the powers of the High Court for the exercise of jurisdiction thereunder. The power
conferred upon the High Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution is wide enough to reach
injustice wherever it is found. The apex Court in catena of the decisions laid down certain guidelines
and self-imposed limitations have been put there subject to which the High Courts would exercise
jurisdiction. Those guidelines cannot be mandatory in all circumstances. When a citizen approaches
the High Court in writ petition that a wrong is caused, the High Court will step into protect him,
whether that wrong was done by the State or an instrumentality of the State. The High Court cannot
pull down the shutters."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 9
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
20. In M.S. Grewal v. Deep Chand Sood, reported in (2001) 8 SCC 151, the Apex Court observed as
under:
"Next is the issue of "maintainability of the writ petition" before the High Court
under Article 226 of the Constitution. The appellants though initially very strongly
contended that while the negligence aspect has been dealt with under penal laws
already, the claim for compensation cannot but be left to be adjudicated by the civil
laws and thus the Civil Court(cid:128)s jurisdiction ought to have been invoked rather than
by way of a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution. This plea of non-
maintainability of the writ petition though advanced at the initial stage of the
submissions but subsequently the same was not pressed and as such we need not
detain ourselves on that score, excepting however recording that the law Courts exist
for the society and they have an obligation to meet the social aspirations of citizens
since law Courts must also respond to the needs of the people. In this context,
reference may be made to two decisions of this Court: the first in line is the decision
in Nilabati Behera v. State of Orissa, (AIR 1993 SC 1960) wherein this Court relying
upon the decision in Rudal Sah (Rudal Sah v. State of Bihar), (AIR 1983 SC 1086)
decried the illegality and impropriety in awarding compensation in a proceeding in
which the Court(cid:128)s power under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution stands
involved and thus observed that it was a clear case for award of compensation to the
Petitioner for custodial death of her son. It is undoubtedly true, however, that in the
present context, there is no infringement of the State(cid:128)s obligation, unless of course
the State can also be termed to be joint tortfeasor, but since the case of the parties
stands restricted and without imparting any liability on the State, we do not deem it
expedient to deal with the issue any further except noting the two decisions of this
Court as above and without expression of any opinion in regard thereto."
21. In Ramesh Singh Pawar v. Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board and others, reported in AIR 2005
MP 2, Apex Court observed that:
"Currently judicial attitude has taken a shift from the old doctrine concept and the
traditional jurisprudential system - affection of the people has been taken note of
rather serious and the judicial concern thus stands on a footing to provide
expeditious relief to an individual when needed rather than taking recourse to the old
conservative doctrine of the Civil Court(cid:128)s obligation to award damages. As a matter
of fact the decision in D.K. Basu has not only dealt with the issue in a manner
apposite to the social need of the "Country but the learned Judge with his usual
felicity of expression firmly established the current trend of justice-oriented
approach". Law Courts will lose their efficacy if they cannot possibly respond to the
need of the society - technicalities their might be many but the justice-oriented
approach ought not to be thwarted on the basis of such technicality since technicality
cannot and ought not to outweigh the course of justice."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 10
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
In light of the aforesaid judicial pronouncements and progression of the constitutional law for
protection of constitutional rights and payment of compensation for damage caused to the citizens,
the constitutional courts can comfortably assume the power to award compensation, in a scenario
when the undisputed facts reveal that the death of a person was due to electrocution and such fact is
established by prima facie evidence, otherwise failure to do so would ultimately amount to
infringement of fundamental Right to Life guaranteed under Article- 21 of the Constitution of India,
1950. OBSERVATION OF THIS COURT
22. It is the finding of this court that, the fact that death of the deceased was caused due to
electrocution, is well established by the charge sheet, post mortem report and inquest report which
are part of the investigation carried by the I.O. in this case. In addition to this, the final report and
the cognizance order, indicate towards existence of a prima facie case and the culpability of the
Opposite Parties. Moreover, with regard to the contention of the Opposite Parties that the post
mortem supports their stance, this Court finds that such ground is hypothetical and based solely on
the claim of the Opposite Parties to exonerate themselves of any liability.
23. Keeping in view the precedents cited above, the materials placed on record and the observation
made, the court is of the considered view that, the prayer made by the Petitioner is sustainable. The
opposite parties are engaged in a hazardous activity, and they will be strictly liable for the loss of life
that had occurred due to their undertaken activity. The judiciary as the guardian of the Constitution
and the protector of fundamental rights, has never shied away from trying to make good of what is
lost in monetary terms. It is universal truth that loss of human life can never be compensated by
bringing back a dead young man to life, however, the bereaved family can be compensated in
monetary terms for the loss of income sustained by such family due to untimely death of a young
member of the family.
24. On a close scrutiny of the factual background of the petitioner(cid:128)s case, it is observed that after the
mishap occurred, the matter was reported to the local police. An investigation was conducted by
registering a P.S. Case. In course of investigation, the inquest report prepared, post mortem done,
statement of witnesses recorded and finally charge sheet was filed implicating the accused person(cid:128)s
names in the charge sheet for commission of a cognizable case. The matter did not stop there. In the
meanwhile, cognizance has also been taken by the jurisdictional magistrate. All the aforesaid
materials clearly establishes electrocution. The accused persons were now required to face trial to
establish the fact that the deceased died not due to their negligence and to avoid their conviction
under the Indian Penal Code, 1860. On the contrary, nothing has been brought on record to
establish that the death was not due to electrocution. In the aforesaid factual backdrop, this court
has no hesitation to hold that the death was due to electrocution. Moreover, the doctrine of strict
liability under the law of tort could very well be applied to the facts of the present case as the
Opposite Parties also were carrying on activities which were hazardous, harmful and risky to human
life. Therefore, they are liable to compensate the petitioner for untimely death of his young son.
CONCLUSION
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 11
Dusmanta Samal vs State Of Orissa And Others . Opp. Parties on 16 April, 2025
25. Therefore, in the light of the above observation, this court holds that the Opposite Parties No.
4-6, who is in- charge of upkeep, maintenance, etc. of the electric lines, is squarely liable to pay an
interim compensation. So far as the quantum of the compensation is concerned, the „OERC
(Compensation to Victims of Electrical Accidents) Regulations, 2020(cid:128), which came into force on
30.05.2020, has been brought to the notice of this court. As per regulation 5 of the aforesaid
regulations, the quantum of compensation payable in the event of a loss of human life has been fixed
to the tune of Rs.4,00,000/- (Rupees Four Lakhs) per person. As such, keeping in view the aforesaid
regulation, this Court deems it proper to direct the Opposite Party No.3 to pay an interim
compensation of Rs.4,00,000/-(Rupees Four lakhs) to the Petitioner within a period of two months
from the date of this judgement, with a right to recover the same from Opposite Party No. 4 to 6.
Further, liberty is granted to the Petitioner to pursue other suitable remedies in the common law
forum for higher compensation, if so advised.
26. Writ petition stands disposed of in favour of the Petitioner. However, there shall be no order as
to costs.
(A.K. Mohapatra) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack The 16th of April, 2025/ Rubi/J.S.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/71691700/ 12
