Falak Mukhtar vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir Through on 18 April, 2025
Falak Mukhtar vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir Through on 18 April,
2025
Author: Javed Iqbal Wani
Bench: Javed Iqbal Wani
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
Reserved on: 20.03.2025
Pronounced on: 18.04.2024
WP(C) 1383/2024
CM (821/2025), CM (7053/2024)
Falak Mukhtar, (Age 34 years)
D/o Mukhtar Ahmad Qureshi,
W/o Rasik Nazir
R/o Kani Dewar, Hawal, Srinagar-190003
... Petitioners/Appellant(s)
Through: Mr. G. A. Lone, Advocate with Mr. Mujeeb Andrabi, Adv. and
Mr. N. A. Baba, Advocate
V/s
1. UT of Jammu & Kashmir through
Secretary to Govt.,
Health and Medical Education Department,
Civil Secretariat, Srinagar/Jammu
2. Dr. Syed Abid Rasheed Shah, IAS
Secretary to Government,
Health and Medical Education Department,
Civil Secretariat, Srinagar/Jammu.
3. Principal,
Government Dental College & Hospital,
Shireen Bagh, Srinagar
4. Dr. Abdul Qayoom Beigh, aged 37 years
S/o Ghulam Mohammad Beigh,
R/o Ganjipora, B. K. Pora, Budgam.
... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Rais ud Din Ganaie, GA for R1-3
Mr. M. I. Dar, Adv. with Ms. Sana Imman and
Mr. Ruaani A. Baba, Advocates for R4
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE JAVED IQBAL WANI, JUDGE
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51909724/ 1
Falak Mukhtar vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir Through on 18 April, 2025
JUDGMENT
18-04-2025
1. The instant petition has been filed by the petitioner herein under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, for seeking the following reliefs:
1) A writ of certiorari quashing the Government Order No. 383-JK(HME) of 2024
dated 20th June, 2024.
2) A writ of mandamus commanding upon the respondents to make selection to the
posts of Sr. Residents/Registrars in accordance with Govt. order No. 282-JK(HME)
of 2023 dated 4th April, 2023 and make appointments to the available vacancies of
Registrars/Sr. Residents, lying vacant in Govt.
Dental College & Hospital, Shireen Bagh, Srinagar and in other Dental and Medical Colleges where
vacancies are available.
3) Any other writ, order or direction, which the Hon'ble Court may deem fit and proper in the
circumstances of the case, may also be passed.
2. The facts under the cover of which the aforesaid reliefs have been prayed, and as are stated in the
petition, are that the Government of UT of J&K issued SO 364 of 2020 dated 27-11-2020 notifying
the J&K Medical and Dental Education (Appointment on Academic Basis) Rules, 2020 and
pursuant thereto issued Government Order No. 282-JK (HME) of 2023 dated 04.04.2023 providing
therein uniform selection criteria for engagement of faculty posts of Professors, Associate
Professors, Assistant Professors, Lecturers and Senior Residents/Registrars in Medical and Dental
Colleges within the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir.
3. It is stated that though most of the Medical and Dental Colleges within the Union Territory of
Jammu and Kashmir made appointments to the said faculty posts on the basis of the selection
criteria contained in Order dated 04-04-2023 supra, yet the appointment of Senior
Residents/Registrars in the Government Medical/Dental College and Hospital, Shireen Bagh,
Srinagar was deferred on the basis of a communication dated 30-10-2023 issued by Under Secretary
to Government, Health and Medical Education Department that too despite availability of the posts
and the urgency expressed in this regard by the Principal/Dean of the said college.
4. The said communication dated 30-10-2023 is stated to have been challenged by the petitioner
herein in the Writ Petition WP(C) No. 1276 of 2024 before this court, wherein an interim order
came to be passed on 07-06-2024, providing therein that so long as the communication dated
30.10.2023 does not take the shape of a Government Order issued in accordance with law, the
selection criteria enumerated in government order no. 282-JK (HME) of 2023 dated 04-04-2023
shall prevail, and that the selection process be proceeded with as per the said criteria.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51909724/ 2
Falak Mukhtar vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir Through on 18 April, 2025
5. It is stated that despite serving the order of the court dated 07-06- 2024 upon the respondents,
the respondents, in defiance thereof, issued Government Order No. 383-JK (HME) dated
20-06-2024, wherein the criteria for selection to the post of Senior Residents/Tutors in Government
Medical and Dental College in J&K were changed without any basis and on irrelevant and
extraneous considerations.
6. The petitioner herein has maintained the instant petition, inter alia, on the premise that the
impugned order suffers from serious non-application of mind and is de horse the law, besides being
an ad-hoc arrangement made for obtaining some vested objectives and that the said order is
incomprehensive falling in the realm of confusion, defying the reason and logic for departing from
the uniform criteria earlier fixed and that the impugned order is also arbitrary and discriminatory,
seemingly having been passed at the Secretary level by respondent 2 herein without any power and
authority in violation of Government Order No. 810 JK (GAD) of 2020 dated 1-9-2020, whereby the
Hon'ble Lt. Governor, J&K in exercise of powers conferred upon him vide Presidential Order SO No.
3937(E) dated 31-10-2019, vested unto the Chief Secretary and some of the Administrative
Secretaries with powers of a Minister to be exercised by them in respect of the matters specified
therein without there being any power vested unto the responder 2 herein in the capacity of the
Administrative Secretary to Health and Medical Education Department and that the impugned
order, in fact, has the effect of changing the rules affecting the rights of the petitioner that too in
presence of earlier petition filed by the petitioner being WP(C) No. 1276 of 2024 order passed
therein inasmuch as without any purpose, and on irrelevant and extraneous considerations without
ruling out an element of bias and mala fides cannot also be ruled out.
7. Objections to the petition have been filed by the official respondents 1 to 3 as well as private
respondent 4 herein who came to be implemented as party respondent by this court in terms of
order dated 09.12.2024.
8. In the objections filed by official respondents, the writ petition is opposed, inter alia, on the
premise that the petitioner has suppressed material facts and that the Government Order dated
20.6.2024 has been issued for the purpose of conducting a written examination for the posts to be
filled up on academic arrangement basis with a view to add competition for filling of the said posts
having been issued with proper application of mind for choosing meritorious candidates for
selection and appointment against the posts and that the mechanism of written examination for
filling of the said posts is already prevalent in premier institutes including the All India Institute of
Medical Sciences (AIIMS), New Delhi, and that the petitioner has no right to challenge the
impugned order.
9. In the objections filed by respondent 4 herein while opposing the petition, it is being stated that
the petitioner has, in fact, participated in the process of selection initiated in terms of the impugned
order dated 20.06.2024 pursuant to the advertisement notice dated 03.07.2024 in which selection
in the merit list for Speciality Prosthodontics the answering respondent secured 72.75 marks out of
100 marks and the petitioner secured 63.75 marks out of 100 marks, figuring at serial numbers 2
and 8 respectively in the said merit list and that the petitioner has suppressed the said facts and that
the petitioner cannot, after having participated in the process of selection initiated pursuant to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51909724/ 3
Falak Mukhtar vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir Through on 18 April, 2025
order under challenge dated 20.6.2024, call in question the same.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused of the record.
10. Mr. G. A. Lone, appearing counsel for the petitioner, while making his submissions in tune and
line with the case set up by the petitioner in the petition, would insist for grant of reliefs sought in
the petition, whereas on the contrary, the appearing counsel for the respondents, while opposing the
submissions of Mr. Lone, would seek dismissal of the petition on the sole ground that the petitioner
cannot challenge the impugned order while simultaneously, without any objection or reservation of
a right thereto, having participated in the process of selection initiated by the official respondents
pursuant to the order under challenge dated 20.06.2024 during the pendency of the petition and
which fact has been suppressed by the petitioner.
11. Insofar as the rival submissions of the appearing counsel for the respondents are concerned, it
would be appropriate to refer to the principles of law laid down by the Apex Court in this regard.
The Apex Court in case titled as "State of UP vs. Karunesh Kumar and others" reported in 2022 SCC
Online SC 1706 has referred to the judgment passed in case titled as Madan Lal v. State of J&K
[(1995) 3 SCC 486: 1995 SCC (L&S) 712] wherein it has been held that "it is now well settled that if a
candidate takes a calculated chance and appears at the interview, then, only because of the result of
the interview is not palatable to him, he cannot turn around and subsequently contend that the
process of interview was unfair or the selection committee was not properly constituted".
The following has also been referred by the Apex Court in the "State of UP" case supra while
referring to "Sadananda Halo v. Momtaz Ali Sheikh [(2008) 4 SCC 619: (2008) 2 SCC (L&S) 9],"
wherein following has been held at para 59:
59. It is also a settled position that the unsuccessful candidates cannot turn back and
assail the selection process.
There are of course the exceptions carved out by this Court to this general rule. This position was
reiterated by this Court in its latest Judgment in Union of India v. S. Vinodh Kumar [(2007) 8 SCC
100 (2007) 2 SCC (L&S) 792).... The Court also referred to the judgment in Om Prakash Shukla v.
Akhilesh Kumar Shukla [1986 Supp SCC 285 1986 SCC (L&S) 644), where it has been held
specifically that when a candidate appears in the examination without protest and subsequently is
found to be not successful in the examination, the question of entertaining the petition challenging
such examination would not arise." Besides, the Apex Court in the above "State of UP" at para 22
held as under:
"22. In the case at hand, the un-selected candidates want to press into service a part
of the 1978 Rules while accepting the 2015 Rules. Such a selective adoption is not
permissible under law, as no party can be allowed to approbate or reprobate, as held
by this Court in Union of India v. N. Murugesan, (2022) 2 SCC 25:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51909724/ 4
Falak Mukhtar vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir Through on 18 April, 2025
"Approbate and reprobate
26. These phrases are borrowed from the Scots law. They would only mean that no
party can be allowed to accept and reject the same thing, and thus one cannot blow
hot and cold. The principle behind the doctrine of election is inbuilt in the concept of
approbate and reprobate. Once again, it is a principle of equity coming under the
contours of common law. Therefore, he who knows that if he objects to an
instrument, he will not get the benefit he wants cannot be allowed to do so while
enjoying the fruits. One cannot take advantage of one part while rejecting the rest. A
person cannot be allowed to have the benefit of an instrument while questioning the
same. Such a party either has to affirm or disaffirm the transaction. This principle
has to be applied with more vigour as a common law principle, if such a party actually
enjoys the one part fully and on near completion of the said enjoyment, thereafter
questions the other part. An element of fair play is inbuilt in this principle. It is also a
species of estoppel dealing with the conduct of a party. We have already dealt with
the provisions of the Contract Act concerning the conduct of a party, and his
presumption of knowledge while confirming an offer through his acceptance
unconditionally.
XXX XXX XXX 27.2. State of Punjab v. Dhanjit Singh Sandhu [(2014) 15 SCC 144]:
(SCC pp. 153-54, paras 22-23 & 25-26) "22. The doctrine of "approbate and
reprobate" is only a species of estoppel, it implies only to the conduct of parties. As in
the case of estoppel it cannot operate against the provisions of a statute. (Vide CIT v.
MR. P. Firm Muar [AIR 1965 SC 1216].)
23. It is settled proposition of law that once an order has been passed, it is complied
with, accepted by the other party and derived the benefit out of it, he cannot
challenge it on any ground. (Vide Maharashtra SRTC v. Balwant Regular Motor
Service [AIR 1969 SC 329].) In R.N. Gosain v. Yashpal Dhir [(1992) 4 SCC 683] this
Court has observed as under (R.N. Gosain case [(1992) 4 SCC 683], SCC pp. 687-88,
para
10)
10. Law does not permit a person to both approbate and reprobate. This principle is
based on the doctrine of election which postulates that no party can accept and reject
the same instrument and that 'a person cannot say at one time that a transaction is
valid and thereby obtain some advantage, to which he could only be entitled on the
footing that it is valid, and then turn round and say it is void for the purpose of
securing some other advantage'.' XXX XXX XXX
25. The Supreme Court in Rajasthan State Industrial Development & Investment
Corpn. v. Diamond & Gem Development Corpn. Ltd. [(2013) 5 SCC 470: (2013) 3
SCC (Civ) 153], made an observation that a party cannot be permitted to "blow hot
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51909724/ 5
Falak Mukhtar vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir Through on 18 April, 2025
and cold", "fast and loose" or "approbate and reprobate". Where one knowingly
accepts the benefits of a contract or conveyance or an order, is estopped to deny the
validity or binding effect on him of such contract or conveyance or order. This rule is
applied to do equity, however, it must not be applied in a manner as to violate the
principles of right and good conscience.
26. It is evident that the doctrine of election is based on the rule of estoppel, the
principle that one cannot approbate and reprobate is inherent in it. The doctrine of
estoppel by election is one among the species of estoppel in pais (or equitable
estoppel), which is a rule of equity. By this law, a person may be precluded, by way of
his actions, or conduct, or silence when he has to speak, from asserting a right which
he would have otherwise had."
12. Having regard to the case set up by the petitioner, noticed in the preceding paragraphs, as also
the aforesaid contentions of the appearing counsel for the respondents, inasmuch as the position
and principles of law referred hereinabove, the only inescapable conclusion that can be drawn is that
the petitioner indisputably has appeared in the process of selection initiated by the respondents for
the post in question pursuant to the order under challenge dated 20.6.2024 without any objection/s
or reserving any right thereto, and has not made the grade, so much so, the petitioner has even
concealed the said fact about her said participation in the selection process held during the
pendency of the petition. Here a reference to the judgment of the Apex court passed in case titled as
"Prestige Lights Ltd Vs. State Bank of India", reported in 2007 (8) SCC 449 would be appropriate
wherein at paras 33, 34 and 35 following has been held:
33 . . . The High Court is exercising discretionary and extraordinary jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution. Over and above, a court of law is also a court of
equity. It is, therefore, of utmost necessity that when a party approaches a High
Court, he must place all the facts before the Court without any reservation. If there is
suppression of material facts on the part of the applicant or twisted facts have been
placed before the Court, the writ court may refuse to entertain the petition and
dismiss it without entering into merits of the matter.
34. The object underlying the above principle has been succinctly stated by Scrutton,
L.J., in R V. Kensington Income Tax Commissioners, in the following words:
"[I] It has been for many years the rule of the Court, and one which it is of the
greatest importance to maintain, that when an applicant comes to the Court to obtain
relief on an ex parte statement he should made a full and fair disclosure of all the
material facts- facts, not law. He must not misstate the law if he can help it-the Court
is supposed to know the law. But it knows nothing about the facts, and the applicant
must state fully and fairly the facts, and the penalty by which the Court enforces that
obligation is that if it finds out that the facts have not been fully and fairly stated to it,
the Court will set aside, any action which it has taken on the faith of the imperfect
statement".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51909724/ 6
Falak Mukhtar vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir Through on 18 April, 2025
35. It is well settled that a prerogative remedy is not a matter of course. In exercising extraordinary
power, therefore, a writ court will indeed bear in mind the conduct of the party who is invoking such
jurisdiction. If the applicant does not disclose full facts or suppresses relevant materials or is
otherwise guilty of misleading the Court, the Court may dismiss the action without adjudicating the
matter. The rule has been evolved in larger public interest to deter unscrupulous litigants from
abusing the process of Court by deceiving it. The very basis of the writ jurisdiction rests in disclosure
of true, complete and correct facts. If the material facts are not candidly stated or are suppressed or
are distorted, the very functioning of the writ courts would become impossible.
In case titled as "K. D. Sharma Vs. Steel Authority of India Limited and Ors" reported in 2008 (12)
SCC 481, the Apex Court at paras 34, 35 and 36 has held as under:
34. The jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 32 and of the High Court
under Article 226 of the Constitution is extraordinary, equitable and discretionary.
Prerogative writs mentioned therein are issued for doing substantial justice. It is,
therefore, of utmost necessity that the petitioner approaching the Writ Court must
come with clean hands, put forward all the facts before the Court without concealing
or suppressing anything and seek an appropriate relief. If there is no candid
disclosure of relevant and material facts or the petitioner is guilty of misleading the
Court, his petition may be dismissed at the threshold without considering the merits
of the claim.
35. The underlying object has been succinctly stated by Scrutton, L.J., in the leading
case of R. v. Kensington Income Tax Commrs, in the following words: (KB P.514):
"......It has been for many years the rule of the Court, and one which it is of the
greatest importance to maintain, that when an applicant comes to the Court to obtain
relief on an ex parte statement he should make a full and fair disclosure of all the
material facts- it says facts, not law. He must not misstate the law if he can help it;
the Court is supposed to know the law. But it knows nothing about the facts, and the
applicant must state fully and fairly the facts; and the penalty by which the Court
enforces that obligation is that if it finds out that the facts have not been fully and
fairly stated to it, the Court will set aside any action which it has taken on the faith of
the imperfect statement".
36. A prerogative remedy is not a matter of course. While exercising extraordinary power a writ
court would certainly bear in mind the conduct of the party who invokes the jurisdiction of the
Court. If the applicant makes a false statement or suppresses material fact or attempts to mislead
the Court, the Court may dismiss the action on that ground alone and may refuse to enter into the
merits of the case by stating, "We will not listen to your application because of what you have done."
The rule has been evolved in larger public interest to deter unscrupulous litigants from abusing the
process of Court by deceiving it.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51909724/ 7
Falak Mukhtar vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir Through on 18 April, 2025
In case titled as "Manohar Lal (dead) by LRs versus Ugrasen (dead) by LRs and Ors" reported in
2010 (11) SCC 557, the Apex Court at paras 48, 49, 50 and 51, has held as under:-
48 . . . When a person approaches a court of equity in exercise of its extraordinary
jurisdiction under Article 226/227 of the Constitution, he should approach the court
not only with clean hands but also with clean mind, clean heart and clean objective.
"Equally, the judicial process should never become an instrument of appreciation or
abuse or a means in the process of the Court to subvert justice." Who seeks equity
must do equity. The legal maxim "Jure naturae aequum est neminem cum alterius
detrimento et injuria fieri locupletiorem", means that it is a law of nature that one
should not be enriched by the loss or injury to another. (Vide The Ramjas Foundation
Vs. Union of India & Ors, K.P. Srinivas Vs. R.M. Premchand & ors. and Nooruddin
Vs. (Dr.) K.L. Anand.
49. Similarly, in Ramniklal N. Bhutta Vs. State of Maharashtra, this Court observed
as under:
"10 . . . The power under Article 226 is discretionary. It will be exercised only in
furtherance of interest of justice and not merely on the making out of a legal
point.....the interest of justice and the public interest coalesce. They are very often
one and the same. ..... The Courts have to weigh the public interest vis-a-vis the
private interest while exercising....any of their discretionary powers.
50. In Tilokchand Motichand Vs. H.B. Munshi, State of Haryana Vs. Karnal
Distillery, and Sabia Khan & Ors. Vs. State of U.P. & Ors. this Court held that filing
totally misconceived petition amounts to abuse of the process of the Court. Such a
litigant is not required to be dealt with lightly, as petition containing misleading and
inaccurate statement, if filed, to achieve an ulterior purpose amounts to abuse of the
process of the Court. A litigant is bound to make "full and true disclosure of facts."
51. In Abdul Rahman Vs. Prasony Bai, S.J.S. Business Enterprises (P) Ltd. Vs. State of Bihar and
Oswal Fats & Oils Ltd. Vs. Addl. Commr. (Admn), this Court held that whenever the Court comes to
the conclusion that the process of the Court is being abused, the Court would be justified in refusing
to proceed further and refuse relief to the party. This rule has been evolved out of need of the Courts
to deter a litigant from abusing the process of the Court by deceiving it.
13. Viewed thus, the law laid down in the judgments supra by the Apex Court manifestly is
applicable to the case in hand, in that, it will not be open to the petitioner to contend, on one hand,
that the impugned order has been issued without any authority or for mala fide considerations, and
on the other hand, acknowledge the validity of the said order without registering any protest or
reserving any right thereto in the process of selection undertaken by the official respondents
pursuant to the said order and conceal the said fact before this court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51909724/ 8
Falak Mukhtar vs Ut Of Jammu & Kashmir Through on 18 April, 2025
14. Thus, for what has been observed, considered and analysed hereinabove, the petition is found to
be without any merit and is accordingly dismissed.
(JAVED IQBAL WANI) JUDGE Srinagar 18-04-2025 N Ahmad Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/51909724/ 9
