Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1 March, 2025
Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1
March, 2025
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
WP (C) No. 1493/2023
CM No. 3508/2023
Reserved On: 18th of February, 2025
Pronounced On: 1st of March, 2025
Farooq Ahmad Janda, Age: 43 Years
S/O Mohammad Sultan Janda
R/O Gousia Colony, Khanyar,
Srinagar.
... Petitioner(s)
Through: -
Mr Gulzar Ahmad Bhat, Advocate.
V/s
1. Union of India through Secretary,
Ministry of Communication and Information Technology,
Department of Posts, Dak Bhawan, New Delhi.
2. Chief Post Master General, J&K Postal Circle, Srinagar, 190001.
3. Director, Postal Services, J&K Postal Circle, Srinagar, 190001.
4. Superintendent, Railway Mail Service, J&K Division, Jammu.
... Respondent(s)
Through: -
Mr Nazir Ahmad Bhat, Advocate.
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr Justice Sanjeev Kumar, Judge Hon'ble Mr Justice Puneet Gupta, Judge
(JUDGMENT) Sanjeev Kumar-J:
01. The Petitioner-Farooq Ahmad Janda, invokes the extraordinary Writ jurisdiction
vested in this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to seek a 'Writ of
Certiorari' for quashing an Order and Judgment dated 16th of March, 2023 passed by
the Central Administrative Tribunal, Srinagar Bench ["the Tribunal"] in OA No. 804
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172701221/ 1
Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1 March, 2025
of 2020 titled 'Farooq Ahmad Janda v. Union of India & Ors.'.
02. Briefly stated, the facts leading to the filing of this Petition are that the Petitioner
came to be appointed as Safai Karamchari in the Department of Posts, Government
of India on 20 th of October, 1999.
Indisputably, in terms of the aforesaid Order, the Petitioner was asked to discharge his duties for a
period of 0700 hours to 1500 hours, i.e., for a period of 08 hours in the area and places indicated in
the said Order. Subsequently, vide Order dated 22nd of August, 2000, issued by the Senior Post
Master, under the orders of the Post Master General, Srinagar, all Safai Karamcharies, including the
Petitioner herein, was posted in RMS office, SRO and Speed Post Office. On 30th of September,
2005, by another Order, the Petitioner was ordered to work as Farash in addition to his duties. As is
claimed by the Petitioner, he continued to work in the said capacity for almost two decades. He
approached the Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench, by way of Original Application
bearing OA No. 062/01008/2017, seeking, inter alia, the disposal of his representations made by
him for pay parity with the regular employees holding the post of Safai Karamcharies as also for
regularization of his services. The said OA, vide Order dated 30th of August, 2017, was disposed of
with a direction to the Respondents to decide the pending representations of the Petitioner.
03. The Respondents considered the representations filed by the Petitioner and, vide Order dated
9th of February, 2018, impugned in OA No. 804/2020, rejected the claim of the Petitioner for
regularization of his services as well as minimum of the pay scale.
04. In OA No. 804/2020, the Petitioner prayed for the grant of following relief(s) in his favour:
i. "That impugned order dated 9.2.2018, Annexure A-1, may kindly be quashed and
set aside being wholly illegal and arbitrary;
ii. That an appropriate writ/ order/ direction commanding upon the respondents to
pay to the applicant minimum of the pay scale as admissible to the regular
incumbents Safai Karamchari/ Safaiwalla/ Sweeper like other similarly placed
employees and extend him all the consequential/ monetary benefits attached to the
post, so as to remove the disparity amongst them. Accordingly, respondents may also
be directed to pay the applicant minimum of the pay scale + dearness allowances in
accordance with judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court of India from the date of initial
appointment and he also been granted difference of arrears with all consequential
benefits along with interest;
iii. That the respondents may be further directed to regularize the services of the
applicant as per Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court judgment dated 2.3.2015 in
the case of Union of India & Others vs. Central Administrative Tribunal, Chandigarh
Bench & Ors. (CWP No. 9167/CAT/2007);
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172701221/ 2
Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1 March, 2025
iv. That this Hon'ble Tribunal may also pass any other order for the grant of relief to
the applicant which it may deem fit in the peculiar facts and circumstances of the
case; and v. That costs of the application may also be awarded in favour of the
applicant."
05. The aforesaid OA was contested by the Respondents by filing their Counter Affidavit. It was the
stand taken by the Respondents that the Petitioner was engaged only as a Daily Wager at intervals
and has not worked continuously. It was further submitted that the Petitioner, being a Daily Wager,
cannot compare his services with the regular Group "D"/ MTS employees, as the two are differently
situate and form different class.
06. The matter was considered by the Tribunal in the light of the rival contentions and the material
on record. The Tribunal came to the conclusion that there was no evidence available on record to
demonstrate that the Petitioner was ever appointed on regular basis to perform the duties of Group
"D"/ MTS and, therefore, was not entitled to pay parity with such regular employees. The contention
of the Petitioner that he was entitled to pay parity on the principle of "equal pay for equal work" was
also rejected, on the ground that equality can be claimed between two equals and not between
unequals. Insofar as the prayer of the Petitioner for regularization of his services is concerned, the
Tribunal held that in the representations made from time to time, the Petitioner had never sought
regularization of his services. Otherwise also, in the absence of any policy decision by the
Respondents and in view of the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled
"Secretary, State of Karnataka & Ors. v. Umadevi & Ors.', reported as (2006) 4 SCC 1, followed by
"A. Umarani v. Registrar, Cooperative Societies", reported as (2004) 7 SCC 112, the employees
engaged on daily wage or casual basis, without following due process of recruitment, are not entitled
to regularization. The Tribunal, vide the Judgment and Order impugned, dismissed the OA of the
Petitioner.
07. Having heard the learned Counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, we are of
the considered opinion that, as is rightly held by the Tribunal, the Petitioner has failed to
demonstrate his case for regularization of his services.
08. From the material on record, it is nowhere discernible that the Petitioner was ever engaged after
following any due process of recruitment. He came to be picked up and appointed as a Safai
Karamchari on daily wage basis. It is, however, a fact that he was allowed to continue in service for
more than two decades. There is also no dispute with regard to the fact that the Petitioner has, all
along, performed the duties which a regularly recruited Safai Karamchari performs in the
Respondent-Department.
09. As a matter of fact, some of the daily wage Safai Karamcharies, who were working with the
Petitioner, came to be appointed on permanent basis against available posts. The reply of the
Respondents, however, is that the colleagues of the Petitioner were appointed on permanent basis
on being selected in a recruitment process. Be that as it may, the fact remains that the Partitioner
has, all along, performed the same duties which his colleagues, who were earlier working with him
on daily wage basis, have been performing even after their regular appointment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172701221/ 3
Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1 March, 2025
10. In the backdrop of this admitted factual position, there is no merit in the submissions made by
the learned Counsel for the Petitioner that, by rendering more than 20 years continuous service on
daily wage basis in the Respondent-Department, the Petitioner has acquired a right of regularization
of his services. The engagement of the Petitioner as Safai Karamchari on daily wage basis made
initially in the year 1999 and continued thereafter was without any due process of recruitment
undertaken by the Respondents.
11. True it is that keeping in view the need for the services being rendered by the Petitioner, he was
continued in the Respondent Department for almost two decades. However, in view of the legal
position laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Constitutional Bench Judgment rendered in
Umadevi's case (supra), followed by A. Umarani's case (supra), the engagement of the Petitioner
cannot be held to be merely an irregular appointment. That being the position and also having
regard to the fact that there is no policy of regularization brought to our notice, it is little difficult for
us to accede to the prayer of the Petitioner for regularization of his services. The Tribunal has, thus,
rightly rejected such a prayer made before it by the Petitioner.
12. We, however, find merit in the submissions made by the learned Counsel for the Petitioner that
the Petitioner is, at least, entitled to the minimum of the pay scale, without allowances, as is
attached and paid to the regularly appointed Safai Karamcharies/ Group "D"/ MTS employees
working in the Respondent Department. This is so because it is not disputed before us that the type
of duties which the Petitioner has been performing for the last more than 20 years are, in any
manner, different or inferior than the duties being performed by the regularly appointed Safai
Karamcharies. We understand that a regularly appointed employee has onerous duties and
responsibilities to discharge and, therefore, he is well compensated by payment of various
allowances.
13. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in "State of Punjab & Ors. v. Jagjit Singh & Ors.", reported as (2017)
1 SCC 148, has already settled the issue and held that a Daily Wager or a temporary employee,
performing the duties akin to the duties performed by a regular employee, is, at least, entitled to the
basic pay of the regular post.
14. The issue, which has fallen for consideration before us in this Petition, has already been
authoritatively decided by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jagjit Singh's case (supra). Paragraph Nos.
57 and 58 of the said Judgment read, thus:
"57. There is no room for any doubt, that the principle of 'equal pay for equal work'
has emerged from an interpretation of different provisions of the Constitution. The
principle has been expounded through a large number of judgments rendered by this
Court, and constitutes law declared by this Court. The same is binding on all the
courts in India, under Article 141 of the Constitution of India. The parameters of the
principle, have been summarized by us in paragraph 42 hereinabove. The principle of
'equal pay for equal work' has also been extended to temporary employees
(differently described as work-charge, daily-wage, casual, ad-hoc, contractual, and
the like). The legal position, relating to temporary employees, has been summarized
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172701221/ 4
Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1 March, 2025
by us, in paragraph 44 hereinabove. The above legal position which has been
repeatedly declared, is being reiterated by us, yet again.
58. In our considered view, it is fallacious to determine artificial parameters to deny
fruits of labour. An employee engaged for the same work, cannot be paid less than
another, who performs the same duties and responsibilities. Certainly not, in a
welfare state. Such an action besides being demeaning, strikes at the very foundation
of human dignity. Any one, who is compelled to work at a lesser wage, does not do so
voluntarily. He does so, to provide food and shelter to his family, at the cost of his
self-respect and dignity, at the cost of his self-worth, and at the cost of his integrity.
For he knows, that his dependents would suffer immensely, if he does not accept the
lesser wage. Any act, of paying less wages, as compared to others similarly situate,
constitutes an act of exploitative enslavement, emerging out of a domineering
position. Undoubtedly, the action is oppressive, suppressive and coercive, as it
compels involuntary subjugation."
From reading of the aforesaid proposition of law, it clearly comes out that the Hon'ble Supreme
Court has laid down the parameters for applying the principle of "equal pay for equal work". The
principle of "equal pay for equal work" has also been extended to temporary employees, which
include a work charge, a daily wage, casual, ad hoc and contractual employees.
15. Further, the legal position has been enunciated and summarized in Paragraph Nos. 42 and 44 of
the Judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jagjit Singh's case (supra). With a view to
appreciate the legal position better, we deem it appropriate to reproduce Paragraph Nos. 42 and 44
of the aforesaid Judgment as well, hereinbelow:
"42. All the judgments noticed in paragraphs 7 to 24 hereinabove, pertain to
employees engaged on regular basis, who were claiming higher wages, under the
principle of 'equal pay for equal work'. The claim raised by such employees was
premised on the ground, that the duties and responsibilities rendered by them, were
against the same post for which a higher pay-scale was being allowed, in other
Government departments. Or alternatively, their duties and responsibilities were the
same, as of other posts with different designations, but they were placed in a lower
scale. Having been painstakingly taken through the parameters laid down by this
Court, wherein the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' was invoked and
considered, it would be just and appropriate, to delineate the parameters laid down
by this Court. In recording the said parameters, we have also adverted to some other
judgments pertaining to temporary employees (also dealt with, in the instant
judgment), wherein also, this Court had the occasion to express the legal position
with reference to the principle of 'equal pay for equal work'. Our consideration, has
led us to the following deductions: -
42.1. The 'onus of proof', of parity in the duties and responsibilities of the subject post
with the reference post, under the principle of 'equal pay for equal work', lies on the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172701221/ 5
Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1 March, 2025
person who claims it. He who approaches the Court has to establish, that the subject
post occupied by him, requires him to discharge equal work of equal value, as the
reference post (see - the Orissa University of Agriculture & Technology case10, Union
Territory Administration, Chandigarh v. Manju Mathur15, the Steel Authority of
India Limited case16, and the National Aluminium Company Limited case18).
42.2. The mere fact that the subject post occupied by the claimant, is in a "different
department" vis-a-vis the reference post, does not have any bearing on the
determination of a claim, under the principle of 'equal pay for equal work'. Persons
discharging identical duties, cannot be treated differently, in the matter of their pay,
merely because they belong to different departments of Government (see - the
Randhir Singh case and the D.S. Nakara case).
42.3. The principle of 'equal pay for equal work', applies to cases of unequal scales of pay, based on
no classification or irrational classification (see - the Randhir Singh case). For equal pay, the
concerned employees with whom equation is sought, should be performing work, which besides
being functionally equal, should be of the same quality and sensitivity (see - the Federation of All
India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognized) case, the Mewa Ram Kanojia case,
the Grih Kalyan Kendra Workers' Union cas6 and the S.C. Chandra case).
42.4. Persons holding the same rank/designation (in different departments), but having dissimilar
powers, duties and responsibilities, can be placed in different scales of pay, and cannot claim the
benefit of the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' (see - the Randhir Singh case1, State of Haryana
v. Haryana Civil Secretariat Personal Staff Association9, and the Hukum Chand Gupta case17).
Therefore, the principle would not be automatically invoked, merely because the subject and
reference posts have the same nomenclature.
42.5. In determining equality of functions and responsibilities, under the principle of 'equal pay for
equal work', it is necessary to keep in mind, that the duties of the two posts should be of equal
sensitivity, and also, qualitatively similar. Differentiation of pay-scales for posts with difference in
degree of responsibility, reliability and confidentiality, would fall within the realm of valid
classification, and therefore, pay differentiation would be legitimate and permissible (see - the
Federation of All India Customs and Central Excise Stenographers (Recognized) case and the State
Bank of India case). The nature of work of the subject post should be the same and not less onerous
than the reference post. Even the volume of work should be the same. And so also, the level of
responsibility. If these parameters are not met, parity cannot be claimed under the principle of
'equal pay for equal work' (see - State of U.P. v. J.P. Chaurasia, and the Grih Kalyan Kendra
Workers' Union case).
42.6. For placement in a regular pay-scale, the claimant has to be a regular appointee. The claimant
should have been selected, on the basis of a regular process of recruitment. An employee appointed
on a temporary basis, cannot claim to be placed in the regular pay-scale (see - the Orissa University
of Agriculture & Technology case).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172701221/ 6
Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1 March, 2025
42.7. Persons performing the same or similar functions, duties and responsibilities, can also be
placed in different pay-scales. Such as 'selection grade', in the same post. But this difference must
emerge out of a legitimate foundation, such as - merit, or seniority, or some other relevant criteria
(see - State of U. P. v. J. P. Chaurasia.) 42.8. If the qualifications for recruitment to the subject post
vis-a- vis the reference post are different, it may be difficult to conclude, that the duties and
responsibilities of the posts are qualitatively similar or comparable (see - the Mewa Ram Kanojia
case, and Government of W. B. v. Tarun K. Roy). In such a cause, the principle of 'equal pay for
equal work', cannot be invoked.
42.9. The reference post, with which parity is claimed, under the principle of 'equal pay for equal
work', has to be at the same hierarchy in the service, as the subject post. Pay-scales of posts may be
different, if the hierarchy of the posts in question, and their channels of promotion, are different.
Even if the duties and responsibilities are same, parity would not be permissible, as against a
superior post, such as a promotional post (see - Union of India v. Pradip Kumar Dey7, and the
Hukum Chand Gupta case).
42.10. A comparison between the subject post and the reference post, under the principle of 'equal
pay for equal work', cannot be made, where the subject post and the reference post are in different
establishments, having a different management. Or even, where the establishments are in different
geographical locations, though owned by the same master (see - the Harbans Lal case23). Persons
engaged differently, and being paid out of different funds, would not be entitled to pay parity (see -
Official Liquidator v. Dayanand).
42.11. Different pay-scales, in certain eventualities, would be permissible even for posts clubbed
together at the same hierarchy in the cadre. As for instance, if the duties and responsibilities of one
of the posts are more onerous, or are exposed to higher nature of operational work/risk, the
principle of 'equal pay for equal work' would not be applicable. And, also when, the reference post
includes the responsibility to take crucial decisions, and that is not so for the subject post (see - the
State Bank of India case).
42.12. The priority given to different types of posts, under the prevailing policies of the Government,
can also be a relevant factor for placing different posts under different pay-scales. Herein also, the
principle of 'equal pay for equal work' would not be applicable (see - State of Haryana v. Haryana
Civil Secretariat Personal Staff Association).
42.13. The parity in pay, under the principle of 'equal pay for equal work', cannot be claimed, merely
on the ground, that at an earlier point of time, the subject post and the reference post, were placed
in the same pay- scale. The principle of 'equal pay for equal work' is applicable only when it is
shown, that the incumbents of the subject post and the reference post, discharge similar duties and
responsibilities (see - State of West Bengal v. West Bengal Minimum Wages Inspectors Association).
42.14. For parity in pay-scales, under the principle of 'equal pay for equal work', equation in the
nature of duties, is of paramount importance. If the principal nature of duties of one post is
teaching, whereas that of the other is non-teaching, the principle would not be applicable. If the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172701221/ 7
Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1 March, 2025
dominant nature of duties of one post is of control and management, whereas the subject post has
no such duties, the principle would not be applicable. Likewise, if the central nature of duties of one
post is of quality control, whereas the subject post has minimal duties of quality control, the
principle would not be applicable (see - Union Territory Administration, Chandigarh v. Manju
Mathur).
42.15. There can be a valid classification in the matter of pay-scales, between employees even
holding posts with the same nomenclature i.e., between those discharging duties at the
headquarters, and others working at the institutional/sub-office level (see - the Hukum Chand
Gupta case), when the duties are qualitatively dissimilar.
42.16. The principle of 'equal pay for equal work' would not be applicable, where a differential
higher pay-scale is extended to persons discharging the same duties and holding the same
designation, with the objective of ameliorating stagnation, or on account of lack of promotional
avenues (see - the Hukum Chand Gupta case).
42.17. Where there is no comparison between one set of employees of one organization, and another
set of employees of a different organization, there can be no question of equation of pay- scales,
under the principle of 'equal pay for equal work', even if two organizations have a common
employer. Likewise, if the management and control of two organizations, is with different entities,
which are independent of one another, the principle of 'equal pay for equal work' would not apply
(see - the S. C. Chandra case, and the National Aluminium Company Limited case).
43. .........
44. We shall first outline the conclusions drawn in cases where a claim for pay parity, raised at the
hands of the concerned temporary employees, was accepted by this Court, by applying the principle
of 'equal pay for equal work', with reference to regular employees: -
44.1. In the Dhirendra Chamoli case, this Court examined a claim for pay parity
raised by temporary employees, for wages equal to those being disbursed to regular
employees. The prayer was accepted. The action of not paying the same wage, despite
the work being the same, was considered as violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
It was held, that the action amounted to exploitation -
in a welfare state committed to a socialist pattern of society.
44.2. In the Surinder Singh case, this Court held, that the right of equal wages claimed by temporary
employees emerged, inter alia, from Article 39 of the Constitution. The principle of 'equal pay for
equal work' was again applied, where the subject employee had been appointed on temporary basis,
and the reference employee was borne on the permanent establishment. The temporary employee
was held entitled to wages drawn by an employee on the regular establishment. In this judgment,
this Court also took note of the fact, that the above proposition was affirmed by a Constitution
Bench of this Court, in the D. S. Nakara case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172701221/ 8
Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1 March, 2025
44.3. In the Bhagwan Dass case, this Court recorded, that in a claim for equal wages, the duration
for which an employee would remain (- or had remained) engaged, would not make any difference.
So also, the manner of selection and appointment would make no difference. And therefore, whether
the selection was made on the basis of open competition or was limited to a cluster of villages, was
considered inconsequential, insofar as the applicability of the principle is concerned. And likewise,
whether the appointment was for a fixed limited duration (six months, or one year), or for an
unlimited duration, was also considered inconsequential, insofar as the applicability of the principle
of 'equal pay for equal work' is concerned. It was held, that the claim for equal wages would be
sustainable, where an employee is required to discharge similar duties and responsibilities as
regular employees, and the concerned employee possesses the qualifications prescribed for the post.
In the above case, this Court rejected the contention advanced on behalf of the Government, that the
plea of equal wages by the employees in question, was not sustainable because the concerned
employees were engaged in a temporary scheme, and against posts which were sanctioned on a year
to year basis.
44.4. In the Daily Rated Casual Labour Employed under P&T Department through Bhartiya Dak Tar
Mazdoor Manch case22 this Court held, that under principle flowing from Article 38(2) of the
Constitution, Government could not deny a temporary employee, at least the minimum wage being
paid to an employee in the corresponding regular cadre, along with dearness allowance and
additional dearness allowance, as well as, all the other benefits which were being extended to casual
workers. It was also held, that the classification of workers (as unskilled, semi-skilled and skilled),
doing the same work, into different categories, for payment of wages at different rates, was not
tenable. It was also held, that such an act of an employer, would amount to exploitation. And further
that, the same would be arbitrary and discriminatory, and therefore, violative of Articles 14 and 16 of
the Constitution.
44.5. In State of Punjab v. Devinder Singh, this Court held, that daily- wagers were entitled to be
placed in the minimum of the pay-scale of regular employees, working against the same post. The
above direction was issued after accepting, that the concerned employees, were doing the same work
as regular incumbents holding the same post, by applying the principle of 'equal pay for equal 44.6.
In the Secretary, State of Karnataka case, a Constitution Bench of this Court, set aside the judgment
of the High Court, and directed that daily-wagers be paid salary equal to the lowest grade of salary
and allowances being paid to regular employees. Importantly, in this case, this Court made a very
important distinction between pay parity and regularization. It was held that the concept of equality
would not be applicable to issues of absorption/regularization. But, the concept was held as
applicable, and was indeed applied, to the issue of pay parity - if the work component was the same.
The judgment rendered by the High Court, was modified by this Court, and the concerned
daily-wage employees were directed to be paid wages, equal to the salary at the lowest grade of the
concerned cadre.
44.7. In State of Haryana v. Charanjit Singh, a three-Judge bench of this Court held, that the
decisions rendered by this Court in State of Haryana v. Jasmer Singh, State of Haryana v. Tilak Raj,
the Orissa University of Agriculture & Technology case and Government of W.B. v. Tarun K. Roy,
laid down the correct law. Thereupon, this Court declared, that if the concerned daily- wage
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172701221/ 9
Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1 March, 2025
employees could establish, that they were performing equal work of equal quality, and all other
relevant factors were fulfilled, a direction by a Court to pay such employees equal wages (from the
date of filing the writ petition), would be justified.
44.8. In State of U.P. v. Putti Lal, based on decisions in several cases (wherein the principle of 'equal
pay for equal work' had been invoked), it was held, that a daily-wager discharging similar duties, as
those engaged on regular basis, would be entitled to draw his wages at the minimum of the pay-scale
(drawn by his counterpart, appointed on regular basis), but would not be entitled to any other
allowances or increments.
44.9. In the Uttar Pradesh Land Development Corporation case33 this Court noticed, that the
respondents were employed on contract basis, on a consolidated salary. But, because they were
actually appointed to perform the work of the post of Assistant Engineer, this Court directed the
employer to pay the respondents wages, in the minimum of the pay-scales ascribed for the post of
Assistant Engineer."
When we analyze the facts of the instant case in the light of the law laid down in Jagjit Singh's case
(supra), we find that the Petitioner is fully covered by the observations of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court made in Paragraph Nos. 57 and 58. The Petitioner, who was engaged for the work, cannot be
paid less than the ones who perform the same duties and responsibilities, may be while working on
regular basis. In the instant case, as noticed above, some of the Safai Karamcharies, who were
working along with the Petitioner on daily wage basis, were regularly appointed by the Respondents,
albeit after proper selection process, are receiving a regular pay scale. The Petitioner, who has been
performing the same duties as are being performed by the aforesaid Safai Karamcharies, now
working on permanent basis in the graded pay scale, cannot be denied the basic of the pay scale of
the lowest grade of Safai Karamcharies.
16. For the aforesaid reasons, we allow this Petition partially and hold the Petitioner entitled to the
basic pay in the lowest grade, as is available to the Safai Karamcharies/ Group "D"/ MTS employees
working in the Respondent Department. This benefit shall be available to the Petitioner w.e.f. the
date the first OA bearing No. 062/01008/2017 was filed by him before the Central Administrative
Tribunal, Chandigarh Bench. The Respondents shall comply with the directions aforesaid and work
out and pay the arrears thereof to the Petitioner within two months from the date a copy of this
Judgment is served upon them. They shall do well to pay to the Petitioner immediately and
forthwith the basic pay of the post of Safai Karamcharies/ Group "D"/ MTF employees. The
impugned Order passed by the Tribunal shall stand modified to the said extent, accordingly.
17. Writ Petition is, accordingly, disposed of on the above terms, along with the connected CM(s).
(Puneet Gupta) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
SRINAGAR
March 1st, 2025
"TAHIR"
i. Whether the Judgment is approved for reporting? Yes.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172701221/ 10
Farooq Ahmad Janda vs Union Of India Through Secretary on 1 March, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/172701221/ 11
