Farooq Ahmad And Ors vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
Farooq Ahmad And Ors vs State Of J&K And Another on 10
March, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 20.02.2023
Pronounced on: 10.03.2023
CRM(M) No. 827/2021
c/w
CRM(M) No. 208/2022
Farooq Ahmad and ors. .....Appellant(s)/ Petitioner(s)
Through: - Mr. K. S. Johal, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Karman Singh Johal, Advocate
Mr. Rahul Pant, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Anirudh Sharma, Advocate
Vs.
State of J&K and another ...Respondent(S)
Through: - Mr. Sumeet Bhatia,GA
Mr. Gagan Kohli, Advocate
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
CRM(M) No. 827/2021
1) The petitioners have challenged FIR No. 162/2021 for offences under Sections 458, 323, 149, 341,
504, 506, 427 IPC and 4/25 Arms Act registered with the Police Station, Udhampur.
2) As per the impugned FIR, on 29.04.2021, at about 6.00 PM, petitioner No. 1/accused misbehaved
with the complainant/respondent No. 4 while he was standing on the gate of his house. Petitioner
No. 1 is alleged to have used abusive and vulgar language against the family of the complainant, who
objected to the same but in the meantime, while the complainant was proceeding towards his house,
petitioner No. 1 came from behind, armed with a baseball bat and he gave a beating to the
complainant. It is alleged that petitioner No. 1 went back to his house after extending threats to the
complainant and he came back after sometime alongwith other petitioners/accused, who are alleged
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152958224/ 1
Farooq Ahmad And Ors vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
to have criminally trespassed into the house of the complainant armed with lathies, baseball bat and
tokas. The complainant was slammed and kicked by the petitioners/accused and even the ladies
present in the house were also attacked and beaten up. It is further alleged that son of the
complainant, Abuzar was also attacked by the petitioners. When brother of the complainant, Saleem
Banday came to rescue him from the clutches of the petitioners, his vehicle was also attacked with
weapons by the petitioners and in the process, the petitioners also received injuries.
3) It appears that the complainant had presented an application containing the aforesaid allegations
before the Special Mobile Magistrate (Sub Judge), Udhampur with a prayer to direct registration of
the FIR. The learned Magistrate, it seems, passed an order dated 05.05.2021, whereby SHO, Police
Station, Udhampur was directed to verify the allegations made in the application and send the
report by the next date of hearing i.e.17.05.2021. The Police of Police Station, Udhampur instead of
sending the report to the learned Magistrate proceeded to register the impugned FIR.
4) The petitioners have challenged the impugned FIR on the grounds that the said FIR is a
counterblast to the FIR bearing No. 146/2021 lodged by Talib Hussain (petitioner No. 8) against the
complainant party in respect of the same occurrence. It has been further submitted that the
impugned FIR has been lodged with a view to wreck vengeance upon the petitioners as the
complainant has long standing enmity with them. The petitioners have further contended that the
Police instead of submitting a report to the learned Magistrate, on its own registered the impugned
FIR, thereby circumventing the process of law initiated by the Magistrate.
5) I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record including the case diaries of
the two FIRs.
6) A perusal of the record shows that in order to get the FIR registered with the Police, the
complainant/respondent No. 4 initially approached the Police Station and thereafter, the SSP
concerned. It has been stated that when the complainant failed to get the desired result of
registration of FIR, he filed an application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. before learned Judicial
Magistrate 1st Class (Sub Judge) Udhampur. The learned Magistrate vide order dated 05.05.2021
directed the SHO, Udhampur to verify the allegations and submit his report by the next date of
hearing i.e. 17.05.2021. A perusal of the minutes of the proceedings of the learned Magistrate would
reveal that on 17.05.2021, an application was made by the SHO, Police Station, Udhampur before
the learned Magistrate seeking extension of 15 days time in submitting his report. While these
proceedings were going on, the impugned FIR came to be registered by SHO, Police Station,
Udhampur on 18.05.2021.
7) The question that arises for consideration is as to whether the action of the Police to register the
impugned FIR when there was no direction from the learned Magistrate to register the case is in
accordance with law, particularly when the learned Magistrate had specifically directed the SHO
concerned to submit his report after verifying the allegations made in the application.
8) Learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the course adopted by the Police in
registering the impugned FIR, without waiting for the direction of the learned Magistrate amounts
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152958224/ 2
Farooq Ahmad And Ors vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
to usurping the jurisdiction of the learned Magistrate and the same cannot be countenanced in law.
9) Per contra, learned counsel for the respondents has submitted that the Police have otherwise got
power to register an FIR once it comes to its notice that a cognizable offence has been committed. It
has been submitted that an order under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. is only a preemptory reminder to the
SHO of a Police Station to perform its statutory duty of registration of FIR and that no particular
form of order is needed for such purpose.
10) It is true that the incharge of a Police Station is vested with the power to register an FIR once
information with regard to cognizable offence is given to him. It is also not in dispute that a
Magistrate while passing a direction under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. is only reminding the officer
incharge of a Police Station about his statutory duty to register an FIR in respect of a cognizable
offence. However, in the instant case, when the complainant had approached the Police for
registration of FIR, they did not deem it appropriate to register the FIR presumably because already
an FIR had been registered by the Police relating to the same occurrence on the basis of the version
given to the Police by the petitioners herein.
11) When the application was made by the complainant before the learned Magistrate, options
available to the learned Magistrate were, either to direct the officer incharge of a Police Station to
straightway register an FIR and undertake the investigation or to direct preliminary verification of
the allegations made in the application. The third course that was open to the Magistrate was to
treat the application as a private complaint and take cognizance of the offence and proceed in
accordance with the provisions contained in Chapter XV of the Cr. P.C.
12) In the instant case, the learned Magistrate appears to have chosen the second option of directing
the preliminary verification with regard to the allegations made in the complaint. The power to
direct preliminary verification of the allegations made in an application under Section 156(3) Cr.P.C.
has been recognized by the Supreme Court in Lalita Kumari v. Govt. of U.P, (2014) 2 SCC 1 as also in
the case of Mrs. Priyanka Srivastava and Anr. Vs. State of UP and ors., 2015 2 Crimes (SC) 179. In
this regard paragraph 27 of the Priyanka Srivastava's case (supra) is relevant to the context, the
same is reproduced as under:
"27. In our considered opinion, a stage has come in this country where Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C. applications are to be supported by an affidavit duly sworn by the applicant
who seeks the invocation of the jurisdiction of the Magistrate. That apart, in an
appropriate case, the learned Magistrate would be well advised to verify the truth and
also can verify the veracity of the allegations. This affidavit can make the applicant
more responsible. We are compelled to say so as such kind of applications are being
filed in a routine manner without taking any responsibility whatsoever only to harass
certain persons. That apart, it becomes more disturbing and alarming when one tries
to pick up people who are passing orders under a statutory provision which can be
challenged under the framework of said Act or under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India. But it cannot be done to take undue advantage in a criminal court as if
somebody is determined to settle the scores. We have already indicated that there has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152958224/ 3
Farooq Ahmad And Ors vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
to be prior applications under Section 154(1) and 154(3) while filing a petition under
Section 156(3). Both the aspects should be clearly spelt out in the application and
necessary documents to that effect shall be filed. The warrant for giving a direction
that an the application under Section 156(3) be supported by an affidavit so that the
person making the application should be conscious and also endeavour to see that no
false affidavit is made. It is because once an affidavit is found to be false, he will be
liable for prosecution in accordance with law. This will deter him to casually invoke
the authority of the Magistrate under Section 156(3). That apart, we have already
stated that the veracity of the same can also be verified by the learned Magistrate,
regard being had to the nature of allegations of the case. We are compelled to say so
as a number of cases pertaining to fiscal sphere, matrimonial dispute/family
disputes, commercial offences, medical negligence cases, corruption cases and the
cases where there is abnormal delay/laches in initiating criminal prosecution, as are
illustrated in Lalita Kumari are being filed. That apart, the learned Magistrate would
also be aware of the delay in lodging of the FIR."
(Emphasis supplied)
13) In Ramdev Food Products Pvt. Ltd vs. State of Gujarat, 2015 3 Crimes (SC) 354, the Supreme
Court has again emphasized the fact that prompt registration of FIR is mandatory but checks and
balances on power of police are equally important. The Court further went on to observe that power
of investigation is not mechanical. It requires application of mind in the manner provided. The
Court further observed that existence of power and its exercise are different. According to the
Supreme Court delicate balance has to be maintained between the interest of society and liberty of
an individual.
14) Again, the Supreme Court in the case of Anil Kumar vs. M. K. Aiyappa, (2013) 10 SCC 705 has
observed as under:
"11. The scope of Section 156(3) CrPC came up for consideration before this Court in
several cases. This Court in Maksud Saiyed case [(2008) 5 SCC 668] examined the
requirement of the application of mind by the Magistrate before exercising
jurisdiction under Section 156(3) and held that where jurisdiction is exercised on a
complaint filed in terms of Section 156(3) or Section 200 CrPC, the Magistrate is
required to apply his mind, in such a case, the Special Judge/Magistrate cannot refer
the matter under Section 156(3) against a public servant without a valid sanction
order. The application of mind by the Magistrate should be reflected in the order. The
mere statement that he has gone through the complaint, documents and heard the
complainant, as such, as reflected in the order, will not be sufficient. After going
through the complaint, documents and hearing the complainant, what weighed with
the Magistrate to order investigation under Section 156(3) CrPC, should be reflected
in the order, though a detailed expression of his views is neither required nor
warranted. We have already extracted the order passed by the learned Special Judge
which, in our view, has stated no reasons for ordering investigation."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152958224/ 4
Farooq Ahmad And Ors vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
15) For the foregoing analysis of law on the subject, it is clear that a Magistrate does have power to
direct preliminary verification into the allegations made in an application under Section 156(3)
Cr.P.C. so as to ascertain whether any cognizable offence is made out. Such course has to be adopted
by a Magistrate in appropriate cases, if the Magistrate feels that it not a clear-cut case where FIR
should be straightway registered. The order of the learned Magistrate passed on 05.05.2021
directing preliminary verification into allegations made in the application filed by the complainant
is, therefore, in accordance with law. Even otherwise, discretion of a Magistrate in directing
preliminary verification in a particular case cannot be gone into by a superior court, unless it is
shown that there is perversity in the exercise of discretion by the Magistrate.
16) In the instant case, a lawful direction passed by the learned Magistrate, it seems, has been
circumvented by the Police by registering the FIR, inasmuch as, the Police in spite of getting a
direction regarding preliminary verification of the allegations, registered the FIR straightway. It
seems that the Police in the instant case at the initial stage did not thought it appropriate to
straightway register an FIR, keeping in view the fact that an FIR relating to the occurrence had
already been registered, but when the learned Magistrate was seized of the matter, the Police did not
allow the learned Magistrate to apply her mind to the material prior to passing an appropriate
direction. It is to be noted that a direction regarding registration of an FIR has to be passed only
after application of the mind. In the present case before the learned Magistrate could apply her
mind to the application of the complainant and the report the Police, the proceedings pending
before her were rendered redundant by the action of the Police. This amounts to an illegality which
is writ large on the face of the record.
17) Another question that arises for consideration is as to what should be the future course of action
in these circumstances. One option would be to allow the investigation to go on, on the basis of the
impugned FIR already registered and thereby perpetuate the illegality committed by the Police and
the other option would be to find a way-out so as to cure this illegality.
18) In the case of N. H. Rishbud and Inder Singh vs. State of Delhi, AIR 1955 SC 196, the Supreme
Court has ruled that Section 5A of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 is mandatory and not
directory and went on to hold that the illegality committed in the course of an investigation does not
affect the competence and jurisdiction of the Court for trial. The Court further held that where
cognizance of the case has been taken and the case has proceeded to termination the validity of the
preceding investigation does not vitiate the result unless miscarriage of justice has been caused
thereby.
19) In State of Harayana and others vs. Bhajan Lal and others, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, the Supreme
Court after noticing the ratio laid down in N. H. Rishbud and Inder Singh's case (supra) explained
that in the case before it the question relating to legal authority of SHO was raised at the initial
stage, therefore, it would be proper and desirable that the investigation should proceed only on the
basis of the valid order in strict compliance of the mandatory provision of Section 5A(1) of the
Prevention of Corruption Act,1947.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152958224/ 5
Farooq Ahmad And Ors vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
20) It is thus clear that if the illegality in undertaking the investigation is pointed out at the earliest
when the investigation is at its inception, it cannot be brushed aside as the Investigating Agency as
well as the complainant would be free to take appropriate steps for proceeding in accordance with
law but if the investigation has culminated in filing of charge sheet before the competent Court then
unless it is shown that prejudice would be caused to any party by quashing the investigation, an
order setting aside the investigation would not be desirable.
21) Coming to the facts of the instant case, the petitioners approached the Court immediately after
the registration of the impugned FIR. In fact, the impugned FIR, as already noted, has been lodged
on 18.05.2021 and instant petition has been filed on 13.12.2021 i.e. within a few months of lodging
of the impugned FIR. The case diary shows that the investigation in the instant case has not
proceeded substantially because of the stay order passed by this Court on 15.12.2021. Thus, the
investigation of the case is still at its inception and as such, illegality committed by the Police in
registering the impugned FIR, can be cured at this stage by passing appropriate directions.
22) In view of what has been discussed herein before, interests of justice would be served by
quashing the impugned FIR and passing appropriate directions to the Investigating Agency to place
its report before the learned Judicial Magistrate 1st Class (Sub Judge), Udhampur, who after
considering the report of the Police would be at liberty to pass orders in accordance with law.
Needless to mention here that the learned Magistrate may either direct the Police to register the FIR
afresh and proceed to conduct the investigation in the case or he can proceed in terms of Chapter
XIV of the Cr.P.C and take cognizance of the offences on the basis of the police report together with
the preliminary evidence.
23) Accordingly, the impugned FIR is quashed and the respondent, SHO, Police Station, Udhampur
is directed to place the material collected by him during investigation of the impugned FIR before
the learned Special Mobile Magistrate (Sub Judge), Udhampur, who shall, after reviving the
application of the complainant under Section 156(3) Cr. P.C., pass appropriate directions in
accordance with law, of course, upon application of his mind to the material that may be placed
before him.
24) The petition stands disposed of in above terms.
25) The petitioners have challenged FIR No. 146/2021 for offences under Sections 382, 323, 34 of
IPC and 4/25 of Arms Act registered with Police Station Udhampur.
26) As per FIR No. 146/2021, on 29.04.2021 at about 6.30 p.m. the petitioners/accused Mohd
Saleem Banday, Mohd Rafi and Mohd Najeem Din launched an attack upon Mohd Farooq,
petitioner No. 1 in CRM(M) No. 827/2021 with a sharp edged weapon and when the
complainant/Talib Hussain came to know it, he rushed to the spot but the above named petitioners
hit him as well as his wife with the car and inflicted injuries upon them. It is further alleged that
Mohd Din, who was armed with stick and his grandson also came on spot and they gave a beating to
Mohd Farooq, who has suffered grievous injuries. A gold chain, one watch and cash amounting to
Rs. 20,000/- are also alleged to have been snatched by the accused from Mohd Farooq.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152958224/ 6
Farooq Ahmad And Ors vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
27) The petitioners, Mohd Saleem Banday etc. have challenged the aforesaid FIR on the grounds
that the same has been lodged by the complainant party in order to wreck vengeance upon them. It
has been submitted that the complainant party has long standing enmity with the petitioners,
therefore, they want to involve them in the false and frivolous litigation.
28) A perusal of the allegations made in the two impugned FIRs prima facie shows that the rival
parties have given two contrary versions of the same occurrence. It appears that time and place of
occurrence in both the FIRs is the same. It is a settled law that counter FIR in respect of an
occurrence giving a version contrary to the version given by the other party, is permissible in law.
However, it would be appropriate if the final reports in the two cases are examined by the same
Court together.
29) In view the above, the decision in this petition is deferred till the outcome of the proceedings
before the learned Special Mobile Magistrate (Sub Judge), Udhampur, which relate to the
allegations in FIR No. 162/2021. Accordingly, this petition is directed to be listed on 20.04.2023 for
awaiting the directions that may be passed by learned Special Mobile Magistrate 1st Class (Sub
Judge), Udhampur, as indicated herein before.
30) Case diaries in both the cases be returned to the learned counsel appearing for the State.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 10.03.2023 Karam Chand/Secy.
Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/152958224/ 7
