Fathima Beevi vs The Joint Secretary (Cofeposa) ... on 21 December, 2024
Fathima Beevi vs The Joint Secretary (Cofeposa) ... on 21
December, 2024
Author: S.M.Subramaniam
Bench: S.M.Subramaniam
HCP.No.2229 of 2024
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
RESERVED ON : 17.12.2024
PRONOUNCED ON : 21.12.2024
CORAM :
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM
AND
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE M.JOTHIRAMAN
H.C.P.No.2229 of 2024
Fathima Beevi ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Joint Secretary (COFEPOSA) Government of India
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue,
Central Economic Intelligence Bureau,
6th Floor, B-wing, Janpath Bhawan
Janpath, New Delhi – 110 001.
2.The Directorate General Central Economic Intelligence Bureau
Government Of India
Ministry of Finance, Department of Revenue,
Central Economic Intelligence Bureau,
6th Floor, B-wing,
Janpath Bhawan
Janpath, New Delhi – 110 001.
3.The superintendent of Prison
Central Prison,
Puzhal, Chennai.
4.The Superintendent of Customs
1 / 28
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91970461/ 1
Fathima Beevi vs The Joint Secretary (Cofeposa) ... on 21 December, 2024
(cid:12) HCP.No.2229 of 2024
Prosecution unit – Airport
New Custome House,
Meenambakkam, Chennai – 600 027. ... Respondents
PRAYER: Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India to
issue a Writ of Habeas Corpus, to call for the records relating to the
proceedings of the 1st respondent herein F.No.PD-12002/04/2024-
COFEPOSA dated 13.08.2024 and quash the same and produce the
detenue Thiru.Mohammed Sabir Ali, Male aged 29, S/o.Shahul Hameed
COFEPOSA No.6197 now detained at Central Prison, Puzhal, Chennai
before this Court and set him at liberty.
For Petitioner : Mr.G.Mohanakrishnan
For Respondents : Mr.AR.L.Sunderesan, Addl. Solicitor
General of India for R1 and R2.
Mr.R.Muniyapparaj
Additional Public Prosecutor
Mr.N.P.Kumar, Spl.PP for R4.
ORDER
(Order of the Court was made by M.JOTHIRAMAN, J.) The petitioner is the mother of the detenue
viz., Mohammed Sabir ali s/o.Shahul Hameed aged about 29 years detained in Central Prison,
Puzhal, Chennai has come forward with this petition, challenging the detention order passed by the
first respondent in F.No.PD-12002/04/2024- https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis COFEPOSA dated
13.08.2024.
The brief case of the petitioner is as follows :-
2. The 4th respondent herein has registered a case in OS.No.651 of 2024-AIU-B
Batch on 26.06.2024 for the offences under Section 132(1)(a) and 135(1)(b) of
Customs, Act, 1962. The detenue was arrested on 28.06.2024 and remanded to
judicial custody on 29.06.2024 with regard to smuggling of Foreign Origin Gold
weighting 785grams valued for a sum of Rs.49,23,457/- into India by way of
concealment in paste form. The investigation was almost completed, but they and
failed to file the final report which shows that the investigating agency is only
interested in detaining the petitioner's son.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91970461/ 2
Fathima Beevi vs The Joint Secretary (Cofeposa) ... on 21 December, 2024
2(i). The detenue was implicated as an accused based on a confession of co-accused, even the said
statement obtained from the co- assued was by threat and coercion. Though, the bail petitions were
enclosed in the booklet, the detaining authority while passing order have not taken into
consideration the retracted statements and the same was not https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
rejected by him. The bail application in Crl.MP.No...../2024 (unable to understand and read) and
the detenue was totally confused because at Page mentions OS.No.75/2024-INT (AIR) and
OS.No.651/2024-AIU-B Batch. So the detenue was totally confused and he was prevented from
giving an effective representation, notably the detaining authority has categorically stated in the
grounds of detention at Page 14 para 10 that they had applied their mind to arrive at the subjective
satisfaction and to formulate the grounds of detention. On this score, the detention order is liable to
be set aside.
2(ii). Page Nos.220, 221 and 222 of the petitioner's bail application are illegible. That apart page
No.243 is also illegible and unable to read which constitutes a clear violation of Article 22(5).
Statutory provisions should be strictly applied without any deviation or else it will lead to the
quashing of the detention order. Since the supplied materials were illegible to the detenue himself.
It is implausible that the detaining authority could have received the records hence it violates the
mandatory provisions for passing the detention order. There was an inordinate delay
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of 45 days in passing the detention order, and there is no live and
proximate link for passing the detention order.
2(iii). On page No.151 of the grounds of detention, the case is presented involving a co-accused
Mohammed Razin Mohammed Ismail who arrived from Abu Dhabi on an Indigo Flight on
25.06.2024, at 9.16a.m. and was scheduled to depart for Colombu on an by Indigo Flight on
26.02.2024, at 01.00a.m. He was then intercepted by Customs Officers and brought to the AIU
room in the arrival area in the presence of witnesses along with his hand bag. So it causes great
confusion for the detenue with regard to the dates. Furthermore, it appears that the detaining
authority did not gone through the grounds of detention, which prevented the detenue from making
an effective representation.
3. Mr.G.Mohanakrishnan, the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner would submit
that there was an inordinate delay of 45 days in passing the detention order. There was no live and
proximate link for passing the detention order. The unreasonable and unexplained delay
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis by the first respondent infringed the Constitutional rights
guaranteed under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. He would submit that the remand
extension orders were not supplied to the petitioner. Additionally, page Nos.220, 221 and 222 of the
petitioner's bail application were illegible, and Page 243 was also unable to read, so it constitutes a
clear violation of Article 22(5). The statutory provisions should be strictly applied without any
deviation, or else it will lead to quashing the order of detention.
3(i). The learned counsel for the petitioner would further submit that the detention order was
passed on 13.08.2024 and the detenue was shown as arrested on 28.06.2024. However, the ground
of detention of the booklet were served on the detenue only on 17.08.2024. The unreasonable delay
between the date of the order and the date of detention raises concern about the genuineness of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91970461/ 3
Fathima Beevi vs The Joint Secretary (Cofeposa) ... on 21 December, 2024
detaining authority's subjective satisfaction. The detaining authority has not offered any satisfactory
and proper explanation for the delay in executing the detention order and by giving necessary
materials. The subjective satisfaction arrived at by the detaining authority is not genuine. Therefore,
the detention order is liable to be revoked. To strengthen his contentions, the learned counsel for
the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis petitioner has relied upon the recent judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court reported in (2024) 4 SCR 460 – Shabana Abdulla v. The Union of India and others
wherein it has been held in Para 15 that “When the Coordinate Bench of the same High Court based
on same grounds of detention and on the basis of the same material, which was relied on by the
detaining authority, had come to a considered conclusion that non- supply of certain documents had
vitiated the right to make an effective representation of the detenus, another Coordinate Bench
could not have ignored the same.”
4. Per Contra, Mr.AR.L.Sunderasan, the learned Additional Solicitor General of India, appearing for
the respondents 1 and 2 would submit that on 26.06.2024 based on specific intelligence indicating
gold being smuggled in the International Transit/Departure area of the Anna International
Terminal Chennai Airport, Officers of Air Intelligence Unit mounted surveillance and intercepted an
individual by name Shri.M.Kani a Sales Executive. Upon detailed examination, the officers
recovered and seized 785 grams of gold valued at Rs.49,23,457/-. He would submit that on further
enquiry, Shri.M.Kani admitted that the gold was in paste form https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and
the same was handed over to him by Shri.Mohammed Razeen Mohammed Ismail, an international
transit passenger, inside the Airhub shop in the International Departure area. As per the
instructions of Shri.Mohammed Sabir, Shri.M.Kani intended to hand over the said gold to
Shri.Vijayan who was supposed to receive the same at one tea shop at Tirusulam Bus Stop near to
Chennai Airport.
4(i). The learned Additional Solicitor General of India submited that during investigation, it was
revealed that the detenue admitted to profiting Rs.2.5 crores from the smuggling activities and
confessed to orchestrating the smuggling of approximately 267 kgs of gold through the transit area
at Chennai International Airport. This involved around 890 bundles valued at approximately 167
crores over a period of 45 days. Furthermore, the detenue planned to expand the gold smuggling
network by opening shops in various other airports, for this he contacted officials at Mumbai and
Delhi airport.
5. Mr.N.P.Kumar, learned Special Public Prosecutor appearing for the 4th respondent would submit
that the investigation has uncovered https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis compelling evidence pointing
to the detenue's central role as the master mind behind the sophisticated gold smuggling operating
between international sources in India. He would further submit that the operation was
meticulously organised, involving the recruitment and training of staff, specifically for the purpose
of smuggling gold. This indicates a high level of planning and coordination aimed at evading legal
scrutiny and exploiting vulnerabilities in airport and transit procedures. The subjective satisfaction
has also been noted by the detaining authority in the grounds of detention.
6. The first respondent passed the impugned order dated 13.08.2024. The relevant portion of the
order is extracted hereunder :-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91970461/ 4
Fathima Beevi vs The Joint Secretary (Cofeposa) ... on 21 December, 2024
“Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by Section 3 (1) of the
Conservation of Foreign Exchange & Prevention of Smuggling Activities Act, 1974, I
direct that the said Shri Mohammed Sabir Ali s/o.Shri Shahul Hameed R/o.No.04-A,
Madhav Apartments, Thomas Road, 1st Street, T.Nagar, Chennai – 600 017 be
detained and https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis kept in Central Prison, Puzhal,
Mahalakshmi Nagar, Chennai, Tamil Nadu, Pin – 600066.”
7. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has raised three primary grounds (i)there was an
inordinate delay (ii)the impugned detention order was not based on subjective satisfaction and
(iii)there is no live and proximate link maintained.
8. Per contra, the learned Additional Solicitor General of India would submit that only after arriving
at subjective satisfaction based on relevant and sufficient material placed before the authority
concerned, the impugned detention order has been passed. There was no inordinate delay in passing
the impugned order and there is a live link exists between the prejudicial activities and order of
detention. To strengthen his contentions, the learned Additional Solicitor General of India has relied
upon the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in - 2014 (11) SCC 326 – Licil Antony V.
State of Kerala wherein it has been held in paragraph 9 that “We have given our thoughtful
consideration to the rival submissions and we have no doubt in our mind that there has to be a
live-link between https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the prejudicial activity and the order of
detention. COFEPOSA intends to deal with persons engaged in smuggling activities who pose a
serious threat to the economy and thereby security of the nation. Such persons by virtue of their
large resources and influence cause delay in making of an order of detention. While dealing with the
question of delay in making an order of detention, the court is required to be circumspect and has to
take a pragmatic view. No hard-and-fast formula is possible to be laid or has been laid in this regard.
However, one thing is clear that in case of delay, that has to be satisfactorily explained. After all, the
purpose of preventive detention is to take immediate steps for preventing the detenu from indulging
in prejudicial activity. If there is undue and long delay between the prejudicial activity and making
of the order of detention and the delay has not been explained, the order of detention becomes
vulnerable. Delay in issuing the order of detention, if not satisfactorily explained, itself is a ground
to quash the order of detention. No rule with precision has been formulated in this regard. The test
of proximity is not a rigid or a mechanical test. In case of undue and long delay the court has to
investigate whether the link has been broken in the circumstances of each case.” (2) 2019 (20) SCC
609 – Union of India V. Dimple Happy https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Dhakad (3) 2021 SCC
Online M ad 14517 – R.Gannasundari v. Additional Chief Secretary to Government of Tamil Nadu
(4) 2021 SCC Online MAD 14518 – M.Rukkumuthu v. Additional Chief Secretary to Government of
Tamil Nadu (5) 2021 SCC Online MAD 5888 – S.Amutha v. Government of Tamil Nadu (6) 2024 (3)
SCC 347 – Safaraz Alam v. Union of India.
9. We have considered the submissions made on either side and perused the available records.
10. At this juncture, it is relevant to cite the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in
2022 Livelaw (SC) 813 – Sushanta Kumar Banik v. State of Tripura wherein it has been held that a
question, whether delay is unreasonable and stands unexplained depends on the facts and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91970461/ 5
Fathima Beevi vs The Joint Secretary (Cofeposa) ... on 21 December, 2024
circumstances of each case. The relevant observation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court is extracted
hereunder:-
“20. It is manifestly clear from a conspectus of the above decisions of this Court, that
the underlying principle is that if there is unreasonable delay between
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the date of the order of detention & actual arrest of
the detenu and in the same manner from the date of the proposal and passing of the
order of detention, such delay unless satisfactorily explained throws a considerable
doubt on the genuineness of the requisite subjective satisfaction of the detaining
authority in passing the detention order and consequently render the detention order
bad and invalid because the “live and proximate link” between the grounds of
detention and the purpose of detention is snapped in arresting the detenu. A question
whether the delay is unreasonable and stands unexplained depends on the facts and
circumstances of each case.”
11) By objecting, the contentions of the petitioner, the learned Additional Solicitor
General of India has drew the attention of this Court, in the counter affidavit filed by
the respondents 1 and 2, particularly in Paragraphs 8, 18 and 26. At this juncture, it is
relevant to cite the paragraphs 8, 18 and 26 of the counter affidavit :-
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis “8. I respectfully submit that during the further
course of investigation, it is revealed that Shri. Mohammed Sabir Ali, Proprietor of
Airhub, established Airhub as a front of smuggling gold into India and orchestrated
the smuggling activities by offering financial incentives to his employees viz. Shri. M.
Kani S/o Shri. Muruganantham, Shri Johnmildon S S/o Shri. Sesumuthu Shri V
Balaji S/o Shri. Vedhachalam, Shri Naveenraj G S/o Shri. Ganeshan, Shri Vignesh R
S/o Shri. Ravichandran, Shri Vinoth M S/o Shri. Makesh and Shri Kishore S S/o Shri.
Siva Kumar and reportedly arranged a seven-day training program for all of his
employees to instruct them on the methods/techniques to effectively carry/conceal
the gold paste in their rectums. Transit passengers were handing over gold at the
Airhub Shop or sometimes in the rest room of the M2 Toilet. All his employees were
tasked with collecting gold bundles from these locations, concealing them in their
rectum and smuggling them out of the airport. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Thereafter, they supposed to hand over the gold to a person Shri. Vijayan at a tea
shop near Tirusulam Bus Station. All instructions regarding the smuggling were
given by Shri Mohammad Sabir, Ali, Vijayan and Shri Jhonmildon.
18. I respectfully submit that with reference to the contents of Paragraph 5 of the
affidavit filed by the petitioner, the Sponsoring Agency submitted a proposal for the
preventive detention of the detenue to the Detaining Authority on 31.07.2024. The
Impugned Detention Order has been passed against the detenue on 13.08.2024 by
the Respondent No. 1 being the Detaining Authority under the COFEPOSA Act, 1974
only after arriving at his subjective satisfaction based on relevant and sufficient
material and facts. This decision was based on the nature and gravity of Shri
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91970461/ 6
Fathima Beevi vs The Joint Secretary (Cofeposa) ... on 21 December, 2024
Mohammed Sabir Ali's role in the activities, which exhibited a high level of
sophistication aimed at https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis evading legal scrutiny and
exploiting vulnerabilities in airport transit procedures. Such detailed planning and
coordination underscore the sophisticated nature of his illicit activities and reflect his
significant potential and propensity to engage in prejudicial activities in the future.
26. I respectfully submit that with reference to the contents of Paragraph 13 and 14 of
the affidavit filed by the petitioner, the detenue was arrested under Customs Act,
1962 on 28.06.2024 and thereafter the investigation was carried on by the Customs
Authority.
During the investigation, the Customs Authority felt the need to preventively detain the detenue.
Accordingly, a proposal for preventive detention of the detenue Shri Md. Sabir Ali along with his
co-detenues were forwarded to the office of the detaining authority on 30.07.2024 which was
received in the office of detaining authority on 31.07.2024. The said proposal
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis was placed before the High Level Screening Committee, consisting
of senior level officers of Govt. of India for screening the said proposal. The screening committee
meeting took place on 07.08.2024 wherein the said proposal was found fit for preventive detention
of Shri Md. Sabir Ali under COFEPOSA Act, 1974. Then only, the said proposals along with all the
relevant documents were placed before the detaining authority. The detaining authority issued the
detention order on 13.08.2024 only after arriving at his subjective satisfaction on the basis of the
material/facts placed before him. The said subjective satisfaction has clearly been noted down by the
detaining authority in the grounds of detention (para 8) wherein the detaining authority clearly
mentioned that he was aware that the detenue was in judicial custody at the time of issuance of
detention order and there is a possibility of his release from the judicial custody on bail. The said
detention order was executed on the detenue on https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 14.08.2024.
Further, according to Section 3(3) of the COFEPOSA Act, 1974, the grounds of detention must be
provided "as soon as possible after detention, but not necessarily immediately, as claimed in the
petition. The phrase "as soon as implies a reasonable timeframe, and Section 3(3) generally allows
for a period of up to five days under ordinary circumstances and up to fifteen days in exceptional
cases. In this instance, the Detention Order was issued on 13.08.2024 and executed on 14.08.2024.
The grounds of detention, along with the list of relied- upon documents, were served to the detenue
on 17.08.2024, which is well within the time limits prescribed by the COFEPOSA Act, 1974.”
12. It is pertinent to mention that the relevant portion of the detention order, where the detaining
authority has stated that the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis documents relied upon are being
served upon the detenue is reiterated in the counter filed by the respondents 1 and 2, specifically in
paragraph 25, the relevant portion is extracted below :-
“I respectfully submit that with reference to the contents of Paragraph 12 of the
affidavit filed by the petitioner, the legible copies of RUDs from pages 220, 221, 222
and 243 were requested by the petitioner through a representation dated 02.09.2024
made to the detaining authority. The detaining authority directed the Sponsoring
Authority to supply various documents as requested by the petitioner. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91970461/ 7
Fathima Beevi vs The Joint Secretary (Cofeposa) ... on 21 December, 2024
sponsoring authority received this request on 05.09.2024 and subsequently supplied
various documents, including Notifications No.43/2024-Customs and 45/2024-
Customs, a legible copy of the bail application dated 28.06.2024 filed by Mohammed
Sabir Ali, a legible copy of the bail application dated 28.06.2024 filed by Mohammed
Sabir Ali, a legible copy of the bail application dated 22.07.2024 filed by Mohammed
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Razeen Mohammed Ismail, and a chronological
sequence of events along with Tamil translations of the requisite documents. These
were provided to the detenue, acknowledged on 16.09.2024.”
13. It is also pertinent to mention that the detaining authority has satisfied itself that the nexus
between the dates of incident and passing of detention order, as well as object of detention has been
well maintained. At this juncture, it is relevant to cite the Paragraphs 6, 7 and 10 of the detention
order, the same is extracted hereinunder :-
“6. In view of the facts and circumstances explained above, I have no hesitation in
concluding that you i.e. Shri Mohammed Sabir Ali played a vital role in smuggling of
gold of foreign origin from abroad along with other accomplices. The investigation by
Customs, Chennai I Commissionerate (Airport) has uncovered compelling evidence
pointing to your central role as the mastermind behind a sophisticated gold
smuggling network operating https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis between
international sources and India. Alongside accomplices Shri Ihshan alias Kumar R
and Shri Vijayan, you established Airhub shop shop in the transit area of Chennai
International Airport. This establishment served as a front for smuggling operations,
allowing them to successfully transport an astonishing 267 kgs of gold valued at
approximately Rs. 167 Crores over just 45 days. The operation was meticulously
organized, involving the recruitment and training of staff specifically for the purpose
of smuggling gold. This indicates a high level of planning and coordination aimed at
evading legal scrutiny and exploiting vulnerabilities in airport transit procedures. The
use of body concealment and strategic transit routes at Chennai International Airport
further highlight the sophisticated nature of your illicit activities. The systematic
nature of these smuggling operations poses a grave threat not only to India's
economic interests but also to its security and https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
regulatory frameworks. You have also designed plan in an organized and repeated
manner in the act of smuggling. Investigations further clearly establish your
continued propensity and inclination to indulge in act of smuggling in a planned
manner to the detriment of the economic security of the country and that unless
prevented you i.e. Shri Mohammed Sabir Ali will continue to do so. Further
considering the nature and gravity of offence in an organized manner in which you
i.e. Shri Mohammed Sabir Ali have engaged yourself in such prejudicial activities and
your role therein, all of which reflect your high potentiality and propensity to indulge
in such prejudicial activities in future, I am satisfied that there is a need to prevent
you from smuggling of gold. Hence, you i.e. Shri Mohammed Sabir Ali ought to be
detained under the Conservation of Foreign Exchange and Prevention of Smuggling
Activities (COFEPOSA) Act, 1974 with a view to preventing you from
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91970461/ 8
Fathima Beevi vs The Joint Secretary (Cofeposa) ... on 21 December, 2024
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis smuggling goods, abetting the smuggling of goods
and harbouring persons engaged in smuggling goods in future, in terms of Section
3(1) of the COFEPOSA Act, 1974.
7. Prevention of perpetration of such despicable activities is indispensable for the
greater cause of the nation. The smuggling syndicate committed the offence with
meticulous planning and deliberate designs having the sole intention of personal
profit regardless of the adverse impact of your actions on national economy and
security and there is every likelihood that you ie. Shri Mohammed Sabir Ali as
member of the syndicate will engage yourself in such smuggling activities again in
view of your propensity to do so.
10. Having regard to the chronological sequence of events in this case, the time
required to https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis scan the proposal, procure additional
information and the voluminous relied upon documents (RUDs), the time required to
apply my mind to arrive at the subjective satisfaction and to formulate the Grounds
of Detention, I am satisfied that the nexus between the dates of incident and passing
of this Detention Order as well as object of your detention has been well maintained.
14. We are of the opinion that in the present case a huge volume of gold i.e., 267 kgs of Gold valued
approximately Rs.167 crores, had been smuggled into the country, over a period of 45 days. The
detaining authority was satisfied that the detenue had a propensity to indulge in the same act of
smuggling and passed the order of preventive detention, which is a preventive measure. Based on
the documents and the materials placed before the detaining authority and considering the
individual role of the detenue, the detaining authority satisfied itself as to the detenue continued
propensity and his inclination to indulge in acts of smuggling in a planned manner, detrimental to
the economic security of the country. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
15. In the light of the above facts and circumstances, we are of the view that the detaining authority
has deemed it necessary to issue a detention order against the detenue. This Court finds there is no
reason to interfere with the impugned order dated 13.08.2024 passed by the first respondent.
16. In fine, the habeus corpus petition stands dismissed. No costs.
[S.M.S., J.] [M.J.R., J.]
21.12.2024
Index: Yes/No
Internet:Yes/No
Neutral Citation: Yes/No
tsh
To
1.The Joint Secretary (COFEPOSA) Government of India Ministry of Finance, Department of
Revenue, Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, 6th Floor, B-wing, Janpath Bhawan Janpath, New
Delhi – 110 001.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91970461/ 9
Fathima Beevi vs The Joint Secretary (Cofeposa) ... on 21 December, 2024
2.The Directorate General Central Economic Intelligence Bureau Government Of India Ministry of
Finance, Department of Revenue, Central Economic Intelligence Bureau, 6th Floor, B-wing, Janpath
Bhawan Janpath, New Delhi – 110 001.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
3.The superintendent of Prison Central Prison, Puzhal, Chennai.
4.The Superintendent of Customs Prosecution unit – Airport New Custome House,
Meenambakkam, Chennai – 600 027.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis S.M.SUBRAMANIAM, J.
AND M.JOTHIRAMAN, J.
tsh https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 21.12.2024 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91970461/ 10
