Fullmoon Kashung vs Officer-In-Charge on 8 March, 2024
Fullmoon Kashung vs Officer-In-Charge on 8 March, 2024
KHOIROM Digitally signed by
KHOIROM
Item No. 45
BIPINCHANDR BIPINCHANDRA SINGH
Date: 2024.03.08
A SINGH 17:15:43 +05'30'
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
BAIL APPLN. No. 13 of 2024
Fullmoon Kashung
... Petitioner
- Versus -
Officer-in-Charge, Narcotics & Affairs of Border (NAB)
... Respondent
B E FO R E HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE GOLMEI GAIPHULSHILLU 08.03.2024 [1] Heard Mr.
Tungrei Ngakang, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. Samarjit Hawaibam, learned
PP appearing for the respondent.
[2] The application has been filed under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal Procedure Code, 1973
with the following prayer:
"To grant interim bail of 1 (one) month to the petitioner in connection with FIR No.
15(10) 2023 NAB-PS, U/S 21(C)/25/29/60(3) ND & PS Act, 1985, so as to enable the
petitioner to perform religious rituals post burial of the deceased mother for the ends
of justice."
[3] The Grounds for filing the present application are as follows:
"The petitioner approaches this Hon'ble court by way of this Cril. Misc. bail
Application for the reliefs prayed for herein on the following, amongst other, which
are without prejudice to one another:
A. Because the interim bail of 6 (Six) days granted to the petitioner in Cril. Misc. (B)
Case No. 14 of 2024 become infructuous on account of petitioner's family members
inability to furnish two sureties with Rs. 10,00,00/- as they belong to poor section of
the society.
B. Because the prayer for extension of the interim period was rejected inspite of the
fact that petitioner has not yet conducted post funeral rituals such as prayer offering
to the deceased, graveyard construction, memorial stone erection etc. The present
condition of the petitioner is extra-ordinary in nature in as much as the death of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47357444/ 1
Fullmoon Kashung vs Officer-In-Charge on 8 March, 2024
petitioner mother requires religious rituals to be offer by the family members to Page
1|5 the departed soul post burial of the death body. Petitioner is the only child of the
deceased mother and there is no one to perform the said religious rituals which are
sacramental in nature.
C. The Supreme Court, in Hussainara Khatoon and Ors Versus Home Secretary, State
of Bihar (1980) 1 SCC 81 held as under:
"3. Now, one reason why our legal and judicial system continually denies justice to
the poor by keeping them for long years in pre- trial detention is our highly
unsatisfactory bail system. It suffers from a property oriented approach which seems
to proceed on the erroneous assumption that risk of monetary loss is the only
deterrent against fleeing from justice.
The Code of Criminal Procedure, even after its re-enactment, continues to adopt the same
antiquated approach as the earlier Code enacted towards the end of the last century and where an
accused is to be released on his personal bond, it insists that the bond should contain a monetary
obligation requiring the accused to pay a sum of money in case he fails to appear at the trial.
Moreover, as if this were not sufficient deterrent to the poor, the courts mechanically and as a
matter of course insist that the accused should produce sureties who will stand bail for Neutral
Citation Number is 2023/DHC/000386 him and these sureties must again establish their solvency
to be able to pay up the amount of the bail in case the accused fails to appear to answer the charge.
This system of bails operates very harshly against the poor and it is only the non-poor who are able
to take advantage of it by getting themselves released on bail. The poor find it difficult to furnish bail
even without sureties because very often the amount of the bail fixed by the courts is so
unrealistically excessive that in a majority of cases the poor are unable to satisfy the police or the
Magistrate about their solvency for the amount of the bail and where the bail is with sureties, as is
usually the case, it becomes an almost impossible task for the poor to find persons sufficiently
solvent to stand as sureties. The result is that either they are fleeced by the police and revenue
officials or by touts and professional sureties and sometimes they have even to incur debts for
securing their release or, being unable to obtain release, they have to remain in jail until such time
as the court is able to take up their cases for trial, leading to grave consequences, namely, (1) though
presumed innocent, they are subjected to psychological and physical deprivations of jail life, (2) they
are prevented from contributing to the preparation of their defence, and (3) they lose their job, if
they have one, and are deprived of an opportunity to work to support themselves and their family
members with the result that the burden of their detention almost invariably falls heavily on the
innocent members of the family. It is here that the poor find our legal and judicial system oppressive
and heavily weighted against them and a feeling of frustration and despair occurs upon them as they
find that they are helplessly in a position of inequality with the non- poor.......... 8. In regard to the
exercise of the judicial power to release a prisoner awaiting trial on bail or on the execution of a
personal bond without sureties for his appearance, I have to say this briefly. There is an amplitude
of power in this regard within the Neutral Citation Number is 2023/DHC/000386 existing
provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, and it is for the courts to fully acquaint themselves
with the nature and extent of their discretion in exercising it. I think it is no longer possible to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47357444/ 2
Fullmoon Kashung vs Officer-In-Charge on 8 March, 2024
countenance a mechanical exercise of the power. What should be the amount of security required or
the monetary obligation demanded in a Page 2|5 bond is a matter calling for the careful
consideration of several factors. The entire object being only to ensure that the undertrial does not
flee or hide himself from trial, all the relevant considerations which enter into the determination of
that question must be taken into account....."
Following the above enumerated settled law, a Coordinate Bench of Delhi High Court vide order
dated 01.06.2022 in "Sehnaz vs State", CRL.A. 447/2020, and order dated 08.07.2021 in "Azad
Khan vs. State (NCT of Delhi)", CRL. M.C. 1438/2021, on similar grounds, released the accused on
bail on furnishing of personal bond only, without any sureties.
D. Because petitioner family being from poor backward section of the society was unable to furnish
the two sureties with Rs. 10,00,00/- as passed by the Ld. Judge in Cril. Misc. (B) Case No. 14 of
2024.
E. In Bhupinder Singh Versus UNITECH LTD, Civil Appeal No (S). 10856/2016 Supreme Court
granted two weeks interim bail to the accused due to the death of applicant's father-in-Law.
F. In Athar Pervez Versus State, the High Court of Delhi by Division Bench decided on the question:
whether the Courts can grant "interim" bail when the conditions for grant of bail under Section 37 of
the Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (NDPS Act) for short) are not satisfied. In
other words, the issue is whether the provisions and conditions of Section 37 of the NDPS Act would
apply only to cases of "bail" or would also apply when the accused seeks "interim" bail.
The Hon'ble Court held as follow: 17. The expression "interim bail is not defined in the Code. It is an
innovation by legal neologism which has gained acceptance and recognition. The terms, "interim"
bail /"interim" suspension of sentence, have been used and accepted as part of legal vocabulary and
are well known expressions. The said terms are used in contradistinction and to distinguish release
on regular bail during pendency of trial or appeal till final adjudication. Applications for "interim"
suspension or bail are primarily moved and prayed for, when the accused or convict is not entitled to
or cannot be granted regular bail or suspension of sentence, or the application for grant of regular
bail is pending consideration and is yet to be decided.
"Interim" bail entailing temporary release can be granted under compelling
circumstances and grounds, even when regular bail would not be justified.
Intolerable grief and suffering in the given facts, may justify temporary release, even
when regular bail is not warranted. Such situations are not difficult to recount,
though making a catalogue would be an unnecessary exercise.
18. We have referred to the terms "bail" and "interim" bail and have set out the
difference between the two, for this distinction is of significance and importance
when we decide the question under reference. Thus, when the nomenclature "bail"
and "interim" bail are not defined by statute or when such terms can connote and
have different meanings, the "bail" and "interim" bail could have contrasting and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47357444/ 3
Fullmoon Kashung vs Officer-In-Charge on 8 March, 2024
dissimilar implications.
Page 3|5
19. By its very nature, "interim" bail is a temporary liberation for a fixed period of
time. It is a bail on pro-tem basis. [See Sunil Fulchand Shah (Supra) and Mukesh
Kishanpuria (Supra)]. "Interim" bail should not and cannot be a substitute and an
alternative for regular bail. It should be granted for the minimal time deservedly
necessary.
G. Because the fact and circumstances of the petitioner is exceptional and
extra-ordinary in nature as the petitioner and his family members are facing
intolerable grief and suffering due to the death of petitioner mother and there is no
one to look after the three minor children of petitioners who are aged about 5 old son
and two daughters aged about 7 and 9 years respectively.
9. That it is humbly submitted that petitioner will not flee away from the course of justice and he
shall surrender before the authority as and when directed by the Hon'ble court.
10. That accused humbly stated that he is quite innocent of the charges levelled against him and that
he has not committed such an offence at any point of time or in other word he has no criminal
antecedents.
11. That it is humbly submitted that petitioner shall undertake not to leave the state of Manipur
without the consent of the Hon'ble court. That no such similar application has been filed or is
pending in any other court including Supreme Court except this present application.
11. That the cause of action arose on the state of Manipur within the jurisdiction of this Hon'ble
court and it is still continuing.
12. That there is no other alternative forum other than the present one under the existing criminal
procedural law.
13. That accused shall be able to furnish sufficient bonds as and when bail is granted in his favour
and further undertakes that he shall not abscond not temper any of the evidence while on interim
bail and shall abide by any condition imposed by the Hon'ble court while on bail."
[4] The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner draws the attention of this Court to Annexure -
A/3, order dated 06.02.2024 passed by the Ld. Special Court (ND & PS), Manipur, Imphal in Cril.
Misc. Case No. 14 of 2024. In that, the Ld. Trial Court, after hearing the prosecution as well as the
learned counsel for the petitioner the order dated 06.02.2024 has been passed. The relevant para
No. 7 of the order is reproduced herein below:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47357444/ 4
Fullmoon Kashung vs Officer-In-Charge on 8 March, 2024
"7. In my view, the situation is an extra-ordinary and exceptional one. Situated thus,
the applicant is hereby released on interim bail for a period of 6(six) days w.e.f.
06/02/2024 till 11/02/2024 on his furnishing PR Bond of Rs. 10,00,000/- (Rupees
ten lakh) only with two sureties of like amount. The accused/applicant shall
surrender before Court on 12/02/2024 at 11 AM."
Page 4|5 [5] Due to the poor family background and long distance from the village, the petitioner
failed to furnish the required PR Bond of the interim order. Thereafter, the petitioner filed one more
petition being Cril. Misc. Case No. 13 of 2024 seeking extension of the interim bail order wherein,
the Ld. Special Judge (ND & PS), Manipur rejected the application.
[6] Considering the nature and situation of the family of the petitioner and the petitioner being the
only child of the deceased mother who died on 05.02.2024, his physical presence in the family is
required to perform the prayer offering to the departed soul which is mandatory to do so and in the
facts and circumstances, the petitioner is granted 10 (ten) days' interim bail so as to enable him to
perform the rituals as mentioned above.
[7] The petitioner is directed to report to the Maphou Police Station just after reaching his village. It
is further directed to the petitioner to furnish the required Bond before the Ld. Special Judge (ND &
PS), Manipur, Imphal on 11.03.2024. The petitioner is also directed to report to the S.P. Central Jail,
Sajiwa on 22.03.2024 by 11:00 a.m. sharp.
[8] Registry is directed to send an extract copy of this order to the Ld. Special Judge (ND & PS),
Manipur, Imphal and the S.P. Central Jail, Sajiwa. A copy of this order also be furnished to both the
learned counsel appearing for the parties.
[9] Further, the S.P., Central Jail, Sajiwa is directed to report about whether the petitioner has
surrendered before him on the date and time mentioned above. The report may be submitted before
this Court on or before 04.04.2024.
[10] List the matter on 04.04.2024.
JUDGE
Bipin
Page 5|5
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47357444/ 5
