Furkan vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Furkan vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Author: Ashutosh Srivastava
Bench: Ashutosh Srivastava
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44428
Court No. - 68
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 9742 of 2025
Applicant :- Furkan
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Ramajan Ahmad
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Ashutosh Srivastava,J.
1. Heard Shri Ramajan Ahmad, learned counsel for the applicant and Shri Manoj Kumar Singh,
learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the record.
2. It is submitted by learned counsel for the applicant that as per allegation in the First Information
Report, which was lodged against unknown person for recovery of cow parts. It is submitted that
applicant was not apprehended from the spot. The name of applicant was surfaced in the
confessional statement when the applicant and other accused persons were arrested in another
crime. It is submitted that there is no other evidence linking the applicant with alleged crime. It is
submitted that co-accused Saleem and Naeem and Faheem, have already been granted bail by this
Court by orders dated 6.8.2024 and 13.08.2024, passed in Criminal Misc. Bail Application Nos.7700
of 2024 and 29927 of 2024. The criminal history of applicant has been explained in paragraph no.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181552194/ 1
Furkan vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
21 of the affidavit filed in support of the bail application. have been explained in paragraph nos. 12
and 13 of the affidavit. Applicant is languishing in jail since 01.08.2024 and in case they are released
on bail, they will not misuse the liberty of bail and will cooperate in the trial.
3. Learned A.G.A. for the State opposed the prayer for bail but does not dispute factual matrix of the
case.
4. No material or circumstance has been brought to the notice of this Court with regard to tampering
of evidence or intimidating of witness in previous criminal cases. In Ash Mohammad Vs. Shiv Raj
Singh, (2012) 9 SCC 446, the Apex Court in para 30 has observed:-
"We may hasten to add that when we state that the accused is a history-sheeter we
may not be understood to have said that a history-sheeter is never entitled to bail.
But, it is a significant factor to be taken note of regard being had to the nature of
crime in respect of which he has been booked."
5. In the case of Prabhakar Tewari Vs. State of U.P. and another, 2020 (11) SCC 648, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has observed that pendency of several criminal cases against an accused may itself
cannot be a basis for refusal of bail.
6. In so far as criminal antecedents of the applicant is concerned, it is not the case of the State that
applicant may tamper with or otherwise adversely influence the investigation, or that he may
intimidate witnesses before or during the trial. The State has also not placed any material that
applicant in past attempted to evade the process of law. If the accused is otherwise found to be
entitled to bail, he cannot be denied bail only on the ground of criminal history, no exceptional
circumstances on the basis of criminal antecedents have been shown to deny bail to accused, hence,
the Court does not feel it proper to deny bail to the applicant just on the ground that they had
criminal antecedent.
7. The principle that Bail is a rule and Jail is an exception has been well recognised by Apex Court
more specifically on the touch stone of Article 21 of the Constitution. The said principle has been
reiterated by the Apex Court in Satyendra Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and
another, 2022 (10) SCC 51. Learned AGA has not shown any exceptional circumstances which would
warrant denial of bail to the applicants.
8. No material, facts or circumstances has been shown by learned AGA for the State that the accused
may tamper with the evidence or witnesses or the accused is of such character that their mere
presence at large would intimidate the witnesses or that accused will use their liberty to subvert
justice or tamper with the evidence.
9. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned AGA for the State.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181552194/ 2
Furkan vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
10. Learned AGA for the State has not shown any material or circumstances that the
accused/applicant is not entitled to bail in larger interests of the public or State.
11. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, nature of offence, evidence, complicity of the
accused, submissions of learned counsel for the parties and without expressing any opinion on the
merits of the case, the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail
application is allowed.
12. Let the applicant Furkan involved in Case Crime No. 192 of 2024, under Sections 3/5/8 of U.P.
Prevention of Cow Slaughtering Act, 1955, Police Station Hafizganj, District Bareilly be released on
bail on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
court concerned subject to the following conditions:-
i. The applicant will not tamper with the evidence during the trial.
ii. The applicant will not pressurize/intimidate the prosecution witness.
iii. The applicant will appear before the trial court on the date fixed, unless personal
presence is exempted and/or the applicant shall make themselves available for
interrogation by a police officer as and when required.
iv. The applicant shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which he is
accused, or suspected, of the commission of which he is suspected.
v. The applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence.
vi. The applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court.
vii. In the event, the applicant changes residential address, the applicant shall inform
the court concerned about new residential address in writing.
13. In case of breach of any of the above condition, the prosecution shall be at liberty to move bail
cancellation application before this Court.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 Deepak/
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/181552194/ 3
