Gajraj Singh Tomar vs Smt. Kasturi on 3 April, 2019
Gajraj Singh Tomar vs Smt. Kasturi on 3 April, 2019
1
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
M.P. 2462/2018
(Gajraj Singh Tomar, vs. Smt. Kasturi & Ors.)
Gwalior, Dated : 03.04.2019
Shri N.K. Gupta, Senior Advocate with Shri S.D. Singh,
Counsel for the petitioner.
Shri B.D. Verma, Counsel for the respondents No.1 to 5.
Shri B.K. Agrawal, Counsel for the respondent No.8. This petition under Article 227 of the
Constitution of India has been filed against the order dated 12.2.2018 and 28.4.2018 passed by 4th
Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Morena in Claim Case No.40/2015 by which the Trial Court had
reviewed its order own dated 20.9.2017 without there being any application for review.
2. The necessary facts for the disposal of the present petition in short are that the respondents No.1
to 6 have filed a claim petition against the petitioner as well as respondents No.7 and 8. It appears
that the owner of the offending vehicle had filed photocopy of insurance policy which according to
respondent No.8 is a forged copy and, accordingly, the respondent No.8 filed an application under
Order 11 Rule 12 of CPC for a direction to the owner to produce the original copy of the insurance
policy. The Claims Tribunal by order dated 20.9.2017 rejected the said application and directed the
respondent No.8 to begin its evidence. Thereafter, it appears that the direction to the respondent
No.8 to begin its evidence was reviewed THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Gajraj Singh
Tomar, vs. Smt. Kasturi & Ors.) by the Claims Tribunal by order dated 12.2.2018 and the petitioner
was directed to begin his evidence because it is the stand of the Insurance Company that the
photocopy of the insurance policy which has been filed by the petitioner is a forged one and,
therefore, in case if the Insurance Company is examined in the beginning, then it would become
necessary for the Claims Tribunal to recall the witnesses of the Insurance Company after the
examination of the petitioner's witnesses. It is not out of place to mention here that the order dated
12.2.2018 was passed by the Trial Court on its own without there being any application for review.
3. Thus, one thing is clear that the respondent No.8 have not expressed any grievance against the
order dated 20.9.2017 by which the Insurance Company was directed to begin its evidence.
4. It appears that the petitioner filed a review application against the order dated 12.2.2018 which
was rejected by the Claims Tribunal by order dated 28.4.2018 and thus this petition has been filed
against the order dated 12.2.2018 as well as the order of review dated 28.4.2018.
5. It is submitted by the counsel for the respondent No.8 that one petition against two orders is not
maintainable, therefore, this petition is not maintainable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/73047060/ 1
Gajraj Singh Tomar vs Smt. Kasturi on 3 April, 2019
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Gajraj Singh Tomar, vs. Smt. Kasturi & Ors.)
6. The petitioner has paid two sets of Court fee, therefore, a single petition arising out of two orders
is maintainable.
7. It is submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that the petitioner has already filed a photocopy of
the insurance policy. It is the case of the respondent No.8 that the said photocopy of the insurance
policy is a forged document and the Insurance Company/respondent No.8 has also lodged a FIR
against the petitioner. Thus where the respondent No.8 is already aware of the fact that the
petitioner has claimed that the offending vehicle was insured and the Insurance Company has taken
a specific stand that the said insurance policy is fake and forged document, then the Claims Tribunal
did not commit any mistake in directing the Insurance Company to being its evidence because the
petitioner would get an opportunity to rebut the evidence of the Insurance Company with regard to
the insurance policy and, accordingly, the Claims Tribunal by order dated 20.9.2017 had directed
the Insurance Company to begin its evidence. The Insurance Company was not aggrieved by the said
order and, therefore, neither they challenged the order nor they filed any application for review.
However, the Claims Tribunal without there being any application for review, has reviewed its own
order dated 20.9.2017 and has now directed the THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
(Gajraj Singh Tomar, vs. Smt. Kasturi & Ors.) petitioner to begin the evidence. It is submitted that
although the review is permissible under the CPC but the same can be done only when there is an
error apparent on the face of the record. The Claims Tribunal had directed the Insurance Company
to begin the evidence after considering the entire aspects of the matter and thus the Claims Tribunal
has committed a material illegality by reviewing its own order dated 20.9.2017.
8. Per contra, it is submitted by the counsel for the respondent No.8 that the Supreme Court in the
case of Pappu and others vs. Vinod Kumar Lamba and another reported in 2018(1) T.A.C. 360 (S.C.)
has held that unless and until the initial burden is discharged by the owner of the vehicle, the
burden would not shift on the Insurance Company and, accordingly, the Claims Tribunal has
corrected its mistake by passing the order dated 12.2.2018.
9. Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
10. The Supreme Court in the case of Pappu (supra) has held as under:-
"11. The question is: whether the fact that the offending vehicle bearing No.DIL-5955 was duly
insured by respondent No.2 Insurance Company would per se make the Insurance Company liable?
This Court in the case of National Insurance Co. Ltd. (supra), has noticed the defences available to
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Gajraj Singh Tomar, vs. Smt. Kasturi & Ors.) the
Insurance Company under Section 149(2)(a)
(ii) of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988. The Insurance Company is entitled to take a defence that the
offending vehicle was driven by an unauthorised person or the person driving the vehicle did not
have a valid driving licence. The onus would shift on the Insurance Company only after the owner of
the offending vehicle pleads and proves the basic facts within his knowledge that the driver of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/73047060/ 2
Gajraj Singh Tomar vs Smt. Kasturi on 3 April, 2019
offending vehicle was authorised by him to drive the vehicle and was having a valid driving licence
at the relevant time. In the present case, the respondent No.1 owner of the offending vehicle merely
raised a vague plea in the Written Statement that the offending vehicle DIL-5955 was being driven
by a person having valid driving licence. He did not disclose the name of the driver and his other
details. Besides, the respondent No.1 did not enter the witness box or examine any witness in
support of this plea. The respondent No.2 Insurance Company in the Written Statement has plainly
refuted that plea and also asserted that the offending vehicle was not driven by an authorised person
and having valid driving licence. The respondent No.1 owner of the offending vehicle did not
produce any evidence except a driving licence of one Joginder Singh, without any specific stand
taken in the pleadings THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Gajraj Singh Tomar, vs. Smt.
Kasturi & Ors.) or in the evidence that the same Joginder Singh was, in fact, authorised to drive the
vehicle in question at the relevant time. Only then would onus shift, requiring the respondent No.2
Insurance Company to rebut such evidence and to produce other evidence to substantiate its
defence. Merely producing a valid insurance certificate in respect of the offending Truck was not
enough for the respondent No.1 to make the Insurance Company liable to discharge his liability
arising from rash and negligent driving by the driver of his vehicle. The Insurance Company can be
fastened with the liability on the basis of a valid insurance policy only after the basic facts are
pleaded and established by the owner of the offending vehicle - that the vehicle was not only duly
insured but also that it was driven by an authorised person having a valid driving licence. Without
disclosing the name of the driver in the Written Statement or producing any evidence to
substantiate the fact that the copy of the driving licence produced in support was of a person who, in
fact, was authorised to drive the offending vehicle at the relevant time, the owner of the vehicle
cannot be said to have extricated himself from his liability. The Insurance Company would become
liable only after such foundational facts are pleaded and proved by the owner of the THE HIGH
COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Gajraj Singh Tomar, vs. Smt. Kasturi & Ors.) offending vehicle."
11. Thus it is clear that unless and until the initial burden is discharged by the owner, the burden
would not shift on the Insurance Company. In the case of Pappu (supra) the owner had merely
mentioned that the person who was driving the offending vehicle was having a valid license. Neither
the name of the driver was disclosed nor the owner entered the witness box nor he examined any
witness in support of his plea. Under these circumstances, the Supreme Court had come to a
conclusion that as the owner had failed to discharge the initial burden and, therefore, it was wrong
to say that the burden was still on the Insurance Company. Accordingly, it was held that unless and
until any evidence is produced by the owner, the onus never shift to the Insurance Company to rebut
such evidence whereas, in the present case the photocopy of the insurance policy relied upon by the
owner is already on record and the Insurance Company has specifically taken a stand that the said
photocopy is a forged document and the insurance policy was never issued by the Insurance
Company. Thus, the Insurance Company is well aware of the documents which have been filed by
the owner and the Insurance Company has also lodged a FIR against the owner and under these
circumstances it cannot be said that the order dated 20.9.2017 passed THE HIGH COURT OF
MADHYA PRADESH (Gajraj Singh Tomar, vs. Smt. Kasturi & Ors.) by the Claims Tribunal was bad.
12. Under these circumstances in absence of an error apparent on the face of the record, the Claims
Tribunal should not have reviewed its own order dated 20.9.2017.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/73047060/ 3
Gajraj Singh Tomar vs Smt. Kasturi on 3 April, 2019
13. At this stage, it is submitted by the counsel for the respondents No.1 to 6 that the claim petition
was filed about four years back and the claim petition is getting prolonged for no reason, as a result
of which, the claimants are suffering. The submission made by the counsel for the respondents No.1
to 6 is bonafide and, accordingly, the orders dated 12.2.2018 and 28.4.2018 passed by 4th Motor
Accident Claims Tribunal, Morena in Claim Case No.40/2015 are hereby set aside. The Insurance
Company/respondent No.8 is directed to begin its evidence as directed by the Claims Tribunal by
order dated 20.9.2017. As the claim petition is pending for the last four years, therefore, the Claims
Tribunal is directed to decide the claim petition positively within a period of three months from the
date of the production of certified copy of this order. No adjournment shall be granted to any of the
parties.
14. With aforesaid directions, this petition is allowed.
(G.S. Ahluwalia)
(alok) Judge
ALOK KUMAR
2019.04.05 11:01:27
+05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/73047060/ 4
