General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
...
LPA No.119/2024
LPA No. 120/2024
LPA No. 121/2024
Reserved on: 01 .03.2025
Pronounced on: 20.03.2025
LPA No. 119/2024
1. General Officer Commanding,
HQ 15 CORPS, Q (OPS) C/O 56 APO.
2. Commanding Officer, Col RR,
Badami Bagh, Cantonment, Srinagar
Kashmir c/o 56 APO Srinagar
Kashmir.
3. Lt. Col RR, (Punjab) Badami Bagh,
Cantonment, Srinagar, Kashmir C/O
56 APO Srinagar Kashmir.
4. HQ 31, Sub Area Commander,
Badami Bagh, Cantonment, Srinagar
Kashmir C/O 56 APO Srinagar
Kashmir.
vs.
1. Aijaz Ahmad Mir S/o Abdul cani
Mir R/O Drangbal, Parnpore, Kastrmir.
2.Director, DEFENCE,Procurement, Sanatnagar,
Srinagar-Kashmir.
3.State Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court, J&K
Srinagar.
LPA No. 120/2024
1. General Officer Commanding,
HQ 15 CORPS, Q (OPS) C/O 56 APO.
2. Commanding Officer, Col RR,
Badami Bagh, Cantonment, Srinagar
Kashmir c/o 56 APO Srinagar
Kashmir.
3. Lt. Col RR, (Punjab) Badami Bagh,
Cantonment, Srinagar, Kashmir C/O
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 1
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
56 APO Srinagar Kasmir.
4. HQ 31, Sub Area Commander,
2
LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals
Badami Bagh, Cantonment, Srinagar
Kashmir C/O 56 APO Srinagar
Kashmir.
vs.
1. Mohd Amin Mir son of Abdul Gani Mir
resident of Drangbal Pampore Kashmir
2. Director, Defence Procurement, Sanatnagar,
Srinagar-Kashmir.
3. State Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court,
J&K Srinagar.
LPA No. 121/2024
1. General Officer Commanding,
HQ 15 CORPS, Q (OPS) C/O 56 APO.
2. Commanding Officer, Col RR,
Badami Bagh, Cantonment, Srinagar
Kashmir c/o 56 APO Srinagar
Kashmir.
3. Lt. Col RR, (Punjab) Badami Bagh,
Cantonment, Srinagar, Kashmir C/O
56 APO Srinagar Kasmir.
4. HQ 31, Sub Area Commander,
Badami Bagh, Cantonment, Srinagar
Kashmir C/O 56 APO Srinagar
Kashmir.
vs.
1. Tariq Ahmad Malla son of Ali Mohd Malla
resident of Kralpora Pulwama Kashmir
2. Director, DEFENCE
Procurement, Sanatnagar,
Srinagar-Kashmir.
3. State Industrial Tribunal cum Labour Court,
J&K Srinagar.
For Appellants:
Mr. T. M. Shamsi DSGI with Mr. Fizan Ahmad
Ganai CGSC.
For Respondents:
Mr. M.M.Dar Advocate with Mr. U.M.Banday
and Mr. Zaffar Mehdi Advocates.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 2
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
3
LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals
CORAM: HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE.
JUDGEMENT
Sanjeev Kumar-J
1. These intra Court appeals filed by the appellants under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent arise out of
an order and judgment dated 23-02-2024 passed by the learned Single Judge of this Court [„the
Writ Court(cid:129)] in OWP No. 341/2017 and two clubbed matters, whereby the Writ Court has upheld
the award dated 15-06-2016 passed by the Industrial Tribunal-cum- Labour Court, J&K, Srinagar (
„the Labour Court(cid:129)).
2. Briefly put, the facts leading to filing of these appeals, as can be culled out of the pleadings and
the material on record, are that S/Shri Aijaz Ahmed Mir, Tariq Ahmed Malla and Mohd Amin Mir [„
hereinafter referred to as the Writ Petitioners for convenience(cid:129)] were engaged as casual porters for
rendering services to the appellants on need basis from April, 2010 till December, 2012. They were
thrown out of service after December, 2012 on the ground that there was no work with the
appellants available for them. The writ petitioners served a legal notice upon the appellants for their
arbitrary ouster from the services. The writ petitioners also staked their claim for regularization of
their services. The notice was replied by the appellants informing the writ petitioners that there was
no provision for regularization of casual porters.
LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals
3. The Writ petitioners filed an application before the Assistant Labour Commissioner, Srinagar,
[„for short ALC, Srinagar(cid:129)] which was dismissed by ALC Srinagar vide order dated 26-03-2013. The
application was dismissed on the ground that the dispute raised by the writ petitioners was outside
the scope of the Industrial Disputes Act. The writ petitioners were accordingly advised to approach
the appropriate forum.
4. After rejection of the application for conciliation by ALC, Srinagar, the writ petitioners
approached the Regional Labour Commissioner, Central, Jammu by way of an application filed
under Section 15 of the Payment of Wages Act, 1936 for recovery of their un-paid wages. The
application was dismissed by the Regional Labour Commissioner (Central), Jammu vide its order
dated 09-10-2013 with the observation that the matter pertains to State Labour Department. The
writ petitioners were, thus, directed to approach the ALC, Srinagar for redressal of their grievance.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 3
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
5. The writ petitioners thereafter approached the ALC, Srinagar by way of an application for
initiating Conciliation Proceedings. They also seems to have moved an application under Payment of
Wages Act for release of pending wages. As is claimed, the writ petitioners waited for 45 days to
know the outcome of the conciliation proceedings initiated by them before the ALC, Srinagar and
when no decision was taken by the ALC, Srinagar (Conciliation Officer), the writ petitioners
approached directly the Labour Court under Section 2-A (2) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 [
„the ID Act(cid:129)].
6. In the application filed by the writ petitioners before the Labour Court, the writ petitioners prayed
for setting aside of their disengagement and reinstatement in service. On being put on notice, the
appellants LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals appeared and filed their written statement. It
was the stand taken by the appellants that the writ petitioners were only casual porters engaged on
need basis and, therefore, they can neither be reinstated nor they can be permanently absorbed.
However, after filing the written statement, the appellants absented from the proceedings. They
were set ex parte by the Labour Court and the writ petitioners were directed to lead their evidence in
ex parte. On the basis of material on record, and the evidence led by the writ petitioners the Labour
Court framed following two issues for adjudication:
(i) Whether the office of appellants, for the purpose of dispute referred in this
reference, was falling within the definition of "Industry" under the Industrial
Disputes Act, 1947 ?
(ii) Whether the instant reference petition was maintainable in view of the provisions
of sub-section (2) of Section 2-A of the Industrial Disputes Act ?
7. The Labour Court having considered the matter in the light of different provisions of the ID Act,
came to the conclusion that the job of a porter is not an activity directly or indirectly related to
protecting the sovereignty of the State and, therefore, the appellants were clearly falling within the
definition of „Industry(cid:129) under the ID Act. On the second issue, the Tribunal held that failure of the
Conciliation Officer i.e. ALC, Srinagar to submit failure report within period of 45 days gave cause of
action to the writ petitioners to invoke sub section (2) of Section 2-A of the ID Act and, therefore,
the reference before the Labour Court was clearly maintainable.
8. After deciding the twin issues framed, the Labour Court addressed the application of the writ
petitioners on merits and came to the conclusion that the termination of the writ petitioners was in
violation of the provisions of LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals Section 25-B and 25-F of the
ID Act and, therefore, bad in the eye of law. The Labour Court allowed the reference and directed
the appellants herein to reinstate the writ petitioners forthwith with a further direction to the
appellants to pay full back wages to the writ petitioners within a period of three months, failing
which they were held entitled to receive interest at the rate of 8% per annum till final realization.
9. The Award dated 15.06.2016 passed by the Labour Court was called in question by the appellants
here by filing three writ petitions which have been disposed of by the writ Court vide impugned
judgment dated 23.02.2024. Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied by the judgment of the writ Court,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 4
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
the appellants are before us in these three appeals.
10. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having perused the material on record, we need
to first put on record that the Labour dispute raised by the writ petitioners before the Labour Court
directly in terms of sub section (2) of Section 2-A of the ID Act, 1947 was contested by the appellants
by filing their written statement. The appellants, however, did not contest the reference by leading
any evidence in rebuttal. As a matter of fact, the appellants absented themselves after filing their
written statement and were proceeded ex parte by the Labour Court. However, on the basis of the
pleadings of the parties, the Labour Court framed two important issues for adjudication i.e. (i)
Whether the appellants (the employer) falls within the definition of 'Industry' as given in Section 2
(j) of the ID Act; and, (ii) whether the reference made by the writ petitioners directly to the Labor
Court is maintainable in view of the provisions of sub section (2) of Section 2-A of the ID Act, 1947.
LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals
11. The Tribunal has very casually dealt with both these issues and answered them in favour of the
writ petitioners. The reasoning given by the Labour Court is far from convincing. In order to find out
as to whether the activity of a Department would fall within the definition of „Industry(cid:129), the nature
of job being performed by a workman/employee is not the sole determining factor. The term
„Industry(cid:129) as defined in Section 2 (j) of the ID Act has baffled the legal minds ever since its
enactment. In the year 1978, a Seven Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Bangalore Water-Supply
& Sewerage Board vs. A. Rajappa & others, (1978) 2 SCC, 213 surveyed the entire case law with
regard to the denotation and connotation of the word „Industry(cid:129) as used in Section 2 (j) of the ID
Act. The Supreme Court, relying upon its earlier judgment in State of Bombay and ors vs. The
Hospital Mazdoor Sabha, AIR 1960 SC, 610 reiterated the triple test evolved in Hospital Majdoor
Sabha case (supra). It was thus held that „Industry(cid:129) exists where there is (i) systematic activity (ii)
organized by cooperation between employer and employee; (iii) for the production and/or
distribution of goods and services calculated to satisfy human wants and wishes. If this triple test is
satisfied, then prima facie there is an „industry(cid:129) in that enterprise.
12. A fortiori, the Court also held that „Industry(cid:129) does not include spiritual or religious services or
services geared to celestial bliss e.g. making on a large scale Prasad or food. The Industry, however,
would include material services and things. Absence of profit motive or gainful objective of the
activities is irrelevant, whether the venture is public, joint, private or other sector. The true focus is
functional and the correct test is the nature of the activity with special emphasis on the
employer/employee relations. If LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals the organization is a trade
or business, it does not cease to be one because of philanthropy animating the undertaking. Hon(cid:129)ble
the Supreme Court also excluded the sovereign functions of the State from the purview of Industry,
though sounding a caution that mere welfare measures undertaken by the State may not be
disguised for sovereign functions. The relevant extract of the judgment is set out below:-
"Banerji, 'amplified by Corporation of Nagpur, in effect met with its Waterloo in
Safdarjung. But in this latter case two voices could be heard and subsequent rulings
zigzaged and conflicted precisely because of this built-in ambivalence. It behaves us,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 5
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
therefore, hopefully to abolish blurred edges, illumine penumbral areas and over-rule
what we regard as wrong. Hesitancy, half- tones and hunting with the hounds and
running with the hare can claim heavy penalty in the shape of industrial confusion,
adjudicatory quandary and administrative perplexity at a time when the nation is
striving to promote employment through diverse strategies which need for their
smooth fulfillment, less stress and distress, more mutual understanding and trust
based on a dynamic rule of law which speaks clearly, firmly and humanely. If the salt
of law lose its savour of progressive certainty wherewith shall it be salted ? So we
proceed to formulate the principles, deducible from our discussion, which are
decisive, positively and negatively, of the identity of 'industry' under the Act. We
speak, not exhaustively but to the extent covered by the debate at the bar and, to that
extent, authoritatively, until over-ruled by a larger bench or superseded by the
legislative branch. (1) [1963] 1 L.L.J. 567 (culcutta).
1. 'Industry', as defined in Sec, 2 (j) and explained hi Banerji, has a wide import.
(a) Where (i) systematic activity, (ii) organized by co- operation between employer
and employee, (the direct and substantial element is chimerical) (iii) for the
production and/or distribution of goods and services calculated to satisfy human
wants and wishes (not spiritual or religious but inclusive of material things or
services geared to, celestial bliss e.g. making, on a large scale, prasad or food), prima
facie, there is an 'industry' in that enterprise.
(b) Absence of profit motive or gainful objective is irrelevant, be the venture in the
public, joint private or other sector.
(c) The true focus is functional and the decisive test is the nature of the activity with
special emphasis on the employer-employee relations.
(d) If the Organisation is a trade or business, it does not cease to, be one because of
philanthropy animating the undertaking.
LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals
11. Although sec. 2(j) uses, words of the widest amplitude in its two limbs, their meaning cannot be
magnified to overreach itself.
(a) 'Undertaking' must suffer a contextual and associational shrinkage as explained in
Banerji and in this judgment, so also, service, calling and the like. This yields the
inference that all organized activity possessing the triple elements in I (supra),
although not trade or business, may still be 'industry' (provided the nature of the
activity, viz. the employer-employee basis, bears resemblance to what we find in
trade or business. This takes into the- fold of 'industry' undertakings, callings and
services adventure 'analogous to the carrying on of trade or business'. All features,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 6
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
other than the methodology of carrying on the activity viz. in organizing the
co-operation between employer and employee may be dissimilar. It does not matter,
if off the employment terms there is analogy.
III. Application of these guidelines should not stop short of their logical reach by invocation of
creeds, cults or inner sense of incongruity or other sense of motivation for or resultant of the
economic operations. The ideology of the Act being industrial peace, regulation and resolution of
industrial disputes between employer and workmen, the range of this statutory ideology must
inform the reach of the statutory definition. Nothing less, nothing mom.
(a) The consequences are (i) professions, (ii) Clubs (iii) educational institutions (iiia)
co-operatives, (iv) research institutes (v) charitable projects and (vi) other kindred
adventures, if they fulfil the triple tests listed in I (supra), cannot be exempted from
the scope of sec. 2 (j).
(b) A restricted category of professions, clubs, co- operatives and even Gurukulas and
little research labs, may qualify for exemption if in simple ventures substantially and
going by the dominant nature criterion substantatively, in single simple ventures, no
employees are entertained but in minimal matters, marginal employees are hired
without destroying the non-
employee character of the unit.
(c) If in a pious or altruistic mission many employ them- selves, free or for small honoraria, or likely
return mainly by sharing in the purpose or cause, such as lawyers volunteering to run a free legal
services clinic or doctors serving in their spare hours in a free medical centre or ashramites working
at the bidding of the holiness, divinity or like central personality and the services are supplied free or
at nominal cost and those who serve are not engaged for remuneration or on the basis of master and
servant, relationship, then, the institution is not an industry even if stray servants, manual or
technical, are hired. Such eleemosynary or like undertakings alone are exempt-not other generosity,
compassion, developmental passion or project. IV The dominant nature test :
(a) where a complex of activities, some of which qualify for exemption others not,
involves employees on the total undertaking, some of whom are not 'workmen' as in
the University of Delhi Case or some departments are not productive of goods and
services if isolated, even then, the predominant nature of the services and the
integrated nature of LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals the departments as
explained in the Corporation of Nagpur, will be true test. The whole, undertaking will
be 'industry' although those who are not 'workmen' by definition may not benefit by
the status.
(b) Notwithstanding the previous clauses, sovereign functions, strictly understood,
alone qualify for exemption, not the welfare activities or economic adventures
undertaken by government or statutory bodies.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 7
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
(c) Even in departments discharging sovereign functions, if there are units which are
industries and they are Substantially severable, then they can be considered to come
within sec. 2(j).
(d) Constitutional and competently enacted legislative provisions may well remove
from the scope of the Act categories which otherwise may be covered thereby.
We over-rule Safdarjung, Solicitors' case, Gymkhana, Delhi University, Dhanrajgirji Hospital and
other rulings whose ratio runs counter to the principles enunciated above, and Hospital Mazdoor
Sabha is hereby rehabilitated. We conclude with diffidence because Parliament which has the
commitment to the political nation to legislate promptly in vital areas like industry and trade and
articulate the welfare expectations in the conscience' portion of the constitution, has hardly
intervened to restructure the rather clumsy, vaporous and tall-aud-dwarf definition or tidy up the
scheme although Judicial thesis and anti- thesis, disclosed in the two decades long decisions, should
have produced a legislative synthesis becoming of a welfare State and Socialistic Society, in a world
setting where I.L.O. norms are advancing and India needs updating. We feel confident, in another
sense, since counsel stated at the bar that a bill on the subject is in the offing. The rule of law, we are
sure, will run with the rule of Life-Indian Life-at the threshold of the decade of new development in
which Labour and Manage- ment, guided by the State, will constructively partner the better
production and fair diffusion of national wealth. We have stated that, save the Bangalore Water
Supply and Sewerage Board-appeal, we are not disposing of the others on the merits. We dismiss
that appeal with costs and direct that all the others be posted before a smaller bench for disposal on
the merits in accordance with the principles of Law herein laid down.
13. From the reading and understanding of the law laid down in Bangalore Water Supply(cid:129)s case
(supra) in the context of argument raised by Mr. Shamsi, that Army performs sovereignty functions
and therefore, cannot be brought within the meaning of the term „Industry(cid:129) as used in Section 2(J)
of the ID Act, it is deducible that the sovereign functions, strictly understood, qualify for exemption
but not welfare acts or economic adventure undertaken by the Government or the statutory bodies.
Even in departments discharging sovereign functions if there are units which are LPA No. 119/2024
& connected appeals industries and they are substantively severable, they can be considered to come
within Section 2(j). The exposition of the term „Industry(cid:129) by the Supreme Court in Bangalore Water
Supply case continues to be an authoritative pronouncement even on date, though contrary voices
seeking reconsideration of the judgment rendered in the aforesaid case have emanated in some later
judgments of the Supreme Court.
14. With a view to overcome the wide amplitude given to the term „Industry(cid:129) by Supreme Court and
to give an ambiguous definition of Industry for the purpose of ID Act, the Industrial Disputes
Amendment Act, 1982 (46 of 1982) came to be promulgated by the Central Government. However,
the amendment made to Section 2(j) of the ID Act has not been notified so far. It is the stand of the
Union of India that it could not bring into force the amended definition of the „Industry(cid:129), as given
in Section 2(j) of the ID Act, for the reason that absent an alternative legal machinery created at the
Central level to substitute the triple test re-affirmed by Hon(cid:129)ble the Supreme Court in Bangalore
Water Supply case (supra), the millions of workers would be rendered vulnerable and without any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 8
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
legal framework for protection of their employment rights.
15. This was the stand put forth by the Union of India in State of UP vs. Jai Bir Singh, (2005) 5 SCC 1
in which a Bench of the Supreme Court has sought reference to a Nine Judge Bench to revisit the
Bangalore Water Supply case judgment.
16. Be that as it may, when we analyze the facts of the instant case, we find that there is a Standard
Operating Procedure (SOP) between Directorate of Defence Labour Procurement Department of
Government of J&K (DLPD) and Army and BSF in Northern Command Zone, which provides LPA
No. 119/2024 & connected appeals for meeting the requirements of the Army/BSF. The porters and
ponies required by Army and BSF for assisting in their operational duties are not engaged by them
on their own but are provided by DLPD. As per the SOP, these porters are engaged to perform the
following duties:-
" (a) Conveyance of military stores where roads do not exist or when Motor Transport
cannot reach due to disruption of traffic.
(b) Collection of water for troops where piped water is not available.
(c) Winter stocking of posts not connected by road.
(d) Evacuation of serious cas in hilly terrain.
(e) Conveyance and replenishment of amn.
(f) Conveyance of private mail."
17. As is evident from the aforesaid enumeration, the primary task of the porters engaged by the
appellants is to perform different types of menial duties to aid and assist the Army for performance
of its plenary duties. They are not engaged to perform any systematic activity carried by the Army
with the aid of these porters. Undoubtedly, the porters perform the labour job and render assistance
to the Army Units working on different fronts. The only and primary function of the Army is to
protect the borders against any external aggression/invasion. The Army does not perform any duty
other than protecting the security, integrity and sovereignty of the nation. There should be no
manner of doubt that the predominant rather the only duty that is performed by the Army partakes
the character of sovereign function. The duties entrusted to the Army cannot be performed by any
person, public or private. The security of borders from external aggression is thus undoubtedly an
inalienable function of the Army, and, therefore, a sovereign activity.
18. It is not the case of writ petitioners that the Units, in which they are engaged, are not engaged in
the activities which are sovereign in nature and, LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals therefore,
severable. The Army functions as a single Unit with the sole aim and objective of protecting the
borders of the country against external aggression. The porters which are engaged as labour for
activities, like carrying ration and ammunition to inaccessible and difficult terrains, definitely
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 9
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
contribute immensely to the duties which the Army is required to perform in the exercise of its
sovereign functions.
19. Viewed from any angle the Indian Army, or for that matter, the 15 Corps, Head quartered at
Badami Bagh, cannot be termed as „Industry(cid:129) as defined under Section 2(j) of the ID Act. Neither
the Labour Court nor the Writ Court has considered this aspect of the matter in the light of legal
position settled by a Seven Judge Bench judgment of Hon(cid:129)ble the Supreme Court in Bangalore
Water Supply case (supra).
20. This answers the first question which has arisen for determination in these proceedings.
21. In view of the answer which we have given to Question No.1, the determination of Question No.2
is rendered academic.
22. We have gone through the proceedings which were filed before the Labour Court and we are of
the considered opinion that the writ petitioners had not approached the competent authority for
adjudication of their dispute. Since ALC, Srinagar, a Conciliation Officer appointed by the
Government of Jammu and Kashmir, was not an authority competent to hold the conciliation
proceedings between the writ petitioners and the appellants, as such, failure of the ALC, Srinagar, to
conclude the Conciliation Proceedings within 45 days did not give any cause of action to the writ
petitioners to invoke sub Section (2) of Section 2-A of the ID Act LPA No. 119/2024 & connected
appeals and approach the Labour Court directly without there being any reference from the
„appropriate government(cid:129).
23. With a view to understand the issue, we need to advert to the definition of „appropriate
government(cid:129) as given in Section 2 (a) of the ID Act, which, for facility of reference, is set out below:-
"(a) appropriate Government means--
(i) in relation to any industrial dispute concerning any industry carried on by or
under the authority of the Central Government, or by a railway company [or
concerning any such controlled industry as may be specified in this behalf by the
Central Government] or in relation to an industrial dispute concerning [a Dock
Labour Board established under section 5A of the Dock Workers (Regulation of
Employment) Act, 1948 (9 of 1948), or [the Industrial Finance Corporation of India
Limited formed and registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956)], or the
Employees' State Insurance Corporation established under section 3 of the
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948 (34 of 1948), or the Board of Trustees
constituted under section 3A of the Coal Mines Provident Fund and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1948 (46 of 1948), or the Central Board of Trustees and the State
Boards of Trustees constituted under section 5A and section 5B, respectively, of the
Employees' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 (19 of 1952), or
the Life Insurance Corporation of India established under section 3 of the Life
Insurance Corporation Act, 1956 (31 of 1956), or the Oil and Natural Gas Corporation
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 10
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
Limited registered under the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956), or the Deposit
Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation established under section 3 of the
Deposit Insurance and Credit Guarantee Corporation Act, 1961 (47 of 1961), or the
Central Warehousing Corporation established under section 3 of the Warehousing
Corporations Act, 1962 (58 of 1962), or the Unit Trust of India established under
section 3 of the Unit Trust of India Act, 1963 (52 of 1963), or the Food Corporation of
India established under section 3 or a Board of Management established for two or
more contiguous States under section 16 of the Food Corporations Act, 1964 (37 of
1964), or the Airports Authority of India constituted under section 3 of the Airports
Authority of India Act, 1994 (55 of 1994),or a Regional Rural Bank established under
section 3 of the Regional Rural Banks Act, 1976 (21 of 1976), or the Export Credit and
Guarantee Corporation Limited or the Industrial Reconstruction Bank of India the
National Housing Bank LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals established under
section 3 of the National Housing Bank Act, 1987 (53 of 1987), or an air transport
service, or a banking or an insurance company, a mine, an oilfield, a Cantonment
Board,] or a major port, any company in which not less than fifty-one per cent. of the
paid-up share capital is held by the Central Government, or any corporation, not
being a corporation referred to in this clause, established by or under any law made
by Parliament, or the Central public sector undertaking, subsidiary companies set up
by the principal undertaking and autonomous bodies owned or controlled by the
Central Government, the Central Government, and
(ii) in relation to any other industrial dispute, including the State public sector
undertaking, subsidiary companies set up by the principal undertaking and
autonomous bodies owned or controlled by the State Government, the State
Government: Provided that in case of a dispute between a contractor and the contract
labour employed through the contractor in any industrial establishment where such
dispute first arose, the appropriate Government shall be the Central Government or
the State Government, as the case may be, which has control over such industrial
establishment;"
24. From reading of Clause (a) (i) of Section 2, it is abundantly clear that the Indian Army, even if it
is to be construed as an Industry for the purposes of Section 2 (j) of the ID Act, yet the same would
be an Industry carried on by or under the authority of the Central Government. That being the clear
position emerging from above definition, the „appropriate government(cid:129) in relation to the industrial
dispute, if any, between the writ petitioners and the appellants would be the Central Government.
The Conciliation proceedings with respect to the industrial dispute between the employer and the
workman are required to be conducted by a Conciliation Officer appointed by the „appropriate
government(cid:129) by notification in the official gazettee. Nothing has been brought to our notice to show
that ALC, Srinagar, was ever appointed by the Central Government to act as Conciliation Officer
under Section 4 of the ID Act. Similarly, there is nothing on record to show LPA No. 119/2024 &
connected appeals that the Labour Court constituted by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir is
also appointed by the Central Government as Labour Court in terms of Section 7 of the ID Act. In
terms of Section 7 of the ID Act, the Labour Courts are to be appointed by the appropriate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 11
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
government for adjudication of industrial disputes. The expression „appropriate government(cid:129) used
in Section 7, in the context of controversy before us, would mean the „Central Government(cid:129).
25. For the foregoing reasons we are of the considered opinion that invocation of Sub Section (2) of
Section 2-A by the writ petitioners was not permissible. Section 2-A, for facility of reference, is
reproduced as under:-
"
2A. Dismissal, etc., of an individual workman to be deemed to be an industrial dispute.--
(1)]Where any employer discharges, dismisses, retrenches, or otherwise terminates the services of
an individual workman, any dispute or difference between that workman and his employer
connected with, or arising out of, such discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination shall be
deemed to be an industrial dispute notwithstanding that no other workman nor any union of
workmen is a party to the dispute. (2)Notwithstanding anything contained in section l0, any such
workman as is specified in sub-section (1) may, make an application direct to the Labour Court or
Tribunal for adjudication of the dispute referred to therein after the expiry of forty-five days from
the date he has made the application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate Government for
conciliation of the dispute, and in receipt of such application the Labour Court or Tribunal shall
have powers and jurisdiction to adjudicate upon the dispute, as if it were a dispute referred to it by
the appropriate Government in accordance with the provisions of this Act and all the provisions of
this Act shall apply in relation to such adjudication as they apply in relation to an industrial dispute
referred to it by the appropriate Government.
(3) The application referred to in sub-section (2) shall be made to the Labour Court or Tribunal
before the expiry of three years from the date of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or otherwise
termination of service as specified in sub-section (1).
26. From reading of Section 2-A, in particular sub Section (2) thereof, it clearly transpires that, any
dispute in respect of discharge, dismissal, retrenchment or termination of services of an individual
workman is an „industrial dispute(cid:129) and the same can be taken by such workman directly to LPA No.
119/2024 & connected appeals the Labour Court or Tribunal for adjudication after expiry of 45 days
from the date he has made application to the Conciliation Officer of the appropriate Government for
conciliation of the dispute. What is significant in sub Section (2) is approaching the Conciliation
Officer of the appropriate Government for conciliation of the dispute. As has been held herein
above, the Conciliation Officer, who was approached by the writ petitioners is ALC, Srinagar, who
acts as a Conciliation Officer appointed by the Government of Jammu & Kashmir. The Central
Government, which would be an „appropriate government(cid:129) in the instant case, has not appointed
ALC, Srinagar, to be a Conciliation Officer to hold conciliation proceedings in respect of an
industrial dispute between an employer and an employee.
27. This aspect of the matter, which had specifically risen for consideration before the Writ Court
has not been considered by the Writ Court. The Labour Court had flagged this issue specifically but
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 12
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
did not deal with it in right perspect.
28. In view of the aforesaid discussion, our answer to Question No.2 is clear and emphatic. The ALC,
Srinagar was not a Conciliation Officer appointed by the Central Government („the appropriate
government(cid:129)), and, therefore, the proceedings filed before him by the writ petitioners were without
jurisdiction and non-existent. Failure of the ALC, Srinagar to conclude the proceedings within forty
five days did not give any cause of action to the writ petitioners to approach directly to the Labour
Court, that too, a Court not appointed by the Central Government (appropriate government).
Neither the Conciliation proceedings before ALC, Srinagar nor the reference adjudicated by the
Labour Court appointed by the LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals Government of Jammu &
Kashmir were maintainable before the said authorities. The impugned award was, thus, vitiated for
want of jurisdiction.
29. In view of the aforesaid, we are of the considered opinion that neither the award passed by the
Labour Court nor the judgment passed by the Writ Court upholding the said award are in
consonance with law.
30. We, therefore, find merit in these appeals and the same are accordingly, allowed. The judgment
of the Writ Court as also the award passed by the Labour Court are set aside. The writ petitioners
shall, however, be at liberty to explore the permissible legal remedies available to them in law and
nothing said herein above shall be an impediment for invoking such remedies.
31. Before parting with the judgment we would like to implore the Indian Army to take a
compassionate view having regard to the services which are rendered by the porters. In view of the
perennial nature of duties which are rendered by the porters to the Army, the engagement of porters
in Indian Army, has become almost indispensable. It would, therefore, be not in the fitness of the
things to permit the Army to follow an archaic practice of „hire and fire(cid:129). Hon(cid:129)ble the Supreme
Court in the case of Yash Pal and others v. Union of India and others, (2017) 3 SCC 272, while
holding the porters entitled to minimum wages, has ruled out issuance of mandamus to the Union
Government for their regularization. During the course of hearing of the aforesaid case, it was
though brought to the notice of Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court that a scheme for regularization of porters
was under consideration. Having regard to all these facts and circumstances, we deem it appropriate
to call upon the Indian Army to ensure that services of these writ petitioners are re-engaged as
porters provided there is nothing adverse found against LPA No. 119/2024 & connected appeals
them and the need for such engagement persists. We are issuing this direction only having regard to
the fact that the need of the porters in the formations of the appellants is perennial and continuous.
We also direct the appellants to pay the writ petitioners pending wages, if any. Should the appellants
decide not to re-engage the writ petitioners, the amount of Rs. 5 lakhs deposited in the Registry shall
be paid to them in equal shares, to enable them to settle in life. The Registry shall release the
amount deposited in favour of the appellants.
(Puneet Gupta) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
SRINAGAR:
20.03.2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 13
General Officer Commanding vs . on 20 March, 2025
Anil Raina, Addl. Registrar/Secy
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64514744/ 14
