Ghulam Nabi vs Union Territory Of J&K & Others on 29 May, 2023
Ghulam Nabi vs Union Territory Of J&K & Others on 29 May,
2023
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND
LADAKH AT JAMMU
WP(Crl.) No.15/2023
Reserved on: 15.05.2023
Pronounced on: 29.05.2023
Ghulam Nabi ...PETITIONER(S)
Through: - Mr. Waheed Choudhary, Advocate.
Vs.
UNION TERRITORY OF J&K & OTHERS ...RESPONDENT(S)
Through: - MS. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
CORAM:HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1) Through the medium of this petition, petitioner seeks quashment of order No.23/PSA of 2022
dated 03.10.2022, issued by District Magistrate, Ramban (for brevity "detaining authority"), in
terms whereof, petitioner-Ghulam Nabi son of Khuda Baksh resident of Amkote Tehsil Banihal
District Ramban (for short "detenu") was ordered to be detained in order to prevent him from acting
in any manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order and lodged in Central Jail, Jammu.
2) The impugned order has been assailed by the detenu, inter alia, on the following grounds:
(i) That the petitioner has not been supplied with entire material replied upon by the
detaining authority and, as such, he was prevented from making an effective
representation against the impugned order of detention;
(ii) That there is non application of mind on the part of the Detaining Authority,
inasmuch as, detaining authority was not aware of the fact that the petitioner has
been granted bail by the Court in all the three FIRs registered against him;
(iii) That the grounds of detention appear to be a xerox copy of the dossier which
shows non application of mind on part of the Detaining Authority; and,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146633125/ 1
Ghulam Nabi vs Union Territory Of J&K & Others on 29 May, 2023
(iv) That the detaining authority has not recorded subjective satisfaction while
directing detention of the petitioner in preventive custody.
3. On being put on notice, the respondents appeared through their counsel and filed their reply
affidavit, wherein they have disputed the averments made in the petition and insisted that the
activities of the detenu are highly prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. It is submitted that
the criminal activities of the petitioner are posing serious threat to the public peace and tranquility.
It is pleaded that the detenue is habitual of indulging in the act of smuggling of narcotic substances.
Besides being an influential hardcore criminal, the detenue is also a notorious drug peddler and was
involved in number of cases. It is stated that the detenue was found involved in number of cases the
details of which are as under:-
i) FIR No.133/2021 under Sections 354C/376/506/34/201 IPC 67A/84-B IT Act
registered at Police Station, Banihal.
ii) FIR No.115/2019 under Sections 8/21 NDPS Act registered at Police Station,
Ramsoo.
iii) FIR No.68/2022 under Sections 8/21/22 NDPS Act registered at Police Station,
Ramsoo.
4. It is further submitted by the respondents that the activities of the detenue are anti-social and
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, security and peaceful atmosphere in the area. It is
further claimed in the reply affidavit that all the statutory and constitutional requirements have
been fulfilled and complied with by the detaining authority and that the order has been issued
validly and legally. In order to support their contentions, the respondents have produced the record
of detention. 4 I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
5 The detenue appears to be involved in illicit trafficking of narcotic drugs along with other criminal
activities. The menace of drugs is a serious threat to public health, safety and well-being of citizens
at large. Even globally, the society is facing ill effects of trafficking of drugs/drug abuse. Besides that,
it also distorts the public order as it is considered to be the originator for petty offences as well as
heinous crimes such as smuggling of arms, ammunition and money laundering. Furthermore, drug
trafficking leads to a constant threat to national security and sovereignty of the State by way of
narco-terrorism. Drug trafficking along with drug abuse, especially by younger generation, has
continued to take a significant toll on valuable human lives and productive years of people around
the globe. With the growth and development of the world economy, drug traffickers are seamlessly
trafficking various types of drugs from one corner to another, ensuring the availability of the
contraband for vulnerable segments of the society, who fall into the trap of drug peddlers and
traffickers. This is a grave concern for all the stakeholders of the nation.
6. Insofar as the plea raised by the detenue that the material relied upon by the detaining authority
has not been supplied to him is concerned, the respondents disputed the same by asserting that the
entire material like detention order, dossier of detention, grounds of detention and copies of FIR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146633125/ 2
Ghulam Nabi vs Union Territory Of J&K & Others on 29 May, 2023
and other relevant documents have been handed over to the detenue at Central Jail, Jammu.
7. The grounds of detention clearly show that the detenue was involved in illegal trade of contraband
and was posing serious threat to the public peace and tranquility. Besides being involved himself in
drugs, detenue has also been alleged that on 22.06.2021, he leaked obscene and nude photographs
to make them viral on various social networking sites/apps of a bride on the day of her marriage at
Chamalwas, Banihal regarding which a case was also registered at Police Station, Banihal vide FIR
No.133/2021 and charge-sheet was laid against him in the Court. Keeping in view the activities of
the detenue, the Detaining Authority after due application of mind, by arriving at subjective
satisfaction has issued the order of detention, which cannot be found fault with. It is settled
proposition of law that this Court while exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution
has a limited scope to scrutinize whether detention order has been passed on the material placed
before it, and it cannot go further and examine the sufficiency of material. This Court does not sit in
appeal over the decision of the Detaining Authority and cannot substitute its opinion over that of
detaining authority when the grounds of detention are precise, pertinent, proximate and relevant
(See State of Punjab v. Sukhpal Singh, (1990) 1 SCC 35.
8. The power of preventive detention is a precautionary power exercised in reasonable anticipation.
It may or may not relate to an offence. The order of preventive detention may be made before or
during prosecution and the pendency of the prosecution is not a bar to an order of preventive
detention and is also not a bar to prosecution. The power of preventive detention is different from
punitive detention. In a prosecution, the accused is sought to be punished for his past acts, however,
in preventive detention the past act is merely a material for drawing inference about future conduct
of the detenue. In the present case, the Detaining Authority has applied its mind by going through
all the material, past conduct of the detenue against whom three FIRs stand registered and
accordingly, arrived at subjective satisfaction that the activities of the detenue were prejudicial to
the interest of the State and issued the order of detention, which cannot be found fault with. Since
the activities of the detenue were directed against the object mentioned in the Act and the Detaining
Authority has arrived at subjective satisfaction that it was necessary to prevent the detenue from
acting in such manner and consequently, order of detention came to be issued. Thus, it clearly
shows that it is satisfaction of the Government on the point, which alone is necessary to be
established.
9. Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the grounds of detention are verbatim of
the dossier. It has already been discussed in the preceding paragraphs that this Court while
examining the material which is made basis of subjective satisfaction of the Detaining Authority,
would not act as a court of appeal and find fault with satisfaction on ground that on the basis of the
material before detaining authority, another view was possible. Such is the limited scope of enquiry
in this aspect. However, in the present case, the grounds of detention are not a replica of the dossier.
10. The grounds of detention were well explained to the detenue in a language, which he fully
understood as is evident from the execution report, where the detenue is a signatory to the same.
Moreover, the detenue was well informed that he can make representation to the government as
well as to the Detaining Authority against his detention, if he so desire. The execution report further
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146633125/ 3
Ghulam Nabi vs Union Territory Of J&K & Others on 29 May, 2023
reveals that the grounds of detention were read over to the detenue in English and explained to him
in Urdu/Hindi language, which he fully understood and in lieu of which his signatures have been
obtained on the execution report and no grouse was ever raised by the petitioner that the documents
were never read over and explained to him in the language which he understands.
11. Liberty of an individual has to be curtailed, within reasonable bounds, for the good of the society
at large. The framers of the Constitution were conscious of the practical need of preventive detention
with a view to strike a just and delicate balance between need and necessity to preserve individual
liberty on one hand, and security of the country as well as the interest of society on the other hand.
Security of State, maintenance of public order, prevention of drug trafficking and other criminal
activities demand effective safeguards in the larger interest of the sustenance of a peaceful and
democratic way of life.
12. The aim of the preventive detention is not to punish a person for having done something but to
intercept and prevent him from doing so. Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Naresh Kumar
Goyal v. Union of India and others, (2005) 8 SCC 276 and Union of India and another v. Dimple
Happy Dhakad, AIR 2019 SC 3428 has held that "an order of detention is not a curative or
reformative or punitive action, but a preventive action, avowed object of which being to prevent
anti-social and subversive elements from imperiling welfare of the country or security of the nation
from disturbing public tranquility or from indulging in illegal activities or from engaging in illicit
traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances etc. Preventive detention is devised to afford
protection to society. The object is not to punish a man for having done something but to intercept
before he does it, and to prevent him from doing so."
13. The law of preventive detention has direct bearing on the subjective satisfaction of the Detaining
Authority. The subjective satisfaction of a Detaining Authority, whether to detain a person or not, is
not open to the objective assessment by a Court. The Court while exercising power under Article 226
is not to act as an appellate forum to scrutinize the merits of the administrative decision to detain a
person. The Court cannot substitute its own satisfaction for that of the authority concerned and
decide whether its satisfaction was reasonable or proper, or whether in the circumstances of the
matter, the person concerned should have been detained or not.
14. It is apt to mention that our Constitution undoubtedly guarantees various freedoms and personal
liberty to citizens in our Republic, however, such freedoms guaranteed by the Constitutional
mandate are not meant to be abused and misused so as to endanger and threaten the very
foundation of our society. The larger interests of our nation as a whole and the cause of preserving
for every person the guaranteed freedoms demands reasonable restrictions on the prejudicial
activities of individuals who jeopardize the rightful freedoms of the rest of the society. The main
object of preventive detention is the security of the State, maintenance of public order and of
supplies and services essential to the community. Detention order, which has been issued by the
detaining authority after arriving at subjective satisfaction, does not suffer from any legal infirmity
as the grounds of detention are definite, proximate and free from any ambiguity. Furthermore, the
detenue was duly informed of what weighed with the detaining authority while passing the order of
detention. The Detaining Authority has recorded its subjective satisfaction after considering all the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146633125/ 4
Ghulam Nabi vs Union Territory Of J&K & Others on 29 May, 2023
material available, thus, none of the constitutional or statutory provision has been violated.
15. The personal liberty may be curtailed, where a person faces a criminal charge or is convicted of
an offence and sentenced to imprisonment. Where a person is facing the trial on a criminal charge
and is temporarily deprived of his personal liberty because of the criminal charge framed against
him, he has an opportunity to defend himself and to be acquitted of the charge in case the
prosecution fails to bring home his guilt. Where such an accused is convicted of offence, he still has
satisfaction of having been given the adequate opportunity to contest the charge and also adduce the
evidence in his defence.
16. The incorporation of Article 22 in the Constitution left room for detention of person without a
formal charge and trial and without such person held guilty of an offence and sentenced to
imprisonment by a competent Court. Its aim and object are to save the society from activities that
are likely to deprive a large number of people of their right to life and personal liberty. In such a
case, it would be dangerous for the people at large, to wait and watch, by the time ordinary law is set
into motion, the person having dangerous designs, would execute his plans, exposing the general
public to risk, causing colossal damage to life and property. It is for that reason necessary to take
preventive measures and subsequently, prevent the person bent upon to perpetuate mischief from
translating his ideas into actions. Therefore, where individual liberty comes into conflict with an
interest of the security of the State or public order, then the liberty of individual must give way to the
larger interest of the nation, as has been laid by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sunil Fulchand v.
Union of India (2003) 3 SCC 409.
17. Hon'ble the Supreme Court in the case of Mohd. Subrati alias Mohd. Karim v. State of West
Bengal (1973)3 SCC 250, has held as under:-
"7.No doubt, the right to personal liberty of an individual is jealously protected by our
Constitution but this liberty is not absolute and is not to be understood to amount to
licence to indulge in activities which wrongfully and unjustly deprive the community
or the society of essential services and supplies. The right of the society as a whole is,
from its very nature, of much greater importance than that of an individual. In case of
conflict between the two rights, the individual's right is subjected by our Constitution
to reasonable restrictions in the larger interest of the society."
18. Personal liberty is one of the most cherished freedoms, perhaps more important than the other
freedoms guaranteed under the Constitution. It was for this reason that the framers of the
Constitution included the safeguards in Article 22 in the Constitution so as to limit the power of the
State to detain a person without trial, which may otherwise pass the test of Article 21, by humanizing
the harsh authority over individual liberty. In a democracy governed by the rule of law, the drastic
power to detain a person without trial for security of the State and/or maintenance of public order,
must be strictly construed. However, where individual liberty comes into conflict with an interest of
the security of the State or public order, then the liberty of the individual must give way to the larger
interest of the nation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146633125/ 5
Ghulam Nabi vs Union Territory Of J&K & Others on 29 May, 2023
19 Viewed thus, there is no ground to interfere in the impugned order of detention. The petition
lacks merit and is dismissed, as such.
20. The detention record be returned to learned counsel for the respondents.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge Jammu 29.05.2023 Vinod, PS Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146633125/ 6
