Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
Author: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
Bench: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
Sr. No. 24
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
SWP No. 578/2016
Reserved on: 28.03.2023
Pronounced on: 13.04.2023
Ghulam Qadir Malik .... Petitioner/Appellant(s)
Through:- Mr. A. H. Qazi, Advocate
VERSUS
State of J&K & Ors. .....Respondent(s)
Through:- Mr. Dewakar Sharma, Dy.A.G
CORAM : HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE WASIM SADIQ NARGAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
BRIEF FACTS:
01.The petitioner through the medium of the present writ petition has sought the
following relief:
"Writ in the nature of Certiorari quashing SFC Order No. 44/2016 dated 03.03.2016
passed by respondent No. 2, whereby, the petitioner has been reverted from the post
of Field Supervisor to the post of Helper and to pass any other writ, order or direction
in favour of the petitioner with cost."
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONER: -
02. The brief facts giving rise to the filing of instant petition is that the petitioner
being qualified and eligible was initially engaged as Daily Wager and, subsequently,
keeping in view the qualification, length of service and dedication towards his work
and conduct, was regularized on permanent basis as Helper w.e.f. 01.04.1995.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 1
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
03. Mr. A. H. Qazi, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner submits that
as per the service record maintained by the respondents, qualification which has been
recorded is matriculation. Learned counsel further submits that after the approval by
State Forest Corporation, Departmental Promotion Committee held on 31st July
2010 vide SFC Order No. 565/2010 dated 18.08.2010 passed by respondent No. 2,
the petitioner along with other officials was promoted as Field Supervisor in the pay
band of Rs. 5200-20200 with grade pay of Rs. 1800 and was posted in State Forest
Corporation Extension Division West Kishtwar and since then the petitioner has been
performing his duties with dedication and to the satisfaction of his superiors.
04. It is the specific case of the petitioner that before consideration of the case for
promotion to the post of Field Supervisor, the petitioner had submitted original
certificate of Secondary School Examination (matriculation) Diploma in the office of
respondent No. 2, being Chairman of the Departmental Promotion Committee and
the said certificate as on date as per the stand of the petitioner is lying in the office of
respondent No. 2.
Further specific case of the petitioner is that as per the petitioner, he was performing his duties on
the strength of promotion order as Field Supervisor for the last more than five years, an order No.
44/2016 dated 03.03.2016 came to be issued by respondent No. 2, whereby, the petitioner has been
reverted from the post of Field Supervisor to the post of Helper and the said order is impugned in
the present petition.
05. Petitioner through the medium of the present petition, has called in question the aforesaid order
on the ground that the entire service record including the service book of the petitioner and original
matriculation diploma certificate is and was lying with the respondents, who after taking due
consideration of the same, have taken conscious decision in promoting the petitioner from the post
of Helper to the post of Field Supervisor. Further case of the petitioner is that before issuing the
promotion Order dated 18.08.2010, the petitioner has never represented before the respondents
that the petitioner has possessed the qualification of 10+2 and inadvertently, the said qualification
has been reflected in the order of promotion which led to the passing of the order impugned.
06. Mr. Qazi, learned counsel for the petitioner, has vehemently argued that the petitioner at no
stage has ever represented the respondents that he is possessing the qualification of 10+2 rather, the
petitioner(cid:128)s specific case is that he possess the Matric qualification and the said certificate has
already been provided by the petitioner to the respondents.
07. From perusal of the order of promotion, it is manifestly cleared that promotion of only such
officials was withheld, who had not submitted the requisite documents which were required in
original by respondent No. 2. Since the petitioner has already produced the matriculation certificate
before respondents, which as per the stand of the petitioner, is lying with the respondents, was
cleared of his promotion as per his seniority strictly inconformity with the rules in vogue. Further
case of the petitioner is that even in the impugned order, it has been admitted that after verifying the
requisite conditions including the qualification, promotion of the petitioner was cleared and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 2
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
order of promotion was issued, accordingly.
08. Mr. Qazi, Learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner with a view to fortify his claim
has placed reliance on J&K State Forest Corporation Employees (Conditions of Service) Regulations
1993 (called as Recruitment Rules) in which the feeding channel for the post of Field Supervisor is
defined as below: -
S. No. Pay Band Grade Name of the Prescribed Selection procedure Pay cadre/post
qualification
1. 5200-20200 1800 Field Supervisor 10+2 and a. 60% by direct recruitment
possessing b. 20% by promotion from physical Class "J" ministerial cadre standards
as employees having minimum prescribed for of 05 years service in that Range
Officers class who are Higher in the Forest Secondary, Part-II (12th) and Department
having prescribed physical from time to standard time c. 20% by promotion from
Class "J" of ministerial cadre employees having a minimum of 08 years service in
that class who are matriculate and having prescribed physical standards
09. Mr. Qazi, learned counsel has vehemently argued that the petitioner is fully eligible being
qualified to be promoted in terms of the aforesaid Rules as his case falls in category (c) of the
aforesaid Rules having more than 08 years of service in the particular class i.e., "J" of ministerial
cadre and having prescribed physical standard. Learned counsel further argued that the petitioner
was performing his duties as Field Supervisor, the respondents without any rhyme and reason or
providing any opportunity of being heard has issued the order impugned by virtue of which the
petitioner has been reverted back to the post of Helper and, thus, the order impugned is violative of
the Rules of the principles of natural justice and cannot sustain the test of law and is liable to be
quashed.
10. The specific stand of the petitioner is that merely at the instance of one Partap Singh, who was
working as Field Worker, the order impugned has been passed, and that too, without providing any
opportunity of being heard to the petitioner or giving any opportunity to the petitioner to rebut the
allegations leveled in the aforesaid complaint. Further stand of the petitioner is that copy of such
complaint has also not been provided to him nor he has been heard before passing the order
impugned.
11. Lastly, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner has argued that under Schedule II
Jammu and Kashmir State Forest Corporation Employees (Condition of Service) Regulations, 2011,
the qualification prescribed for promotion to the post of Field Supervisor is Matric having 08 years
service in that class and since the petitioner, who is senior most matriculate Helper having more
than 15 years at that time when the DPC was convened, has possessed the physical standard and was
eligible for being promoted to the post of Field Supervisor being matriculate and thus, no fault can
be attributed to the petitioner for not being qualified under rules which would be the basis for
demoting him from the post of Field Supervisor as that of Helper.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 3
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS: -
12. Per contra, Mr. Dewakar Sharma, learned Dy.A.G. appearing on behalf of the
respondents, has submitted that the reply has been filed by the respondents wherein
a specific stand has been taken that the petitioner has suppressed the material facts
for assailing the impugned order and as per the stand of the learned Dy.A.G., rules
pertaining to the promotion from the post of Field Assistant to that of Field
Supervisor were amended in the year of 2010 and later on in the year of 2012 and the
petitioner, who was matriculate, has wrongly shown himself as 10+2 Higher
Secondary Part-II and sought promotion from 20% quota prescribed in that category.
13. The further stand of the respondents is that the petitioner was brought on regular
establishment of SFC on 01.04.1995 as Helper and posted at State Forest Corporation
Extension Division Kishtwar West.
14. The further stand of the respondents is that the promotions in the J&K State
Forest Corporation are being governed under J&K State Forest Corporation
Employees Regulations-1993 and these regulations were in force up to 30.06.2010.
Under the provisions of these rules, the following criteria was provided for promotion
to the post of Field Assistant and the feeding cadre was Class-IV: -
a. 80% by direct recruitment b. 20% by promotion from Class „M(cid:128) of Administrative
cadre employees having prescribed minimum qualifications and physical standards.
15. It is further stated by the respondents that the above rules have been amended in
the year 2010 and notified vide SFC order No. 498 of 2010 dated 26.07.2010 and
again re-casted in the year 2012 and notified vide SFC Order No. 83 of 2012 dated
08.03.2012. As per these amended rules, the following is the provision for promotion
for the post of Field Supervisor: -
a. 60 % by direct recruitment b. 20 % by promotion from Class „J(cid:128) of Ministerial
cadre employees having a minimum of 05 years service in that class who are Higher
Secondary, Part-II (12th) and having prescribed physical standards. c. 20 % by
promotion from Class „J(cid:128) of Ministerial cadre employees having a minimum of 08
years service in that class who are matriculate and having prescribed physical
standards.
16. The further stand of the respondents is that soon after the amendment of these
recruitment rules in the year 2010, a meeting of Departmental Promotion Committee
was conducted on 31.07.2010. Consequent upon the decision of DPC, formal
promotion orders were issued vide SFC Order No. 565 of 2010 dated 18.08.2010.
17. The further stand of the respondents is that the petitioner was figuring at Serial
No. 12 in the seniority list of Field Worker of Jammu region issued on 15.03.2010 and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 4
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
his qualification was recorded as TDC (10+2) and not Matriculate and on the basis of
10+2 qualification, he was considered for promotion by the Departmental Promotion
Committee in its meeting held on 31.07.2010 from the level of Helper to the level of
Field Supervisor and formal promotion order was issued by SFC vide order No. 565
of 2010 dated 18.08.2010.
18. Learned counsel appearing on behalf of respondents further submitted that
pursuant thereto, a representation came to be filed by one Partap Singh, Field
Worker, in which he questioned the promotion of petitioner on the plea that the
petitioner was not possessing 10+2 qualification in the year 2010 as reflected in his
promotion order. Consequently, the Divisional Manager Kishtwar West was asked to
furnish 10+2 qualification of the petitioner along with service book and the same was
furnished accordingly.
19. On perusal of the said certificate, it revealed that the petitioner has passed his
10+2 examination in the year 2013 and the said certificate was verified from the J&K
Board of School Education and the same was authenticated and found genuine by the
said Board. Since the petitioner has secured Higher Secondary part-II in the year
2013, as such, petitioner was not eligible for promotion in the year 2010 under 10+2
quota and this was precisely the reason that his promotional order was rescinded
vide order impugned dated 03.03.2016.
LEGAL ANALYSIS
20. It is a peculiar case where the petitioner was promoted pursuant to approval of the State Forest
Corporation Promotion Committee in its meeting held on 31.07.2010 as Field Supervisor by virtue
of order dated 18.08.2010 vide SFC order No. 565 of 2010 on the basis of the qualification, length of
service and seniority and after enjoying the fruits of promotion for more than five and a half years,
the said promotion has been withdrawn by virtue of order impugned dated 03.03.2016 from the
date of its issuance i.e. 18.08.2010 retrospectively. From the perusal of the aforesaid order
impugned, it is manifestly clear that the Departmental Promotion Committee in its meeting held on
31.07.2010 considered the promotion of class-IV officials to the level of Field Supervisor in terms of
provision contained in J&K, SFC Service Rules with the following condition: -
"Regarding work and conduct, non-involvement and integrity certificates, category,
qualification and technical qualification, wherever required, it was decided that the
Managing Director will verify the same before the formal promotion orders are
issued."
21. The order impugned further reveals that the petitioner who was working as Helper, fulfilled the
aforesaid conditions and produced required qualification certificate and, accordingly, promotion
was released in his favour by virtue of SFC order No. 565 of 2010 dated 18.08.2010, except those,
who had not furnished the required documents. Thus, it is empathetically clear that the petitioner
was qualified, eligible and was found fit by the Departmental Promotion Committee on the basis of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 5
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
the service record, which was produced by the petitioner and, accordingly, promotion was ordered
in his favour. It is not a case that the petitioner at any stage committed any fraud with respect to the
qualification or produced any forged documents which could be the basis for his promotion, rather
it is a case where the respondents inadvertently has mentioned his qualification in the order of
promotion as 10+2 instead of Matric. Due to the inadvertent mistake which has crept in the order of
promotion regarding the qualification of the petitioner by the respondents, the petitioner can in no
way be penalized, when the fact remains that when the petitioner was accorded promotion, he was
simply matriculate and not 10+2.
22. Besides, the petitioner was performing his duties as Field Supervisor uninterruptedly and
without any hindrance on the strength of his promotion order which was issued way back on
18.10.2010 and drawing his salary for the last more than five years and six months, when all of a
sudden the order impugned came to be issued and that too without providing the petitioner any
opportunity of being heard and without issuing any show cause notice. The petitioner has been
demoted and his promotion has been withdrawn at the behest of some complaint/representation
alleged to have been filed by Partap Singh, who questioned the promotion of the petitioner on the
basis of the qualification certificate and the respondents in most haste manner and without
providing any opportunity of being heard or issuing any show cause notice have acted upon the said
representation/complaint and passed the order impugned, withdrawing the promotion of the
petitioner after a gap of five years and six months without any justifiable cause. The specific case of
the petitioner is that neither the copy of the complaint was ever supplied to him nor the respondent
ever issued any show cause notice by providing him an opportunity of being heard before passing
the order impugned. It is not a case, where the petitioner has misrepresented about his qualification
which could be the basis for his demotion, rather it is a case, where inadvertently, his qualification
has been reflected as 10+2, instead of Matric in the order of promotion by the respondents and due
to the inadvertent mistake on part of the respondents, the petitioner can in no way be penalised. The
law has even been stretched to the extent that even if an employee has been wrongly promoted still,
the person cannot be demoted without giving him any opportunity of being heard or issuing notice.
23. The rules of natural justice and procedural rules cannot be given go-bye in such a light and
casual manner. The Departmental Promotion Committee was not expected to be so ignorant, naive
and novice so as to pass an order granting promotion to the petitioner without due application of
mind. Even if the respondent felt that the promotion granted to the petitioner has not been done
legally and validly and deserves to be withdrawn, even then, the minimum which was required to be
done on part of the respondents was to follow the rules of natural justice and at least an opportunity
of being heard should have been afforded to the petitioner getting his version.
24. Further the stand of the petitioner in the writ petition is that while considering the case of the
petitioner along with other officials for promotion to the post of Supervisor, the entire service
records, including the service book and original matriculation diploma certificate was lying with the
respondents and the respondents through the Departmental Promotion Committee has taken a
conscious decision in promoting the petitioner being senior-most matriculate Helper having good
service record to his credit. At no stage, the petitioner ever represented that he possess the
qualification of 10+2 issued. Besides, the order of promotion further reveals that the promotion of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 6
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
only such officials was withheld, who have not submitted their requisite certificates in original and
since the petitioner submitted his original matriculation certificate and as per his seniority, was
accordingly, promoted. This aspect of the matter finds mention even in the order impugned,
wherein, it has been reflected that the petitioner fulfilled all the conditions under rules and,
accordingly, the promotion was released in his favour. For facility of reference, the relevant para of
the order impugned dated 03.03.2016 is reproduced as under: -
"Whereas, Shri Gh. Qadir Malik, Helper, who fulfilled above conditions and produced
required qualification certificates, promotion were released including Shri Gh. Qadir
Malik issued vide SC Order NO. 565 of 2010 dated 18.08.2010 except those who had
not furnished the required documents;
Whereas, as per the decision of Departmental Promotion Committee the work and
conduct, non involvement and integrity certificates, category, qualification and
technical qualification certificates were called from their respective DDO's;
Whereas, on the complaint / representation of Shri Partap Singh, wherein the
promotion of Shri Gh. Qadir Malik was questioned the Divisional Manager Kishtwar
West was directed to furnish his 10+2 qualification certificate along with original
service book vide this office letter No 406/Bix/SFC dated 08.02.2016;
Whereas, the Divisional Manager vide his letter No. 798/DM/SFC/KW dated
19.01.2016 has furnished original Service Book alongwith 10+2 certificate of Shri Gh.
Qadir Malik; Whereas, on the examination and checking of the said certificate it
revealed that Shri Gh. Qadir Malik has passed his 1072 qualification in the year 2013
instead of 2010, when the DPC. cleared his name for promotion under 10+2 quota
under SC Rules and Regulations; Whereas, after scrutiny/examination of records, it
is established that in the year 2010 when the DPC had cleared promotion of Shri Ch.
Qadir Malik under 10+2 quota as per provision of J&K SC Service Regulations relying
that the applicant possessed 10+2 qualification prior to DPC ie. 31.07.2010 and Shri
Gh. Qadir Malik was not qualified /eligible at that time of under 10+2 quota and
acquired 10+2 qualification in 2013;
Now therefore, in view of above reasons, the promotion of Shri Gh. Qadir Malik,
Helper to the level of Field Supervisor released vide SFC order No.565 of 2012 dated
18.08.2010 is hereby withdrawn from the date of its issuance Le. 18.08.2010.
However, the official shall now be considered for promotion at appropriate time by
the DC taking into consideration the fact that he passed 10+2 qualification in 2013."
25. Thus, viewed from any angle, the order impugned withdrawing the promotion of the petitioner
cannot sustain the test of law. The petitioner is not only protected under the constitutional
provision, but his promotion for all practical purposes covered under the rules. The promotion of
the petitioner, even otherwise, is also legally valid in terms of J&K SFC, Employees Condition of
Service Regulations, 1993, as the petitioner falls in Category-C, wherein, 20% of the promotion from
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 7
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
Class-J of the Ministerial cadre employees having a minimum of 08 years of service in that class,
who are matriculate and having prescribed physical standards has been laid down. The petitioner
being senior-most matriculate Helper with 15 years of service and possessing the prescribed physical
standards, was promoted to the post of Field Supervisor and the promotion of the petitioner was
strictly in conformity with the aforesaid rules falling in „Article-C(cid:128) being matriculate.
I am fortified with the view passed by the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court of India in Nisha Priya Bhatia Vs.
Union of India and another, reported in 2020 13 SCC 56, relevant is para 26 and 28, which is
reproduced as under:
"26.Article 311 of the Constitution is a manifestation of the essential principles of
natural justice in matters of dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of public
servants and imposes a duty upon the Government to ensure that any such decision
against the public servant is preceded by an inquiry, coupled with an opportunity of
being heard and making a representation against such decision. The abovementioned
principles of natural justice are also generally implicit under Article 14, as a denial of
the same to the public servant in question would taint the decision with the vice of
arbitrariness and deprive the public servant of equal protection of the law. Article 311
reads thus:
Article 311 - Dismissal, removal or reduction in rank of persons employed in civil
capacities under the Union or a State.- (1) No person who is a member of a civil
service of the Union or an all India service or a civil service of a State or holds a civil
post under the Union or a State shall be dismissed or removed by an authority
subordinate to that by which he was appointed.
(2) No such person as aforesaid shall be dismissed or removed or reduced in rank
except after an inquiry in which he has been informed of the charges against him and
given a reasonable opportunity of being heard in respect of those charges:
Provided that where it is proposed after such inquiry, to impose upon him any such
penalty, such penalty may be imposed on the basis of the evidence adduced during
such inquiry and it shall not be necessary to give such person any opportunity of
making representation on the penalty proposed:
Provided further that this clause shall not apply-
(a) where a person is dismissed or removed or reduced in rank on the ground of
conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge; or
(b) where the authority empowered to dismiss or remove a person or to reduce him in
rank is satisfied that for some reason, to be recorded by that authority in writing, it is
not reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry; or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 8
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
(c) where the President or the Governor, as the case may be, is satisfied that in the
interest of the security of the State it is not expedient to hold such inquiry.
(3) If, in respect of any such person as aforesaid, a question arises whether it is
reasonably practicable to hold such inquiry as is referred to in clause (2), the decision
hereon of the authority empowered to dismiss or remove such person or to reduce
him in rank shall be final."
28.A perusal of the text of Article 311 reveals that this Article comes into operation when a public
servant is being subjected to dismissal, removal or reduction in the rank. The usage of words
"dismissal", "removal" or "reduction in rank" clearly points towards an intent to cover situations
where a public servant is being subjected to a penal consequence. Thus, until and unless the action
taken against a public servant is in the nature of punishment, the need for conducting an inquiry
coupled with the grant of an opportunity of being heard, as envisaged under Article 311, does not
arise at all. Succinctly put, the action contemplated against the public servant must assume the
character of „punishment(cid:128) in order to attract the safeguards under Article 311. The policy, object
and scope of Article 311 has been clarified by this Court in State of Bombay vs. Saubhagchand M.
Doshi5, wherein the Court observed thus:
"10. Now, the policy underlying Article 311(2) is that when it is proposed to take
action against a servant by way of punishment and that will entail forfeiture of
benefits already earned by him, he should be heard and given an opportunity to show
cause against the order. But that consideration can have no application where the
order is not one of punishment and results in no loss of benefits already accrued, and
in such a case, there is no reason why the terms of employment and the rules of
service should not be given effect to. Thus, the real criterion for deciding whether an
order terminating the services of a servant is one of dismissal or removal is to
ascertain whether it involves any loss of benefits previously earned. Applying this
test, an order under Rule 165-A cannot be held to be one of dismissal or removal, as it
does not entail forfeiture of the proportionate pension due for past services."
29.Thus, it was incumbent on part of the respondents to have given a reasonable opportunity of
showing cause against the proposed action to the petitioner, but the respondents in derogation to
the mandate of the aforesaid constitutional provision has inflicted the punishment by withdrawing
the promotion after more than five and a half years without any justifiable cause. This clearly proves
that the order impugned has been issued by the respondents by way of colourable exercise of power
with mala fide intention and have acted arbitrarily on the basis of a complaint filed by one Pratap
Singh, who has no locus to challenge the promotion of the petitioner. What was the minimum
required on part of the respondents was to have provided the copy of the complaint to the petitioner
before passing the order impugned, but the respondents in most haste manner and without
application of mind have passed the order impugned in violation of the principles of the natural
justice. The action of the respondents, as such, is violative of Article 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution
of India. The basis for withdrawing the promotion of the petitioner by the respondents has been
spelt out in the order impugned, wherein, it has been reflected that: -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 9
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
"Whereas, after scrutiny/examination of records, it is established that in the year
2010 when the DPC had cleared promotion of Shri. Gh. Qadir Malik under 10+2
quota as per provision of J&K SFC Service Regulations relying that the application
possessed 10+2 qualification prior to DPC i.e. 31.07.2010 and Shri. Gh. Qadir Malik
was not qualified/eligible at that time of under 10+2 quota and acquired 10+2
qualification in 2013."
30.The only allegation which has been leveled against the petitioner is that since the petitioner was
not possessing 10+2 qualification on the day, when the promotion was accorded, thus, he could not
have been promoted on the basis of 10+2 quota, as he has acquired the said qualification in 2013 i.e.
after 03 years. Although, from the record it transpires that the petitioner at no stage has ever sought
his promotion on the basis of 10+2, rather, the petitioner was promoted on the basis of being
matriculate and this was precisely the reason that in the order impugned, it has been reflected that
the petitioner fulfilled the required qualification and was accordingly, promoted. The order
impugned is self-contradictory.
31.The allegation which has been leveled by the respondents against the petitioner was never
enquired in detail by conducting a detailed enquiry or charge-sheeting the petitioner and in absence
of any enquiry or finding recorded by the enquiry officer, it cannot be assumed that the petitioner, at
any stage, misrepresented with regard to his qualification. Thus, before imposing the proposed
punishment on the petitioner, the respondents were under a legal obligation qua the petitioner to
have provided him an opportunity of being heard, which is missing in the present case, and, thus,
the order impugned cannot sustain the test of law and is liable to be quashed.
I am also fortified by the view of Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court of India in Dharampal Satyapal Limited
Vs. Deputy Commissioner of Central Excise Gauhati and Ors., reported in (2015) 8 SCC 519,
relevant is para 35 and 36, wherein, it was held that: -
"35. From the aforesaid discussion, it becomes clear that the opportunity to provide
hearing before making any decision was considered to be a basic requirement in the
court proceeding. Later on, this principle was applied to other quasi-judicial
authorities and other tribunals and ultimately it is now clearly laid down that even in
the administrative actions, where the decision of the authority may result in civil
consequences, a hearing before taking a decision is necessary. It was, thus, observed
in A.K. Kraipak caselS that if the purpose of rules of natural justice is to prevent
miscarriage of justice, one fails to see how these rules should not be made available to
administrative inquiries. In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India20 also the application
of principle of natural justice was extended to the administrative action of the State
and its authorities. It is, thus, clear that before taking an action, service of notice and
giving of hearing to the notice is required. In Maharashtra State Financial Corpn. v.
Suvarna Board Mills21, this aspect was explained in the following manner:
3. It has been contended before us by the learned counsel for the appellant that
principles of natural justice were satisfied before taking action under Section 29,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 10
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
assuming that it was necessary to do so. Let it be seen whether it was so. It is well
settled that natural justice cannot be placed in a straitjacket; its rules are not
embodied and they do vary from case to case and from one fact-situation to another.
All that has to be seen is that no adverse civil consequences are allowed to ensue
before one is put on notice that the consequence would follow if he would not take
care of the lapse, because of which the action as made known is contemplated. No
particular form of notice is the demand of law. All will depend on facts and
circumstances of the case.
36. In East India Commercial Co. Lid. v. Collector of Customs, AIR 1962 SC 1893, this Court held
that whether the statute provides for notice or not, it is incumbent upon the quasi-judicial authority
to issue a notice to the persons concerned disclosing the circumstances under which proceedings are
sought to be initiated against them, failing which the conclusion would be that principles of natural
justice are violated."
I am also fortified by the view passed in Khem Chand Vs. Union of India, reported in 1958 AIR 300,
wherein, the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court has held as under: -
"Reasonable opportunity envisaged by Art. 311 (2) includes an opportunity to make
his representation as to why the proposed punishment should not be inflicted on
him, which he can only do if the competent authority, after the enquiry is over and
after applying his mind to the gravity or otherwise of the charges proved against the
Government servant, tentatively proposes to inflict one of the three punishments and
communicates the same to the Government servant."
32.The real test of determining whether the reduction in rank or withdrawal of the promotion is by
way of punishment or not, if the said reduction/withdrawal of promotion visits the person with
penal consequences by virtue of the order impugned and the pay of the petitioner has been reduced
and it entails punishment, the same can be done only by providing an opportunity of being heard
and not otherwise. I am supported by the view passed by the Supreme Court in S.L. Kapoor Vs.
Jagmohan, reported in (1980) 4 SCC 379, which is reproduced as under: -
"In our view the principles of natural justice know of no exclusionary rules dependent
on whether it would have made any difference if natural justice had been observed.
The non-observance of natural justice is itself prejudice to any man, and proof of
denial of natural justice is unnecessary. It will come from a person who had denied
justice that the person who has been denied justice is not prejudiced."
"The old distinction between a judicial act and an administrative act had withered
away and we have been liberated from the psittacine incantation of „administrative
action(cid:128). Now, from the time of the decision of this Court in State of Orissa v. Dr.
(Miss) Binapani Dei, 1967 (2) SCR 625 : (AIR 1967 SC 1269):
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 11
Ghulam Qadir Malik vs State Of J&K & Ors on 13 April, 2023
[1967 SLR 465 (SC) j "even an administrative order which involves civil
consequences......must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice". What
are civil consequences? The question was posed and answered by this Court in
Mohinder Singh Gill v. The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi, (1978) 2 S.C.R.
272 : ((1978) 1 SCC 405 : AIR 1978 SC 851), Krishna Iyer J., speaking for the
Constitution Bench said: -
"But what is a civil consequence, let us ask ourselves, by passing verbal booby -traps?
„Civil consequence(cid:128) undoubtedly cover infraction of not merely property or personal
rights but of civil liberties, material deprivations and non-pecuniary damages. In its
comprehensive connotation, everything that affects a citizen in his civil life inflicts a
civil consequence."
33.The ratio of this judgment was followed by a Division Bench of Punjab and Haryana Court in
Varinder Chawla v. Chandigarh Administration, 1984(1) S.L.R. 452, wherein it is held that an
opportunity of hearing was required to be granted before a person could be reverted from a post
notwithstanding the fact that the order of his promotion was illegal and void ab initio having been
passed by an authority not competent to do so. CONCLUSION: -
34. For the reasons stated hereinabove, coupled with a settled legal position, the order impugned
dated 03.03.2016 vide SFC order No. 44/2016 dated 03.03.2016, by virtue of which, the promotion
of petitioner stood withdrawn is, hereby, set aside/quashed and the promotion of the petitioner by
virtue of order No. 565 of 2010 dated 18.08.2010 as Field Supervisor is upheld. The present writ
petition is allowed in the manner indicated here in above.
35. Disposed of, accordingly.
(WASIM SADIQ NARGAL) JUDGE JAMMU 13.04.2023 Vishal Whether approved for speaking :
Yes Whether approved for reporting : Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68483483/ 12
