Gian Chand Khajuria Age 49 Years S/O ... vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir Through ... on 19 August, 2023
Gian Chand Khajuria Age 49 Years S/O ... vs State Of Jammu
And Kashmir Through ... on 19 August, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
Sr. No. 1
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRM(M) No. 703/2017
Reserved on: 21.07.2023
Pronounced on: 19.08.2023
Gian Chand Khajuria age 49 years S/o Puran .....Petitioner(s)
Chand Khajuria R/o H. No. 38 Lane-2 Block-
B Roop Nagar Enclave Jammu.
Through :- Sh. Rahul Pant, Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Palak Sharma, Advocate
V/s
1.State of Jammu and Kashmir through Police .....Respondent(s)
Station Vigilance Organization Jammu.
2.Incharge Police Station Vigilance
Organization Jammu.
Through :- Mrs. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG.
CORAM: HON(cid:128)BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Petitioner by the medium of instant petition filed under section 561-A [now Section 482 Cr.PC] of
Code of Criminal Procedure (hereinafter referred as to the „Code(cid:128)) has sought the quashment of
FIR No. 28 of 2017 registered with Police Station Vigilance Organization Jammu against him for
commission of offences punishable under Sections 5(1)(c)(d) r/w Section 5(2) of the Jammu and
Kashmir Prevention of Corruption Act Svt 2006 r/w Sections 420, 120-B RPC, on the following
grounds:-
(i) that the petitioner is an employee of Food, Civil Supplies and Consumer Affairs
Department Government of Jammu & Kashmir and was promoted against the post of
Sr. Assistant in the year 2012, whereafter, he was made I/C Tehsil Supply Officer
(TSO) discharging his duties in his own pay and grade;
(ii) that during the period w.e.f. 11.05.2013 to 12.02.2014 (for total period of 9
months) petitioner remained posted as I/C Tehsil Supply Officer (TSO) Hiranagar in
terms of order No. 86 DCAPDJ of 2013 dated 11.05.2013, whereafter, he was
transferred out of Hiranagar by virtue of order No.58-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163934005/ 1
Gian Chand Khajuria Age 49 Years S/O ... vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir Through ... on 19 August, 2023
DCAPDJ of 2013 dated 13.02.2014 issued by Director of Consumer Safaris and Public Distribution
Jammu;
(iii) that the petitioner was to be considered for substantive promotion to the post of head assistant
which is equivalent to Tehsil Supply Officer (TSO), and while the matter was been considered an
FIR bearing No. 28 of 2017 dated 02.08.2017 came to be registered against him in Police Station
Vigilance Organization Jammu for commission of alleged offences punishable under Sections
5(1)(c)(d) r/w Section 5(2) of the Jammu and Kashmir Prevention of Corruption Act Svt 2006 r/w
Sections 420, 120-B RPC;
(iv) that perusal of FIR impugned shows that the investigating agency claims to have conducted a
preliminary investigation on written complaint lodged by one Sh. R.S. Sharma, the nature of
allegations depicted in the FIR are, (a) that one Sh. Dharam Pal Sharma is running a Kerosene Oil
Depot illegally without any permission and in connivance with the officers/officials of CAPD
Department, (b) that licence of one floor mill bearing license No. KTH/Rice/Mill/84/59 dated
18.04.1984 in the name of one Sh. Bishan Dass is being continuously functioning even after the
death of said Bishan Dass in the year 2007, (c) that wife of Bishan Dass is having AAY Ration Card
(Antodya Ann Yojna) which includes name of her son Omkar Sharma in the said AAY Ration Card &
(d) that the different dealers from time to time in connivance with officials of CAPD Department
have misappropriated/black marketed the Govt. Ration ;
(v) that so far the allegation of running of a Kerosene Oil Depot by one Dharam Pal Sharma is
concerned, petitioner is not connected with the said allegations as the license for running the said
depot was issued in the year 2000 by the then Director CAPD Department, petitioner was posted as
incharge TSO Hiranagar in the year 2013 for a period of only 9 months and therefore cannot be
saddled with any criminal liability for the license which was issued much prior to his posting in the
year 2000 by the then Director;
(vi) that the allegations pertaining to renewal of license of Floor Mill in favour of one Bishan Dass
has been issued in the year 1984 under license No. KTH/Rice/Mill/84/59 dated 18.04.1984,
petitioner is not at all connected with the issuance of said license, the said license was renewed on
03.02.2012 and thereafter it was renewed in the year December 2015 meaning thereby that during
the period w.e.f. 11.05.2013 to 12.02.2014 when petitioner was incharge TSO Hiranagar the said
license was not renewed by him therefore the allegations against the petitioner are totally absurd
and motivated by extraneous considerations;
(vii) that the next allegation levelled in the FIR is that APL/BPL/AAY lists were prepared by Halqa
Panchayat and the same were entertained by TSO for the purpose of issuance of Ration Card
without getting any investigation from the revenue authorities which is mandatory required, perusal
of FIR shows that AAY category Ration Card was issued in the name of Raj Kumari in the year 2011
when the petitioner was not posted as Incharge TSO Hiranagar;
(viii) that the petitioner has not included even a single name or issued a single new Ration Card in
favour of any person after taking over as inchrge TSO Hiranagar, all that the petitioner has done in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163934005/ 2
Gian Chand Khajuria Age 49 Years S/O ... vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir Through ... on 19 August, 2023
his capacity as Incharge TSO Hiranagar was that he replaced the old ration cards with new ration
cards as per the policy of Govt.;
(ix) that on the face of FIR, petitioner cannot saddled with any kind of criminal liability as the FIR
does not disclosed commission of any offence against the petitioner, the connivance and criminal
conspiracy of the petitioner with Sarpanches and beneficiaries for preparing fake list of undeserving
beneficiaries under APL/BPL/AAY category does not arise as no such list was prepared during the
tenure of petitioner, petitioner has not issued any new ration card in favour of any undeserving
person like Raj Kumari;
(x) that the petitioner has rendered unblemished service of 31 years and is now being harassed for
ulterior motives, petitioner has been arrayed as an accused on totally irrelevant and absurd
allegations, the sword of allegations is hanging on the head of the petitioner thereby violating his
right to life and personal liberty, petitioner has already suffered defamation and miseries as he has
been denied promotion despite the fact that he has been cleared by the Vigilance Organization for
the purpose of his promotion, that no offence is made out against the petitioner, allegations in the
FIR are totally absurd and has been malafidely involved in FIR.
2. Respondents per contra, have filed objections/reply and have sought the dismissal of the petition
on the grounds, that it was prima-facie found that the then TSO Hiranagar Sh. Gian Chand in
connivance with the Sarpanches, beneficiaries and others prepared fake list of undeserving
beneficiaries under the APL/BPL/AAY categories and thereafter issued the ration cards for ulterior
motives for causing wrongful loss to the state and deprivation of benefits to the actual beneficiaries
falling under such categories. It is contended, that the investigation is still under progress and at
initial stage, the licenses are mostly renewed by senior/competent officers on the basis of field
reports submitted by field staff, the allegations in the FIR against the petitioner are not motivated
but have been preliminary substantiated on the basis of a formal complaint received against him
upon which a proper verification was conducted by the Vigilance Organization and the allegations
were prima-facie substantiated. It is stated, that the investigation is at it's infancy, wherein the
concerned recorded are being procured, but in the meantime the Hon'ble High Court vide order
dated 06.12.2017 has stayed the investigation, the petitioner/accused has himself admitted that in
the capacity of incharge TSO Hiranagar he has replaced the old ration cards as per policy of the
Govt. without any verification which means that while preparing new rations cards no verification
was done.
3. Sh. Rahul Pant, Ld. Senior counsel appearing for the petitioner, in addition to his oral arguments,
has also submitted the written arguments, whereby, while recapitulating the averments of the
petition, he has sought the setting aside/quashment of impugned FIR by canvassing arguments, that
the petitioner has remained as incharge Tehsil Supply Officer (TSO) Hiranagar only for a period of 9
months w.e.f. 11.05.2013 till 12.02.2014, whereas, the allegations against the petitioner regarding
the running of license of Kerosene Oil Depot illegally without any permission by one Sh. Dharam Pal
Sharma, license of one floor mill in the name of Bishan Dass, issuance of ration card under AAY
ration card category in the name of one Raj Kumari (w/o Bishan Dass) relate back to years 2000,
1984 and 2011 respectively when the petitioner was not even posted as incharge TSO Hiranagar,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163934005/ 3
Gian Chand Khajuria Age 49 Years S/O ... vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir Through ... on 19 August, 2023
therefore, no criminal liability can be fastened with the petitioner for the alleged offences attributed
to him. It is vehemently argued, that though the legal position is well settled that for quashing of FIR
under Section 482 of Cr.pc it is not open for the court to embark upon any enquiry as to the
reliability or genuineness of the allegations which would amount to "mini trial", however, at least
there has to be some factual supporting material alleged in the FIR to fasten the accused with the
criminal liability, which is comprehensively lacking in the case in hand, entitling the petitioner
setting aside/quashment of FIR. To buttress his arguments, Ld. Counsel has relied upon a judgment
of Hon'ble Supreme Court reported in 2022 LiveLaw (SC) 153 [SHAFIYA KHAN @ SHANUNTALA
PRAKAPATI VERSUS STATE OF U.P. & ANR.].
4. Mrs. Monika Kohli, Ld. Sr. AAG has sought the dismissal of the petition by strenuously
articulating arguments, that petitioner/accused has been involved in the commission of offences
punishable under Sections 5(1)(c)(d) r/w Section 5(2) of the Jammu and Kashmir Prevention of
Corruption Act Svt 2006 and Sections 420, 120-B RPC on the basis of written report lodged by the
residents of Village Girnari Tehsil Hiranagar District Kathua wherein it was alleged that (a) one
Dharam Paul Sharma is running a Kerosene Oil Depot and other Ration Depot in the said village
illegally without any permission and in connivance with the officers/officials of the CA&PD, (b) one
flour mill registered under Licence No. KTH/Rice/Mill/84/59 dated 18.04.1984 in the name of one
Bishan Dass is being continuously renewed even after the death of Bishan Dass, who expired in the
year 2007, (c) wife of Late Bishan Dass is having AAY ration card which include the name of his son
Omkar Sharma in the said AAY ration card and beings this the different dealers from time to time in
connivance with the officer of CA&PD department have misappropriated/black marketed the
government ration. It is argued, that offences punishable under Sections 5(1)(c)(d) r/w Section 5(2)
of the Jammu and Kashmir Prevention of Corruption Act Svt 2006 and Sections 420, 120-B RPC
have been committed by the petitioner/accused, but due to the interim directions passed by this
Court whereby the proceedings in the impugned FIR have been stayed, the investigation is not
proceeding ahead. It is vehemently argued, that FIR can be registered merely on suspicion based on
"probabilities", it is settled law that when an investigation is yet to start there should be no scrutiny
as to what extent the allegations in FIR are probable, reliable or genuine and the High Court cannot
quash the FIR on the ground that it did not disclose cognizable offence. Reliance has been placed on
the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court in a case law reported in AIR 2023 SUPREME COURT
1441[State of Chhattisgarh and another v. Aman Kumar Singh and Ors Etc.Etc.].
5. I have heard Ld. Counsel for the parties, perused the material on record and gone through the
relevant law on the subject matter meticulously. The powers of inherent jurisdiction under Section
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure can be exercised in a case, where there is clear abuse of
process of the court and when criminal proceedings are found to have been initiated with mala-fide
intention to wreck vengeance on or to cause harm to the accused, or when the allegations are absurd
or inherently improbable, however the inherent jurisdiction powers have to be exercised sparingly
by the High Court to prevent the abuse of process of the Court or otherwise to secure the ends of
justice. Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in a case titled "State of Haryana & Ors. vs. Ch. Bhajan Lal
& Ors" [1992 Suppl (1) SCC 335] while dealing with the scope and powers of High Court under
Section 482 of Cr.pc to quash the criminal proceeding while succinctly laying down certain
parameters, in paragraphs 102 & 103 has held as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163934005/ 4
Gian Chand Khajuria Age 49 Years S/O ... vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir Through ... on 19 August, 2023
102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the
Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a
series of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article
226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted
and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelized and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
wherein such power should be exercised:
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under 156 (1) of the Code except under an order of a
Magistrate within the purview of Section 155 (2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected
in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against
the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a
non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a
Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155 (2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on
the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused. (6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the
provisions of the Code or the concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the
institution and continuance of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the
Code or the concerned Act, providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
view to spite him due to private and personal grudge.
103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that the power of quashing a criminal proceeding
should be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases;
that the court will not be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness
or otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR or the complaint and that the extraordinary or
inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the court to act according to its whim or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163934005/ 5
Gian Chand Khajuria Age 49 Years S/O ... vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir Through ... on 19 August, 2023
caprice."
In the case of "Pepsi Foods Ltd. & Anr vs. Special Judicial Magistrate & Ors", [(1998) 5 SCC 749]
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India while examining the extraordinary powers of High Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India and also the inherent powers under Section 482 of Cr.pc and
relying upon the ratio decided of Bhajan Lal's case (supra) held as under:
"22. It is settled that High Court can exercise its power of judicial review in criminal
matters. In State of Haryana and others vs. Bhajan Lal and others 1992 Supp (1) SCC
335, this court examined the extraordinary power under article 226 of the
Constitution and also the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which it
said could be exercised by the High Court either to prevent abuse of the process of
any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice. While laying down certain
guidelines where the court will exercise jurisdiction under these provisions, it was
also stated that these guidelines could not be inflexible or laying rigid formulae to the
followed by the facts and circumstances of each case but with the sole purpose to
prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice.
One of such guidelines is where the allegations made in the first information report
or the complaint, even if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their
entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or make out a case against the
accused. Under Article 227 the power of superintendence by the High Court is not
only of administrative nature but is also of judicial nature. This article confers vast
powers on the High Court to prevent the abuse of the process of law by the inferior
courts and to see that the stream of administration of justice remains clean and pure,
The power conferred on the High Court under Articles 226 and 227 of the
constitution and under Section 482 of the Code have no limits but more the power
more due care and caution is to be exercised invoking these powers."
In another case titled "State of Andhra Pradesh Vs. Gourishetty Mahesh & Ors", [(2010) 11 SCC 226]
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held, that though the powers possessed by the High Court under Section
482 Cr.PC are wide, however, such powers require care/caution in its exercise, the interference must
be on sound principles and the inherent power should not be exercised to stifle a legitimate
prosecution, it was clarified that if the allegations set out in the complaint do not constitute the
offence of which cognizance has been taken by the Magistrate, it was open to the High Court to
quash the same in exercise of inherent powers under Section 482 Cr.PC.
6. Ld. Counsel for petitioner has argued with great vehemence, that petitioner in the case in hand
was incharge TSO Hiranagar for a brief period of 9 months only w.e.f. 11.05.2013 till 12.02.2014,
whereas, the allegations against him regarding running of license of Kerosene Oil Depot illegally
without any permission by one Sh. Dharam Pal Sharma, license of one floor mill in the name of
Bishan Dass, issuance of ration card under AAY ration card category in the name of one Raj Kumari
(w/o Bishan Dass) relate back to years 2000, 1984 and 2011 respectively when he was not even
posted as incharge TSO Hiranagar, therefore, no criminal liability can be fastened to him for the
alleged offences attributed to him. It is strenuously argued, that though the legal position is well
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163934005/ 6
Gian Chand Khajuria Age 49 Years S/O ... vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir Through ... on 19 August, 2023
settled that for quashing of FIR under Section 482 of Cr.pc it is not open for the court to embark
upon any enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness of the allegations which would amount to "mini
trial", however, at least there has to be some factual supporting material alleged in the FIR to fasten
the accused with the criminal liability which is comprehensively lacking in the case in hand entitling
the petitioner setting aside/quashment of FIR. Ld. Counsel to buttress his arguments, has relied
upon 2022 LiveLaw (SC) 153 [SHAFIYA KHAN @ SHANUNTALA PRAJAPATI VERSUS STATE OF
U.P. & ANR.].
In Shafiya Khan's case (Supra) relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner, Hon'ble Supreme Court in paras
19, 20 & 21 of the judgment held as under:-
19. Although it is true that it was not open for the Court to embark upon any enquiry
as to the reliability or genuineness of the allegations made in the FIR, but at least
there has to be some factual supporting material for what has been alleged in the FIR
which is completely missing in the present case and documentary evidence on record
clearly supports that her Nikah Nama was duly registered and issued by competent
authority and even the charge sheet filed against her does not prima facie discloses
how the marriage certificate was forged.
20. In the given circumstances and going through the complaint on the basis of which
FIR was registered and other material placed on record, we are of the considered
view that no offence of any kind as has been alleged in the FIR, has been made out
against the appellant and if we allow the 7 criminal proceedings to continue, it will be
nothing but a clear abuse of the process of law and will be a mental trauma to the
appellant which has been completely overlooked by the High Court while dismissing
the petition filed at her instance under Section 482 Cr.PC.
21. Consequently, the appeal is allowed. The criminal proceedings initiated against
the appellant in reference to FIR No.0227 of 2019 dated 9th July, 2019 under
Sections 494, 495, 416, 420, 504 & 506 IPC lodged at PS Bazar Khala, District
Lucknow, U.P. are hereby quashed and set aside.
Ratios of the Judgments of "Ch. Bhajan Lal(cid:128)s" case, "Pepsi Foods(cid:128)s Ltd" case, "Gourishetty
Mahesh(cid:128)s" case (Supra) and the one of "Shafiya Khan(cid:128)s" case (Supra) relied by Ld. Counsel for
petitioner Hon'ble Supreme Court has culled out the parameters/guidelines for quashing FIR u/s
482 Cr.pc to the effect, that it is not open for the High Court to embark upon any enquiry regarding
the reliability or genuineness of the allegations made in FIR however, at least there has to be some
factual supporting material for what has been alleged in the FIR. Ratios of the judgments (Supra)
squarely apply to the facts of the case in hand, wherein, the allegations against petitioner relate back
to the years 2000, 1984 & 2011, whereas, during the said periods the petitioner was not posted as
incharge Tehsil Supply Officer (TSO) Hiranagar as the petitioner remained posted as Incharge TSO
Hiranagar for 9 months w.e.f. 11.05.2013 to 12.02.2014. Even from the perusal of contents of FIR
factual supporting material in the FIR to fasten the petitioner with criminal liability is
comprehensively lacking, therefore, the petition deserves its setting aside/quashment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163934005/ 7
Gian Chand Khajuria Age 49 Years S/O ... vs State Of Jammu And Kashmir Through ... on 19 August, 2023
7. Ld. Counsel for respondent while relying upon the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court reported
in AIR 2023 SUPREME COURT 1441[State of Chhattisgarh and another v. Aman Kumar Singh and
Ors Etc.Etc] has forcefully articulated arguments, that the FIR can be registered merely on suspicion
based on "probabilities" and it is settled law that when an investigation is yet to start there should be
no scrutiny as to what extent the allegations in FIR are probable, reliable or genuine. Relying upon
the law laid down in the judgment (Supra), Ld. Counsel has urged, that the offences punishable
under Sections 5(1)(c)(d) r/w Section 5(2) of the Jammu and Kashmir Prevention of Corruption Act
Svt 2006 r/w Sections 420, 120-B RPC have been committed by the petitioner in the case in hand,
therefore, as the investigation is yet to start, there should be no scrutiny in regard to the allegations
in the FIR whether the allegations are probable, reliable or genuine. I have scanned the judgment of
Aman Kumar Singh's case (Supra) relied by Ld. Counsel for respondent, wherein Hon'ble Supreme
Court while reversing/setting aside the decision/order of the High Court of Chhattisgarh quashing
the FIR against accused had held, that there were allegations against the accused to have amassed
disproportionate assets of more than (cid:130) 2500 Crores contrary to his legal source of income and the
investigation was yet to start and cognizable offence was disclosed against accused. Ratio of the
judgment (Supra) relied by Ld. Counsel for respondent is distinguishable and inapplicable to the
facts of the case in hand. In the case in hand, there is no factual supporting material alleged in FIR
which could disclose the commission of cognizable offence against petitioner for the period of
11.05.2013 to 12.02.2014 he remained posted as Incharge TSO Hiranagar, whereas, the allegations
relate back to the years 2000,1984 & 2011when the petitioner was not even posted as Incharge TSO
Hiranagar. Moreso, there are no allegations of corruption/amassing of money by the petitioner from
the complainant or any other person. The allegations made in the FIR against the petitioner sans
any material, if taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not prima facie constitute
any offence or make out a case against the petitioner/accused, as the allegations are so absurd and
inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that
there is sufficient ground for proceeding against the petitioner/accused. Therefore,
petitioner/accused in the case in hand cannot be saddled with criminal liability for the periods for
which he was not posted as TSO Hiranagar.
8. For the foregoing reasons and discussion, I feel myself persuaded to allow the petition.
Resultantly, impugned FIR No. 28/2017 registered at Police Station Vigilance Organization Jammu
for the commission of offences punishable under Sections 5(1)(c)(d) r/w Section 5(2) of the Jammu
and Kashmir Prevention of Corruption Act Svt 2006 r/w Sections 420, 120-B RPC qua the petitioner
stands quashed.
9. Disposed of accordingly.
(MOHAN LAL)
JUDGE
JAMMU
19.08.2023
Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163934005/ 8
