Girija Shankar Maurya vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Girija Shankar Maurya vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Author: Ashutosh Srivastava
Bench: Ashutosh Srivastava
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44722
Court No. - 68
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 338 of 2025
Applicant :- Girija Shankar Maurya
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Chandra Shekhar Kushwaha,Devidayal Tiwari
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Anjali,G.A.,Pramod Kumar Singh
Hon'ble Ashutosh Srivastava,J.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant, Sri S. K. Rai, learned AGA for the State-Respondent and
perused the record.
This bail application under Section 483 of Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 has been
moved on behalf of accused-applicant seeking enlargement on bail in Case Crime No. 237 of 2024,
under Sections 3/7/25 of Arms Act, Police Station Doharighat, District Mau.
Learned counsel for the applicant argued that the accused-applicant is innocent and has been falsely
implicated in this case crime number. Learned counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant
runs a shop of seed and the Police has caught him from the shop. He further submits that nothing
incriminating material has been recovered from the possession of the applicant. The alleged
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165623415/ 1
Girija Shankar Maurya vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
recovery has been made from the house of one Ashutosh Maurya and the applicant has no concern
with the aforesaid crime. There is no independent witness of the aforesaid alleged crime. The
applicant is languishing in jail since 01.12.2024. The applicant has no criminal antecedent and there
is no likelihood of his fleeing from course of justice or tampering with evidence in case of release on
bail. Hence, the bail has been prayed for.
Learned AGA has vehemently opposed, but could not dispute the fact that applicant has no criminal
antecedents.
Considering all those facts and circumstances, the nature of accusations, severity of the punishment
in the case of conviction and nature of supporting evidence, reasonable apprehension of tampering
with the witness and prima-facie case, but without commenting on merit of case, a case for bail is
made out.
Accordingly, the bail application is allowed.
Let the accused-applicant, Girija Shankar Maurya, involved in above mentioned case crime number
be released on bail, on his executing a personal bond and two reliable sureties each, in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned, subject to the following conditions:
1. The applicant will not tamper with the evidence.
2. The applicant will not indulge in any criminal activity.
3. The applicant will not pressurize/intimidate the prosecution witnesses and
co-operate in the trial.
4. The applicant will appear regularly on each and every date fixed by the trial court,
unless his personal appearance is exempted through counsel by the court concerned.
In the event of breach of any of the aforesaid conditions, the court below will be at liberty to proceed
to cancel his bail.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 pks
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165623415/ 2
