Girja Shankar And Another vs Commissioner, Devi Patan Mandal, Gonda ... on 31 January, 2025
Girja Shankar And Another vs Commissioner, Devi Patan
Mandal, Gonda ... on 31 January, 2025
Author: Jaspreet Singh
Bench: Jaspreet Singh
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:6749
Court No. - 8
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 880 of 2025
Petitioner :- Girja Shankar And Another
Respondent :- Commissioner, Devi Patan Mandal, Gonda And Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Faiz Ahmad Khan
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Pankaj Gupta
Hon'ble Jaspreet Singh,J.
Heard learned counsel for the petitioners and the learned standing counsel for the
State-respondents.
By means of the instant petition, the petitioners assail the order dated 22.04.2024 passed by the
respondent No.1, whereby an application under Section 5 of the Limitation Act, 1963 (for short, 'the
Act of 1963') which was accompanied by an application for recall purported to be under Order IX
Rule 9 CPC was rejected on the ground of limitation. Consequently, the application itself has also
been dismissed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166941689/ 1
Girja Shankar And Another vs Commissioner, Devi Patan Mandal, Gonda ... on 31 January, 2025
The submission of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that initially a suit for partition was
instituted between Alakhram (the predecessor of the petitioners) and Ram Bahadur. The said suit
was partly decreed for certain khatas, but insofar as Khata No.172 is concerned, it was dismissed by
means of the judgment dated 13.11.1963. It is further urged that the said order was not assailed by
any of the parties to the said suit and it attained finality.
Almost after three decades, Shri Alakhram instituted another suit for declaration under Section
229-B of the U.P. Z.A. & L. R. Act, 1950 impleading the sons of Ram Bahadur namely Ram Rang and
Ram Kailash, who have also now passed away and are represented by their legal heirs, who are the
private-respondents No.4 to 8 in the instant petition.
It is urged that the said suit of Alakhram instituted on 16.10.1996 came to be dismissed for want of
prosecution on 11.04.2013.
On 29.05.2023, almost after ten years from the dismissal of the suit, the present petitioners moved
an application seeking to recall of the order dated 11.04.2013 and also moved a separate application
under Section 5 of the Act of 1963.
In the said application under Section 5 of the Act of 1963, it was stated that Alakhram prior to his
death was suffering from illness and he was also not conscious, however, he passed away on
11.04.2013 and on the same very day itself, the suit filed by him was also dismissed for want of
prosecution.
It was further stated that there was some animosity between Babadeen (son of Alakhram), hence,
despite the passing away of Alakhram, his son namely Babadeen did not take any measure insofar as
the suit is concerned as it is alleged that Babadeen had no knowledge of the proceedings. Babadeen
also expired on 23.12.2022 and it is thereafter on 10.05.2023, the present petitioners became aware
that their grandfather namely Alakhram had initiated certain proceedings which came to be
dismissed on 11.04.2013, hence, after making the necessary inquiries, the formal applications
seeking recall of the order dated 11.04.2013 along with an application under Section 5 of the Act of
1963 was moved on 29.05.2023.
This came to be contested and the Additional Commissioner while passing the impugned order
dated 31.01.2024 found that the reasons as given in the application seeking condonation of delay
was not properly explained as it did not indicate the bonafide. This was further assailed in a revision
which also did not find favour with the revisional Court and being aggrieved, the petitioners are
before this Court.
It is urged that the Courts should have taken a liberal view of the matter and it has been
categorically held that so far as possible, the matter should be decided on merits and technicalities
should be avoided.
Having considered the aforesaid submissions and from a perusal of the material on record, this
Court finds that there was nothing substantial indicated in the application under Section 5 of the Act
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166941689/ 2
Girja Shankar And Another vs Commissioner, Devi Patan Mandal, Gonda ... on 31 January, 2025
of 1963 to buttress the cause sought to be projected in the application for condonation of delay. It is
also to be noticed that it is no doubt true that the limitation should be considered liberally where the
cause shown is explained. It is not the length of delay which is material rather it is sufficiency of the
cause which is to be looked into. Even a short delay may not be condoned, if the cause is not
sufficiently explained whereas long delay can also be condoned provided it has been adequately
explained.
In the instant case, vague averments have been made especially where the delay is of about ten
years.
This Court is reminded of the latest decision of the Apex Court in the case of H. Guruswamy & Ors.
v. A. Krishnaiah, 2025 SCC OnLine SC 54, wherein the Apex Court has reiterated and re-visited the
principles upon which an application for condonation of delay is to be tested in Paras 13 to 17 reads
as under:-
"13. We are at our wits end to understand why the High Court overlooked all the
aforesaid aspects. What was the good reason for the High Court to ignore all this?
Time and again, the Supreme Court has reminded the District judiciary as well the
High courts that the concepts such as "liberal approach", "Justice oriented
approach", "substantial justice" should not be employed to frustrate or jettison the
substantial law of limitation.
14. We are constrained to observe that the High Court has exhibited complete
absence of judicial conscience and restraints, which a judge is expected to maintain
while adjudicating alisbetween the parties.
15. The rules of limitation are not meant to destroy the rights of parties. They are
meant to see that the parties do not resort to dilatory tactics but seek their remedy
promptly.
16. The length of the delay is definitely a relevant matter which the court must take
into consideration while considering whether the delay should be condoned or not.
From the tenor of the approach of the respondents herein, it appears that they want
to fix their own period of limitation for the purpose of instituting the proceedings for
which law has prescribed a period of limitation. Once it is held that a party has lost
his right to have the matter considered on merits because of his own inaction for a
long, it cannot be presumed to be non-deliberate delay and in such circumstances of
the case, he cannot be heard to plead that the substantial justice deserves to be
preferred as against the technical considerations. While considering the plea for
condonation of delay, the court must not start with the merits of the main matter.
The court owes a duty to first ascertain the bona fides of the explanation offered by
the party seeking condonation. It is only if the sufficient cause assigned by the litigant
and the opposition of the other side is equally balanced that the court may bring into
aid the merits of the matter for the purpose of condoning the delay.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166941689/ 3
Girja Shankar And Another vs Commissioner, Devi Patan Mandal, Gonda ... on 31 January, 2025
17. We are of the view that the question of limitation is not merely a technical
consideration. The rules of limitation are based on the principles of sound public
policy and principles of equity. No court should keep the 'Sword of Damocles'
hanging over the head of a litigant for an indefinite period of time."
Having considered the aforesaid submissions made in the application for condonation of delay and
applying the principles of law laid down by the Apex Court in H. Guruswamy (supra), this Court
finds that the delay has not been adequately explained. The reasons given by the Additional
Commissioner in the revision as well as by the Sub-Divisional Magistrate while passing the
impugned order does not suffer from palpable error which may persuade this Court to entertain the
instant petition which is accordingly dismissed.
Order Date :- 31.1.2025 Rakesh/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166941689/ 4
