Golu @ Dharmendra Thakur vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 January, 2019
Golu @ Dharmendra Thakur vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on
21 January, 2019
1 MCRC-2309-2019
The High Court Of Madhya Pradesh
MCRC-2309-2019
(GOLU @ DHARMENDRA THAKUR Vs THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH)
1
Jabalpur, Dated : 21-01-2019
Shri D.K. Melani, Advocate for the petitioner.
Shri Devendra Shukla, G.A. for the respondent/State.
Heard.
This is first bail application filed by the petitioner under Section 438 of Cr.P.C. for grant of
anticipatory bail, apprehending his arrest in connection with Crime No. 444/2018 registered at
Police Station-Dundaseoni District- Seoni (M.P.) for the offence under Section 34(2) of the M.P.
Excise Act and Section 109 of IPC.
Prosecution story in brief is that police received an information on 02.01.2018 that some persons
were transporting liquor in an auto rickshaw bearing registration No. MP-51R-1867 and were going
Seoni to Mandla route. Thereafter, police had blockade and seized 198 liters of country and foreign
made liquor amounting of Rs.69,000/- from the said auto. Police has also seized two mobile phones
with Rs.6,000/- and also seized the alleged auto.
On asking by the police, the persons told their name as Gaurav @ Lucky (Auto Driver) and Anshar.
They have failed to produce the document regarding transportation of the alleged liquor, thereafter
they have arrested by the police. The allegation against the present petitioner is that he has loaded 2
cartoons of alcohol on the vehicle.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner is innocent and has been falsely
implicated in this case. Petitioner has not committed any offence. He is nothing to do with
transporting the seized liquor directly or indirectly. During investigation, on the basis of
memorandum of the co- accused persons, the petitioner has been made an accused in the present
case, the statement of the co-accused is not admissible in law. The other co- accused Dhanendra @
Dhabbu has been released on anticipatory bail by this 2 MCRC-2309-2019 Court. Therefore, he
prays for grant of anticipatory bail. In support of his contentions, he relied upon the order of this
High Court in the case of Rahul Kumar vs. State of M.P. dated 18.12.2018 passed in M.Cr.C. No.
49303/2018.
Per-contra, learned G.A. for the respondent/State opposes the anticipatory bail application by
submitting that the quantity of seized liquor is more than 50 bulk liter. Therefore, as per Section
59(A) of M.P. Excise Act, petitioner is not entitled to get the anticipatory bail. If the petitioner get
anticipatory bail then it will adversely affect the investigation. Therefore, anticipatory bail should
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63469003/ 1
Golu @ Dharmendra Thakur vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 January, 2019
not be granted to the petitioner.
Heard the arguments of both the parties and perused the case diary. Learned State counsel raised
the arguments that as per Section 59(A) of M.P.Excise Act there is specific bar to get the anticipatory
bail to the petitioner. In this regard, in the case of Naresh Kumar Lahriya Vs. State of M.P. reported
in 2004(4) M.P.H.T. 205, the Court has held as under:-
"it would be open to a accused to show that no offence inviting frown of Section 59-A
(i) of the Act is made out as the basic ingredients are absent. It needs no emphasis
that it would be dependent of the fact of each case. We may hasten to state here that
merely because Section 438 is not applicable to certain categories of offences, the
Court is not bereft of power only because in the FIR the said offences are mentioned.
It can not be stated with certitude that if the accused can put forth a case or make out
of a case, though the offences which have been mentioned under Section 59-A (i) of
the Act do find mention in the FIR, but essentially and factually the case docs not fall
under the said provision, irrefragably the Court can entertain the application for
grant of anticipatory bail because it is not the nomenclature which should govern the
scenario but the real essence. We may repeat at the cost of repetition that our
observations do not clothe the Court with the power to grant anticipatory bail under
Section of the Code and transgress the enacted provision inasmuch as we have held it
to be intra vires but we only say that if the accused can, by clarificatory means with
substantial material put forth and bring it to the notice of the Court that the offences
which are encapsuled under Section 59-A (i) of the Act are really not in respect of
which the accused has been roped in and sought to be arrested are actually not within
its ambit or sweep and not covered by it then the eclipse created by the provision gets
lifted and the accused can seek theambit of umbrellas of Section 438 of the Code."
3 MCRC-2309-2019 Keeping in view the law laid down in the above cited case and looking to the
facts and circumstances of the case particularly the fact as pointed out by the learned counsel for the
petitioner that petitioner is having valid license to sell country and foreign liquor and he has been
made an accused on the basis of memorandum of co-accused. There is no prima facie material found
to constitute the offence as aforesaid except memorandum of the co-accused. Hence looking to the
circumstances of the case possibility of false implication of the petitioner-accused can not be ruled
out. Therefore, I am of the view that the petitioner is entitled to be released on anticipatory bail.
Consequently, this first application for anticipatory bail filed on behalf of Petitioner-Golu @
Dharmendra Thakur is allowed. It is directed that in the event of his arrest, the petitioner shall be
released on his furnishing a personal bond in the sum of Rs.50,000/- (Rs. Fifty Thousand Only)
with one solvent surety in the like amount to the satisfaction of the Arresting Officer for his
appearance before the trial Court on all dates and for complying with the conditions enumerated in
sub-section (2) of section 438 of the Cr.P.C.
M.Cr.C. stands disposed of.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63469003/ 2
Golu @ Dharmendra Thakur vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 21 January, 2019
C.C. as per rules.
(RAJENDRA KUMAR SRIVASTAVA) JUDGE Pallavi
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63469003/ 3
