Gopal Chandra Mahanta vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... ... on 31 January, 2025
Gopal Chandra Mahanta vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... ... on
31 January, 2025
Author: Aditya Kumar Mohapatra
Bench: Aditya Kumar Mohapatra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
WP(C) No.32804 of 2024
Gopal Chandra Mahanta ..... Petitioner
Represented By Adv. -
Mr. Pradeep Kumar
Mahapatra
-versus-
State Of Odisha and others ..... Opposite Parties
Represented By Adv. -
Ms. B.K. Sahu, AGA
CORAM:
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ADITYA KUMAR MOHAPATRA
ORDER
31.01.2025 Order No.
01. 1. This matter is taken up through Hybrid Arrangement (Virtual /Physical Mode).
2. Although this matter is listed for admission, on consent of both sides, the matter is taken up for
final disposal.
3. Heard learned counsel for the Petitioner as well as learned Additional Government Advocate
appearing for the State-Opposite Parties and learned Standing Counsel appearing for the Opposite
Party No.5-Principal Accountant General (A&E), Odisha, Bhubaneswar.
4, It is submitted by the learned counsel for the Petitioner that after the judgment of this Court in
Biharilal Barik case, which was confirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the Government of Odisha
issued a general approval order vide Panchayati Raj and Drinking Water Department Memo
No.18586 dated 26.09.2017 wherein a clarification was given to all Collectors in respect of sanction
of RACP in respect of VLW.
5. On perusal of the said letter, it appears that the Government was pleased to sanction RACP in
respect of all eligible VLWs and has sanctioned financial upgradation in the post of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78977914/ 1
Gopal Chandra Mahanta vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... ... on 31 January, 2025
GPEO/PA/ABDO/SDPO and DPO on completion of 10/20/30 years of service in the post of VLW
under the RACP scheme. Hence, the VLW are eligible to get Grade Pay of Rs.4200/-, Rs.4600/- and
Rs.4800/- respectively on completion of 10, 20, and 30 years of service in the cadre of VLW with
effect from 01.01.2013 under RACP Scheme. The aforesaid decision of the Government has the
concurrence of the Finance Department vide UOR No.1969/PSF dated 15.09.2017. On the basis of
the sanction accorded by the Government vide Memo No.26.09.2017 the present Petitioner who was
working as VLW in the district of Keonjhar has been extended the benefits of RACP by District
Office, Keonjhar vide Memo No.2893 dated 26.12.2017. A copy of the Office Order of District Office,
Keonjhar has been attached to the writ application under Annexure-2. On perusal of records, it
appears that the Petitioner's date of entry in to service is 26.06.2003 and he has been given sanction
to receive 1st RACP at the rate of Rs.4200/- with effect from 26.06.2013. Thereafter the
Government of Odisha vide a General Order dated 01.07.2020 issued by the Finance Department to
all the departments of Government extended the Grade Pay to all State Government employees
under RACP scheme as per the principle laid down in Biharilal Barik's case.
6. Learned counsel for the Petitioner at this juncture submits that A.G. Orissa (AE), Odisha,
Bhubaneswar is raising an objection with regard to disbursement of 1st RACP amount after the
Petitioner has retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation. Learned counsel for the
Petitioner in this regard draws the attention of this Court to letter dated 28.11.2024 under
Annxure-5. On perusal of the letter issued by the Senior Accounts Officer, Office of the A.G.Orissa, it
appears that due to non-production of sanction for implementation of order by the Administrative
department towards grant of higher Grade Pay under RACP Scheme the case of the Petitioner has
been returned for proper compliance. In the aforesaid context, learned counsel for the Petitioner
submits that since there is approval by the concerned Administrative department, in a general order
involving all the State Government employees, there is no necessity to grant approval in individual
case. Moreover, Law laid down by this Court which was affirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Biharilal Barik's case, the State Government adopted the law laid down by judicial pronouncement
in respect of the Government Employees working under the State of Odisha. It is further contended
by the learned counsel for the Petitioner that the Office of A.G. is unnecessarily causing harassment
to the petitioner and similarly situated persons by insisting upon production of approval in
individual case. He further submits that the Petitioner, who is retired by now is being unnecessarily
harassed by such administrative obstacle.
7. Learned counsel for the Petitioner referring to order of this Court passed in W.P.(C) No.13283 of
2022 and batch of others in respect of similarly placed employees of Subarnapur district submits
that this Court directed the Collector, Subarnapur to examine the issue and write a letter to the A.G
Odisha in favour of the Petitioner. Further, pursuant to the direction issued by this Court in the
aforesaid case the Collector, Subarnapur wrote a letter to the A.G. and on the basis of such letter, the
Petitioners have been extended the benefit of RACP scheme. In such view of the matter, the
Petitioner prays for similar direction in the present case.
8. Mr. S.K. Patra, learned Standing Counsel appearing for A.G. Odisha submits that administrative
approval is necessary to disburse the Grade Pay under RACP scheme and other related benefits.
Since there was no specific administrative approval in the present case, the case of the Petitioner has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78977914/ 2
Gopal Chandra Mahanta vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... ... on 31 January, 2025
not been considered and the file has been returned for proper compliance.
9. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and upon a careful consideration of the present case
and analysis of the legal position, this Court is of the considered view that in view of the general
administrative approval granted by the State Government in the Panahcyati Raj & Drinking Water
department no approval is required in individual cases. Therefore, following the direction issued by
this Court in Nishi Ranjan Pattanaik- vrs.State of Orissa and others in W.P.(C) No.13283 of 2022
dated 27.06.2022 and batch of other cases, this Court directs the Collector, Keonjhar to examine the
case of the Petitioner and write a letter to the A.G. Odisha within a period of four weeks from the
date of production of certified copy of this order. In the event such a letter is issued by the Collector,
Keonjhar, the A.G. of Odisha shall do well to do the needful to sanction and disburse the retirement
benefit in favour of the Petitioner within a period of two months from the date of receipt of letter
from the Collector, Keonjhar.
10. With the aforesaid observation, the writ application stands disposed of.
(A.K. Mohapatra) Judge Debasis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78977914/ 3
