Guddu Alias Deepanshu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
Guddu Alias Deepanshu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3
March, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:29445
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 3771 of 2025
Applicant :- Guddu Alias Deepanshu
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Abhinav Gaur,Ankit Shukla,Mohd. Rashid Siddiqui,Udbhav Tripathi
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Rakesh Kumar Gupta
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Anoop Trivedi, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Sri Ankit Shukla, learned counsel for
the applicant and Sri Rakesh Kumar Gupta, learned counsel for the informant as well as Sri R.P.
Patel, learned State Law Officer and perused the record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 289 of 2024, under Sections 65(1), 351(2) of BNS, Section
3/4(2) of POCSO Act Police Station Chhaprauli, District Baghpat, during the pendency of trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140251551/ 1
Guddu Alias Deepanshu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
PROSECUTION STORY:
4. The victim is stated to have gone to attend her nature's call in the midnight of 14.11.2024, then the
applicant called her to his house whereby she was forced into a room and raped by the applicant.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT :
5. The applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case and he has nothing to do with the
said offence.
6. The FIR is delayed by about 13 hours days and there is no explanation of the said delay caused.
7. The prosecution story stands falsified from the fact that there is no injury sustained by the victim
as the medical report does not indicate it.
8. There is no sign of any struggle whatsoever as the victim has stated that she was disrobed
completely by the applicant.
9. The victim by her physical appearance seems to be major, although, as per ossification test report,
the age of the victim has come up to be 16 years.
10. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
11. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since 17.11.2024.
The applicant is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not
misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF INFORMANT :
12. The bail application has been opposed on the ground that there is no enmity between the parties.
The allegations that earlier on, compromise was entered into between the parties, is not signed by
the informant, as such the story has been cooked up. The victim is minor, as such her consent, if
any, has no significance whatsoever.
CONCLUSION:
13. In light of the judgement of the Supreme Court passed in Niranjan Singh and another vs
Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and others AIR 1980 SC 785, this Court has avoided detailed
examination of the evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the case as no party
should have the impression that his case has been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is
needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive exploration of the merits in the order itself.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140251551/ 2
Guddu Alias Deepanshu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
14. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
15. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
16. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
17. Learned State Law Officer could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would
warrant denial of bail to the applicant.
18. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned State Law Officer.
19. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
20. Let the applicant- Guddu Alias Deepanshu involved in aforementioned case crime number be
released on bail on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C./351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
21. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140251551/ 3
Guddu Alias Deepanshu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
22. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Sumit S (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/140251551/ 4
