Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8
December, 2021
Author: S.M.Subramaniam
Bench: S.M.Subramaniam
W.P.No.37231 of 2016
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 08.12.2021
CORAM :
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM
W.P.No.37231 of 2016
Gulab Singh Rana,
Roll No. 14083
General Manager,
Indian Overseas Bank,
Central Office,
763, Anna Salai,
Chennai – 600 002. ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Central Public Information Officer,
Indian Overseas Bank,
Central Office, #763, Anna Salai,
Chennai – 600 002.
2.The First Appellate Authority cum General Manager,
Law Department, (RTI Cell)
Indian Overseas Bank,
Central Office,
#763, Anna Salai,
Chennai – 600 002
3.The Central Bureau of Investigation
Rep. by the Head of the Branch,
Bank Securities & Fraud Cell,
5th Floor, CBI Head Quarters,
5-B, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road,
New Delhi – 110 003
1/103
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) W.P.No.37231 of 2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 1
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
4.The Central Information Commission
Rep. by its Registrar,
Room No. 306, 3rd Floor,
“B” Wing, August Kranti Bhavan,
Bhikaji Cama Place,
Old JNU Campus,
New Delhi – 110 066 ... Respondents
Prayer : Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India for
issuance of a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, calling for the records of the
4th respondent in Second Appeal No. SA/ UG/ 15/ f9219ydtm in File
No.CIC/SH/A/2015/001081 dated, 21.7.2016 and to quash the same
consequently, direct the 1st and 3rd respondents to provide the point-wise
information sought for by the petitioner vide, RTI Application dated,
30.9.2014.
For Petitioner : Mr.S.Sathiaseelan
For R1 and R2 : Mr.R.Manimuthu
For R3 : Mr.K.Srinivasan
Special Public Prosecutor [For CBI]
For R4 : Mr.K.Venkataswamy Babu
Central Government Standing Counsel
2/103
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) W.P.No.37231 of 2016
ORDER
The writ on hand has been instituted, questioning the legality of the findings arrived by the 4th
respondent/The Central Information Commission in order 21.07.2016 and to direct the respondents
1 and 3 to provide point wise information sought for by the petitioner vide Right to Information Act
(RTI Act, 2005) application dated 30.09.2014.
2. The petitioner was working as General Manager, in Marketing Department, Indian Overseas Bank
(IOB), Central Office at Chennai. The Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI), Bank Securities and
Fraud Cell at New Delhi, has registered an F.I.R on 23.02.2012 and arrayed the petitioner as
accused No.12 for the alleged offences under Section 120B read with 420, 467, 468 and 471 of I.P.C
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 2
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
and under Section 13 (2) read with 13 (1) (d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
3. The petitioner approached the Central Public Information Officer of the Indian Overseas Bank
(IOB), Central Office at Chennai under Right to Information Act, 2005 vide an application dated
30.09.2014, seeking the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis following informations namely:
“1. Copy of request letter received from CBI for seeking sanction for any prosecution.
2. Copy of internal office memorandum containing the opinion/views of my
Disciplinary Authority for giving sanction for my prosecution based upon my reply
date 01.12.2012 to the first explanation letter dated 18.10.2012 issued to me.
3. Copy of first advice given by CVC, New Delhi.
4. The outcome of the reconciliatory meeting between my Disciplinary Authority and
CBI called by Central Vigilance Commissioner at the office of CVC, New Delhi.
5. The copy of any further clarification sought by CVC after the reconciliatory meeting
and if so, copy of Bank's reply thereto.
6. The copy of internal office memorandum containing the opinion/views of my
Disciplinary Authority of giving sanction for my prosecution based upon my reply
dated 03.07.2014 to the second explanation letter dated 20.06.2014 issued to me.
7. The copy of latest correspondence from CVC requesting/advising the bank again
for sanction of my prosecution.
8. The copy of internal office memorandum containing the opinion/views of my
present Disciplinary Authority based https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis upon which
the permission is given by the Bank to CBI for my prosecution.
9. Copy of Draft sanction supplied by CBI.”
4. The above RTI application was rejected by the Central Public Information Officer vide order dated
13.10.2014, on the ground that the informations sought for by the petitioner and documents are
exempted under Section 8(1) (d), (g) (h) of the RTI Act.
5. The petitioner preferred an appeal before the Appellate Authority under Section 19 (1) of the Act
on 27.10.2014, but the first appeal was dismissed by confirming the decision of the Public
Information Officer on 16.12.2014. The petitioner preferred a second appeal under Section 19 (3) of
the RTI Act before the Central information Commission at New Delhi on 30.03.2015 and the said
appeal was also rejected. Thus, the petitioner is constrained to move the present writ petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 3
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
6. The learned counsel for the petitioner mainly contended that the Fundamental Rights ensured
and the Statutory Rights conferred under the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Right to Information
Act have been unreasonably denied in the present case.
Section 8 (h) regarding exemption is not applicable in respect of the facts and circumstances of the
case of the petitioner. In this regard, the learned counsel for the petitioner drew the attention of this
Court regarding Section 24 of the Right to Information Act. Sub Section (1) to Section 24 of the
Right to Information Act states that “nothing contained in this Act shall apply to the intelligence and
security organisations specified in the Second Schedule, being organisations established by the
Central Government or any information furnished by such organisations to that Government.” The
proviso clause contemplates:
“Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human
rights violation shall not be excluded under this sub-section”
7. Relying on the said proviso clause, the learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated that in the case
of the petitioner, the investigations were completed during the relevant point of time and even
charge sheet was filed.
In view of certain discrepancy, the petitioner submitted an application seeking informations, which
all are vital to defend this case. Thus, the denial of right https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of
information under the Act is unlawful and not in consonance with the provisions of the Act.
8. The learned counsel for the petitioner is of an opinion that there is no reason to deny point wise
informations and documents sought for by the petitioner. The information cannot be construed as
confidential and more so, investigations were completed and charge sheet laid before the Competent
Criminal Court of Law. Thus, the decisions taken by the Public Information Officer/1st Appellate
Authority and Central Information Commission are perverse and liable to be set aside.
9. The learned counsel for the petitioner relied on various judgments to convince that information
sought for should be provided and in the present case, the petitioner is entitled for the informations.
In the case of Bhagat Singh Vs. Chief Information Commissioner and Others reported in 2008 (100)
DRJ 63, the Delhi High Court held as follows:
“13. Access to information, under Section 3 of the Act, is the rule and exemptions
under Section 8, the exception. Section 8 being a restriction on this fundamental
right, must therefore is to be https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis strictly construed. It
should not be interpreted in manner as to shadow the very right itself. Under Section
8, exemption from releasing information is granted if it would impede the process of
investigation or the prosecution of the offenders. It is apparent that the mere
existence of an investigation process cannot be a ground for refusal of the
information; the authority withholding information must show satisfactory reasons
as to why the release of such information would hamper the investigation process.
Such reasons should be germane, and the opinion of the process being hampered
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 4
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
should be reasonable and based on some material. Sans this consideration, Section 8
(1) (h) and other such provisions would become the haven for dodging demands for
information.
14. A rights based enactment is akin to a welfare measure, like the Act, should receive
a liberal interpretation. The contextual background and history of the Act is such that
the exemptions, outlined in Section 8, relieving the authorities from the obligation to
provide information, constitute restrictions on the exercise of the rights provided by
it. Therefore, such exemption provisions have to be construed in their terms; there is
some authority supporting this view (See Nathi Devi v. Radha Devi Gupta, 2005 (2)
SCC 201 :
2005 (80) DRJ 518[SC]; B.R. Kapoor v. State of Tamil Nadu, 2001 (7) SCC 231and V.
Tulasamma v. Sesha Reddy, 1977 (3) SCC 99).
Adopting a different approach would result in narrowing the rights and approving a judicially
mandated class of restriction on the rights under the Act, which is unwarranted.
14. In the present case, the orders of the three respondents https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis do not
reflect any reasons, why the investigation process would be hampered. The direction of the CIC
shows is that the information needs to be released only after the investigation and recovery in
complete. Facially, the order supports the petitioner's contention that the claim for exemption made
by respondent Nos. 2 and 3 are untenable. Section 8(1) (j) relates only to investigation and
prosecution and not to recovery. Recovery in tax matters, in the usual circumstances is a time
consuming affair, and to withhold information till that eventuality, after the entire proceedings,
despite the ruling that investigations are not hampered by information disclosure, is illogical. The
petitioner's grouse against the condition imposed by the CIC is all the more valid since he claims it
to be of immense relevance, to defend himself in criminal proceedings. The second and third
respondents have not purported to be aggrieved by the order of CIC as far as it directs disclosure of
materials; nor have they sought for its review on the ground that the CIC was misled and its
reasoning flawed. Therefore, it is too late for them to contend that the impugned order contains an
erroneous appreciation of facts. The materials available with them and forming the basis of notice
under the Income Tax act is what has to be disclosed to the petitioner, i.e., the information seeker.”
10. In the case of The Director of Income Tax (Investigation) and Another Vs. Bhagat Singh and
ANR, the High Court of Delhi delivered a judgment in LPA.No.1377 of 2007 on 17.12.2007, reads as
follows:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis “8. Information sought for by the respondent No. 1
relates to fate of his complaint made in September, 2003, action taken thereon after
recording of statement of Ms.Saroj Nirmal and whether Ms.Saroj Nirmal has any
other source of income, other than teaching in a private school. This information can
be supplied as necessary investigation on these aspects has been undertaken during
last four years by the Director of Income Tax (Investigation).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 5
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
In fact proceedings before the said Director have drawn to a close and the matter is
now with the ITO i.e. the Assessing Officer.
Under Section 8(1)(h) information can be withheld if it would impede investigation,
apprehension or prosecution of offenders. It is for the appellant to show how and why
investigation will be impeded by disclosing information to the appellant. General
statements are not enough. Apprehension should be based on some ground or
reason. Information has been sought for by the complainant and not the assessee.
Nature of information is not such which interferes with the investigation or helps the
assessee. Information may help the respondent No. 1 from absolving himself in the
criminal trial. It appears that the appellant has held back information and delaying
the proceedings for which the respondent No. 1 felt aggrieved and
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis filed the aforesaid writ petition in this Court. We
also find no reason as to why the aforesaid information should not be supplied to the
respondent No. 1. In the grounds of appeal, it is stated that the appellant is ready and
willing to disclose all the records once the same is summoned by the criminal court
where proceedings under Section 498A of the Indian Penal Code are pending. If that
is the stand of the appellant, we find no reason as to why the aforesaid information
cannot be furnished at this stage as the investigation process is not going to be
hampered in any manner and particularly in view of the fact that such information is
being furnished only after the investigation process is complete as far as Director of
Income Tax (Investigation) is concerned. It has not been explained in what manner
and how information asked for and directed will hamper the assessment
proceedings.”
11. In the case of Secretary to Government and others Vs. S.Suresh Babu and others, reported in
2010 (3) CTC 742, the Hon'ble High Court of Madras held as follows:
“2.By the impugned order, the Commission held that the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Home Department of the State Government cannot
deny information sought for by respondents 1 to 3 and that protections claimed by
virtue of exemption under Section 8(h) of the Right to Information Act (for short RTI
Act) will not apply to the petitioner department.
The Writ Petition was admitted on 20.4.2007 and an interim order was granted.
Subsequently when the matter came up on 23.12.2009, at the instance of the learned
Government Pleader, the Writ Petition was permitted to be withdrawn. Accordingly it
was dismissed as withdrawn. Thereafter, the State Government filed a Review
Application in Review Application No. 37 of 2010. After due notice to the parties, the
Review Application was allowed by an order, dated 17.3.2010 and the Writ Petition
was restored.
8. Throughout the case, the petitioner only relied upon the exemption granted under
Section 8(h) of the Act, which reads as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 6
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
“8(h) information which would impede the process of investigation or apprehension
or prosecution of offenders;” During the course of argument, learned Advocate
General also placed reliance upon Section 8(e) which reads as follows: “8(e)
information available to a person in his fiduciary relationship, unless the competent
authority is satisfied that the larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such
information;” https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
14. It is not as if the official correspondence between the Police Department and the
Government took place on the basis of fiduciary relationship. But they are the official
correspondence between two departments. In so far as Section 8(h) is concerned,
exemption is available only when it is considered to be impediment in the process of
investigation or apprehension or prosecution of offenders. In the present case, the
information is about derailment of the prosecution by the police. Therefore pressing
into service Section 8(h) will not arise.
15. Even Section 24 of the RTI Act provides immunity to certain organisations set up
by the State Government. Section 24(4) reads as follows:
“24(4) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to such intelligence and security
organisation being organisations established by the State Government, as that
Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify:
Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human
rights violations shall not be excluded under this sub-section:
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations
of violation of human rights, the information shall only be provided after the
approval of the State Information Commission and, notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 7, such information shall be provided within forty-five days from
the date of the receipt of request.” https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
16. By virtue of power vested under Section 24, the State Government has issued
G.O.Ms. No. 158, P & AR Department, dated 26.8.2008 exempting only the Tamil
Nadu State Vigilance Commission and Directorate of Vigilance and Anti-Corruption.
Even in such cases, as per the First Proviso, notwithstanding such exemption, there is no immunity
if informations are sought for on the allegations of corruption and human rights violation and which
information can never be excluded from the public purview.
17. That question came up for consideration before this Court in Superintendent of Police, Central
Range, Office of the Directorate of Vigilance and Anti-Corruption, Chennai-600 028 v. R.
Karthikeyan and others, W.P. No. 23507 and 23508 of 2009, dated 12.1.2010. In paragraph Nos. 11
to 14, this Court held as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 7
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
“11. He also submitted that when the said G.O. came to be challenged, a Division
Bench of this Court in P. Pugalenthi v. State of Tamil Nadu and others in W.P. No.
4907 of 2009, dated 30.3.2009 upheld the validity of the said G.O. In paragraphs 5,
6, 8, 9 and 11 of the order, the Division Bench had observed as follows:
“5. As can be seen from the language used in the main part of sub- section (4), it
states that nothing contained in this Act shall apply to such intelligence and security
organisation. Thus, in the first part, two entities are mentioned in singular as
organisation. Subsequently, they are referred as ‘organisations’ established by the
State Government. If intelligence and security organisation was only one, there was
no need to use the plural term ‘organisations’ https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
subsequently. It clearly indicates that such an organisation can be for intelligence
purpose or for security purpose. The word “and” between the two words intelligence
and security organisation will have to be read as “or”. Therefore, the second
submission of Mr. Radhakrishnan cannot be accepted.
6. The third submission of Mr. Radhakrishnan was that this provision affects the
fundamental rights envisaged under Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution of India for
freedom of speech and expression. It is material to note that sub-clause (2) of Article
19 of the Constitution of India provides that any such law insofar as it imposes
reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause in
the interests of [the sovereignty and integrity of India,] particularly the security of the
State, friendly relations with foreign States, public order, decency or morality, or in
relation to contempt of Court, defamation or incitement to an offence, its operation
will not be affected by sub-clause 1(a). In our view, Section 24(4) of the Act provides
for reasonable restriction in the interest of public order.
…
8. As can be seen from this paragraph, these two organisations primarily deal with
investigation into alleged corrupt activities of public servants. The investigations and
subsequent actions culminate in disciplinary action or criminal action in the
appropriate Courts of law. Thereafter, it is stated that confidentiality and secrecy in
certain cases are required to be maintained right from the initial stage upto filing of
charge-sheet on https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the one hand and upto issue of
final orders in the case of disciplinary proceedings. In the latter part of this
paragraph, it is stated that in vigilance cases, giving information at the initial stage,
investigation stage and even prosecution stage, would lead to unnecessary
embarrassment and would definitely hamper due process of investigation.
9. In our view, the State has given sufficient reasons as to why it was exercising
powers under Section 24(4) of the Act and this is in exercise of discretionary power,
which is otherwise also protected under sub-clause (2) of Article 19 of the
Constitution of India as stated earlier.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 8
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
….
11. The third ground is that the property held by these organisations or their budgetary allocations
must be known to the public. It is not for us to dictate to the State as to how it has to function, when
it gives exemption to these organisations. Insofar as the allegation of corruption and human rights
violation are concerned, the First Proviso to Section 24(4) of the Act takes care of apprehension of
the petitioner. It clearly provides that information on allegation of corruption and human rights will
not be excluded under this sub- section. In our view, there is no reason for the petitioner to have any
such apprehension.” (Emphasis added)
12. Therefore, he submitted that the petitioner is well within their right to deny the information
sought for by the first respondent in https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis both the Writ Petitions and
that the Information Commission had erred in directing the petitioner to furnish such information.
13. In the light of the above order of the Division Bench, this Court is not inclined to go into the
efficacy of exemption given to the Directorate of Vigilance and Anti-Corruption from the purview of
the RTI Act. But, as rightly observed by the Commission, if some organisations operate in different
spheres such as intelligence and security, in those areas, exemption can be valid. But when the very
same organisation dealt with corruption cases of public servants, then exemption under Section
24(4) of the RTI Act cannot be taken advantage of, since the Proviso to Section 24(4) clearly says
that information pertaining to the allegations of corrupt and human rights violations shall not be
excluded under the sub-section.
14. Therefore, notwithstanding the exemption obtained by the petitioner organisation, any
information relating to the allegations of corrupt cannot be excluded from the purview of public
access. The information sought for by the first respondent are wholly statistical information
regarding the number of cases filed, their success rate and the post conviction or post trial action
taken against such officers. These information are vital in a transparency Government as public are
entitled to know the officers who are facing charge of corruption as well as conviction or acquittal
obtained by them as well as the result of departmental action initiated by the Government. Perhaps,
consequent to Proviso to Section 24(4), in paragraph 11 the Division Bench has specifically referred
to the Proviso and held that the First Proviso will take care https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of
apprehension expressed by the petitioner in that case. The Section cannot be used to exclude the
information of allegation of corruption.
18. The Supreme Court in its decision in Union of India v. Assn. for Democratic Reforms, 2002 (5)
SCC 294, while directing the personal information of candidates standing in election to be divulged
as it should be available in public domain, in paragraph 44 had observed as follows:
“44. It is also submitted that even the gazetted officers in all Government services are
required to disclose their assets and thereafter to furnish details of any acquisition of
property annually. In our view, it is rightly submitted that in a democratic form of
Government, MP or MLA is having higher status and duty to the public. In P.V.
Narasimha Rao v. State (CBI/SPE) the Court inter alia considered whether Member
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 9
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
of Parliament is a public servant. The Court (in para 162) held thus: (SCC p. 747)
“162. A public servant is ‘any person who holds an office by virtue of which he is
authorised or required to perform any public duty’. Not only, therefore, must the
person hold an office but he must be authorised or required by virtue of that office to
perform a public duty. Public duty is defined by Section 2(b) of the said Act to mean
‘a duty in the discharge of which the State, the public or that community at large has
an interest’. In a democratic form of government it is the Member of Parliament or a
State Legislature who represents the people of his constituency in the highest law-
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis making bodies at the Centre and the State
respectively. Not only is he the representative of the people in the process of making
the laws that will regulate their society, he is their representative in deciding how the
funds of the Centre and the States shall be spent and in exercising control over the
executive. It is difficult to conceive of a duty more public than this or of a duty in
which the State, the public and the community at large would have greater interest.”
(Emphasis supplied) The aforesaid underlined portion highlights the important
status of an MP or an MLA.”
19. The Supreme Court in Vineet Narain v. Union of India, 1998 (1) SCC 226, dealing
with cases of corruption of public servants dealt with the role of the judiciary in
dealing with such matters and in paragraph 55, it had observed as follows:
“55. These principles of public life are of general application in every democracy and
one is expected to bear them in mind while scrutinising the conduct of every holder of
a public office. It is trite that the holders of public offices are entrusted with certain
powers to be exercised in public interest alone and, therefore, the office is held by
them in trust for the people. Any deviation from the path of rectitude by any of them
amounts to a breach of trust and must be severely dealt with instead of being pushed
under the carpet. If the conduct amounts to an offence, it must be promptly
investigated and the offender against whom a prima facie case is made out should be
prosecuted expeditiously so that the majesty of law is upheld and the rule of law
vindicated. It is the duty of the judiciary to enforce the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis rule of law and, therefore, to guard against erosion
of the rule of law.”
20. Therefore, in the light of the above, this Court cannot interfere with the order
passed by the fourth respondent-Information Commission. Hence, the Writ Petition
will stand dismissed. No costs. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous Petition
stands closed.
12. In the case of Deputy Commissioner of Police Vs. D.K.Sharma, reported in 2010
SCC Online Del 4454, the Delhi High Court held as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 10
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
“6.This Court is inclined to concur with the view expressed by the CIC that in order to
deny the information under the RTI Act the authority concerned would have to show
a justification with reference to one of the specific clauses under Section 8 (1) of the
RTI Act. In the instant case, the Petitioner has been unable to discharge that burden.
The mere fact that a criminal case is pending may not by itself be sufficient unless
there is a specific power to deny disclosure of the information concerning such case.
In the present case, the criminal trial has concluded. Also, the investigation being
affected on account of the disclosure information sought by the Respondent pertains
to his own case. No prejudice can be caused to the Petitioner if the D.D. entry
concerning his arrest, the information gathered during the course of the
investigation, and https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the copies of the case diary are
furnished to the Respondent. The right of an applicant to seek such information
pertaining to his own criminal case, after the conclusion of the trial, by taking
recourse of the RTI Act, cannot be said to be barred by any provision of the CrPC. It is
required to be noticed that Section 22 of the RTI Act states that the RTI Act would
prevail notwithstanding anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Official
Secrets Act, 1923 and any other law for the time being in force.
13. In the case of B.S.Mathur Vs. Public Information officer reported in 2011 (125)
DRJ 508, the High Court of Delhi, head as follows:
“19. The question that arises for consideration has already been formulated in the
Court's order dated 21st April 2011: Whether the disclosure of the information sought
by the Petitioner to the extent not supplied to him yet would “impede the
investigation” in terms of Section 8(1)(h) RTI Act” The scheme of the RTI Act, its
objects and reasons indicate that disclosure of information is the rule and
non-disclosure the exception. A public authority which seeks to withhold information
available with it has to show that the information sought is of the nature specified in
Section 8 RTI Act. As regards Section 8(1)(h) RTI Act, which is the only provision
invoked by the Respondent to deny the Petitioner the information sought by him, it
will have to be shown by the public authority that the information sought “would
impede the process of investigation.” The mere reproducing of the wording of the
statute would not be https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis sufficient when recourse is
had to Section 8(1)(h) RTI Act. The burden is on the public authority to show in what
manner the disclosure of such information would ‘impede’ the investigation. Even if
one went by the interpretation placed by this Court in W.P.(C) No. 7930 of 2009
[Additional Commissioner of Police (Crime) v. CIC, decision dated 30th November
2009] that the word “impede” would “mean anything which would hamper and
interfere with the procedure followed in the investigation and have the effect to hold
back the progress of investigation”, it has still to be demonstrated by the public
authority that the information if disclosed would indeed “hamper” or “interfere” with
the investigation, which in this case is the second enquiry.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 11
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
24. No grounds have been made out by the Respondent under Section 8(1)(h) of the RTI Act to
justify exemption from disclosure of the information sought by the Petitioner.
25. The writ petitions are accordingly allowed and the impugned order dated 6th September 2010 of
the CIC is hereby set aside. Information to the extent not already provided in relation to the three
RTI applications should be provided to the Petitioner by the Respondent within a period of four
weeks from today. While providing the information it will be open to the Respondent to apply
Section 10 RTI Act where required.
14. In the case of Sudhirranjan Senapati, Addl. Commissioner of Income Tax Vs. Union of India and
other, the High Court of Delhi in https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis W.P.(C).No.7048 of 2011 dated
05.03.2013, held as follows:
“4.1 More specifically, the information sought was as follows:
Certified true copies of all order sheet entries / Note Sheet entries / File notings of
US, VandL / DS, VandL/Director, VandL/JS (Admn.)/Member
(PandV)/Chairman,CBDT/Secretary,Revenue/MO S (R), if any, / Finance Minister, if
any? pertaining to prosecution sanction by the Central Government u/s. 19(1)(a) of
Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 vide such sanction order dated 09.04.2009 in
F.No.C-14011/8/2008-VandL of Central Board of Direct Taxes, Department of
Revenue, Ministry of Finance, GOI, New Delhi.
4.2 The CPIO vide order dated 16/17.08.2010, declined the request for furnishing
information by taking recourse to the provisions of Section 8(1)(h) of the RTI Act.
Pertinently, no reasons were set out in the order. All that is said, in the order of the
CPIO is that, requisite information cannot be supplied as the same is exempted from
disclosure under Section 8(1)(h) of the RTI Act.
5. Being aggrieved, the petitioner preferred an appeal with the First Appellate
Authority. The appeal met the same fate. By an order dated 05.10.2010, the First
Appellate Authority dismissed the petitioner?s appeal. The sum and substance of the
rationale given in the order of the First Appellate Authority was that, since criminal
prosecution was pending, information sought for by the petitioner could not be
disclosed. The First Appellate Authority went on to https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
observe in its order that, any disclosure of information prior to a final decision would
be premature and injurious to the process of investigation. Accordingly, relying upon
the provisions of Section 8(1) (h) of the RTI Act, it sustained the order of the CPIO.
6. The petitioner being aggrieved, with the order of the First Appellate Authority,
preferred an appeal with the CIC. The CIC by virtue of the impugned order dated
18.07.2011, rejected the petitioner?s appeal. By a cryptic order, the CIC accepted the
stand of the respondents that information sought for, could not be supplied to the
petitioner as the case was pending in court and that disclosure of information would
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 12
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
impede the process of prosecution.
7. The learned counsel for the petitioner has impugned the decision of the CIC and
the authorities below on the following grounds :-
(i). The investigation is complete. The chargesheet qua the accused, which includes
the petitioner, has been filed in court. On failure of the respondents to demonstrate
as to how the disclosure of information would impede prosecution of the petitioner,
the said information ordinarily ought to have been supplied to the petitioner.
The learned counsel for the petitioner says that disclosure of information is the rule, the denial of
the same is an exception. He submits that the exception carved out in Sections 8 and 9 of the RTI
Act have thus to be construed strictly.
8. In support of the submission, the learned counsel for the petitioner relies upon the judgment of a
Single Judge of this Court in Bhagat Singh Vs. Chief Information Commissioner and ors., 146
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (2008) DLT 385.
9. The contesting respondents i.e., respondent nos.2 and 3 are represented by Mr. Singh, who has
largely relied upon the stand taken in the counter affidavit. Mr. Singh submits that since the
prosecution of the petitioner is ensuing, any disclosure of information would compromise the case
of the prosecution and hence, cannot be divulged. Recourse was taken to the provisions of Section
8(1)(h) to support the stand of the respondents.
9.1 Mr. Singh also relied upon a judgment of another learned Single Judge of this court, dated
10.11.2006, passed in WP(C) 16712/2006, titled Surinder Pal Singh Vs. Union of India and Others.
Mr. Singh submits with all persuasive powers at his command that the facts in Surinder Pal?s case
are identical to the present case and therefore having regard to the fact that the court sustained the
stand of the official respondents in that case wherein information was denied by taking recourse to
the provisions of Section 8(1)(h) of the RTI Act, similar result ought to follow in the present case.
10. I have heard the learned counsels for the parties and perused the record.
11. At the outset, as noticed above, a chargesheet against the petitioner has been filed and the trial
has commenced. Therefore, the questions which falls for consideration is: whether the case of the
petitioner would come within the ambit of the provisions of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Section 8(1)(h) of the RTI Act. The said provision reads as follows :
8. Exemption from disclosure of information ?
(i). Notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be no obligation to give any citizen ?
(a). x x x x
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 13
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
(b). x x x x
(c). x x x x
(d). x x x x
(e). x x x x
(f). x x x x
(g). x x x x
(h). Information which would impede the process of investigation or apprehension or prosecution of
offenders.
11.1 As rightly contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner, a learned Single Judge of this
court in Bhagat Singh?s case has construed the said provision of the Act to mean that in order to
claim exemption under the said provision, the authority withholding the information must disclose
satisfactory reasons as to why the release of information would hamper investigation. The reasons
disclosed should be germane to the formation of opinion that the process of investigation would be
hampered. The said opinion should be reasonable and based on material facts. The learned Single
Judge, I may note goes on to observe that sans this consideration, Section 8(1)(h) and other such
provisions of the RTI Act would become a ?haven for dogging demands for information.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 11.2 In the light of the aforesaid observations of the learned Single
Judge in Bhagat Singh?s case, one would have to see as to whether the affidavit filed on behalf of
respondent nos.2 and 3 discloses the reasons as to how information sought, would hamper the
prosecution of the petitioner. A perusal of the affidavit shows that no such averment is made in the
counter affidavit filed by respondent nos.2 and 3. Undoubtedly, the petitioner here is seeking
information with regard to the sanction accorded for his own prosecution. It cannot be disputed, as
is noticed by my predecessor, in this very matter, in the order dated 14.10.2011, that the accused
during the course of his prosecution can impugn the sanction accorded for his prosecution, on the
basis of which the prosecution is launched. For this proposition, the learned Judge, in its order
dated 14.10.2011, relies upon the following judgments :
State Inspector of Police, Visakhapatmam Vs. Surya Sankaran Karri (2006) 7 SCC 172
and Romesh Lal Jain Vs. Naginder Singh Rana, (2006) 1 SCC 294.
11.3 I have no reason to differ with the view taken either in Bhagat Singh case or with
the prima facie view taken in the order passed by my predecessor in his order dated
14.10.2010. It is trite that an accused can challenge the order by which sanction is
obtained to trigger a prosecution against the accused. If that be so, I do not see any
good reason to withhold information which, in one sense, is the underlying material,
which led to the final order according sanction for prosecution of the petitioner. As a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 14
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
matter of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis fact, the trial court is entitled to examine
the underlying material on the basis of which sanction is accorded when a challenge
is laid to it, to determine for itself as to whether the sanctioning authority had before
it the requisite material to grant sanction in the matter. See observations in
Gokulchand Dwarkadas Morarka vs The King AIR 1948 PC 82 and State of Karnataka
vs Ameerjan (2007) 11 SCC
273. Therefore, the said underlying material would be crucial to the cause of the
petitioner, who seeks to defend himself in criminal proceedings, which the State as
the prosecutor cannot, in my opinion, withhold unless it can show that such
information, would hamper prosecution.
12. As indicated above, no reasons are set out in the counter affidavit. The argument of Mr. Singh
that a Single Judge of this court in Surinder Pal Singh?s case (supra) has taken a view in favour of
the respondents, is not quite correct, for the reason that the learned Single Judge in the facts and
circumstances of that case came to the conclusion that the apprehension of the respondent i.e., the
State in that case, was ?not without any basis.
12.1 It appears in that case the petitioner, who was being criminally prosecuted for having
fraudulently reduced the quantum of excise duty to be paid by an assessee, while passing an
adjudication order, had sought information with regard to: note sheets; correspondence obtaining
qua the material in the file of the CBI; correspondence in the file of the CVC pertaining to the
matter; and correspondence in the file of the Department of Vigilance, CBES.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 12.2 A close perusal of the nature of information sought seems to
suggests that much of it may have been material collected during the course of investigation, the
disclosure of which could have perhaps hampered the prosecution of the petitioner.
13. Therefore, in my view, in such like cases when, the State takes a stand the information cannot be
disclosed; while dilating on its stand in that behalf, the State would necessarily have to, deal with the
aspect as to how the information sought, is of such a nature, that it could impede prosecution. Much
would thus depend, on the nature of information sought, in respect of which, a clear stand needs to
be taken by the state, while declining the information. The burden in this regard is on the State (see
B.S. Mathur Vs. Public Information Officer of Delhi High Court, 180 (2011) DLT 303) 13.1 The facts
obtaining in Surinder Pal case?s are distinguishable and hence, the ratio of that judgment would not
apply to the facts obtaining in the present case.
13.2 It also be noted that the learned Single Judge?s view in Bhagat Singh case has been upheld by a
reasoned order by the Division Bench in Directorate of Income Tax and Anr. Vs. Bhagat Singh,
dated 17.12.2007 passed in LPA 1377/2007.”
15. In the case of Adesh Kumar Vs. Union of India and others reported in 2014 SCC Online Del 7203,
the Delhi High Court held as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 15
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis “9. It is apparent from a bare perusal of the CIC's
order that it does not indicate the reasons that persuaded the CIC to uphold the
viewof the Public Authority that the disclosure of information sought by the
petitioner would impede prosecution of the petitioner. A co-ordinate Bench of this
Court in the case of B.S. Mathur v. Public Information Officer of Delhi High
Court:W.P.(C)295/2011,decidedon03.06.2011 had considered the contention with
regard to with holding information under Section 8(1)(h) of the Act and held as
under:
“19. The question that arises for consideration has already been formulated in the
Court's order dated 21st April 2011: Whether the disclosure of the information sought
by the Petitioner to the extent not supplied to him yet would “impede the
investigation” in terms of Section 8(1)(h) RTI Act? The scheme of the RTI Act, its
objects and reasons indicate that disclosure of information is the rule and non-
disclosure the exception. A public authority which seeks to withhold information
available with it has to show that the information sought is of the nature specified in
Section 8 RTI Act. As regards Section 8(1)(h) RTI Act, which is the only provision
invoked by the Respondent to deny the Petitioner the information sought by him, it
will have to be shown by the public authority that the information sought “would
impede the process of investigation.” The mere reproducing of the wording of the
statute would not be sufficient when recourse is had to Section 8(1)(h) RTI Act. The
burden is on the public authority to show in what manner the disclosure of such
information would ‘impede’ the investigation. Even if one went by
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the interpretation placed by this Court in W.P. (C)
No. 7930 of 2009 [Additional Commissioner of Police (Crime) v. CIC, decision dated
30th November 2009] that the word “impede” would “mean anything which would
hamper and interfere with the procedure followed in the investigation and have the
effect to hold back the progress of investigation”, it has still to be demonstrated by
the public authority that the information if disclosed would indeed “hamper” or
“interfere” with the investigation, which in this case is the second enquiry.”
10. A bare perusal of the order passed by the FAA also indicates that the aspect as to
how the disclosure of information would impede prosecution has not been
considered. Merely, citing that the information is exempted under Section 8(1)(h) of
the Act would not absolve the public authority from discharging its onus as required
to claim such exemption. Thus, neither the FAA nor the CIC has questioned the
Public Authority as to how the disclosure of information would impede the
prosecution.”
16. The Central Information Commission in the case of Shri.Madhu K. Farde Vs. Employees
Provident Fund, CPIO & RPFC-I (Vigilance) held as follows:
"It is submitted that to deny file-notings exemption has not been claimed u/s 8(1)(h)
of the RTI Act. Rather exemption is claimed u/s 8(1) (e) and (g) of the RTI Act, 2005
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 16
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
provisos of which exempt information available to a person in his fiduciary
relationship unless https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the competent authority is
satisfied that the larger public interest warrants the disclosure of such information;
and also exempts from disclosure of such information, the disclosure of which would
endanger the life or physical safety of any person or identify the source of
information or assistance given in confidence for law enforcement or security
purpose. It is submitted that confidentiality of note-files is an entirely wholesome
principle conducive to good governance. Any compromise with objectivity in
processing matters extant in the file is potentially damaging to governance by
exposing those entrusted in charge of processing the matter to undue and sometimes,
intimidating, scrutiny by interested parties, Anonymity of vigilance officers recording
files notes deserves to be protected in their own interest as well as the interest of the
system they serve. The public authority is duty bound to protect the interests of its
officers who examine through their notings in files the conduct of other employees of
the public authority and thereby expose themselves to possible revengeful action by
those whose conduct they bring under scanner. Further applying section 10(1) and
hiding the names of the authors of the file notings will not serve any purpose as even
without the authors' names, the identity of the authors of the notes could be disclosed
by reference to the hierarchies through which the file passed as well as the
handwriting in which the notes were recorded. Protection needs to be provided to the
officers of sensitive department such as the vigilance in performing their duties from
the probing eyes of outsiders. Also parting file notings with the applicant serves no
public interest as https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the personal interest of the
applicant cannot be equated with public interest.
The performance of an employee/officer in an organization is primarily a matter
between the employee and the employer and normally those aspects are governed by
the service rules which fall under the expression "personal information", the
disclosure of which has no relationship to any public activity or public interest. Hence
falls squarely under the dictum of Hon'ble Supreme Court India judgment in Girish R
Deshpande Vs. CIC in special leave petition (Civil) No.27734 of 2012 @ 14781/2012
dated 03/10/2012. If the file-noting is provided to the applicant it would affect the
fair and free expression of view by the officers who have to analyze the investigation
report and evidences on record with the fear that it would be sought for in future and
would prejudice the delinquent officers against them, if the noting against the officer
being investigated is parted with. In view of the above, provision of Section 8(1) (e)
and (g) of the RTI Act is claimed to deny the file notings."
17. In the case of Union of India and others Vs. Col.V.K. Shad and others reported in 2012 SCC
Online Del 5710, the High Court of Delhi held as follows:
“20. Before I proceed further, I may also note that the first proviso in Section 8 says
that, information which cannot be denied to the Parliament or the State Legislature,
shall not be denied to any https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis person. Sub-section (2)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 17
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
of Section 8, states that notwithstanding anything contained in the Official Secret
Acts, 1923, or any of the exemptions provided in Sub-section (1), would not come in
the way of a public authority in allowing access to information if, public interest in its
disclosure outweighs the harm to the protected interest.
20.1 A Full Bench of this court in the case of Secretary General, Supreme Court of
India v. Subhash Chandra Agarwal, 166 (2010) DLT 305 : 2010 (114) DRJ 505 [FB],
in the context of provisions of Section 8(1)(j) also examined what would constitute a
fiduciary relationship. The observations contained in paragraph 97 to 101, being
apposite are extracted hereinbelow:
“…..97. As Waker defines it: “A “fiduciary” is a person in a position of trust, or
occupying a position of power and confidence with respect to another such that he is
obliged by various rules of law to act solely in the interest of the other, whose rights
he has to protect. He may not make any profit or advantage from the relationship
without full disclosure. The category includes trustees, Company promoters and
directors, guardians, solicitors and clients and other similarly placed.” [Oxford
Companion to Law, 1980 p. 469]
98. “A fiduciary relationship”, as observed by Anantnarayanan, J., “may arise in the
context of a jural relationship. Where confidence is reposed by one in another and
that leads to a transaction in which there is a conflict of interest and duty in the
person in whom such confidence is reposed, fiduciary relationship immediately
springs https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis into existence.” [see Mrs. Nellie Wapshare
v. Pierce Lasha & Co. Ltd. AIR 1960 Mad 410]
99. In Lyell v. Kennedy (1889) 14 AC 437, the Court explained that whenever two
persons stand in such a situation that confidence is necessarily reposed by one in the
other, there arises a presumption as to fiduciary relationship which grows naturally
out of that confidence. Such a confidential situation may arise from a contract or by
somegratuitous undertaking, or it may be upon previous request or undertaken
without any authority.
100. In Dale & Carrington Invt. (P) Ltd. v. P.K. Prathaphan: (2005) 1 SCC 212 and
Needle Industries (India) Ltd. v. Needle Industries Newey (India) Holding Ltd.
(1981) 3 SCC 333, the Court held that the directors of the company owe fiduciary duty
to its shareholders.
In P.V. Sankara Kurup v. Leelavathy Nambier: (1994) 6 SCC 68, the Court held that an agent and
power of attorney can be said to owe a fiduciary relationship to the principal.
101. Section 88 of the Indian Trusts Act requires a fiduciary not to gain an advantage of his position.
Section 88 applies to a trustee, executor, partner, agent, director of a company, legal advisor or
other persons bound in fiduciary capacity. Kinds of persons bound by fiduciary character are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 18
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
enumerated in Mr. M. Gandhi's book on “Equity, Trusts and Specific Relief (2nd ed., Eastern Book
Company) (1) Trustee, (2) Director of a company, (3) Partner, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (4)
Agent, (5) Executor, (6) Legal Adviser, (7) Manager of a joint family, (8) Parent and child, (9)
Religious, medical and other advisers, (10) Guardian and Ward, (11) Licensees appointed on
remuneration to purchase stocks on behalf of government, (12) Confidential Transactions wherein
confidence is reposed, and which are indicated by (a) Undue influence, (b) Control over property, (c)
Cases of unjust enrichment, (d) Confidential information, (e) Commitment of job, (13) Tenant for
life, (14) Co-owner, (15) Mortgagee, (16) Other qualified owners of property, (17) De facto guardian,
(18) Receiver, (19) Insurance Company, (20) Trustee de son tort, (21) Co-heir, (22) Benamidar.
20.2 The above would show that there are two kinds of relationships. One, where a fiducial
relationship exists, which is applicable to https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis legal relationships
between parties, such as guardian and ward, administrator and heirs, executors and beneficiaries of
a testamentary succession; while the other springs from a confidential relationship which is pivoted
on confidence. In other words confidence is reposed and exercised. Thus, the term fiduciary applies,
it appears, to a person who enjoys peculiar confidence qua other persons. The relationship
mandates fair dealing and good faith, not necessarily borne out of a legal obligation. It also
permeates to transactions, which are informal in nature. [See words and phrases Permanent Edn.
(Vol. 16-A, p. 41) and para 38.3 of the CBSE v. Aditya Bandopadhyay]. As indicated above, the
Supreme Court in the very same judgment in paragraph 39 has summed up as to what the term
fiduciary would mean.
20.3 In the instant case, what is sought to be argued in sum and substance that, it is a fiducial
relation of the latter kind, where the persons generating the note or opinion expects the fiduciary,
i.e., the institution, which is the Army, to hold their trust and confidence and not disclose the
information to the respondents herein, i.e., Messers V.K. Shad and Ors. If this argument were to be
accepted, then the persons, who generate the notes in the file or the opinions, would have to be, in
one sense, the beneficiaries of the said information. In an institutional set up, it can hardly be
argued that notes on file qua a personnel or an employee of an institution, such as the Army,
whether vis-a-vis his performance or his conduct, in any manner, can benefit the person, who
generates the note or renders an opinion. As a matter of fact, the person who generates the note or
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis renders an opinion is presumed to be a person who is objective
and not conflicted by virtue of his interest in the matter, on which, he is called upon to deliberate. If
that position holds, then it can neither be argued nor can it be conceived that notes on file or
opinions rendered in an institutional setup by one officer qua the working or conduct of another
officer brings forth a fiduciary relationship. It is also not a relationship of the kind where both
parties required the other to act in a fiduciary capacity by treating the other as a beneficiary. The
examples of such situations are found say in a partnership firm where, each partner acts in fiduciary
capacity qua the other partner(s).
20.4 If at all, a fiduciary relationship springs up in such like situation, it would be when a third party
seeks information qua the performance or conduct of an employee. The institution, in such a case,
which holds the information, would then have to determine as to whether such information ought to
be revealed keeping in mind the competing public interest. If public interest so demands,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 19
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
information, even in such a situation, would have to be disclosed, though after taking into account
the rights of the individual concerned to whom the information pertains. A denial of access to such
information to the information seekers, i.e., the respondents herein, (Messers V.K. Shad & Co.)
especially in the circumstances that the said information is used admittedly in coming to the
conclusion that the delinquent officers were guilty, and in determining the punishment to be
accorded to them, would involve a serious breach of principles of natural justice, as non-
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis communication would entail civil consequences and would render
such a decision vulnerable to challenge under Article 14 of the Constitution of India provided
information is sought and was not given. [See UOI v. R.S. Khan 173 (2010) DLT 680].
21. It is trite law that the right to information is a constitutional right under Article 19(1)(a) of the
Constitution of India which, with the enactment of the RTI Act has been given in addition a
statutory flavour with the exceptions provided therein. But for the exceptions given in the RTI Act;
the said statute recognizes the right of a citizen to seek access to any material which is held or is in
possession of public authority.”
18. In the case of State (NCT of Delhi) Vs. Sanjay, reported in (2014) 9 Supreme Court Cases 772, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India held as follows:
“63. It is well known that a non obstante clause is a legislative device which is usually
employed to give overriding effect to certain provisions over some contrary
provisions that may be found either in the same enactment or some other enactment,
that is to say, to avoid the operation and effect of all contrary provisions.”
19. In the case of Kerala Public Service Commission and others Vs. State Information Commission
and others, reported in 2011 SCC https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Online Ker 3927, the Kerala
High Court held as follows:
“21. One of the issues that arise for consideration is the plea of the PSC that it having
made rules for issuance of copies and dissemination of information to candidates; it
ought not to be compelled to issue such information, also under the provisions of the
RTI Act This argument appears to be quite appealing because public institutions like
PSC meet their expenses from public funds. Necessarily, it has to be the endeavor of
all concerned to ensure that expenditure from such funds is confined to actual
requirements. At the same time, the mode and provision for access to information
under the provisions of the rules made by the PSC, as also, the cost factor, if any,
involved, may be relevant considerations to ultimately conclude as to whether there
could be any exclusion of access to such information under the provisions of the RTI
Act and the rules framed there under, on the premise that alternate, efficacious and
cost-friendly modes of access to information are otherwise provided for by the
statutory rules and other provisions that govern the working of the public authority
from which, information could be sought under the RTI Act. But, as the law now
stands, there is no scope for any judicial recognition of such a plea and a favourable
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 20
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
decision on that issue through a judicial order. This is because Section 22 of the RTT
Act provides that the provisions of that Act shall have effect notwithstanding
anything inconsistent therewith contained in the Official Secrets Act, 1923 (19 of
1923), and any other law for the time being in force or in any instrument having effect
by virtue of any law other than that Act. Such statutory
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis provision having been made by the legislature,
within its competence, it cannot be watered down or modified except by recourse to
legislative procedures. We therefore do not find way to accept the contention of the
PSC in this regard.”
20. In the case of The Superintendent of police Vs. R.Karthikeyan and others, reported in 2011 (3)
CTC 241, the High Court of Madras held as follows:
“17. In terms of Section 24(4), the State Government is empowered to notify in the
Official Gazette that nothing contained in the Right to Information Act shall apply to
such intelligence and security organization being organizations established by the
State Government. Nevertheless, in the light of the First Proviso, such power being
conferred on the State Government to notify exempting such intelligence and security
organizations, it cannot notify in respect of the information pertaining to the
allegations of corruption and human rights violations. As a necessary corollary, the
power to exempt from the provisions of the Act is not available to the State
Government even in case of intelligence and security organizations in respect of the
information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human rights violations.
The Application of the Notification depends upon the nature of information required.
In this context, we may refer that the First Respondent in W.A. No. 321 of 2010 has
sought for the particulars relating to the number of investigations completed and the
number of persons convicted for the years from 2003-2004 to 2007-2008 with the
details as to the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis names of such convicted persons,
the post held by them when the act of corruption was done, the charges framed and
the recommendations given to the Vigilance Commissioner after investigation.
Likewise the First Respondent in W.A. No. 320 of 2010 has sought for the particulars
relating to the number of Police Stations/wings/branches within the Chennai city
were raided by the DVAC officials during the last five years i.e., from January, 2003,
how many Police officials were caught during the raids, the list of names, the
designation and the address of such officials who were caught and the amount
recovered from each official, details of departmental actions taken against such
official including the copy of enquiry report, the details of prosecution launched
against such officials, the status of prosecution against each official, how many have
been re-inducted into active service including the date of rejoining the service and
their present place/station of service, the details of action taken by the Department to
prevent corruption at Police Stations/branches/wings especially in Chennai city and
the grievance redressal machinery for the public to make a Complaint against such
corrupt official demanding bribe/favour to do the duty. As all these particulars would
certainly relate to corruption, the Government Order has no application to the facts
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 21
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
of this case.”
21. In the case of S.Vijayalakshmi Vs. Union of India and others, reported in 2011 (5) CTC 376, the
High Court of Madras held as follows:
“37. The apprehension that the CBI by virtue of its inclusion
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis in the Second Schedule has got a blanket
exemption, cannot be countenanced for the simple reason that what has been
contemplated under Section 24 is no such blanket exemption. The Act was intended
among other things to contain corruption and to hold Governments and their
Instrumentalities accountable to the Government. This purpose and intent of the Act
is sufficiently provided for in the two Provisos to Section 24(1) of the Act. The
information pertaining to allegation of corruption and human rights violation are not
excluded under sub-section (1) of Section 24. Therefore, the exemption by virtue of
inclusion of CBI in the Second Schedule to a RTI Act is not a wholesale or a blanket
exemption as contended by the Petitioner. After taking note of the facts placed before
this Court and the law discussed above, it cannot be stated that every Police Thana is
an Intelligence Agency and should be treated on par with the CBI for the benefit of
the exemption under Section 24 of the Act.”
22. In the case of V.Vidya Vs. The State Information Commission, reported in 2017 SCC Online Mad
22613, the High Court of Madras held as follows:
“7. Both, the first respondent and the learned Single Judge have declined the
appellant's request to furnish the copies of the report dated 08.07.2015 and
17.08.2015, on the ground that CBCID was an authority which came within the ambit
of sub-section (4) of section 24 of the RTI Act and hence, the provisions of the said
Act https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis were not applicable to it. In this behalf,
reference was made to the G.O.Ms. No. 1043, dated 14.10.2015, issued by the
Government of Tamil Nadu.
8. In effect, it was contended that the CBCID was one amongst those establishments,
to which the RTI Act would not apply. The said G.O. was issued by the State
Government, admittedly, in exercise of powers vested upon it under Section 24(4) of
the RTI Act.
13. The main plank of the submission of the counsels appearing for the respondents,
was that, the RTI Act was not applicable to CBCID, in view of the provisions of
Sub-section (4) of Section 24 of the RTI Act. The fact that CBCID had been notified as
an organization, which was exempt from the provisions of the RTI Act, was sought to
be demonstrated by relying upon G.O.Ms. No. 1043, dated 14.10.2015.
14. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 22
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
15. Shorn of unnecessary details and verbiage, the only issue which arises for our
consideration is, as to whether the first proviso to Sub-section (4) of Section 24 of the
RTI Act is applicable to the facts obtaining in the instant case.
16. For the sake of convenience, the relevant part of the aforesaid Section is extracted
hereafter:
“24. (1) xxxx (2) xxxx https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (3) xxxx (4) Nothing
contained in this Act shall apply to such intelligence and security organisation being
organisations established by the State Government, as that Government may, from
time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify:
Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human
rights violations shall not be excluded under this sub-section:
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations
of violation of human rights, the information shall only be provided after the
approval of the State Information Commission and, notwithstanding anything
contained in section 7, such information shall be provided within forty-five days from
the date of the receipt of request.” (emphasis is ours)
17. It is not in dispute that by virtue of G.O.Ms. No. 1043, dated 14.10.2005, CBCID
has been notified as an agency by the Government of Tamil Nadu, to which the
provisions of RTI Act would not apply. The issue, which arises for consideration is as
to whether the instant case falls within exception carved out to in the first proviso to
Sub-section (4) of Section 24 of the RTI Act.
18. The first proviso of Sub-section (4) of Section 24 of the RTI Act, stipulates that
information pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights violation, shall
not stand included in the Sub- section, i.e., Sub-section (4) of Section 24 of the RTI
Act.
19. The facts narrated above would show that the appellant alleges
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis that because of the association of Mr. S.R. Jangid
(the then Suburban Commissioner) with Mr. K.C. Bose, her complaint against the
latter was not taken forward, and instead six (6) false cases were foisted upon her.
The fact that out of the six (6) false cases, four (4) cases were closed, has not been
disputed by the counsel for the respondents. As a matter of fact, the record also
shows that the appellant had filed a writ petition against Mr. S.R. Jangid for initiating
departmental action against him. The said writ petition, we are informed, is pending
adjudication in this Court.
20. Furthermore, as indicated above, the appellant has also filed a civil suit for
damages on the alleged ground of malicious prosecution and defamation. As noticed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 23
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
above, vide order dated 24.02.2014, two (2) criminal complaints of cheating being
C.C. No. 101 of 2010 and 426 of 2010, were quashed by this Court on the ground that
both cases had falsehood and mala fides as its edifice.
The observations made by a learned Single Judge of this Court, tend to indicate that the then
Suburban Commissioner may have had something to do in the lodgement of the complaints. This
order of the learned Single Judge, despite a SLP having been filed by the complainant in those cases,
was not interfered by the Supreme Court. As a matter of fact, the complainant made himself scarce
as he was not available at the given address. The police, in fact, were unable to effect service in the
Crl.O.P. filed by the appellant, to quash the said criminal complaints.
21. The matter thus boils down to one aspect, which is, do these broad assertions bring the case
within the purview of the first https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis proviso to Section 24(4) of the RTI
Act.
21.1. The term “human rights” has not been defined in the RTI Act. However, the expression “human
rights” has been defined in the Protection of Human Right Act, 1993 (in short “1993 Act”). Section
2(1)(d) of the 1993 Act, which provides a definition of human rights reads as follows:
“2. Definitions-(1) In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires — XXXXX
(d) “human rights” means the rights relating to life, liberty, equality and dignity of
the individual guaranteed by the Constitution or embodied in the International
Covenants and enforceable by courts in India. XXXX” 21.2. “Human rights” means
the rights relating to life, liberty, equality and dignity of the individual guaranteed by
the Constitution or embodied in International Covenants and enforceable by a Court
in India. Therefore, quite clearly, a citizen of this country is entitled to live his life
with dignity. Deprivation of dignity would, to our minds, involve violation of human
rights.
21.3. The appellant contends that six (6) false criminal cases were lodged against her, out of which
four (4) were closed. These being:
Crime Nos. 1225/2009, 1247/2009, 960/2009 and 804/2009. Besides these four (4)
cases, the appellant has referred to, two other cases i.e., C.C. No. 101 of 2010, pending
before the Judicial Magistrate, Ambattur, and C.C. No. No. 426 of 2010, pending on
the file of the Judicial Magistrate, Alandur. These cases as noted herein above
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis were quashed by the learned Single Judge of this
Court vide judgement dated 24.02.2014, on the ground that they were predicated on
falsehood and mala fides.
21.4. Having regard to these facts and circumstances, to our minds, it was incumbent
upon the first respondent to make further inquiries in the matter.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 24
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
21.5. The first respondent, on the other hand, rejected the appellant's plea on the
short ground that it was for her to establish that her complaints related to corruption
and violation of human rights. Furthermore, the first respondent went on to observe
that in the complaints lodged against her, by Mr. K.C. Bose, investigation was carried
out and she was placed in judicial custody. According to the first respondent, since,
the police officer acted in accordance with law, it could not be said that their action
violated human rights or they had indulged in corrupt activities.
21.6. The learned Single Judge, more or less, adopted the same reasoning. In our
view, the reasoning is flawed. The reason for the same is this: While, the police
officers in lodging cases against the appellant, based on the complaints made against
her, and in having her prosecuted thereafter may have acted under the authority of
law-the fact that four (4) out of the six (6) cases fell by the wayside did denude the
appellant of her dignity, while she was being prosecuted. The reasoning given by the
first respondent that the police officer acted under the authority of law, may be a
valid defence in an action for malicious prosecution, provided they are able to show
good faith that, however, by itself would not prevent the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis appellant from contending that her dignity was
impaired and hence, violated her human rights. If, that be the position, surely,
information with regard to the result of the enquiries carried out, based on her
complaints ought to be furnished to the appellant for whatever they are worth.
22. In view of the foregoing discussion, we are inclined to allow the writ appeal.
Consequently, the order of the learned Single Judge is set aside. This would result in
the order of the first respondent dated 19.08.2016 also being set aside. Consequently,
the second respondent will furnish the information sought by the appellant in her
applications dated 18.12.2014 and 24.08.2015.
23. In the case of The Superintendent of Police Vs.M.Kannappan, reported in 2012
SCC Online Mad 4747, the High Court of Madras held as follows:
“5. On the other hand, Mr. G. Rajagopalan, learned senior counsel appearing for the
second respondent has submitted that as per the provisos to Section 24(4) of the RTI
Act, the information pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights
violations are not excluded and the authorities shall provide the information relating
to those allegations. He has relied on the judgment of a Division Bench of this Court
in The Superintendent of Police, Central Range, Office of the Directorate of Vigilance
and Anti- Corruption v. R. Karthikeyan, 2011 (3) CTC 241. He has also taken
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis me through Sections 2(f), 4(1)(b)(v) and 8 of the
RTI Act and has submitted that in view of the aforesaid provisions viz., Sections 2(f),
4(1)(b)(v) & 8 and the provisos to Section 24, the first respondent is entitled to a copy
of the manual.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 25
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
7. We are not concerned with sub-sections (1) to (3) of Section 24 and are concerned
only with sub-section (4) of Section 24 and the provisos thereto. The provisos to
Section 24(4) make it clear that even if the intelligence and security organizations
established by the State Government are exempted from the application of the Act
under Section 24(4), the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and
human rights violations shall not be excluded. In these circumstances, this Court
dismissed the Writ Petition Nos.
23507 and 23508 of 2009 by a common order dated 12.1.2010, which were preferred by the writ
petitioner herein questioning the order of the Tamil Nadu Information Commission directing the
authorities to furnish the details relating to the number of police officials who were caught during
the raid by DVAC together with the list of names, designation and the address of officials, number of
investigations completed and convictions arrived at between the years 2003-04 and 2007-08 etc., in
corruption matters to the applicants therein. The order of the learned single Judge was upheld by
the Division Bench in the judgment reported in 2011 (3) CTC 241. Paragraphs 4 & 5 of the order
dated 12.1.2010 in W.P. Nos. 23507 & 23508 of 2009 and paragraphs 16 & 17 of the judgment of the
Division Bench reported in 2011 (3) CTC 241 are https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis extracted
hereunder:-
“4. In W.P. No. 23507 of 2009, the first respondent sought for information regarding
the number of police officials who were caught during the raid by DVAC together
with the list of names, the designation and the address of officials, who were caught
during raids along with the amount recovered from each officials as well as the details
of departmental action taken against each officials, the details of prosecution
launched against the officials under the Prevention of Corruption Act and the status
of such prosecution against each officials and whether the persons whose names are
furnished were reinstated in service and if so, the date on which they had rejoined
service as well as the details of list of action taken by the department to prevent
corruption at Police Station/Branches/Wings in Chennai City.
5. The letter which was originally sent to the State Government was forwarded to the
Director of Vigilance and Anti-Corruption. On such redirection, the appellate
authority further directed the petitioner organization to examine the scope of giving
such information in accordance with law. It was, thereafter, the petitioner
organization by an order dated 2.2.2009 informed the first respondent that they are
exempted from the purview of the RTI Act.
When the first respondent made a complaint to the second respondent Information Commission,
the second respondent passed the impugned order directing the petitioner to furnish the
information.
16. The validity of the said Government Order was questioned https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
before this Court in P. Pugalenthi v. State of T.N. represented by the Secretary to Government,
Personnel and Administrative Reforms (N) Department, Chennai and others, W.P. No. 4907 of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 26
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
2009 and the same has been upheld by order dated 30.3.2009. The contention of the learned
Special Government Pleader is that in view of the above, the Chief Information Commissioner
should not have directed the furnishing of information required by each of the first respondent in
the appeals and consequently the learned Judge should not have dismissed the writ petitions filed
by the department. In our opinion, the said contention is totally unacceptable. Even in the said
judgment, the Division Bench has categorically held that in the event the information required by an
applicant relates to the allegations of corruption, the said Government Order cannot be made
applicable and accordingly the department cannot claim the exemption from furnishing those
particulars relating to corruption. The learned Judge has correctly applied the above judgment with
reference to the particulars required by each of the first respondent in these appeals, as they relate
only to corruption.
17. In terms of Section 24(4), the State Government is empowered to notify in the Official Gazette
that nothing contained in the Right to Information Act shall apply to such intelligence and security
organization being organizations established by the State Government. Nevertheless, in the light of
the first proviso, such power being conferred on the State Government to notify exempting such
intelligence and security organizations, it cannot notify in respect of the information pertaining to
the allegations of corruption https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and human rights violations. As a
necessary corollary, the power to exempt from the provisions of the Act is not available to the State
Government even in case of intelligence and security organizations in respect of the information
pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human rights violations. The application of the
notification depends upon the nature of information required. In this context, we may refer that the
first respondent in W.A. No. 321 of 2010 has sought for the particulars relating to the number of
investigations completed and the number of persons convicted for the years from 2003-2004 to
2007-2008 with the details as to the names of such convicted persons, the post held by them when
the act of corruption was done, the charges framed and the recommendations given to the Vigilance
Commissioner after investigation. Likewise the first respondent in W.A. No. 320 of 2010 has sought
for the particulars relating to the number of police stations/wings/branches within the Chennai city
were raided by the DVAC officials during the last five years i.e., from January, 2003, how many
police officials were caught during the raids, the list of names, the designation and the address of
such officials who were caught and the amount recovered from each official, details of departmental
actions taken against such official including the copy of enquiry report, the details of prosecution
launched against such officials, the status of prosecution against each official, how many have been
re-inducted into active service including the date of rejoining the service and their present
place/station of service, the details of action taken by the Department to prevent corruption at
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis police stations/branches/wings especially in Chennai city and the
grievance redressal machinery for the public to make a complaint against such corrupt official
demanding bribe/favour to do the duty. As all these particulars would certainly relate to corruption,
the Government Order has no application to the facts of this case.”
8. The Division Bench has taken note of the fact that G.O.Ms. No. 158 dated 26.8.2008 was upheld
in W.P. No. 4907 of 2009 on 30.3.2009. Thereafter, the Division Bench upheld the order of the
learned single Judge dismissing the writ petitions preferred by the Public Information Officer, the
petitioner herein in refusing to furnish the information.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 27
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
9. The first appellate authority has stated that a proposal had been sent to the Government for
preferring Special Leave Petition. The Tamil Nadu Information Commission also noted that no stay
order was produced staying the operation of the order of the Division Bench. Even today, though the
learned Special Government Pleader has stated that an SLP was preferred against the order of the
Division Bench, he is not able to state that the order of the Division Bench is stayed by the Apex
Court.
10. In view of the judgment of the Division Bench read with the provisos to Section 24(4) of the RTI
Act, I am of the view that the first respondent herein is entitled to have the manual of the DVAC. The
manual cannot be kept as a secret document. It is nothing but a set of rules as to how the DVAC is
functioning. I am not able to understand as to why the DVAC feels shy to furnish the manual. In
fact, the information that were the subject matter before the Division
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Bench were concerned with the corruption and the consequent
action taken by the DVAC and those details were directed to be furnished. Hence, the DVAC cannot
refuse to furnish the manual maintained by it. At this juncture, I wish to refer to the submission
made by the learned senior counsel for the second respondent that the manual is not exempted from
disclosure as per Section 8 of the RTI Act. While Section 8 states that there shall be no obligation to
give the information relating to various documents mentioned therein, the manual of the DVAC is
not one among them. Likewise, the public authorities shall maintain the rules, regulations,
instructions, manuals and records for discharging their functions as contemplated under Section
4(1)(b)(v) of the RTI Act. Section 2(f) defines “information” and the same is also extracted
hereunder:-
“2. Definitions.--In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires,--
(f) “information” means any material in any form, including records, documents,
memos, e-mails, opinions, advices, press releases, circulars, orders logbooks,
contracts, reports, papers, samples, models, data material held in any electronic form
and information relating to any private body which can be accessed by a public
authority under any other law for the time being in force.”
11. On a cumulative reading of Sections 2(f), 4(1)(b)(v), 8 and the provisos to Section 24(4), I am of
the view that the first respondent is entitled to the manual of DVAC. Hence, finding no infirmity in
the impugned order, the writ petition fails and the same is dismissed. No costs.”
24. In the case of First Appellate Authority-cum-Additional https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Director General of Police and Anr. Vs. Chief Information Commissioner, Haryana and Anr.
reported in 2011 SCC Online P&H 17663, the High Court of Punjab and Haryana, held as follows:
“4. Since the question of law raised in both appeals is common, therefore, the appeals
are being taken for decision together. It is argued by learned counsel for the appellant
that the appellant-authority is exempted from the purview of the Act on the basis of
the notification dated 29.12.2005. Since, the Act itself is not applicable, the
information cannot be sought under the Act by respondent No. 2. It is argued that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 28
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
information which is sought does not pertain to violation of human rights or
corruption, therefore, the same cannot be supplied in terms of exception to Section
24(4) of the Act. The notification dated 29.12.2005 and the relevant extract of Section
24(4) of the Act reads as under:
Notification: dated 29th December, 2005 No. 5/4/2005-IAR - In exercise of the
power conferred by sub-section (4) of section 24 of the “Right to Information Act”
2005 (Central Act No. 22 of 2005), the Governor of Haryana hereby specifies the
intelligence and security organizations as mentioned in the schedule given, below for
the purpose of the said sub-section. Schedule
(i) State Criminal Investigation Department (C.I.D.) including the Crime Branch:
(ii) Haryana Armed Police:
(iii) Security Organization of Police:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(iv) Haryana Police Telecommunication Organization:
(v) India Reserve Battalion:
(vi) Commando Section 24(4) Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to such
intelligence and security organizations, being organizations established by the State
Government, as that Government may, from time to time, by notification in the
Official Gazette, specify:
Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human
rights violations shall not be excluded under this sub-section:
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations
of violation of human rights, the information shall only be provided after the
approval of the State Information Commission and, notwithstanding anything
contained in Section 7, such information shall be provided within forty-five days from
the date of the receipt of request.
5. Learned counsel for the appellant has argued that the learned State Information
Commissioner has found that the information, which is sought by the
applicant-respondent No. 2, is not sensitive in nature dealing with sovereignty and
integrity of India, therefore, such information can be disclosed is not tenable as such
ground for non-disclosure is contemplated by Section 8 of the Act. It is contended
that in terms of Section 24(4) of the Act, the information which can be disclosed is in
respect of the allegations of corruption and human rights violations but since the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 29
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
information sought does https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis not relate to any of the
excepted matters, the information cannot be sought. We have heard learned counsel
for the appellant and find no merit in the present appeal. Learned single Judge has
held that the information sought pertains to allegation of corruption and, therefore,
cannot be withheld by the appellant. The question needs to be examined is whether
the information in respect of encroachment of the public land or of filling up the
public post can be said to be the information “pertaining to allegation of corruption”.
6. The expression “pertaining to allegation of corruption”.is not defined in the Act.
Even, the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 does not define what are the allegations
pertaining to corruption? In the absence of any statutory definition in the Act, the
ordinary meaning to the expression used in the Act has to be applied. The expression
“pertaining to allegation of corruption” cannot be defined. It includes within its
meaning many colours and shades of corruption. There cannot be any exhaustive
definition that what are the allegations pertaining to corruption. But an attempt can
be made to understand the scope of the expression used in the statute.
13. As mentioned above, the expression pertaining to allegation of corruption cannot
be exhaustively defined. The Act is to step-in-aid to establish the society governed by
law in which corruption has no place. The Act envisages a transparent public office.
Therefore, even in organizations which are exempt from the provisions of the Act, in
terms of the notification issued under Section 24(4) of the Act Still information which
relates to corruption or the information which https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
excludes the allegation of corruption would be relevant information and cannot be
denied for the reasons that the organization is exempted under the Act. The
information sought in the present case is in respect of the number of vacancies which
have fallen to the share of the specified category and whether such posts have been
filled up from amongst the eligible candidates. If such information is disclosed, it will
lead to transparent administration which is antithesis of corruption. If organization
has nothing to hide or to cover a corrupt practice, the information should be made
available.
The information sought may help in dispelling favouritism, nepotism or arbitrariness. Such
information is necessary for establishing the transparent administration. Therefore, we do not find
any illegality in the order passed by the. State Information Commissioner, Haryana and affirmed by
learned single Judge in the orders impugned in the present appeals.”
25. In the case of Ym.Md.Abid Hussain Vs. The State of Manipur, reported in 2015 SCC Online Mani
129, the High Court of Manipur, held as follows:
“[8] The Right to Information Act, 2005 (hereinafter referred to as the “Act”) was
enacted in the year 2005 for setting out the practical regime of right to information
for citizens to secure access to information under the control of public authorities, in
order to promote transparency and accountability in the working of every
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 30
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis public authority as mentioned in the Preamble to
the said Act. The said Act was enacted keeping in mind the necessity of democracy of
having an informed citizenry and transparency of information which are vital to its
functioning and also to contain corruption and to hold Governments and their
instrumentalities accountable to the governed and to harmonise the conflicting
interests of the equally public importance which may arise to maintain efficient
operations of the Governments, optimum use of limited fiscal resources and
preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information. Thus, while enacting the
Right to Information Act, 2005, the Parliament had kept into consideration these two
conflicting public interests and while allowing access to information relating to the
public authorities, certain restrictions have been also placed, for example, by
enumerating the areas as provided under Section 8 of the Act, which provides that
notwithstanding anything contained in this Act, there shall be no obligation to give
any citizen information relating to the matters indicated in Section 8 of the Act.
Similarly, certain information relating to the third party has also been restricted as
provided under Section 11 of the Act. Section 24 of the Act further provides that
nothing contained in the Act shall apply to the intelligence and security organisations
specified in the Second Schedule, being organisations established by the Central
Government and such organisations established by the State Government as the State
Government may from time to time by Notification in official gazette specify. Thus, in
respect of these intelligence and security organisations referable to Section 24 of the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Act no one will have a right under the Act to seek
for information. Yet, a certain exception has been made by opening a window of
limited access in respect of information pertaining to allegations of corruption and
human rights violation relating to these intelligence and security. In other words,
even though these intelligence and security organisations are outside the purview of
the Right to Information Act, 2005, yet, in respect of any information pertaining to
allegations of corruption and human rights violation relating to these organisations,
provisions of the Right to Information Act will become applicable.
[9] It is clear from the pleadings and submissions made, the core objection of the
respondents in denying the information to the petitioner relating to the recruitment
process of Sub-Inspector of Police is that the Manipur Police Department has been
exempted from the applicability of the Right to Information Act, 2005 in terms of
Section 24(4) of the Act. Since the Manipur Police Department has been exempted
and as no allegation pertaining to corruption and violence of human rights had been
made, the petitioner is not entitled to the information sought for.
[10] In view of the above objection of the respondents, the scope of Section 24 of the
Right to Information Act, 2005 needs to be understood properly. In this regard, the
relevant portion of Section 24 (4) may be reproduced hereinbelow:-
“Section 24(4). Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to such intelligence and
security organisations, being organisations established by the State Government, as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 31
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
that Government may, from https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis time to time, by
notification in the Official Gazette, specify : Provided that the information pertaining
to the allegations of corruption and human rights violations shall not be excluded
under this sub-section:
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations
of violation of human rights, the information shall not be provided after the approval
of the State Information Commission and, notwithstanding anything contained in
Section 7, such information shall be provided within forty-five days from the date of
the receipt of request.” [11] Thus, a reading of the aforesaid provisions of the Act
would clearly show that what had been taken out from the purview of the Right to
Information Act, 2005 by the main part of sub-Section 4 of Section 24 of the Act, has
been brought back by the proviso as far as information pertaining to allegations of
corruption and human rights violation are concerned. In other words, even if any
intelligence or security organisations have been excluded from the purview of the Act
on the basis of notification issued in the official gazette by the State such exemption
would not be applicable as regards information pertaining to allegations of
corruptions and human rights violence. Hence, if the information sought for pertains
to allegations of corruptions and human rights violence, even in respect of such
intelligence and security organisations, the provisions of the Right to Information
Act, 2005 will be applicable. In that context, the expression “information pertaining
to allegations of corruption and human rights violence” needs to be
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis understood properly for if any information is
covered by the said expression, the authorities are under obligation to provide the
information. As to the scope of the aforesaid expression “information pertaining to
allegations of corruption and human rights violence” this has been analysed and
explained by the Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court in an order dated
28.04.2011 rendered in LPA No. 744 of 2011 and LPA No. 745 of 2011 (supra) which
has been relied on by the counsel for the petitioner. The Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana
High Court has examined the scope of the expression “information pertaining to
allegations of corruption and human rights violence” with reference to the issue
involved in the said case as to whether any information in respect of encroachment of
the public post or of filling up the public post can be said to be “information
pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights violence”. The Hon'ble High
Court observed that this expression is not defined in the Act and even in the
definition clauses in the Corruption Act, 1988. Referring to the resolution of the
General Assembly of the United Nations in its meeting held on 8th January, 1997
which dealt with the seriousness of the problems of corruption and various facets of
corruption, the Hon'ble High Court observed that the public officers are to be
attentive, fair and impartial in the performance of their functions and at no time
should afford any undue preferential treatment to any group or individual or
improperly discriminate against any group or individual, or otherwise abuse the
power and authority vested in them and information which relates to the working of a
public office https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and whether such office acted in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 32
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
accordance with laws would be relevant so as to exclude the allegation of corruption.
The Hon'ble High Court in the said case held that the information sought for which is
in respect of the number of vacancies which have fallen to share of the specified
category and whether such posts have been filled up from amongst the eligible
candidates, if disclosed, will lead to transparent administration which is antithesis of
corruption and help in dispelling favouritism, nepotism or arbitrariness.
Accordingly, the Hon'ble Punjab & Haryana High Court directed furnishing of such information.
[12] This Court respectfully agrees with the reasoning and conclusion arrived at for holding that
information in the nature sought for in the said case could not be withheld and ought to be
disclosed. In the present case, the information sought for relates to the marks obtained by the
successful candidates as well as the petitioner and it is the case of the petitioner that the information
sought for before this Court is to dispel any doubt over corruption. Therefore, it can be said that the
information sought for by the petitioner in the present case also pertains to the allegations of
corruption. In this respect, it may be observed that the expression used in this provision is about
“information pertaining to the allegations of corruption” and not “information pertaining to
corruption”. The earlier expression is of wider import. As per the earlier expression which has been
used in the statute, the allegation need not be about a proven corruption or clearly shows existence
of corruption. Allegation of corruption may or may not result in https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
proving existence of corruption but there must be indication of the possibility of existence of
corruption. However, it does not mean that anybody can seek information by making an allegation
of corruption. There must be some proximity or nexus with the information sought and possibility of
a corruption. In the present case, if it is found on the basis of the information sought by the
petitioner that persons who do not otherwise qualify in terms marks obtained by the candidates
have been included in the select list, obviously, the charge of corruption can certainly be validly
raised. To that extent such information sought for by the petitioner can be said to be pertaining to
allegations of corruption. It is not necessary that the information so furnished would prove an
instance of corruption. It would be sufficient if the information so provided leads to a genuine
complaint or allegation about the existence of corrupt practice. Therefore, this Court would hold
that if the information sought for has a proximate link with the charge of corruption, such
information would be covered by the expression “information pertaining to allegations of
corruption”. Similar position is with the case where there is allegation of human rights violation.
The information sought for so provided per se may not establish corrupt practice or violation of
human rights but it forms a valid and reasonable basis for making allegations of corrupt practice or
violation of human rights, such information would come within the scope of the expression
“information pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights violation”. This Court would
hold that if any such information has the potential to raise a https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
serious question of the existence of corruption or violation of human rights, it can be certainly
considered to be “pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights violation”. In that event,
such information cannot be withheld, if sought for. [13] One may look at this issue from another
perspective. The exclusion of certain organisations under the main provisions of Sub- sections(1)
and (4) of Section 24 is to ensure efficient functioning and operations of the Government, optimum
use of limited fiscal resources, preservation of confidentiality of sensitive information and as such
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 33
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
other public interest and to protect such other public interest as clearly mentioned in the Preamble
to the Act. It is a well established principle that provisions of preamble could be invoked for a proper
construction of the statute if the language used is too general. As already discussed above, the
expression used in the proviso i.e., “information pertaining to allegations of corruption and human
rights violence” is of too general and of wide amplitude which has not been defined in the Act or any
cognate Act. However, giving a too wide interpretation may defeat the very purpose of ensuring
preservation of the public interests as clearly mentioned in the Preamble. Therefore, a balanced and
reasonable interpretation of the said expression can be done by referring to the Preamble as
mentioned above. The Preamble is a key to open the mind of the Legislative and proves the board
parameters of the enactment which impelled the lawmakers to craft such statutes. The aforesaid
preamble is reproduced hereinbelow:-
“An Act to provide for setting out the practical regime of right to
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis information for citizens to secure access to
information under the control of public authorities, in order to promote transparency
and accountability in the working of every public authority, the constitution of a
Central Information Commission and State Information Commissions and for
matters connected therewith or incidental thereto.
WHEREAS the Constitution of India has established democratic Republic;
AND WHEREAS democracy requires an informed citizenry and transparency of
information which are vital to its functioning and also to contain corruption and to
hold Governments and their instrumentalities accountable to the governed; AND
WHEREAS revelation of information in actual practice is likely to conflict with other
public interests including efficient operations of the Governments, optimum use of
limited fiscal resources and the preservation of confidentiality of sensitive
information;
AND WHEREAS it is necessary to harmonise these conflicting interests while
preserving the paramountcy of the democratic ideal; NOW, THEREFORE, it is
expedient to provide for furnishing certain information to citizens who desire to have
it.” [14] Therefore, in the context of the Preamble, what is evident is that these
organisations referred to in Section 24 of the Act have been specifically sought to be
taken out of the purview of the Right to Information Act, 2005 in order to protect
certain public interests including efficient operations of Government, optimum use of
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis limited resources and preservation of
confidentiality of sensitive information. However, an exception has been made to this
exclusionary provision by inserting the said proviso where the “information
pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights violence” will be subject to
the provisions of the Right to Information Act, 2005. This Court is of the view that if
any information sought for does not relate to any of these areas referred to in the
Preamble which the Act seeks to protect and preserve and thus keep away from
public domain but are also relatable to any allegation of corruption and violence of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 34
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
human rights, there is no reason why such an information should be withheld, if
sought for. [15] This issue can be viewed from another perspective. The legislature in
their anxiety to keep certain organisations which are engaged in activities involving
sensitive information, secrecy of the State, have sought to keep these organisations
away from the purview of the Act by including such organisations in the Second
Schedule of the Act as far as Central Organisations are concerned and in the official
gazette in respect of State organisations. It does not, however, mean that all
information relating to these organisations are completely out of bound of the public.
For example, even though the Central Bureau of Investigations is one of the
organisations included in the Second Schedule to the Act, it does not mean that all
information relating to it are out of bound of the public. If one looks at the website of
the Central Bureau of Investigation which is in the public domain, there are so many
information about the organisation which are already voluntarily
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis made open to the public. This is for the simple
reason that disclosure of these information does not in any way compromise with the
integrity of the organisation or confidentiality of the sensitive nature of works
undertaken by this organisation. The purpose of excluding all these organisations
from the purview of the Act as provided under Section 24 is to merely protect and
ensure the confidentiality of the sensitive works and activities undertaken by these
organisations. Therefore, if there are any information which do not impinge upon the
confidentiality of the sensitive activities of the organisation and if such information is
also relatable to the issues of corruption or violation of human rights, disclosure of
such information cannot be withheld. Similarly, in respect of the police organisations
in the State of Manipur if anybody seeks any information which does not touch upon
any of the sensitive and confidential activities undertaken by the police department
and if the said information also can be related to the issues of any allegation of
corruption or violation of human rights, such information cannot be withheld. We
may further clarify this position by borrowing the concept of doctrine of “pith and
substance”. The doctrine of “pith and substance” was evolved by the courts primarily
to determine whether a particular law relates to a subject mentioned in one list or the
other and while doing so, the Court looks into the substance of the enactment. Thus,
if the substance of the enactment falls within the Union List then the incidental and
encroachment by the enactment on the State list would not make it invalid. Thus, the
essence of this doctrine centred round the substantive part of the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis enactment or the core subject of the enactment.
Though this doctrine cannot be invoked to decide the issue raised in this petition, the
principle behind it may be referred to while deciding the issue at hand. By doing so,
this Court will hold that if any information relates to the core activity of the
organisation because of which such an organisation has been excluded from the
purview of the Act, any such information can be withheld except which relates to
allegation of corruption and violation of human rights. Therefore, if there be any
information which does not relate to the principal or the core function of the
organisation which is sought to be protected by including in Section 24 of the Act, but
if it can have some reference or relatable to corruption or violation of human rights,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 35
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
such an information cannot be withheld. It may be observed that the core function of
the police organisation is to maintain law and order, security of the State and
discharge such activities which are related to and ancillary to these functions. It that
context, undertaking the exercise of a recruitment process is not part of the core
function of the police department. It is some function which could be outsourced to
any other agency like the Public Service Commission etc. and this activity does not
form part of the core function of the Police Department which cannot be outsourced
to any other agency. Of course, recruitment of intelligence officials may form part of
the core function. But in the present case, such is not the case. The recruitment in
issue is the general recruitment process of the personnel of the police department
generally.
[16] There is of course, one aspect this Court has to keep in mind.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Section 8 of the Act provides for exemption from
certain information. It starts with the non-obstantive expression “Notwithstanding
anything contained in this Act.” Therefore, even if any information sought for comes
under any of the clauses mentioned in Section 8 of the Act, the authority can
withheld such information. In the present case, disclosure of the marks obtained by a
candidate in a recruitment process cannot be said to be hit by any of the clauses
mentioned in Section 8 of the Right to Information Act, 2005. This Court has already
observed that such information is relatable to the allegations of corruption and
human rights violations, such information cannot be withheld. [17] The information
sought for by the petitioner as mentioned above, in the opinion of the Court will not
be covered by any of the inhibiting factors mentioned in Section 8 of the Act, nor
impinge upon the core activity of the Manipur Police Organisation and if furnished
would rule out any allegation of corruption, hence is “pertaining to allegations of
corruption”. The Court, therefore, holds that such information cannot be withheld on
the strength of any provision of the Act.”
26. In the case of Shri Phairembam Sudesh Singh Vs. State of Manipur, reported in 2016 SCC Online
Mani 13, the High Court of Manipur, held as follows:
“5. The subject matter in issue relates to the interpretation of the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis provisions of Section 24 of the RTI Act, 2005 and
in particular, Section 24(4) which is reproduced herein below:
“Section 24(4). Nothing contained in this Act shall apply to such intelligence and
security organisations, being organisations established by the State Government, as
that Government may, from time to time, by notification in the Official Gazette,
specify: Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and
human rights violations shall not be excluded under this sub-section:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 36
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations
of violation of human rights, the information shall not be provided after the approval
of the State Information Commission and, notwithstanding anything contained in
Section 7, such information shall be provided within forty-five days from the date of
the receipt of request.”
6. Shri Th. Khagemba, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has heavily relied
upon the judgment and order dated 13-10-2015 passed by this court in W.P. (C) No.
880 of 2014 wherein this court had examined the question as to whether the
petitioner therein was entitled to information sought for by him when the Police
Department, Government of Manipur had been exempted and no allegation
pertaining to corruption and violence of human rights had been made by him. Similar
issue has arisen in the present case and the only difference is that in the said case, the
information sought for was with regard to the recruitment process of Sub-
Inspector of Police whereas in the present case, the information https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
sought for by the petitioner are as regards his service namely the initial appointment, suspension
order, documents relating to departmental proceedings, termination order etc. On perusal of the
said judgment and order, this court is of the view that the issue involved herein is covered by it and
in that case, this court held that the information sought for by the petitioner therein which pertained
to allegations of corruption, would be covered by the expression “information pertaining to
allegations of corruption”. It has further been held that if any information has the potential to raise a
serious question of the existence of corruption or violation of human rights, it can be certainly
considered to be “pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights violation”. The para 12
thereof is as under:
“[12] This issue can be viewed from another perspective. The legislature in their
anxiety to keep certain organisations which are engaged in activities involving
sensitive information, secrecy of the State, have sought to keep these organisations
away from the purview of the Act by including such organisations in the Second
Schedule of the Act as far as Central Organisations are concerned and in the official
gazette in respect of State organisations. It does not, however, mean that all
information relating to these organisations are completely out of bound of the public.
For example, even though the Central Bureau of Investigations is one of the
organisations included in the Second Schedule to the Act, it does not mean that all
information relating to it are out of bound of the public. If one looks at the website of
the Central Bureau of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Investigation which is in the
public domain, there are so many information about the organisation which are
already voluntarily made open to the public. This is for the simple reason that
disclosure of these information does not in any way compromise with the integrity of
the organisation or confidentiality of the sensitive nature of works undertaken by this
organisation. The purpose of excluding all these organisations from the purview of
the Act as provided under Section 24 is to merely protect and ensure the
confidentiality of the sensitive works and activities undertaken by these
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 37
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
organisations. Therefore, if there are any information which do not impinge upon the
confidentiality of the sensitive activities of the organisation and if such information is
also relatable to the issues of corruption or violation of human rights, disclosure of
such information cannot be withheld. Similarly, in respect of the police organisations
in the State of Manipur if anybody seeks any information which does not touch upon
any of the sensitive and confidential activities undertaken by the police department
and if the said information also can be related to the issues of any allegation of
corruption or violation of human rights, such information cannot be withheld. We
may further clarify this position by borrowing the concept of doctrine of “pith and
substance”. The doctrine of “pith and substance” was evolved by the courts primarily
to determine whether a particular law relates to a subject mentioned in one list or the
other and while doing so, the Court looks into the substance of the enactment. Thus,
if the substance of the enactment falls within the Union List then the incidental and
encroachment by the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis enactment on the State list
would not make it invalid. Thus, the essence of this doctrine centred round the
substantive part of the enactment or the core subject of the enactment. Though this
doctrine cannot be invoked to decide the issue raised in this petition, the principle
behind it may be referred to while deciding the issue at hand. By doing so, this Court
will hold that if any information relates to the core activity of the organisation
because of which such an organisation has been excluded from the purview of the
Act, any such information can be withheld except which relates to allegation of
corruption and violation of human rights. Therefore, if there be any information
which does not relate to the principal or the core function of the organisation which is
sought to be protected by including in Section 24 of the Act, but if it can have some
reference or relatable to corruption or violation of human rights, such an information
cannot be withheld. It may be observed that the core function of the police
organisation is to maintain law and order, security of the State and discharge such
activities which are related to and ancillary to these functions. It that context,
undertaking the exercise of a recruitment process is not part of the core function of
the police department. It is some function which could be outsourced to any other
agency like the Public Service Commission etc. and this activity does not form part of
the core function of the Police Department which cannot be outsourced to any other
agency. Of course, recruitment of intelligence officials may form part of the core
function. But in the present case, such is not the case. The recruitment in issue is the
general recruitment process of the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis personnel of the
police department generally.”
7. While passing the said judgment and order, this court has agreed to and subscribed
to the views of the Hon'ble Punjab and Haryana High Court rendered in its order
dated 28-04-2011 in LPA No. 744 of 2011 and LPA No. 745 of 2011 wherein it has
examined the scope of the expression “information pertaining to allegations of
corruption and human rights violence” as regards the issue whether any information,
in respect of encroachment of the public post or of filling up the public post, can be
said to be “information pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 38
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
violence”. The said Hon'ble High Court has observed that this expression is not
defined in the Act and that the public officers are to be attentive, fair and impartial in
the performance of their functions and at no time should afford any undue
preferential treatment to any group or individual or improperly discriminate against
any group or individual, or otherwise abuse the power and authority vested in them
and information which relates to the working of a public office and whether such
office acted in accordance with laws would be relevant so as to exclude the allegation
of corruption. The said Hon'ble High Court has further held that the information
sought for which is in respect of the number of vacancies which have fallen to the
share of the specified category and whether such posts have been filled up from
amongst the eligible candidates, if disclosed, will lead to transparent administration
which is antithesis of corruption and help in dispelling favouritism, nepotism or
arbitrariness.
Accordingly, the Hon'ble Punjab & Haryana High Court are https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
directed for furnishing of such information.
8. This court proposes to add further observations to its earlier judgment and order referred to
above. There can be no any dispute that the RTI Act, 2005 is enacted with the avowed objective of
conferring a statutory right on the citizens in India to have access to Government-controlled
information or to seek information from Central Government/State Governments, local bodies and
other competent authorities as a matter of right. The idea is that it would prove to be instrumental
in bringing in transparency and accountability in Government and Public Institutions which would
help in bringing the growth of corruption in check. The scope of the Act is wide enough to cover all
the Constitutional Institutions and subject to exemptions, universally applies to all Public
Authorities. Section 3 gives statutory recognition to the right to information subject to the other
provisions of the Act. Section 8 sets out limitations on the right of access as exemptions from
disclosure of information. Similarly, Section 24(4) confers power on the State Government to
exempt any intelligence and security organisation established by it from the purview of the
provisions. It may be noted that the right to information is a facet of “freedom of speech and
expression”, as contained in Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution, which are the foundation of all
democratic organisations. Fundamental rights should not be cut down by too restricted an
approach. Even prior to the enactment of RTI Act, 2005, the expression “freedom of speech and
expression” has been construed https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
a catena of decisions, to include not only liberty to propagate one's views, ideas, opinions and
thoughts but also the right to acquire information. In other words, the right to information can be
said to be a fundamental right subject to the exemptions as contained in Section 8 and 24 of the RTI
Act. As has been held by the Hon'ble Punjab & Haryana High Court, the expression “information
pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights violence” is not defined in the Act but it has
a wide connotation in view of the objective sought to be achieved in the Act. The relevance of
transparency and accountability in the administration has arisen because of the corruption being
rampant and power allegedly being misused by the Public Authorities in the country. Article 19 of
the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 1948 provides that everyone has the right to freedom of
pinion and expression; this right includes freedom to hold opinions without interference and to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 39
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
seek, receive and impart information and ideas through any media and regardless of frontiers. To
comprehend the intent of the Legislature while enacting the RTI Act specially as regards the said
expression, the provisions of the Act, as a whole, are to be read keeping in mind the purpose for
which the RTI Act is enacted and it may further be noted that the exemptions cannot be construed
so as to defeat the very objective sought to be achieved in the RTI Act, 2005. Therefore, it has been
rightly held by this court in the said case of Md. Abid Hussain v. State of Manipur, W.P. (C) No. 880
of 2014 that any information which does not touch upon any of the sensitive and
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis confidential activities undertaken by the Police Department,
Government of Manipur cannot be withheld at all. In other words, access to such information
cannot be denied to the citizens. It can be seen from the facts of the present case that the
information sought for by the petitioner have nothing to do with the sensitive and confidential
activities undertaken by the Police Department, Government of Manipur and therefore, the same
cannot be denied to him.
9. In view of the above, the instant writ petition is allowed and consequently, the decision/order
dated 26-06-2015 passed by the State Chief Information Officer, Manipur Information Commission,
Imphal in Appeal Case No. 17 of 2015 is quashed and set aside with the direction that the
respondent No. 4 shall provide the information sought for by the petitioner within a period of three
weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment and order. There shall be no order as to
costs.”
27. In the case of CPIO CBI Vs. C.J.Karira, reported in 2017 SCC Online Del 10475, the High Court
of Delhi held as follows:
“4. In view of the above, the only controversy to be addressed is whether the
information sought by the petitioner falls within the proviso to Section 24(1) of the
Act.
5. The respondent had filed an application dated 31.01.2012 with the petitioner, inter
alia, seeking the following information for https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the
period January 2007 to December 2011.
“1. All the Ministries/Departments of the Government of India.
2. Union Public Service Commission/Lok Sabha Secretariat/Rajya Sabha
Secretariat/Cabinet Secretariat/Central Vigilance Commission/President's
Secretariat/Vice-President's Secretariat/Prima Minister's Office/Planning
Commission/Election Commission.
3. Central Information Commission/State Information Commissions
4. Staff Selection Commission, CGO Complex, New Delhi
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 40
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
5. Office of the Comptroller & Auditor General of India, 10, Bahadur Shah Zafar
Marg, New Delhi
6. All Officers/Desks/Sections, Department of Personnel & Training and Department
of Pension & Pensions Welfare”
6. The petitioner had responded to the aforesaid request by a letter dated 05.03.2012
claiming that CBI was included within the second schedule to the Act and, thus, in
terms of section 24(1) of the Act was excluded from the applicability of the Act.
7. Before proceeding further, it would be relevant to refer to Section 24(1) of the Act,
which is set out below:— “24. Act not to apply in certain organizations.—(1) Nothing
contained in this Act shall apply to the intelligence and security organisations
specified in the Second Schedule, being organisations established by the Central
Government or any information furnished by such organisations to that Government:
Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and human
rights violations shall not be excluded under https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis this
sub-section:
Provided further that in the case of information sought for is in respect of allegations
of violation of human rights, the information shall only be provided after the
approval of the Central Information Commission, and notwithstanding anything
contained in section 7, such information shall be provided within forty-five days from
the date of the receipt of request.”
8. It is apparent from the plain reading of the first proviso to Section 24(1) of the Act
that information pertaining to allegations of corruption and human rights violation
are not excluded from the purview. The petitioner contended that since the
information sought related to allegations of corruption, the same were not excluded
from the scope of Section 24(1) of the Act.
9. The learned counsel for the petitioner had countered the aforesaid contention and
submitted that the proviso must be read in a restricted manner and, only information
pertaining to allegations of corruption relating to the public authority - in this case
CBI - was excluded from the purview of Section 24(1) of the Act. It was contended
that since the information sought by the respondent pertain to allegations of
corruption in other organisations, the first proviso would be inapplicable and, the
petitioner would not be obliged to disclose the same.
10. The aforesaid question is squarely covered by the decision of the Coordinate
Bench of this Court in CPIO, Intelligence Bureau v. Sanjiv Chaturvedi: W.P.(C)
5521/2016, decided on 23.08.2017, whereby this Court has held as under:—
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis “29. The plain reading of the proviso shows that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 41
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
exclusion is applicable with regard to any information. The term “any information”
would include within its ambit all kinds of information.
The proviso becomes applicable if the information pertains to allegations of corruption and human
rights violation. The proviso is not qualified and conditional on the information being related to the
exempt intelligence and security organizations. If the information sought, furnished by the exempt
intelligence and security organizations, pertains to allegations of corruption and human rights
violation, it would be exempt from the exclusion clause.
30. The proviso “Provided that the information pertaining to the allegations of corruption and
human rights violations shall not be excluded under this sub-section” has to be read in the light of
the preceding phrase “or any information furnished by such organisations to that Government”.
31. When read together, the only conclusion that can be drawn is that, if the information sought
pertains to allegation of corruption and human right violation, it would be exempt from the
exclusion clause, irrespective of the fact that the information pertains to the exempt intelligence and
security organizations or not or pertains to an Officer of the Intelligence Bureau or not.”
11. The respondent who is present in Court states that the information sought by him has become
stale and, he be permitted to file a fresh application under the Act. Plainly, the respondent is not
precluded from filing an application before the petitioner for information relating to allegations of
corruption or human rights https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis violation. In the event such
application is filed, the petitioner would examine the same. Although, it would not be open for the
petitioner to claim that information relating to allegations of corruption in other organisation is
exempt from disclosure, however, the petitioner would be at liberty to examine whether the
information sought by the petitioner is exempt under any of the clauses of Section 8(1) of the Act.”
28. Relying on the above judgments, the learned counsel for the petitioner reiterated that in all the
above judgments relied, all the Courts have consistently held that right of information cannot be
denied in ordinary circumstances and the right being the Statutory right conferred, must be
provided to the information seekers in all circumstances. Rejection of application cannot be done in
a mechanical manner by wrongfully invoking Section 8 of the RTI Act. Merely because the
informations sought for are relating to the corruption cases and a criminal case is registered, the
same would not deprive information seekers from getting information and documents or otherwise
under the provisions of the Right to Information Act.
29. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
objected the contentions raised by the petitioner by stating that the F.I.R was registered on
23.02.2012 and the petitioner was arrayed as an accused. The petitioner worked as Assistant
General Manager in Defence Colony Branch of Indian Overseas Bank from 24.06.2007 to
29.04.2008. Indian Overseas Bank is the leader Bank for the Consortium of Banks, who sanctioned
term loans to M/s. Century Communications Limited. The limits sanctioned by the Consortium
Banks were released through a no-lein account maintained with Indian Overseas Bank, Defence
Colony Branch. During his tenure, the petitioner as Assistant General Manager of the Branch had
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 42
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
committed serious irregularities of disbursing an amount of Rs.69.85 Crores without collecting the
invoices/quotations, credit report of suppliers and further, he had failed to monitor the no-lein
account and allowed operations using check books and thereby the company diverted the funds by
issuing various cheques. These irregularities on the part of the petitioner had facilitated the
borrower to defraud the Consortium of Banks by diverting the funds to their own associate concerns
without creation of the asset, for which, the limits were sanctioned. The fraud was detected during
December, 2011 and is reported to the Reserve Bank of India on 22.02.2012 and thereafter, the
Central Bureau https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of Investigation/3rd respondent lodged an F.I.R
against the company, its directors, several Bank officials and others as admitted by the petitioner
himself.
30. The CBI had sought sanction for prosecution of the petitioner and the competent authority had
granted the same in order dated 10.09.2014.
The information sought for by the petitioner under the Right to Information Act relates to the
correspondence between the CBI and the sanctioning authority and also the administrative
decisions of the sanctioning authority.
Thus, the application of the petitioner was rejected by invoking Section 8 (1)
(d), (g), (h) of the RTI Act.
31. The learned counsel for the respondents reiterated that in various decisions of the Central
Information Commission and the Courts, the exemption under Section 8(1) (h) is a continuous
exemption till the prosecution of the offenders. Hence, it is not mandatory to furnish the
information, if charge sheet is laid. In fact, the Central Information Commission had impleaded the
CBI as the 3rd respondent and found that the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis informations sought
for by the petitioner relates to the confidential correspondence between the sanctioning authority
and CBI. Thus, there is no infirmity as such in rejecting the application filed by the petitioner.
32. With reference to the above contentions, the learned counsel for the respondent relied on the
judgment of the Central Information Commission in the case of Shri K.L.Bablani Vs. Directorate
General of Vigilance, Customs and Central Excise dated 16.09.2009 and the observations are as
follows:
“7. It is my belief, therefore, that a pubic authority which is authorized to hold
file-notings in sensitive files, such as vigilance and disciplinary matters, confidential
under the provisions of Section 124 of AT-16092009-04.doc the Indian Evidence Act
can also hold such documents (file-notings) confidential under Section 11(1) of RTI
Act read with Section 2(n), on satisfying certain conditions, Section 2(n) of RTI Act,
which states that a “third party” means a person other than the citizen making a
request for information and includes a public authority.”
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 43
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
33. The Hon'ble Division Bench of the High Court of Madras in the case of the S.Vijayalakshmi Vs.
Union of India, reported in 2011 (5) CTC 376, elaborately considered the rights of the information
seekers with reference to the provisions of the RTI Act and made the following observations, which
is relevant to the present case:
“22. Repeated reference has been made by stating that the exemption under Section
24 (1) is a blanket exemption or in other words a whole sale exemption. In the
preceding paragraphs we have reproduced Section 24 of the Act. In terms of
sub-Section (1) of Section 24, nothing contained in the RTI Act shall apply to the
Intelligence and Security Organisations specified in the Second Schedule being
organisations established by the Central Government or any information furnished
by such organisations to that Government. As noticed above, First Proviso to Section
24 (1) of the Act states that information pertaining to the allegations of corruption
and human right violation shall not be excluded under Section 24(1) of the Act. In
terms of the Second Proviso, to sub-Section (1) of Section 24, that in case of
information sought for is in respect of allegations of violation of human right, the
information shall only be provided after the approval of the Central Information
Commission and notwithstanding anything contained in Section 7 (which deals with
the disposal of requests), and such https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis information
shall be provided within 45 days from the date of receipt of request. Therefore, it can
hardly be stated to be case of a whole sale exemption or a blanket exemption. If an
RTI applicants comes with a query alleging corruption in any of the Agencies or
Organisations, listed out in the Second Schedule to the RTI Act, such information
sought for is bound to be provided and the protection under Section 24 (1) cannot be
availed of. Similar is the case relating to violation of human rights. Therefore, the
safeguard is inbuilt in the Statute so as to ensure that even in respect of the Agencies
or Organisations listed out in the Second Schedule are not totally excluded from the
purview of the RTI Act.”
34.The High Court of Madras in the above judgment, in unequivocal terms, held that agencies or
organizations listed out in the Second Schedule are not totally excluded from the purview of the RTI
Act. Further, with reference to the 1st Proviso to Section 24(1) of the Act, which is also relied upon
by the learned counsel for the petitioner. The Court states that information pertaining to the
allegations of corruption and human rights violation shall not be excluded under Section 24(1) of the
Act.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
35. The learned counsel for the respondent reiterated that though there is no absolute prohibition
for providing information in respect of the organizations listed out in the Second Schedule, the
nature of the informations sought for is to be considered by the Public Information Officer. Thus, in
the present case, the information sought for was considered as confidential and under those
circumstances, the application was rejected.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 44
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
36. In the case of Chandra Bhushan Sahay Vs. CPIO & General Manager (MP and IR), Central
Information Commission, passed an order dated 10 July, 2020 and the relevant paragraph held as
follows:
“5. The Supreme Court in its order dated February 12, 2019 has held as under:
4. The dispute remains about document Nos.1, 3 and 4 as they were not supplied
considering the provisions of Section 8 (i) (h) of the Right to Information Act which
prohibits disclosure of information connected with ongoing investigations and
prosecutions and it was opined that it was source information that has triggered the
anti-corruption proceedings and nothing should be done which affects the
proceedings or which compromises the position of the sources of information. 5. In
view of the aforesaid reasons employed by https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the
Information commissioner, we are of the opinion that there was justification in
refusing to supply the aforesaid documents.
However, as rightly pointed out by learned counsel for the appellant that during the course of trial, if
the trial Court feels it appropriate and if a prayer is made, the documents may be called by court in
accordance with law.”
37. Considering the arguments as advanced by the respective learned counsels appeared on behalf of
the parties to the lis, let us consider the information sought for by the petitioner.
38. The petitioner requested for a copy of request letter received from CBI for seeking sanction, copy
of internal office memorandum containing the opinion/views of Disciplinary Authority for giving
sanction for prosecution, copy of first advice given by CVC, New Delhi, the outcome of the
reconciliatory meeting between Disciplinary Authority and CBI office of the New Delhi, the copy of
any further clarification sought for by the CVC, the copy of internal office memorandum containing
the opinion/views of Disciplinary Authority for giving sanction for prosecution, the copy of latest
correspondence from CVC requesting/advising the Bank, the copy of internal
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis office memorandum containing the opinion/views of the present
Disciplinary Authority and finally copy of draft sanction supplied by CBI.
39. Considering the nature of questions sought for, interestingly, the first information is the request
letter received from the CBI for seeking sanctioning. The said letter may have certain informations
pertaining to the investigation/interrogation. The second document is copy of internal office
memorandum containing the opinion/views of the Disciplinary Authority.
40. This Court is of the considered opinion that note file, opinions, views of the Disciplinary
Authority may vary from time to time based on the informations and based on the collection of facts
and evidences. Even at later point of time, initial opinion may not be final opinion in many cases.
Subsequent facts may provide a different views and opinion and therefore, if the copy of the opinion
and views are supplied, it will create unnecessary hindrance for the peaceful investigation,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 45
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
interrogation and to proceed with the departmental disciplinary proceedings as well as the criminal
proceedings.
For example, on receipt of the preliminary report, the Disciplinary Authority
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis would have formed certain opinions or expressed some views.
However, those opinions and views cannot be construed as final, as far as the decisions to be taken.
During subsequent period, if further documents are made available or certain other facts are placed,
then the Disciplinary Authority may change his opinion or views. This is exactly the reason why, in
disciplinary case, the rule contemplates opportunities to the deliquent officials. Therefore, the
internal office memorandum containing opinion/views if supplied, undoubtedly, would create
unnecessary issues as the petitioner will certainly rely on the document for the purpose of
destroying the case.
However, any accused/delinquent officials is entitled to defend his case in the manner known to law.
41. Thus, furnishing of such opinions and views of the Disciplinary Authority at various stages, if
provided under the RTI Act, then it will hamper the continuation of the disciplinary proceedings and
further, disrupt the investigation to be conducted by the investigating agency.
42. Perusal of other documents and informations sought for by the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis petitioner are all relatable to the reconciliatory meeting between
the officials.
Clarifications sought for by the CVC, latest correspondence etc., of such informations and
documents sought for reveals that it is between the authorities and more so, relating to
views/opinions, internal correspondences etc.,
43. No doubt, all such correspondences are protected under Section 8 of the RTI Act. However, it is
the “subjective satisfaction” of the authorities. The “subjective satisfaction” must be considered by
the Public Information Officer, while complying with the request of the information seekers. This
exactly is the purpose and object of 8 (h) of the Act.
“Section 8 (h) contemplates of information which would impede the process of investigation or
apprehension or prosecution of offenders.”
44. Where the circumstances narrated under Section 8 (h) on that informations, which would
impede the process of investigation or https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis apprehension or
prosecution of offenders. Thus, if the information provided, would cause any hindrance to the
investigation or apprehension or prosecution of offenders. The language employed is
“Apprehension”. Thus, “Apprehension” of the competent authority is also considered in the
legislation. The word “Apprehension”, no doubt, can be interpreted widely and further, it provides
discretion to the authorities for forming an opinion, whether there is an an “Apprehension” or not.
In this regard, the subjective satisfaction of the competent authority is of paramount importance.
The Public Information Officer is expected to consider in the event of furnishing such informations,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 46
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
which all are connected with the investigation or prosecution of offenders and providing of such
informations, would impede the process, then, he is empowered to exercise power of discretion and
reject the application of the information seeker. Thus, the scope of section 8 (h) is to be understood,
with reference to the context and to the subjective satisfaction of the authorities competent. If the
competent authority satisfied that there is a likelihood of impede the process of investigation or
prosecution of offenders, then such informations or documents shall be denied.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
45. The purpose and object of the exemption clause is to ensure that the administrative
confidentiality are protected and because of providing of information, the further continuation of
investigation or prosecution cannot be impeded. This being the scope of exemption under Section 8
(h), the questions sought for by the petitioner in the present case with reference to 8
(h) is to be considered.
46. As discussed in the aforementioned paragraphs, the questions and documents sought for by the
petitioner in the present case is relatable to internal office memorandum containing opinions/views
of reconciliatory meeting between the Disciplinary Authority and CBI clarification sought for by
CVC internal office memorandum containing opinions/views latest correspondences from CVC etc.,
47. This Court is of the considered opinion that such informations, if provided, it will create
unnecessary hampering of the Disciplinary https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Proceedings or the
prosecution. Even an apprehension in this regard is sufficient is to deny information to the
applicants. The word “Apprehension” is employed in the Act, so as to protect the prosecution and
process of investigation, which should not be paralyzed at any circumstances in the public interest.
When the investigation is undertaken, then the authorities must be provided with an amount of
discretion for the purpose of culling out the truth in respect of the allegations. Thus, any hindrance
in between, would undoubtedly paralyze the investigation process, which would dilute the
prosecution and would extend unlawful benefit to the accused persons.
48. The opinions and views formed by the competent authorities on every stage may vary or change
depending on the progress made in the investigation and based on the further facts culled out from
and out of the evidences. During the course of such investigation or prosecution, if informations are
provided regarding the opinions already formed, then undoubtedly the same will hamper further
investigation and disrupt the prosecution to be conducted by the agency. If such nature of
informations or documents are provided, then it may not be possible to proceed with the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis prosecution for the purpose of establishing the offence.
49. In this context, the rights of both the parties should be considered by the Courts. It is not only
the right of the information seekers, but the right of the information provider must also considered
by this Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 47
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
Whenever a statutory right is conferred to the citizen, equally such right is conferred to the other
citizen, whose interest is also to be protected before allowing a person to exercise such a statutory
right. To elaborate, right and duties are corresponding terms, so also, rights can be exercised by any
citizen, honoring the corresponding rights of the other citizen. It is exactly the constitutional
perspective and the philosophy. Take a case, where informations or documents are mechanically
provided to the information seekers in all circumstances, then the right and duties of the
investigating agency and the prosecutors are denied, establishing their cases before the competent
Court of law or before the Disciplinary Authority. Thus, a balancing approach is required, while
implementing the provisions of the RTI Act. It is not as if, an information seeker is entitled to get all
informations and documents including certain internal correspondences and views or opinions
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis recorded by the competent authorities then and there and time to
time.
Therefore, practical and pragmatic approach coupled with rules of constructive interpretation is of
paramount importance to take a decision in such circumstances. In the event of committing any
lapses, the same would provide unlawful gain to the accused/delinquent persons, which would
result in destruction of the prosecution or the case of the Disciplinary Authority and larger the
public interest involved in the matter of criminal prosecution is also to be considered by the Court.
State being the prosecutors, right of investigation, collected evidence, record the opinions and views
in those files must be protected in all circumstances and by obtaining all such informations and
documents from the competent authorities, the accused may not be allowed to destroy the basis of
prosecution as such views/opinions or internal correspondence can never be construed as final
opinion/views or the final decision.
50. Considering the fact that the Central Information Commission elaborately considered the
grounds raised by the petitioner in the order passed in the Second Appeal, arrived a conclusion that
the exemption granted to CBI https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis from applicability of the RTI Act, in
terms of Section 24 (1) would became meaningless. If RTI applicants would get information from
another Public Authority, the very information that they cannot get from the CBI or information,
inexplicably linked to the information and materials provided by the CBI to the Public Authority.
51. The above findings of the Central Information Commission explicitly clarifies that what an
information seeker could not able to get from the CBI, cannot attempt to get from his employer or
from other agencies.
Such calculated applications filed under the RTI Act, at no circumstances, are entertainable. In the
present case, the informations and documents sought for are no doubt relating to the files being
maintained by the CBI and about the investigation of the Criminal case, so also pertaining to the
sanction, which all are relatable to investigation/interrogation or prosecution. Thus, the first proviso
to Section 24 (1) cannot be extended merely under the ground that the word 'Corruption' is
employed in the Statute.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 48
Gulab Singh Rana vs The Central Public Information Officer on 8 December, 2021
52. Distinctions are to be drawn in this regard and Section 24 (1) proviso must be read and
understood along with the spirit of Section 8 (h) of the Right to Information Act. Rule of
constructive interpretation in such circumstances are imminent to ensure that the purpose and
object of the RTI Act is not defeated. So also at the time of providing informations or documents, the
rights of other parties and the criminal laws system of prosecution by the State is not affected or
destroyed on account of providing such confidential informations to the information seekers.
53. In view of the principles considered by this Court in the aforementioned paragraphs, this Court
is able to form a concrete opinion that the informations and documents sought for by the petitioner
are rightly rejected by the Public Information Officer, Indian Overseas Bank, First Appellate
Authority and finally by the Central Information Commission/Second Appellate Authority.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
54. Thus, this Court do not find any infirmity or perversity as such in respect of the reasons and
findings given, which all are candid and convincing. Consequently, the Writ Petition fails and stands
dismissed. No costs.
08.12.2021
Jeni
Internet : Yes
Index : Yes
Speaking order:Yes
To
1.The Central Public Information Officer,
Indian Overseas Bank,
Central Office, #763, Anna Salai,
Chennai – 600 002.
2.The First Apellate Authority cum General Manager, Law Department, (RTI Cell) Indian Overseas
Bank, Central Office, #763, Anna Salai, Chennai – 600 002
3.The Head of the Branch, The Central Bureau of Investigation Bank Securities & Fraud Cell, 5th
Floor, CBI Head Quarters, 5-B, CGO Complex, Lodhi Road, New Delhi – 110 003
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
4.The Registrar, The Central Information Commission Room No. 306, 3rd Floor, “B” Wing, August
Kranti Bhavan, Bhikaji Cama Place, Old JNU Campus, New Delhi – 110 066
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis S.M.SUBRAMANIAM, J.
Jeni 08.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/156343819/ 49
