Gulshan Begum And Others vs State Of J&K And Another on 17 May, 2023
Gulshan Begum And Others vs State Of J&K And Another on 17
May, 2023
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
...
CRMC No.426/2017
Gulshan Begum and others ....... Petitioner(s)
Through: Ms. Surinder Kour, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Mical Dogra, Advcoate
Versus
State of J&K and another .........Respondent(s)
Through: Mr.Eishan Dadhichi, GA
Mr. Irfan Khan, Advocate
CORAM: HON'BLE MR JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT (Oral)
17.05.2023
1) In this petition filed under Section 561-A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the petitioners seek
quashment of FIR No.102/2017 registered at Police Station, Banihal for the commission of offences
punishable under Sections 354, 504 and 327 RPC, as well as, order dated 04.07.2017 passed by the
learned Judicial Magistrate 1st Class (Munsiff), Banihal for registration of the FIR.
2) Briefly stated, the case of the prosecution is that on 10.06.2017, respondent No.2 had gone to her
land bearing Khasra No.1189/1820 situated in Domaala Nowgam, Chamalwas. The petitioners, who
were already there hiding themselves, started using abusive and bad language against respondent
No.2. Petitioner No.2 grabbed respondent No.2 from breasts and other petitioner No.3 to 5 caught
respondent No.2 from hair and clothes and petitioner No. 6 and 7 started beating her with fists and
kicks. When respondent No.2 raised her voice by screaming loudly, some locals rushed to rescue her
and on seeing the locals approaching the spot, petitioners fled away from the spot. On an complaint
moved by respondent No.2 before learned Judicial Magistrate, an enquiry under Section 202 Cr.P.C.
was directed to be conducted by the concerned police. On receipt of the report, he ordered
registration of FIR under Section 354/504/506/323 and, accordingly, FIR No.102/2017 came to be
registered at Police Station, Banihal and investigation started.
3. While the investigation in the FIR was going on, petitioner challenged the registration of FIR and
sought quashment of the same. It is stated that there is a land dispute between the petitioners and
family of respondent No.2 who have been interfering into the land of the petitioners, as a result
whereof, the petitioners lodged FIR No.165/2015 under Section 447, 379 RPC against husband of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155568975/ 1
Gulshan Begum And Others vs State Of J&K And Another on 17 May, 2023
respondent No.2 and two brothers of husband of respondent No.2, namely, Shakeel Ahmed and
Mohd. Yousuf. It is pleaded that the family members of respondent No.2 did not stop and continued
to interfere in the possession of the petitioners over their proprietary land with a view to grab their
land, which constrained the petitioners to lodge another FIR No.76/2017 under Section 325 RPC
against respondent No.2 and her family members. The petitioners submit that in counter blast to
the FIRs registered by them, respondent No.2 filed complaint before the Court of JMIC, Banihal.
This Court, however, vide order dated 26.07.2017 had stayed the investigation in the FIR.
4. During the pendency of the petition, the parties, owing to the better sense that has prevailed
inter-se, decided to resolve their disputes and have also entered into a compromise. The respondent
No.2- complaiant as also petitioner No.2 recorded their statements before the Registrar Judicial on
17.05.2023, wherein they have stated that they have amicably resolved all disputes and issues out of
Court. Respondent No.2 in her statement has also stated that she has no grievance against the
petitioners and does not want to pursue the case filed by her against the petitioner. She further
stated that she has no objection in case FIR No.102/2017 registered at Police Station, Banihal is
quashed.
5. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
6. In the backdrop of the compromise arrived at between the parties, the question arises as to
whether this Court has power to quash the proceedings, particularly when some of the offences
alleged to have been committed are non-compoundable in nature. The Supreme Court in the case of
Gian Singh. v. State of Punjab & another, reported in (2012) 10 SCC 303, while considering this
aspect, has observed as under:
"57. The position that emerges from the above discussion can be summarised thus:
the power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to
a criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code.
Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases
power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised
where the offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
and circumstances of each case and no category can be prescribed. However, before
exercise of such power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences
like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not
private in nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise
between the victim and offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like
Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while
working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155568975/ 2
Gulshan Begum And Others vs State Of J&K And Another on 17 May, 2023
and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the purposes of
quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category
of cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote
and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put accused to great oppression
and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise with the victim.
In other words, the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or contrary
to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of law despite
settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end and if
the answer to the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding.."
7. Similarly, the Supreme Court in the case titled Narinder Singh & Ors. Vs. State of Punjab & anr,
reported in (2014) 6 SCC 466, has laid down guidelines for quashing of criminal proceedings. The
guidelines are reproduced as under:
"31. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay down the following
principles by which the High Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
the settlement between the parties and exercising its power under Section 482 of the
Code while accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
accept the settlement with direction to continue with the criminal proceedings:
(I) Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be distinguished from the
power which lies in the Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has inherent power
to quash the criminal proceedings even in those cases which are not compoundable,
where the parties have settled the matter between themselves. However, this power is
to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
(II) When the parties have reached the settlement and on that basis petition for
quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases would be
to secure:
(i) ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155568975/ 3
Gulshan Begum And Others vs State Of J&K And Another on 17 May, 2023
While exercising the power the High Court is to form an opinion on either of the aforesaid two
objectives. (III) Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions which involve heinous and
serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
private in nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for offences alleged to have been
committed under special statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by
Public Servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender.
(IV) On the other, those criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-dominantly civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship
or family disputes should be quashed when the parties have resolved their entire disputes among
themselves. (V) While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine as to whether the
possibility of conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases would put the
accused to great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
quashing the criminal cases. (VI) Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the category of
heinous and serious offences and therefore is to be generally treated as crime against the society and
not against the individual alone. However, the High Court c/w CRM(M) No.614/2021 would not rest
its decision merely because there is a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed
under this provision. It would be open to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation of
Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which
if proved, would lead to proving the charge under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be
open to the High Court to go by the nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on
the vital/delegate parts of the body, nature of weapons used etc. Medical report in respect of injuries
suffered by the victim can generally be the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis,
the High Court can examine as to whether there is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances of
conviction are remote and bleak. In the former case it can refuse to accept the settlement and quash
the criminal proceedings whereas in the later case it would be permissible for the High Court to
accept the plea compounding the offence based on complete settlement between the parties. At this
stage, the Court can also be swayed by the fact that the settlement between the parties is going to
result in harmony between them which may improve their future relationship. (VII) While deciding
whether to exercise its power under Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play a
crucial role. Those cases where the settlement is arrived at immediately after the alleged
commission of offence and the matter is still under investigation, the High Court may be liberal in
accepting the settlement to quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is because of the reason
that at this stage the investigation is still on and even the charge sheet has not been filed. Likewise,
those cases where the charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is still at
infancy stage, the High Court can show benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but after
prima facie assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned above. On the other hand, where
the prosecution evidence is almost complete or after the conclusion of the evidence the matter is at
the stage of argument, normally the High Court should refrain from exercising its power under
Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial court would be in a position to decide the case
finally on merits and to come a conclusion as to whether the offence under Section 307 IPC is
committed or not. Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is already recorded by the trial
court and the matter is at the appellate stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155568975/ 4
Gulshan Begum And Others vs State Of J&K And Another on 17 May, 2023
parties would not be a ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has
already been convicted by the trial court. Here charge is proved under Section 307 IPC and
conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question of sparing a
convict found guilty of such a crime."
8. From a perusal of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court, it is clear that in the cases or
disputes which have predominantly civil flavour and where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute, the High Court is well within
its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceedings if it is known that because of the compromise
arrived at between the parties, there is remote possibility of securing conviction of the accused. In
fact, in such cases, the Supreme Court has clearly observed that it would amount to extreme
injustice if despite settlement having been arrived at between the parties, the criminal proceedings
are allowed to continue.
9. Adverting to the facts of the instant case, it is clear that the parties to the dispute, i.e., petitioners
and respondent No.2 have entered into a compromise, whereby respondent No.2 has decided not to
pursue prosecution in the impugned FIR against the petitioners. Therefore, once the rival groups
have arrived at a settlement as regards the basis of the dispute, allowing the prosecutions to
continue merely because some of the offences alleged against the accused are non- compoundable in
nature would amount to great injustice to both the parties and, in fact, it will amount to squander
the fruits of compromise that has been arrived at between the parties, who happen to be relatives
and want to live peacefully. The continuance of criminal proceedings against the petitioners, in these
circumstances, will be nothing but an abuse of process of law.
10. In view of the aforesaid discussion, this petition is allowed. As a result, FIR No.102/2017
registered at Police Station, Banihal for commission of offences punishable under Sections 354, 504,
506, 327 RPC as well as order dated 04.07.2017 passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate (Munsiff),
Banihal for registration of the FIR is quashed.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge Jammu 17.05.2023 Vinod, PS Whether the order reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155568975/ 5
