Gulzar Ahmad Dar And Ors vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir & ... on 29 August, 2025
Gulzar Ahmad Dar And Ors vs Union Territory Of Jammu And
Kashmir & ... on 29 August, 2025
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
Reserved on: 25.07.2025
Pronounced on: 29.08.2025
Case No.:- WP(C) No. 2036/2024
Gulzar Ahmad Dar and Ors
.....Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Tasaduq Hussain Khawja, Advocate with
Mr. Imaan Abdul Muizz, Advocate.
Vs
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir & ors.
..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Hakeem Aman Ali, Dy. AG for R-1.
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
(Per: Sanjay Dhar-J)
1. The petitioners, through the medium of the present petition, have challenged the judgement dated
30.03.2021 passed by Central Administrative Tribunal, Jammu Bench (hereinafter to be referred to
as 'Tribunal') to the extent it provides for fixing of seniority of the petitioners, who have been
inducted/promoted against leave or training reserve vacancies, below those candidates, who have
been inducted/promoted against regular vacancies. Challenge has also been thrown to Govt. Order
No. 316-JK (GAD) of 2021 dated 07.04.2021 whereby seniority of the petitioners has been re-fixed.
Besides this, the petitioners have sought a direction upon the respondents to either quash all
promotions that have been made on the basis of seniority list dated 07.04.2021 or in the alternative,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139153313/ 1
Gulzar Ahmad Dar And Ors vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir & ... on 29 August, 2025
to accord promotions to the petitioners retrospectively by treating them as senior in accordance with
seniority list issued in the year 2011.
2. According to the petitioners, they were members of various feeding services of Jammu and
Kashmir Administrative Service and they were appointed to these services after qualifying Jammu
and Kashmir Combined Competitive Services Examination in the year 1999. The petitioners as well
as the private respondents, who were also members of the various feeding services of Jammu and
Kashmir Administrative Service and who also belong to the 1999 batch, were considered for
promotion to time scale of Jammu and Kashmir Administrative Service (hereinafter to be referred
to as 'JKAS') in the year 2008 in accordance with Jammu and Kashmir Administrative Service Rules
of 1979 (hereinafter to be referred to as 'Rules of 1979') whereafter they were inducted in the time
scale of JKAS in the year 2008.
3. It has been submitted that the seniority list of the officers, promoted in the year 2008, was issued
in terms of Govt. Order No. 743-GAD of 2011 dated 24.06.2011 after inviting objections and
considering the same. It has been further submitted that said seniority list became a subject matter
of long drawn litigation initially before this Court and ultimately before the learned Tribunal. The
learned Tribunal, in terms of the impugned judgment dated 30.03.2021, upheld the seniority list
dated 24.06.2011 but it was observed by the learned Tribunal that the officers appointed against
leave and training vacancies cannot be placed above those who have been promoted against regular
vacancies.
4. Pursuant to the aforesaid judgment of the learned Tribunal, the seniority list of 2011 came to be
revised by the Government, which led to issuance of fresh seniority list dated 07.04.2021, which is
under challenge in the present writ petition.
5. It has been submitted by the petitioners that they were ranking superior to the private
respondents in the seniority list of 2011, which was issued on the basis of merit obtained by the
candidates during the selection process conducted in accordance with the Rules of 1979 but because
of the aforesaid observations made by the learned Tribunal, the petitioners have been pushed down
in the seniority list thereby affecting their rights to be promoted to higher scales of pay as also their
induction in Indian Administrative Services (IAS). The petitioners are stated to have made
representations to the official respondents seeking restoration of their seniority in accordance with
the seniority list of 2011 but they have not taken any action, which compelled the petitioners to
approach this Court by way of the present writ petition.
6. The petitioners have challenged the impugned judgment of the learned Tribunal to the extent it
has resulted in re- fixation of seniority of the petitioners on the grounds that the classification made
by the learned Tribunal between the vacancies falling under leave and training reserve category and
those termed as regular vacancies is misplaced and without any legal basis. It has been contended
that as per the Rules of 1979, leave and training vacancies are part of the cadre borne on the service
to which the petitioners and the private respondents belong and all these posts have been duly
sanctioned and form part of the strength of the cadre, therefore, treating the promotion/induction
of the petitioners in the time scale in a different manner has no legal basis.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139153313/ 2
Gulzar Ahmad Dar And Ors vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir & ... on 29 August, 2025
7. It has been further contended that the learned Tribunal has, without any basis, assumed that only
duty posts are regular posts and the leave and training vacancies are non-regular posts. It has been
contended that once the learned Tribunal had upheld the validity of seniority list of 2011, it was not
open to it to make the impugned observations. It has been further contended that the impugned
seniority list of 2021 has been issued without observing principles of natural justice and once final
seniority list was issued by the official respondents in the year 2011, it had no jurisdiction to issue a
fresh seniority list in the year 2021.
8. The writ petition has been contested by the official respondents by filing their reply. In their
reply, it has been submitted that during the years 2005, 2006 and 2007, the induction of officers
appointed to various departmental feeding services in the year 1999 against the slots, which had
become available from the year 2004 onwards, could not be considered as a result of which none of
the officers belonging to 1999 batch were inducted nor any officer from subsequent batch of 2001
could be inducted in time scale of JKAS. It has been submitted that the Establishment cum Selection
Committee had observed that in respect of certain departmental feeding services, the members of
the service cannot be considered for their induction into time scale of JKAS in the normal course
due to non-availability of slots, therefore, it was recommended that leave reserve/training reserve
vacancies shall be utilized as an exception for ensuring induction of members of departmental
feeding services, both direct and promotees appointed upto 31.12.1999.
9. It has been submitted that in view of the aforesaid decision, the committee considered the service
records of 49 officers of the different feeding services of overall merit as reflected in their APRs and
recommended their induction into the time scale of JKAS against leave/training reserves. Out of
these 49 officers, the petitioners were also inducted in the time scale of JKAS against leave/training
reserved posts. After the induction of officers in the time scale of JKAS, a tentative select list of
officers was issued vide Government Order No. 485-GAD of 2010 dated 21.04.2010 and objections
were invited. Upon receipt of representations against the tentative select list, a committee was
constituted by the Government which submitted its report on 15.02.2011. On the basis of the
recommendations of this Committee, a final seniority list of officers appointed to time scale of JKAS
between 01.01.2004 to 01.12.2008 was issued by the Government in terms of Government Order
No. 743- GAD of 2011 dated 24.06.2011.
10. It has been submitted that the aforesaid seniority list including Rule 15(4) of J&K Administrative
Service Rules, 2008 which provided for retrospective effect of appointment on the basis of vacancies
became subject matter of challenge in various writ petitions filed before the High Court, which were
later on transferred to the learned Tribunal. The said petitions came to be decided by the learned
Tribunal vide impugned judgment dated 30.03.2011, which contains the impugned observations
with regard to promotion of officers inducted against leave reserve/training reserve posts.
11. It has been further submitted that in the light of the impugned observations made by the learned
Tribunal, impugned seniority list dated 07.04.2021 was issued by the Government as it decided to
implement the judgment of the learned Tribunal. Accordingly, officers promoted against leave
reserve/training reserve posts including the petitioners were placed below the officers, who were
promoted/inducted against regular vacancies.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139153313/ 3
Gulzar Ahmad Dar And Ors vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir & ... on 29 August, 2025
12. It has been submitted that leave reserve/training reserve posts cannot be equated with regular
posts and because there were no regular vacant posts available for according promotion to the
petitioners, as such, in order to prevent a situation whereby a junior batch officer would have stolen
a march over the petitioners, who belong to a senior batch, as a one-time exception, it was decided
to utilize leave reserve/training reserve posts for according promotion/induction to them.
13. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case including the
record produced by the official respondents.
14. To be precise, the dispute raised in the present petition is with regard to the placement of the
petitioners in the seniority list of officers inducted to time scale of JKAS in the year 2008. It is not in
dispute that the petitioners were inducted to time scale of JKAS in the year 2008 against leave
reserve/training reserve vacancies and not against the regular vacancies. While the petitioners claim
that leave reserve/training reserve vacancies being part of the cadre of the service as defined under
Rules of 1979, which govern the instant case, as such, it was not open to the learned Tribunal to take
a view that leave reserve/training reserve vacancies are not part of the cadre and, therefore, could
not have been utilized for according promotion to the petitioners and that the same has been done
only as a measure of administrative exigency which does not fit into the one under the rules. It has
been submitted that the learned Tribunal has fallen into error by making a distinction between leave
reserve/training reserve vacancies and the regular vacancies.
15. The official respondents, on the other hand, claim that as per the Rules of 1979,
promotions/induction into time scale of JKAS for the officers belonging to feeding cadre services
can be made only against the slots available against the particular service of the feeding cadre and
because these slots were not available in the feeding cadre service to which the petitioners belong,
normally they could not have been inducted/promoted in the year 2008 but in order to save a
situation whereby the officers of a subsequent batch would have stolen a march over the petitioners,
who belonged to the 1999 batch, as a special concession, the leave reserve/training reserve vacancies
were utilized and this concession given to the petitioners does not entitle them to be placed
above/alongside the officers, who have been inducted/promoted against the regular slots allotted to
the respective feeding cadre services.
16. Before going into the merits of the afore-noted contentions raised by the parties, a glaring aspect
of the matter, which stares at the face of the petitioners is the inordinate delay on their part to
challenge the judgment of the learned Tribunal and the consequent seniority list dated 07.04.2021,
is required to be addressed.
17. It is to be noted that the petitioners were parties to the proceedings before the Tribunal and their
seniority was under challenge before the Tribunal. It is not a case where the petitioners were not
aware about the impugned judgment passed by the learned Tribunal. The petitioners have
approached this Court in September, 2024 while as the impugned judgment has been passed by the
learned Tribunal on 30.03.2021 meaning thereby that the petitioners have approached this Court
after a lapse of about three and half years of passing of the impugned judgment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139153313/ 4
Gulzar Ahmad Dar And Ors vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir & ... on 29 August, 2025
18. The issue that arises for determination is whether or not this Court should exercise its
extraordinary writ jurisdiction in the facts and circumstances of this case having regard to
inordinate delay in filing the writ petition and the established principle of law that delay defeats
equity.
19. The effect of delay in filing a writ petition upon the rights of a litigant has been a subject matter
of determination before the Supreme Court in a number of cases. It would be apt to refer to some of
these precedents to understand the legal position on this aspect.
20. The Supreme Court has, in the case of 'State of Uttaranchal and anr Vs. Sri Shiv Charan Singh
Bhandari and Ors', (2013) 12 SCC 179, while dealing with the issue relating to effect of delay and
laches, observed as under:
"16. We have no trace of doubt that the respondents could have challenged the ad hoc
promotion conferred on the junior employee at the relevant time. They chose not to
do so for six years and the junior employee held the promotional post for six years till
regular promotion took place. The submission of the learned counsel for the
respondents is that they had given representations at the relevant time but the same
fell in deaf ears. It is interesting to note that when the regular selection took place,
they accepted the position solely because the seniority was maintained and,
thereafter, they knocked at the doors of the tribunal only in 2003. It is clear as noon
day that the cause of action had arisen for assailing the order when the junior
employee was promoted on ad hoc basis on 15.11.1983.
17. In C. Jacob v. Director of Geology and Mining and another a two-Judge Bench
was dealing with the concept of representations and the directions issued by the court
or tribunal to consider the representations and the challenge to the said rejection
thereafter. In that context, the court has expressed thus: -
"Every representation to the Government for relief, may not be replied on merits.
Representations relating to matters which have become stale or barred by limitation,
can be rejected on that ground alone, without examining the merits of the claim. In
regard to representations unrelated to the Department, the reply may be only to
inform that the matter did not concern the Department or to inform the appropriate
Department. Representations with incomplete particulars may be replied by seeking
relevant particulars. The replies to such representations, cannot furnish a fresh cause
of action or revive a stale or dead claim."
21. In State of 'Tamil Nadu Vs. Seshachalam, (2007)10 SCC 137', the Supreme court observed as
under:
"Some of the respondents might have filed representations but filing of
representations alone would not save the period of limitation. Delay or laches is a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139153313/ 5
Gulzar Ahmad Dar And Ors vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir & ... on 29 August, 2025
relevant factor for a court of law to determine the question as to whether the claim
made by an applicant deserves consideration. Delay and/or laches on the part of a
Government servant may deprive him of the benefit which had been given to others.
Article 14 of the Constitution of India would not, in a situation of that nature, be
attracted as it is well known that law leans in favour of those who are alert and
vigilant."
22. Again in 'Chennai Metropolitan Water Supply and Sewerage Board and ors Vs. T.T. Murali Babu,
(2014) 4 SCC 108', the Supreme Court has observed as under:
"13. First, we shall deal with the facet of delay. In Maharashtra State Road Transport
Corporation v. Balwant Regular Motor Service, Amravati and others the Court
referred to the principle that has been stated by Sir Barnes Peacock in Lindsay
Petroleum Co. v. Prosper Armstrong Hurd, Abram Farewall, and John Kemp, which
is as follows: -
"Now the doctrine of laches in Courts of Equity is not an arbitrary or a technical
doctrine. Where it would be practically unjust to give a remedy, either because the
party has, by his conduct, done that which might fairly be regarded as equivalent to a
waiver of it, or where by his conduct and neglect he has, though perhaps not waiving
that remedy, yet put the other party in a situation in which it would not be reasonable
to place him if the remedy were afterwards to be asserted in either of these cases,
lapse of time and delay are most material. But in every case, if an argument against
relief, which otherwise would be just, is founded upon mere delay, that delay of
course not amounting to a bar by any statute of limitations, the validity of that
defence must be tried upon principles substantially equitable. Two circumstances,
always important in such cases, are, the length of the delay and the nature of the acts
done during the interval, which might affect either party and cause a balance of
justice or injustice in taking the one course or the other, so far as relates to the
remedy."
14. In State of Maharashtra v. Digambar, while dealing with exercise of power of the High Court
under Article 226 of the Constitution, the Court observed that power of the High Court to be
exercised under Article 226 of the Constitution, if is discretionary, its exercise must be judicious and
reasonable, admits of no controversy. It is for that reason, a person(cid:128)s entitlement for relief from a
High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution, be it against the State or anybody else, even if is
founded on the allegation of infringement of his legal right, has to necessarily depend upon
unblameworthy conduct of the person seeking relief, and the court refuses to grant the discretionary
relief to such person in exercise of such power, when he approaches it with unclean hands or
blameworthy conduct.
15. In State of M.P. and others etc. etc. v. Nandlal Jaiswal and others etc. etc. the Court observed
that it is well settled that power of the High Court to issue an appropriate writ under Article 226 of
the Constitution is discretionary and the High Court in exercise of its discretion does not ordinarily
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139153313/ 6
Gulzar Ahmad Dar And Ors vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir & ... on 29 August, 2025
assist the tardy and the indolent or the acquiescent and the lethargic. It has been further stated
therein that if there is inordinate delay on the part of the petitioner in filing a petition and such
delay is not satisfactorily explained, the High Court may decline to intervene and grant relief in the
exercise of its writ jurisdiction. Emphasis was laid on the principle of delay and laches stating that
resort to the extraordinary remedy under the writ jurisdiction at a belated stage is likely to cause
confusion and public inconvenience and bring in injustice.
16. Thus, the doctrine of delay and laches should not be lightly brushed aside. A writ court is
required to weigh the explanation offered and the acceptability of the same. The court should bear in
mind that it is exercising an extraordinary and equitable jurisdiction. As a constitutional court it has
a duty to protect the rights of the citizens but simultaneously it is to keep itself alive to the primary
principle that when an aggrieved person, without adequate reason, approaches the court at his own
leisure or pleasure, the Court would be under legal obligation to scrutinize whether the lis at a
belated stage should be entertained or not. Be it noted, delay comes in the way of equity. In certain
circumstances delay and laches may not be fatal but in most circumstances inordinate delay would
only invite disaster for the litigant who knocks at the doors of the Court. Delay reflects inactivity and
inaction on the part of a litigant - a litigant who has forgotten the basic norms, namely,
"procrastination is the greatest thief of time" and second, law does not permit one to sleep and rise
like a phoenix. Delay does bring in hazard and causes injury to the lis. In the case at hand, though
there has been four years(cid:128) delay in approaching the court, yet the writ court chose not to address
the same. It is the duty of the court to scrutinize whether such enormous delay is to be ignored
without any justification. That apart, in the present case, such belated approach gains more
significance as the respondent-employee being absolutely careless to his duty and nurturing a
lackadaisical attitude to the responsibility had remained unauthorisedly absent on the pretext of
some kind of ill health. We repeat at the cost of repetition that remaining innocuously oblivious to
such delay does not foster the cause of justice. On the contrary, it brings in injustice, for it is likely to
affect others. Such delay may have impact on others(cid:128) ripened rights and may unnecessarily drag
others into litigation which in acceptable realm of probability, may have been treated to have
attained finality. A court is not expected to give indulgence to such indolent persons - who compete
with „Kumbhakarna(cid:128) or for that matter „Rip Van Winkle(cid:128). In our considered opinion, such delay
does not deserve any indulgence and on the said ground alone the writ court should have thrown the
petition overboard at the very threshold."
23. The Supreme Court in the case of 'P.S. Sadasivaswamy Vs. State of Tamil Nadu', 1975 (1) SCC
152 has held that a person aggrieved by an order of promoting a junior over his head should
approach the court at least within six months or at the most, within a year of such promotion. The
Court further went on to observe that it is not that there is any period of limitation for the courts to
exercise their powers under Article 226 or is it that there can never be a case where the courts
cannot interfere in a matter after the passage of a certain length of time but it would be a sound and
wise exercise of discretion for the courts to refuse to exercise their extraordinary powers under
Article 226 in the case of persons who do not approach it expeditiously for relief and who stand by
and allow things to happen and then approach the court to put forward stale claims and try to
unsettle, settled matters.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139153313/ 7
Gulzar Ahmad Dar And Ors vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir & ... on 29 August, 2025
24. Applying the aforesaid legal position with regard to effect of delay and laches on the part of the
petitioners in approaching the Court to the facts of the instant case, it is clear that the petitioners
have slept over their rights for about three and a half years and have approached this Court
belatedly. Their only explanation for this delay is that they made representations with the official
respondents, which were not considered. Copies of a couple of representations have been annexed
with the petition. There is nothing on record to suggest that these representations were actually
received by the official respondents. In fact, these representations do not even bear the date on
which the same were made and even in the petition it has not been mentioned as to on which date
these representations were delivered by the petitioners with the official respondents.
25. The Supreme Court in 'State of Tamil Nadu Vs. Seshachalam', (2007) 10 SCC 137, has clearly
held that filing of representations alone would not save the period of limitation. Delay or laches is a
relevant factor for a court of law to determine the question as to whether the claim made by an
applicant deserves consideration. Again the Supreme Court in the case of 'Union of India and ors Vs.
Chaman Rana & Anr, 2018(5) SCC 798 has held that merely repeated filing of representations could
not be sufficient explanation for delay in approaching the court for grant of relief.
26. In the face of aforesaid legal position, even it is assumed that representations were made by the
petitioners to the official respondents, the same would not save the situation from them particularly
when the official respondents have not even responded to these representations. Even otherwise,
making of representations by the petitioners in the facts and circumstances of the instant case was
an unnecessary exercise because the official respondents had issued the impugned seniority list on
the basis of the judgment passed by the learned Tribunal and once the official respondents decided
to accept the said judgment, they had no option but to comply with the same and issue the
impugned seniority list. The representations of the petitioners could not in any case have made any
difference. The only option available with the petitioners to avoid the consequences of judgment of
the learned Tribunal was to challenge the said judgment by way of appropriate proceedings which
the petitioners did only after three and a half years without there being explanation for the delay.
27. Although there is no limitation period prescribed for filing writ proceedings, yet the High Court
generally refuses to exercise its writ jurisdiction if the proceedings are not filed within a reasonable
time. What should be the reasonable time would depend upon the facts and circumstances of a
particular case. Generally speaking reasonable time for challenging a judgment of Central
Administrative Tribunal would be the period of limitation prescribed for filing a Letters Patent
Appeal. Thus, reasonable period for the petitioners to approach this Court to invoke writ jurisdiction
against the impugned judgment of Central Administrative Tribunal would have been sixty days or at
the most within a period of six months from the date of passing of judgment by the Tribunal, but the
petitioners have invoked the writ jurisdiction of this Court after a lapse of about three and half years.
Having regard to the fact that the petitioners were party to the proceedings before the Tribunal
before which their seniority was under challenge there is no justification for them to have consumed
so much of time in approaching this Court.
28. As per the own case of the petitioners during the interregnum not only fresh seniority list on the
basis of the impugned judgment passed by the learned Tribunal has been issued by the official
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139153313/ 8
Gulzar Ahmad Dar And Ors vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir & ... on 29 August, 2025
respondents in April, 2021 but official respondents have also made promotions to Super Time Scale
of Service and have further initiated the process of inducting the officers in Indian Administrative
Services (IAS) on the basis of seniority list of 2011. Thus, the petitioners have allowed the situation
to change inasmuch as the officers have been promoted to higher scales of pay on the basis of the
judgment of the learned Tribunal. In view of this altered situation, it can be safely inferred that the
petitioners have waived their rights by their conduct as a result whereof the private respondents
have been put in a position that if they are reverted back to the earlier seniority, it would work
harshly against them. The petitioners, by their lethargic conduct, have allowed the subsequent
developments to take place and this is an important factor which would weigh with this court in
deciding whether or not to exercise writ jurisdiction.
29. For what has been discussed hereinbefore, this Court refuses to exercise its extraordinary writ
jurisdiction on account of inordinate and unexplained delay on the part of the petitioners in
approaching this Court. Thus, without going into the merits of the rival contentions raised by the
parties, this writ petition is dismissed on the grounds of delay and laches.
(SANJAY DHAR) (VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL)
JUDGE JUDGE
JAMMU
29.08.2025
Naresh/Secy.
Whether order is speaking: Yes
Whether order is reportable: Yes
...
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139153313/ 9
