Hadu Paltasingh vs State Of Orissa & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 14 July, 2023
Hadu Paltasingh vs State Of Orissa & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 14
July, 2023
Author: B.R.Sarangi
Bench: B.R.Sarangi
ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
AFR W.P(C) NO. 23028 OF 2015
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and
227 of the Constitution of India.
---------------
Hadu Paltasingh ..... Petitioner
-Versus-
State of Orissa & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties
For petitioner : M/s. Tanmay Mishra and
S. Senapati, Advocates
For opp. parties : Mr. H.M. Dhal,
Addl. Govt. Advocate
P R E S E N T:
THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI AND THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE
MURAHARI SRI RAMAN DECIDED ON : 14.07.2023 DR. B.R. SARANGI,J. The petitioner, by
means of this writ petition, seeks to quash the order dated 02.01.2015 passed in O.G.L.S Revision
No.2 of 2014 under Annexure-9, by which opposite party no.2-Collector, Khurdha has cancelled the
lease sanctioned in favour of // 2 // the petitioner as per Section 7-A(3) of the Odisha Government
Land Settlement (Amendment) Act, 2013.
2. The factual matrix of the case, in brief, is that the petitioner had filed an application in prescribed
format under the Orissa Government Land Settlement Act, 1962, (hereinafter to be referred in short
as "OGLS Act, 1962") before the competent authority on 15.04.1976 for grant of lease of a piece of
land measuring Ac.4.000 dec. out of plot no.910/1126 under khata no.293 in Mouza-Nayakote for
agriculture purpose. In pursuance thereof, W.L. Case No.98 of 1976 was instituted and a notice was
published by the Tahasildar, Khurda inviting objections from the general public. A notice was also
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83994504/ 1
Hadu Paltasingh vs State Of Orissa & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 14 July, 2023
sent to the concerned Gram Panchayat, i.e., Olasingha G.P., where the land is situated, which was
received by the then Sarapanch, Olasingha G.P. Thereafter, the Tahasildar, Khurda also directed the
Revenue Inspector to cause an enquiry regarding the statements made by the petitioner in his
application form. In response thereto, the R.I. enquired into the matter, as per provisions of // 3 //
the OGLS Act, 1962 and the OGLS Rules, 1974 about the eligibility of the petitioner regarding his
landed property, income, etc., and submitted his report before the Tahasildar for settlement of the
land. After due enquiry and after receipt of the report from the Panchayat, following due procedure
as laid down in the statute, the Tahasildar leased out one acre of land in favour of the petitioner,
vide order dated 26.08.1978.
2.1 As per the order of the Tahasildar, the R.I. went to the spot and after necessary measurement,
handed over possession of the land to the petitioner. The Tahasildar also issued Form 'K' in favour
of the petitioner. Since then the petitioner is in peaceful possession of the land till date.
2.2 While the matter stood thus, on the report of opposite party no.3-Sub-Collector, Khurdha,
opposite party no.2-Collector, Khurda initiated a proceeding under Section 7-A(3) of OGLS
(Amendment) Act, 2013 by instituting OGLS Revision No.2 of 2014 and issued a show-cause notice
dated 12.08.2014 to the // 4 // petitioner alleging that the land has been settled in his favour under
a mistake of fact and on account of material irregularity of procedure. 2.3 After receiving the
show-cause notice, the petitioner filed his show-cause reply dated 09.09.2014 (Annexure-8) in
OGLS Revision No.2 of 2014 annexing all the documents, which he had received under the Right to
Information Act, 2005, denying and disputing all the allegations. It was specifically submitted by the
petitioner that before granting lease in his favour, the provisions of the OGLS Act, 1962 and the
OGLS Rules, 1974 had been properly followed and there was no irregularity in granting lease in his
favour. It was further stated that the findings given by the Sub- Collector in his enquiry report,
which formed the basis for initiation of the revision proceeding, have no basis at all and perverse, for
which dismissal of the revision case was prayed.
2.4 Opposite party no.2-Collector, Khurdha, without verifying the documents filed by the petitioner
and without considering the objection filed by the // 5 // petitioner and without taking into account
the material evidences available on record in their proper perspective, passed the impugned order
dated 02.01.2015 in OGLS Revision No.2 of 2014, whereby the lease sanctioned in favour of the
petitioner was cancelled. It is also alleged that no specific finding with regard to his objection was
given by the revisional authority. Hence, this writ petition.
3. Mr. S. Senapati, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently contended that since the
land in question was settled in favour of the petitioner in the year 1978, the OGLS (Amendment)
Act, 2013 is not applicable to the case of the petitioner. Thus, initiation of the revision proceeding
under Section 7- A(3) of the OGLS Act, 1962 as per said amendment after 36 years of settlement of
the land is not maintainable in the eye of law. It is contended that if the statute prescribes a mode to
do in a particular manner, without assigning any reason and without following due procedure, the
action taken by opposite party no.2-Collector, Khurda cancelling the lease // 6 // granted in favour
of the petitioner cannot be sustained in the eye of law, as he had got the lease settled in his favour by
following due procedure. It is further contended that though the petitioner had taken a specific plea
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83994504/ 2
Hadu Paltasingh vs State Of Orissa & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 14 July, 2023
in his application and also advanced argument at the time of hearing, the same was not taken into
consideration nor any finding has been recorded to that effect by the Collector, Khrdha, while
passing the impugned order dated 02.01.2015 in OGLS Revision No.2 of 2014. Thereby, the said
order cannot be sustained in the eye of law, being without jurisdiction, and is liable to be quashed.
The action of the Collector, Khurdha is hit by limitation under Section 7A(3) of the OGLS Act, 1962.
To substantiate his contentions, he has relied upon Purna Ch. Pradhan v. State of Orissa & Ors,
2006(I) OLR 184; Nirmal Kumar Pattnaik v. State of Orissa & Ors., 2012(Supp.-II) OLR 450 and
Bata Krushna Nayak v. State of Orissa & three Ors.,2010 (I) OLR 723.
4. Mr. H.M. Dhal, learned Addl. Government Advocate appearing for the opposite parties contended
// 7 // that since there were irregularities in the settlement of land in favour of the petitioner, the
same having been detected on perusal of the records and report of the Sub-Collector, Khurdha, the
Collector, Khurdha issued notice to the petitioner by initiating OGLS Revision No.2 of 2014.
Thereby, after giving opportunity of hearing to the petitioner, the Collector, Khurdha passed the
impugned order dated 02.01.2015 in OGLS Revision No.2 of 2014 cancelling the lease sanctioned in
favour of the petitioner as per Section 7- A(3) of the OGLS (Amendment) Act, 2013. Therefore, the
Collector, Khurdha has not committed any illegality or irregularity in passing the impugned order so
as to cause interference by this Court at this stage.
5. This Court heard Mr. S. Senapati, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. H.M.
Dhal, learned Addl. Government Advocate appearing for the State-opposite parties in hybrid mode.
Pleadings have been exchanged between the parties and with the consent of learned counsel for the
parties, the writ // 8 // petition is being disposed of finally at the stage of admission.
6. Before delving into the issue involved in this case, the relevant provisions of Section 7-A(3) of the
OGLS Act, 1962, as they existed prior to amendment vide the OGLS (Amendment) Act, 2013, are
reproduced herein below:-
"The Collector may, of his own motion or otherwise, call for and examine the records
of any proceeding in which any authority, subordinate to it has passed an order under
this Act for the purpose of satisfying himself that any such order was not passed
under a mistake of fact or owing to a fraud or misrepresentation or on account of any
material irregularity of procedure and may pass such order thereon as he thinks fit.
Provided that no order shall be passed under this sub-section unless the person
affected by the proposed order has been given a reasonable opportunity of being
heard in the matter.
Provided further that no proceeding under this sub-section shall be initiated after the
expiry of fourteen years from the date of the order."
7. As per the second proviso to Section 7-A(3), no proceeding under this sub-section shall be
initiated after the expiry of fourteen years from the date of the order. But the aforesaid provisions by
way of amendment have been substituted on 13.11.2013. By // 9 // virtue of amendment, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83994504/ 3
Hadu Paltasingh vs State Of Orissa & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 14 July, 2023
limitation period of 14 years, as per second proviso to Section 7A(3), has been removed. But fact
remains, initiation of cancellation proceeding of lease granted vide W.L. Lease Case No.98 of 1976
was made on 08.08.2014 by issuing notice to the petitioner and by that time 14 years from the date
of settlement of the land in favour of the petitioner had expired. More so, the notice does not contain
anything with regard to any irregularity committed in the allotment of land in favour of the
petitioner. In absence of any specific mention with regard to the same in the notice nor in order
dated 08.08.2014 directing for issue of notice, the impugned action taken under Section 7A(3) of the
OGLS Act, 1962 cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
8. Apart from the same, the petitioner had specifically pleaded in paragraph-7 of his objection to the
following effect:-
"7. That the second proviso to Sub-Section-(3) of Section-7-A of O.G.L.S. Act,
specifically provides that no proceeding under the said section shall be initiated after
expiry of 14 years from the date of order. It is also well settled principle of law that
the authority has no jurisdiction to initiate any proceeding U/s.7-A(3) of O.G.L.S.
Act, after // 10 // expiry of 14 years and initiation of any Revision proceeding
U/s.7-A(3) of O.G.L.S. Act, 1962 after expiry of 14 years from the date of order of
settlement of land is not maintainable in the eye of law. It is humbly submitted that
as the land in question has been settled in the year 1978, the amendment act is not
applicable to the case of the applicant/Opp. Party. Therefore, as the present revision
proceeding U/s.7-A(3) of O.G.L.S. Act, 1962 has been initiated after about 36 years of
settlement of land, it is not maintainable in the eye of law and the same is liable to be
dropped/dismissed."
Referring to such averment, learned counsel for the petitioner advanced his argument, but on
perusal of the order impugned, it would be apparent that no finding to that effect has been recorded
nor has any discussion been made in regard to the same therein. The Collector, Khurdha is duty
bound to answer the argument advanced on behalf of the petitioner, when the question of law is
involved and more so when such pleadings are available in the objection filed by the petitioner. 8.1
In this connection it is worthwhile to notice the principles of exercise of power with reference to
limitation provided under the statute as laid down in various judgments.
// 11 // It has been succinctly laid down by the Supreme Court of India in Thirumalai Chemicals Ltd.
v. Union of India, (2011) 6 SCC 739 as follows:
"Limitation provisions, therefore, can be procedural in the context of one set of facts
but substantive in the context of different set of facts because rights can accrue to
both the parties. In such a situation, test is to see whether the statute, if applied
retrospectively to a particular type of case, would impair existing rights and
obligations. An accrued right to plead a time bar, which is acquired after the lapse of
the statutory period, is nevertheless a right, even though it arises under an Act which
is procedural and a right which is not to be taken away pleading retrospective
operation unless a contrary intention is discernible from the statute Therefore, unless
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83994504/ 4
Hadu Paltasingh vs State Of Orissa & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 14 July, 2023
the language clearly manifests in express terms or by necessary implication, a
contrary intention a statute divesting vested rights is to be construed as prospective.
A statute, merely procedural is to be construed as retrospective and a statute while
procedural in nature affects vested rights adversely is to be construed as prospective."
It is not a case for enforcement of right but it is a case of exercise of power by the authority
designated under the relevant statute. When the officer has taken recourse to the proceedings and
exercised his power, it has to be in accord with the provisions at the time the authority under the
statute seeks to exercise power conferred by the statute. It goes without saying that such exercise of
power has to be in accordance with the conditions under which such power can be exercised.
// 12 // There is no vested right in any authority to exercise powers in future. In State of UP v.
Aryaverth Chawl Udyog, (2015) 17 SCC 324 the Supreme Court of India referring to S.C. Prashar v.
Vasantsen Dwarkadas, (1964) 1 SCR 29, observed as follows:
"35. It would be relevant here to notice the observations of the Constitution Bench of
this Court in S.C. Prashar Vrs.
VasantsenDwarkadas, (1964) 1 SCR 29 = (1963) 49 ITR 1. Kapur, J., in a separate
judgment, quoting the Privy Council in Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. Ltd.Vrs. ITC,
(1926-27) 54 IA 421 = 1927 SCC OnLine PC 76 has brought home the point that if
after change in law, the period of time prescribed for action by the Tax Authorities
has already expired, then subsequent change in the law does not make it so
retrospective in its effect as to revive the power of the Tax Authority to take action
under the new law. The relevant observations are as follows: [S.C. PrasharVrs.
VasantsenDwarkadas, (1964) 1 SCR 29 = (1963) 49 ITR 1, SCR pp. 73-
74] "*** In Delhi Cloth & General Mills Co. Ltd.Vrs. ITC, (1926-27) 54 IA 421 = 1927 SCC OnLine PC
76, it was held that no appeal lay against the decision of a High Court if it was given before appeals
to the Privy Council were provided for. In that connection Lord Blanesburgh observed at p. 425: (IA
p. 425 = SCC OnLine PC) '*** their Lordships can have no doubt that provisions which, if applied
retrospectively, would deprive of their existing finality orders which, when the statute came into
force, were final are provisions which touch existing rights.' In all these cases the Privy Council
proceeded on the principle that if the right of action had become barred according to the law of
limitation in force, subsequent enlargement of the period of time does not revive the remedy to
enforce the rights already // 13 // barred. The same principle, in my opinion, would apply to the
periods specified in Section 34 of the Act and if the period prescribed for taking action had already
expired, subsequent change in the law does not make it so retrospective in its effect as to revive the
power of an Income Tax Officer to take action under the new law. It is one of the canons of
construction of statute of limitation that in the absence of express words, a necessary intendment,
no change in the period of limitation can revive the right to sue which has become barred nor can it
impair the immunity from any action which had become final after the lapse of a specified period of
time."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83994504/ 5
Hadu Paltasingh vs State Of Orissa & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 14 July, 2023
When a statute confers any power on a statutory authority, howsoever wide the discretion may be, it
should be exercised with circumspection; such power must not smack arbitrariness, mechanical
application of mind and backed by whims and caprice. In such cases, the power so exercised cannot
be said to withstand the test of judicial scrutiny.
In the present case, as is apparent from the record, the Collector, Khurdha initiated proceeding on
08.08.2014 which is around 36 years after from the date of order of the Tashasildar, i.e.,
26.08.1978, is flagrant violation of the provisions ignoring purport of the second proviso to Section
7A(3) of the OGLS Act, as // 14 // it stood at the relevant point of time. In such view of the matter,
the exercise of power of revision is beyond the period stipulated under the second proviso to Section
7A(3) of the OGLS Act.
8.2. Reliance was placed on behalf of the petitioner on Purna Ch. Pradhan (supra), wherein this
Court took note of the fact that in case fraud committed on the authority for obtaining a lease, the
date of detection of such fraud would be the relevant date for calculation of the period of limitation.
The second proviso to Section-7-A(3) of the OGLS Act, 1962 provides that no proceeding under the
said Section shall be initiated after expiry of 14 years from the date of order. Therefore, the initiation
of the proceeding against the petitioner by the authority is wholly without jurisdiction.
8.3. In Bata Krushna Nayak (supra), this Court also held that the original lease was granted long
back in 1974 whereas the order of the revisional authority was passed in 1998, i.e. about 24 years
after the grant of lease. Therefore, under the second proviso to Section-
// 15 // 7-A(3), no proceeding can be initiated after expiry of fourteen years from the date of the
order granting lease. 8.4. In Nirmal Kumar Pattanaik (supra), this Court held that suo motu lease
revision initiated under Section 7-A(3) of the OGLS Act, 1962 after a lapse of 25 years is without
jurisdiction.
9. No doubt, there was no question of any fraud or misrepresentation on the part of the petitioner
for settlement of land in his favour nor is it the case of the opposite parties that the petitioner had
committed any fraud or misrepresentation in settling the land in his favour. Law is well settled that
fraud vitiates every solemn action and thereby the entire proceeding. As such, in absence of any
allegation of fraud on the part of the petitioner and misrepresentation by the petitioner, the
impugned order cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
10. As it appears, the Collector, Khurdha, on perusal of the connected records received from the
Tahasildar and the report of the Sub-Collector, Khurdha, found irregularities. The relevant part of
the // 16 // order impugned containing the findings of the Collector, Khurdha to the above effect are
extracted hereunder:-
"1) No proper enquiries were conducted about the eligibility and availability of the
land in the name of the lessee and family members.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83994504/ 6
Hadu Paltasingh vs State Of Orissa & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 14 July, 2023
2) Priority has not been maintained as per Section 3(2) of the Act where it has been
stipulated that 70% of the land should be settled in favour of the STs & SCs.
3) Enquiry has also not been conducted properly about the income of the lessee and
her wife as per the section 5(3) of the rules.
4) Proclamation has not been made as per the rules 5(4) by beat of drum in village as
well as in the panchayat.
5) The most and vital point is that an area of Ac 0.450 dec of land also been
sanctioned in the name of the wife of the lessee Kamala Dei from the same plot vide
the W.L. case no.1133/78-79 in the same manner and same procedure."
From the above, it can be safely inferred that, while passing order dated 08.08.2014 for issuing
notice to the petitioner, nothing was pointed out as to what irregularities were committed and, as
such, irregularities have been taken note of by the Collector, Khurdha on perusal of the records and
report of the Sub-Collector, Khurdha, that too without giving opportunity of hearing to the
petitioner. The Collector, without independent application of mind, simply directed to issue notice
under Section 7A(3) of the OGLS Act, 1962 based on review note of Sub-Collector.
// 17 //
11. The first proviso to Section 7A(3) makes it clear that no order shall be passed under this sub-
section unless the person affected by the proposed order has been given a reasonable opportunity of
being heard in the matter. Therefore, if some irregularities were pointed out on perusal of the
records, it was incumbent upon the Collector, Khurdha to point out the same to the petitioner by
giving opportunity of hearing. Without doing so, the finding arrived at by the Collector, Khurdha,
that irregularities were committed in the matter of settlement of the land in favour of the petitioner,
cannot be sustained in the eye of law. Therefore, the impugned order has been passed without
complying with the principles of natural justice. 11.1. The soul of natural justice is 'fair play in
action'.
In HK (An Infant) in re, 1967 1 All ER 226 (DC), Lord Parker, CJU, preferred to describe natural
justice as 'a duty to act fairly'.
In Fairmount Investments Ltd. V. Secy of State for Environment, 1976 2 ALL ER 865 (HL), Lord //
18 // Russel of Killowen somewhat picturesquely described natural justice as 'a fair crack of the
whip'.
In R. v. Secy. Of State for Home Affairs, ex p. Hosenball, Geoffrey Lane, LJ, 1977 3 All ER 452 (DC &
CA), preferred the homely phrase 'common fairness' in defining natural justice.
Natural justice, another name of which sense justice, is the name of those principles which
constitute the minimum requirement of justice and without adherence to which justice would be a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83994504/ 7
Hadu Paltasingh vs State Of Orissa & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 14 July, 2023
travesty. Natural justice accordingly stands for that "fundamental quality of fairness which being
adopted, justice not only be done but also appears to be done".
12. In Swadeshi Cotton Mills v. Union of India, AIR 1981 SC 818, the meaning of natural justice
came up for consideration and the apex Court held as follows:-
"The phase is not capable of a static and precise definition. It cannot be imprisoned
in the straight-jacket of cast-iron formula. Historically, "natural justice" has been
used in a way, "which implies the existence of moral principles of self evident and
unarguable truth", "natural justice" by Paul Jackson, 2nd Ed. Page-1, In course of
time, judges nurtured in the traditions of British jurisprudence, often invoked it in
conjunction with a reference to // 19 // "equity and good conscience". Legal experts
of earlier generations did not draw any distinction between "natural justice" and
"natural law". "Natural justice" was considered as "that part of natural law which
relates to the administration of justice".
13. In Bhagwan v. Ramchand, AIR 1965 SC 1767, the apex Court held that the rule of law demands
that the power to determine questions affecting rights of citizens would impose the limitation that
the power should be exercised in conformity with the principles of natural justice.
14. In Union of India v. Mohd. Ramzan Khan, AIR 1991 SC 471 : (1991) 1 SCC 588, the Three-Judge
Bench of the apex Court clarified that non-furnishing of the report would amount to violation of the
rules of natural justice and make the final order liable to challenge.
15. The aforesaid question had ultimately came up for consideration before a Constitutional Bench
in the case of Managing Director, ECIL v. B. Karunakar, AIR 1994 SC 1074 : (1993) 4 SCC 727,
wherein relying upon the Five-Judge Bench view in Union of India v.
// 20 // Tulsiram Patel, AIR 1987 SC 1919 : (1986) 3 SCC 35, the apex Court considered the question
whether after Forty-second Amendment the charged employee was entitled to demand a second
opportunity and came to the conclusion that whatever right such an employee had of a second
opportunity to show cause against the proposed punishment had been taken away by the
Forty-second Amendment and there was no provisions of law under which a Government servant
could claim that right. But in B. Karunakar (supra), the apex Court explained that in Tulsiram Patel
(supra) the Court had not dealt with the procedure to be followed by the disciplinary authority after
the inquiry officer's report is received by it. The question whether the delinquent employee should
be heard by the disciplinary authority to prove his innocence of the charges levelled against him
when they were held to have been proved by the enquiry officer, although he need not be heard on
the question of the proposed penalty, was neither raised nor answered in Tulsiram Patel (supra).
The Constitution Bench in B. Karunakar (supra) approved the approach taken in Union of India &
Ors. v. E. Bashyan, AIR // 21 // 1988 SC 1000 and the decision in Mohd. Ramzan Khan (supra) to
the effect that whenever the enquiry officer is other than the disciplinary authority and the report of
the enquiry officer held the employee guilty of all or any of the charges with proposal for any
punishment or not, the delinquent employee was entitled to a copy of the report to enable him to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83994504/ 8
Hadu Paltasingh vs State Of Orissa & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 14 July, 2023
make a representation to the disciplinary authority against it and the non-furnishing of the report
amounted to violation of the principles of natural justice. Though the aforementioned matter is
decided in the context of a service dispute, the underlying principle is very much applicable so far as
compliance of the principle of natural justice is concerned.
16. In view of the discussions made above, this Court is of the considered view that very initiation of
the proceedings under Section 7A(3) of the OGLS Act by the Collector, Khurdha in OGLS Revision
No.2 of 2014, without specifying the details of the irregularities said to have been committed in the
matter of settlement of the land in favour of the petitioner, amounts to non-
// 22 // compliance of the principles of natural justice and the action taken in the said revision case
is barred by limitation provided under second proviso to Section 7A(3). Therefore, the order dated
02.01.2015 passed by the Collector, Khurdha in OGLS Revision No.2 of 2014 cancelling the lease
sanctioned in favour of the petitioner as per Section 7A(3) of the OGLS (Amendment) Act, 2013,
having been passed after a long lapse of 36 years, cannot be sustained in the eye of law. Accordingly,
the order impugned is liable to be quashed and is hereby quashed.
17. In the result, the writ petition stands allowed, but, however, under the circumstances of the case
there shall be no order as to costs.
(DR. B.R. SARANGI)
JUDGE
M.S. RAMAN, J. I agree.
JUDGE
Date: 17-Jul-2023 14:34:01 Orissa High Court, Cuttack The 14th July, 2023, Alok
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83994504/ 9
