Hahnemann Homeopathic Medical College ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 March, 2023
Hahnemann Homeopathic Medical College ... vs The State Of
Madhya Pradesh on 2 March, 2023
Author: Sheel Nagu
Bench: Sheel Nagu
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
AT JABALPUR
WP No. 5626 of 2021
(HAHNEMANN HOMEOPATHIC MEDICAL COLLEGE AND HOSPITAL BHOPAL AND OTHERS Vs THE
STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH AND OTHERS)
Dated : 02-03-2023
Shri Naman Nagrath - Senior Advocate with Shri Nikhil Tiwari -
Advocate for the petitioners.
Shri Vikram Singh - Advocate for the Union of India.
Shri Amit Seth - Deputy Government Advocate for the State.
Shri Aditya Sanghi - Advocate for CCIL.
Shri Aditya Singh Rajpur - Advocate for M.C.H.
Matter is partly heard.
In the meanwhile, the Union of India is directed to ensure filing of reply.
After hearing arguments partly, this court is of the considered view that it
would be appropriate for proper adjudication of the issue to hear National
Testing Agency which conducts NEET on the following aspects :-
1. The number of candidates who have secured minimum 50
percentile for unreserved, 40 percentile for reserved and 45 percentile
for handicapped in the last three years.
2. The number of persons who have secured the aforesaid
minimum marks have been given admissions in different colleges
imparting education in Homeopathy as well as in Indian System of
Medicine.
Signature Not Verified
State counsel is also directed to submit the following data :-
SAN
Digitally signed by VAIBHAV YEOLEKAR
Date: 2023.03.03 11:17:21 IST 1. The number of students who secured minimum
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131736819/ 1
Hahnemann Homeopathic Medical College ... vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 2 March, 2023
percentile in NEET and were called for counselling and
admitted to different colleges of Homeopathy and of
Indian System of Medicine in the State of M.P. in the last
three academic years (including the current academic
year).
2. How many seats remained vacant in all the
colleges of the State of M.P. in the last three academic
years (including the current academic year).
3. Number of seats filled up by way of interim
arrangement under court orders.
Registry is directed to reflect the name of Shri Vikram Singh in the cause
list as counsel appearing for the Union of India and its functionaries and who
has accepted advance notice on behalf of the NTA.
Shri Vikram Singh is directed to furnish aforesaid information on affidavit
before the next date of hearing.
In case, the National Testing Agency has not been impleaded as
respondent, needful be done by the petitioner, for which no application shall be
required.
Let the needful, if required, take place within three working days. List this case on 14/03/2023.
(SHEEL NAGU) (VIVEK AGARWAL)
JUDGE JUDGE
vy
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131736819/ 2
