Hanmanthraya S/O Ramanna Havaldar vs State Of Karnataka And Ors on 28 September, 2020
Hanmanthraya S/O Ramanna Havaldar vs State Of Karnataka
And Ors on 28 September, 2020
Author: Nataraj Rangaswamy
Bench: Nataraj Rangaswamy
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
KALABURAGI BENCH
DATED THIS THE 28th DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2020
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE NATARAJ RANGASWAMY
WRIT PETITION No.200303/2016 (LB-ELE)
Between:
Hanmanthraya
S/o Ramanna Havaldar
Aged about 63 Years
Occ: Retired Government Service
President of Sri Maharshi Valmiki Nayak
Sangha, Jewargi
Taluk: Jewargi, Dist: Kalaburagi
R/o C/o Office of the
Sri Maharshi Valmiki Nayak
Sangha, Jewargi
... Petitioner
(By Sri Ameet Kumar Deshpande, Advocate)
And:
1. State of Karnataka
Represented by its Principal Secretary
Department of Panchayatraj & Development
M.S. Building, Bangalore - 560 001
2. The Deputy Commissioner
Kalaburagi - 585 102
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2624159/ 1
Hanmanthraya S/O Ramanna Havaldar vs State Of Karnataka And Ors on 28 September, 2020
3. The Karnataka State Election Commission
Cunningham Road
Bangalore - 560 052
... Respondents
(Sri Shivakumar R. Tengli, AGA for R1 & R2;
Sri Veeranagouda Malipatil, Advocate for
Sri P.S. Malipatil, Advocate for R3)
This Writ Petition is filed under Articles 226 & 227 of
the Constitution of India, praying to quash the notification
dated 9.11.2015 in No. published in the
Karnataka Special Gazette, Part-3 No.1376 dated
11.11.2015 insofar as the number of seats reserved for the
persons belonging to Scheduled Tribe and the number of
seats reserved for the persons belonging to Scheduled
Caste in Kalaburagi Zilla Panchayat shown at Sl.No.27 of
the notification is concerned, a copy of which is at
Annexure-B.
This petition having been heard, reserved for orders
on 01.09.2020 and coming on for pronouncement of order
this day, the Court made the following:-
ORDER
A notification under Section 162 of the Karnataka Gram Swaraj and Panchayat Raj Act, 1993
(henceforth referred to as 'the Act of 1993') reserving seats to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in Zilla Panchayats in the State of Karnataka, was issued by the respondent No.3 on
09-11-2015 which was published in the Karnataka State Gazette on 11-11-2015. The petitioner herein
is aggrieved by the reservation of one seat to Scheduled Tribes and 13 seats to Scheduled Castes out
of the total 47 seats in Kalaburagi Zilla Panchayat.
2. The petitioner contends that he being a President of Sri Maharshi Valmiki Nayak Sangha
submitted a representation dated 03-12-2015 wherein he claimed that as per the census of 2001, the
population of Scheduled Tribes in Kalaburagi District was 1,54,000 which was shown as 11299. He
claimed that as per the reservation provided for Scheduled Tribes in Zilla Panchayats 2 seats out of
47 seats were to be reserved for Scheduled Tribes but only one seat was reserved. Thus, he sought to
rectify this anomaly. This representation was in itself vague and led one farther into the woods
rather than out. However, thankfully the counsel for the petitioner has assimilated the facts which is
summarised thus.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2624159/ 2
Hanmanthraya S/O Ramanna Havaldar vs State Of Karnataka And Ors on 28 September, 2020
3. As per the census of 2011, the total population of the Kalaburagi District was 25,66,326 of which,
the total population of Scheduled Tribes was 65259 and constituted 2.54428% of the total
population. Thus the number of seats in the Zilla Panchayat to be reserved for Scheduled Tribes
would be 2.54428% of total number of seats (47) which corresponds to 1.19 seats and has to be
rounded off to 2. It is stated that the total population of Scheduled Castes was 6,48,782 which
constituted 25.28057% and thus the pro rata seats to be reserved for Scheduled Castes was 11.18%
which could be rounded off to 12. It is thus contended that instead of the above, only one seat was
reserved for Scheduled Tribes and 13 seats were reserved for Scheduled Castes in terms of the
notification dated 09-11-2015. The case of the petitioner can be summarised by the following table:
Total SC ST Percentage No of Total
Population Population Population to Total seats to Seats
Population be Reserved
A B C D reserved
C x 100/A
4. The petitioner thus aggrieved by the
notification dated 09-11-2015 has filed this writ petition seeking the following reliefs:
" Quash the notification dated 09-11-2015 bearing No. published in the Karnataka
Special Gazette, Part-3 No.1376 dated 11-11-2015 insofar as the number of seats
reserved for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Tribe and the number of seats
reserved for the persons belonging to Scheduled Caste in Kalaburagi Zilla Panchayat
shown at Sl.No.27 of the notification is concerned, a copy of which is at Annexure- B."
5. The claim of the petitioner is based on the words "the same proportion to the total number of
seats to be filled by direct election in the Zilla Panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes
in the district or of the Scheduled Tribes in the district bears to the total population of the district"
(underlining by Court) appearing in Section 162 of the Karnataka Gram Swaraj and Panchayat Raj
Act, 1993. The learned counsel relied on the Judgment of Apex Court in Ganesh Sukhdeo Gurule vs
Tahsildar, Sinnar and Others reported in 2019 (3) SCC 211 that a decimal in the context of no
confidence motion should be read as a whole and contended that the same analogy has to be
adopted in the present case and seats reserved to Scheduled Tribes in Kalaburagi Zilla Panchayat
has to be treated as 2 though the proportionate seats is 1.19.
6. The respondent No.3 has filed its objections contending that the total rural population and the
corresponding Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes population in the rural areas has to be taken
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2624159/ 3
Hanmanthraya S/O Ramanna Havaldar vs State Of Karnataka And Ors on 28 September, 2020
for the purpose of determining the proportion of reservation since a Zilla Panchayat is constituted
only for the rural areas in view of Section 158 of the Act of 1993 which provides for the
establishment of Zilla Panchayat over the area excluding the smaller urban area/Municipal
Corporation/ Town Panchayat or an Industrial Township. It is stated that the total rural population
of the Zilla Panchayat area of Kalaburagi is 1730775 and the total seats is 47. The Rural Scheduled
Casts population is 489697 which if divided by 13 seats reserved for them would yield 37669
population which would be represented by one seat. Since the Scheduled Tribes population is 50074
(which is less than 1.5 times of 37669 of Scheduled Castes population), only one seat was reserved
for Scheduled Tribes. This seems to be based on Section 160 of the Act of 1993 which states that:
"the number of members to be elected from each taluk being fixed by the State
Election Commission in accordance with the scale of one member for every
population between thirty five thousand and forty-five thousand."
7. This Court in terms of the Order dated 27-01-2016 had ordered that the elections to the
Kalaburagi Zilla Panchayat shall be subject to the result of this writ petition. Since the term of the
Zilla Panchayat would be five years which is yet to complete, this writ petition has not become
infructuous and the relief sought for could still be considered on merits.
8. Heard Sri Ameet Kumar Deshpande, counsel for the petitioner, the Additional Government
Advocate for the respondent Nos.1 and 2 and Sri P. S. Malipatil, counsel for respondent No.3.
9. The controversy in this case is:
Whether for the purposes of Section 162 of the Act of 1993, the population of the
entire district and the population of Scheduled Castes and Schedules Tribes in the
district has to be taken into account or the population residing within the area of the
Zilla Panchayat?
10. Part IX of the Constitution of India heralded the decentralisation of administration by
establishment of local self governing institutions at the Village, Taluk and District levels. The
controversy on hand can best be answered by referring to the relevant provisions of the Constitution
of India and the Act of 1993 relating to the meaning of a District, Zilla Panchayat area,
establishment, composition of Zilla Panchayat, the territorial limits of the Zilla Panchayat, the
Electoral roll etc.
11. Article 243-B provides for the constitution of three tier Panchayats at the village, intermediate
and District levels and the word "District" is defined as a district in a State under Article 243(a) and
as a revenue district under Section 2(10) of the Act of 1993. Article 243(e) of the Constitution of
India defines a "Panchayat area" as the territorial area of a Panchayat while Sub Section (43) of
Section 2 of the Act of 1993 defines "Zilla Panchayat" as the Zilla Panchayat established under that
Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2624159/ 4
Hanmanthraya S/O Ramanna Havaldar vs State Of Karnataka And Ors on 28 September, 2020
12. Article 243-C of the Constitution of India holds a key answer to the question that has confronted
this Court in this writ petition and is extracted below:
"243-C. Composition of Panchayats.--(1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, the Legislature of a
State may, by law, make provisions with respect to the composition of Panchayats:
Provided that the ratio between the population of the territorial area of a Panchayat
at any level and the number of seats in such Panchayat to be filled by election shall,
so far as practicable, be the same throughout the State.
(2) All the seats in a Panchayat shall be filled by persons chosen by direct election
from territorial constituencies in the Panchayat area and, for this purpose, each
Panchayat area shall be divided into territorial constituencies in such manner that
the ratio between the population of each constituency and the number of seats
allotted to it shall, so far as practicable, be the same throughout the Panchayat area".
(underlining by Court)
13. This makes it clear that for the division of territorial constituencies of a Zilla Panchayat, it is the
ratio of the seats to the total population within the territorial area of the Panchayat that has to be
taken into account.
14. Article 243-D of the Constitution of India is the focal provision which deals with the reservation
of seats and this writ petition has to be tested on the anvil of this provision, which is extracted
below:
"243-D. Reservation of seats.-- (1) Seats shall be reserved for--
(a) the Scheduled Castes; and
(b) the Scheduled Tribes, in every Panchayat and the number of seats so reserved
shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of seats to be
filled by direct election in that Panchayat as the population of the Scheduled Castes in
that Panchayat area or of the Scheduled Tribes in that Panchayat area bears to the
total population of that area (underlining by Court) and such seats may be allotted by
rotation to different constituencies in a Panchayat.
(2) XXXXX (3) XXXXX (4) The offices of the Chairpersons in the Panchayats at the
village or any other level shall be reserved for the Scheduled Castes, the Scheduled
Tribes and women in such manner as the Legislature of a State may, by law, provide:
Provided that the number of offices of Chairpersons reserved for the Scheduled
Castes and the Scheduled Tribes in the Panchayats at each level in any State shall
bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion to the total number of such offices in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2624159/ 5
Hanmanthraya S/O Ramanna Havaldar vs State Of Karnataka And Ors on 28 September, 2020
the Panchayats at each level as the population of the Scheduled Castes in the State or
of the Scheduled Tribes in the State bears to the total population of the State:
Provided further that not less than one-third of the total number of offices of
Chairpersons in the Panchayats at each level shall be reserved for women:
Provided also that the number of offices reserved under this clause shall be allotted
by rotation to different Panchayats at each level.
(5) XXXXX (6) XXXXX"
15. Thus, the reservation of seats to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the Zilla Panchayat is
based on the proportionate ratio of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to the total population in
the Panchayat area. However, reservation of Chairpersons in the Zilla Panchayat is based on the
proportionate ratio of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes to the total population in the State.
16. Section 158 of the Act of 1993 provides for the constitution of Zilla Panchayat which is the pivotal
provision and is extracted below:
"Section 158 - Establishment of Zilla Panchayat and its incorporation (1) There shall
be constituted for each district a Zilla Panchayat having jurisdiction over the entire
district excluding such portions of the district as are included in a smaller urban area
or are under the authority of a Municipal Corporation, a Town Panchayat or an
Industrial Township (underlining by Court) constituted under any law for the time
being in force:
Provided that a Zilla Panchayat may have its office in any area comprised within the
excluded portion of the district and in such area may exercise its powers and
functions over schools and other institutions under its control or management.
(2) Every Zilla Panchayat shall be a body corporate by the name of
"......................................... Zilla Panchayat"
shall have perpetual succession and a common seal and subject to such restrictions as are imposed
by or under this or any other enactment, shall be vested with the capacity of suing or being sued in
its corporate name, of acquiring, holding and transferring property movable or immovable, whether
without or within the limits of the area over which it has authority of entering into contracts and of
doing all things, necessary, proper or expedient for the purpose for which it is constituted."
17. Thus, the territorial limits of a Zilla Panchayat in a District in a State would invariably mean such
area excluding the smaller urban area/Municipal area/ Industrial township.
18. Section 162 of the Act of 1993 which appears to be the cause for the case is extracted below:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2624159/ 6
Hanmanthraya S/O Ramanna Havaldar vs State Of Karnataka And Ors on 28 September, 2020
"Section 162 - Reservation of seats (1) Seats shall be reserved by the State Election
Commission in the Zilla Panchayat, -
(a) for Scheduled Castes; and
(b) for the Scheduled Tribes;
and number of seats so reserved shall bear, as nearly as may be, the same proportion
to the total number of seats to be filled by direct election in the Zilla Panchayat as the
population of the Scheduled Castes in the district or of the Scheduled Tribes in the
district bears to the total population of the district:
(underlining by Court) Provided that at least one seat each shall be reserved in a Zilla
Panchayat for the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes and the Scheduled
Tribes.
(2) Such number of seats which shall, as nearly as may be one third of the total
number of seats in a Zilla Panchayat shall be reserved by the State Election
Commission for persons belonging to the Backward Classes.
Provided that out of the seats reserved under this sub-section, eighty per cent of the total number of
such seats shall be reserved by the State Election Commission for the persons falling under category
'A' and the remaining twenty per cent of the seats shall be reserved by the State Election
Commission for the persons falling under category 'B'.
(3) Not less than one third of the seats reserved for each category of persons belonging to the
Scheduled Castes, Scheduled Tribes and Backward Classes and those of the non-reserved seats in
the Zilla Panchayat shall be reserved by the State Election Commission for women:
Provided that the seats reserved under sub-sections (1), (2) and (3) shall be allotted
by rotation to different constituencies in the district:
Provided further that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to prevent
the persons belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes or Backward
Classes or women for whom seats have been reserved in a Zilla Panchayat from
standing for election to the non-reserved seats in such Zilla Panchayat."
19. Thus, while Article 243-D of the Constitution of India mandated reservation based on population
within the Panchayat area, Section 162 deviated and mandated reservation based on population
within the District. It is this that the petitioner has leveraged by contending that a "District" is
defined under Section 2 (10) of the Act of 1993 as a revenue district. He therefore contends that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2624159/ 7
Hanmanthraya S/O Ramanna Havaldar vs State Of Karnataka And Ors on 28 September, 2020
intendment of designing Section 162 of the Act of 1993 in the manner it is, is to ensure a uniform
reservation across all Zilla Panchayath in the State of Karnataka.
20. It is relevant to note that under Section 163 of the Act of 1993, the respondent No.3 is entitled to
divide the area within the jurisdiction of every Panchayat, for the purpose of election to such Zilla
Panchayat into as many single member constituencies as the number of members required to be
elected under Section 160 of the Act of 1993. Thus, the territorial limits of a Panchayat area should
be the area excluding the municipal areas and the industrial township which invariably excludes the
population in these areas for the purpose of establishment of a Zilla Panchayat. This is further
fortified by the way in which an electoral roll under Section 165 of the Act of 1993 is determined for
the elections to a constituency of a Zilla Panchayat:
"Section 165 - Electoral roll. -
The electoral roll of the Zilla Panchayat shall be prepared by the Assistant
Commissioner subject to the superintendence, direction and control of the State
Election Commission:
Provided that the electoral roll of the Karnataka Legislative Assembly for the time
being in force for such part of the District as is included in any constituency of the
Zilla Panchayat may be adopted for the purpose of preparation of electoral roll of the
Zilla Panchayat for such constituency:
Provided further that the electoral roll for such constituency of the Zilla Panchayat
shall not include any amendment, transposition, inclusion or deletion of any entry
made after the last date for making nomination for the election of such constituency
and before the completion of such election."
21. Thus, it is inevitable that while calculating ratio of the population of Scheduled Castes or
Schedule Tribes for the purpose of reservation under Section 162 of the Act of 1993, it is only the
population of the Panchayat area that has to be looked into and not the population of the entire
district. The justification by the respondent No.3 for reserving 13 seats to Scheduled Castes and 1
seat to Scheduled Tribes on the ground that the population of Scheduled Tribes is just above the
average population that the Scheduled Castes would represent is wholly untenable and the
reservation has to be based on the ratio of the total population of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes in the Panchayat with the total population of the Panchayat area. The argument of the
learned counsel for the petitioner that reservation of seats should be based on the population of the
district is too far fetched and would not fit into the scheme of reservation in local self governing
institutions at the District level. This can be explained by the following illustration:
"If in a District there is a population of 40,00,000 (including population in smaller
urban area/ municipal councils /industrial areas) and the number of seats in the Zilla
Panchayat (based on the territorial area excluding smaller urban area/ municipal
councils /industrial areas) is 20 and if the population of Scheduled Castes in the State
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2624159/ 8
Hanmanthraya S/O Ramanna Havaldar vs State Of Karnataka And Ors on 28 September, 2020
is 25% and Scheduled Tribes is 10% then the reservation based on Section 162 of the
Act of 1993 would be 5 seats to Scheduled Castes and 2 seats to Scheduled Tribes. In
addition, reservation is provided to Backward classes at 1/3rd of the total number of
seats which would be 6 seats at the lower end. Thus, the total reservation would be 5
+2+6 + 13. However, Section 162 (2) of Act of 1993 mandates that the total
reservation should not exceed 50%, which in this illustration would exceed and would
violate the reservation pattern.
Suppose, each constituency out of 20 constituencies represent the maximum population of 45,000
as mandated under Section 160 of the Act of 1993 then the total population in the Panchayat area
would be 18,00,000 and if the Scheduled Castes population is 20% and Scheduled Tribes population
is 2% then the reservation would be 4 seats to Scheduled Castes + 1 seat to Scheduled Tribes and
1/3rd to Backward Classes would be 6 + 4+1+6 =11 which could be reduced to 10."
22. As a matter of fact Part IX-A of the Constitution of India which relates to constitution of
Municipalities, makes a pointed reference to proportionate reservation of seats based on the
population of the municipal area. This is incorporated in Section 11 of the Karnataka Municipalities
Act, 1964 and mandates that the reservation to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in the
number of seats to a council is based on the proportionate ratio of Scheduled Castes and Scheduled
Tribes to the total population in the municipal area. Similarly, Section 7 of the Karnataka Municipal
Corporations Act, 1976 mandates reservation of seats to Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes in
municipal corporations which is based on the ratio of total population of Scheduled Castes or
Scheduled Tribes in the city to the total population of the city.
23. In all the three enactments, namely, the Karnataka Municipal Corporations Act, 1976, Karnataka
Municipalities Act, 1964 and the Karnataka Gram Swaraj and Panchayat Raj Act, it is ordained that
one seat each shall be reserved for Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes and this makes it clear
that it is the population of the Panchayat area that should be the basis of reserving seats as it is well
nigh impossible to comprehend any Panchayat area in Karnataka which is not inhabited by people
belonging to the Scheduled Castes or Scheduled Tribes.
24. Thus there is a clear inconsistency between Section 162 of the Act of 1993 and Article 243-D of
the Constitution of India in so far as it relates to reservation of seats in the Panchayat. It is such
inconsistency that is sought to be weeded out by Article 243-N of the Constitution of India which
reads as follows:
"243-N. Continuance of existing laws and Panchayats.--Notwithstanding anything in
this Part, any provision of any law relating to Panchayats in force in a State
immediately before the commencement of the Constitution (Seventy-third
Amendment) Act, 1992, which is inconsistent with the provisions of this Part, shall
continue to be in force until amended or repealed by a competent Legislature or other
competent authority or until the expiration of one year from such commencement,
whichever is earlier:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2624159/ 9
Hanmanthraya S/O Ramanna Havaldar vs State Of Karnataka And Ors on 28 September, 2020
Provided that all the Panchayats existing immediately before such commencement
shall continue till the expiration of their duration, unless sooner dissolved by a
resolution passed to that effect by the Legislative Assembly of that State or, in the
case of a State having a Legislative Council, by each House of the Legislature of that
State.
25. Thus, it is crystal clear that while fixing the proportionate reservation of seats in the Zilla
Panchayat, it should be only on the basis of population in the Zilla Panchayat area and not the
population of the district. Having held so, if the population in the smaller urban areas /municipal
areas/ industrial townships is excluded, then the following would emerge:
Total rural SC- rural ST-rural Percentage No of No of Population- population
population to total seats to seats rural be reserved population reserved A B C D B x
100/A D x 47 C x 100/A seats/100 1730775 489697 28.29 13.29 13 50074 2.89 1.36 1
26. In view of the above, the respondent No.3 has rightly reserved thirteen seats to Scheduled Castes
and 1 seat to Scheduled Tribes by ignoring the decimal. The Judgment in the case of Ganesh
Sukhdeo Gurule is not an authority in the matter of reservation of seats and thus would not in any
help the petitioner. Thus there is no merit in this writ petition and the same is dismissed.
Sd/-
JUDGE RSP
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2624159/ 10
