Hardeep Singh Age 42 Years S/O Ajeet ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir on 31 March, 2023
Hardeep Singh Age 42 Years S/O Ajeet ... vs Union Territory Of
Jammu & Kashmir on 31 March, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
Sr. No. 93
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
B. A No. 102/2022
Reserved on :13.03.2023
Pronounced on :31.03.2023
Hardeep Singh age 42 years S/o Ajeet Singh .... Petitioner(s)
R/O Dak Garh Jinder Tehsil & District
Gurdaspur (Through his sister Kulwant Kour)
Through :- Mr. Rajesh Kumar, Advocate
V/s
1. Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir ....Respondent(s)
Through Station House Officer Lakhanpur Kathua.
2. Superintendent District Jail Kathua Through :- Mr. Dewakar Sharma, Dy. AG Coram: HON'BLE
MR.JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE ORDE R 31.03.2023
1. Petitioner/accused indicted in case FIR no. 108/2018 of Police Station Lakhanpur (Kathua) for
commission of offences punishable u/ss 8/15 of Narcotic Drugs Psychotropic Substance Act 1985
(for short the NDPS Act) has sought regular bail under the provisions of Section 439 of Cr.pc on the
grounds, that he is a citizen of India and presently under detention in District Jail Kathua, that false
allegation came to be leveled against the him alleging commission of offence u/s 8/15 of NDPS Act
and after the investigation challan bearing No. 18/2019 came to be filed against him before the
Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge Kathua on 02.04.2019. It is averred, that the petitioner
came to be arrested by police on 04.10.2018 and till date he is in detention at District Jail Kathua,
charges have been framed against the petitioner on 25.02.2022, that the petitioner filed an
application for grant of bail before the Trial Court on 02.12.2021 and the same was dismissed vide
order dated 10.02.2022 on the ground that the statutory bar under section 37 of NDPS Act is
attracted, petitioner is facing trial for transporting huge commercial quantity of poppy straw
weighing 501 kg.
2. Respondent/U.T. of J&K has opposed the bail on the grounds, that accused has committed
heinous offences against society and his bail application deserves to be rejected and dismissed as
there is every likelihood that the accused may jump over the conditions of bail and influence the
vital prosecution witnesses. It is contended, that on 02.10.2018, SGCT Labh Krishan No. 893/K of
PP Industrial Estate Hatli Morh (Kathua) reported at Police Station Lakhanpur and has produced a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/125623281/ 1
Hardeep Singh Age 42 Years S/O Ajeet ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir on 31 March, 2023
docket on behalf of SI Maninder Singh I/C PP Industrial Estate Hatli Morh Kathua which reveals
that on 02.10.2018 I/C PP Industrial Estate Hatli Morh, Kathua alongwith SGCT Labh Krishan,
SGCT Raj Kumar No. 458/K, Karan Singh No. 97/Ex, SPO Ajay Kumar No. 135/K were on Naka
vehicle checking duty at Govindsar Morh NHW by the order of Senior officers, during Naka
checking one truck bearing registration No. JK13A-9512 coming from Jammu side was signaled to
stop, but the driver of the said vehicle did not obey the signal and ran away from the spot towards
Lakhanpur, I/C PP alongwith above said police personnel followed the above said truck in Govt.
vehicle which was being driven by Pankaj Singh No. 1070/SPO, during the said practice at about
1500 hours the above said vehicle was found to stuck in the jamming and during enquiry driver of
the said truck disclosed his name as Hardeep Singh S/o Ajeet Singh caste Saini R/o Nanowal Jinder
Gurdaspur and on the search of cabin of the truck 01 kg Poppy Straw was recovered from the tool
box and in the meantime 5/6 employees of the Forest Department of Check Post Lakhanpur in civil
appeared on spot and obstructed/manhandled the police officials while delivering their lawful duty
and while overpowering took the truck alongwith driver to some unknown place, thereby in order to
help the accused drug smuggler forest officials with common intentions took away the said truck
alongwith driver to an unknown place, the said truck could have loaded with some contraband
substances, on this docket a case FIR No. 108/2018 u/s 8/15 NDPS Act and 147, 148,353, 323,109
RPC stands registered and investigation entrusted to SI Bishan Dass EXJ-785924 the then I/C PP
Basantpur. It is contended, that during the course of investigation, I.O visited the spot, prepared site
plan, poppy straw recovered from the possession of accused Hardeep Singh, driver of truck bearing
registration No. JK13A-9512, which is 01 kg in weight, out of which 200 gms taken as sample for
chemical analysis at FSL Jammu, sealed it on spot and marked it as A-1, rest of the poppy straw also
sealed/seized on spot and marked as A, I.O also recorded the statements of complainant and other
eye witnesses u/s 161 CrPC, thereafter on 02.10.2018, it came to the notice that the truck involved in
the said case is parked in the premises of Forest Check Post Anti Polythene Lakhanpur, on this I.O
alongwith EMIC Kathua, SHO P/S Lakhanpur and other nafri went to Forest Check Post Lakhanpur
but officials of the forest check post locked the gate and not allowed the police party to enter the
gate, however on 04.10.2018 during further investigation I.O entered into the premises of the forest
department where truck was kept, police searched the truck and recovered 500kg of poppy straw
kept in 50 cardboard carrying 10 kg in each and during investigation offences u/s 8/15 of NDPS Act
were proved against the petitioner and offences u/s 353, 147 RPC were proved against the other
accused persons (forest officials) who had obstructed the police and taken away the vehicle loaded
with contraband. It is contended, that as per the prosecution story other accused/forest officials
moved before this Court under Section 561-A Cr.PC for quashment of FIR No. 108/2018 under
Sections 147, 148, 353, 332, 109 RPC wherein an interim order was passed by this Court that
"subject to objection by the other side and till next date of hearing, the challan if not presented, the
same shall not be presented before the competent court without the prior permission of this Court",
the other accused involved in this case are government employee and government permission is yet
to be obtained for presentation of challan against them, and after obtaining government sanction
supplementary challan will be separately produced in the court of law.
3. Ld. Counsel for petitioner while making a strong case for petitioner's enlargement on bail has
vehemently argued, that charge sheet laid in the court of Ld. Addl. Sessions Judge Kathua does not
depict that the quantity of alleged contraband recovered from the accused person is commercial. It
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/125623281/ 2
Hardeep Singh Age 42 Years S/O Ajeet ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir on 31 March, 2023
is argued, that the petitioner is innocent and has been falsely implicated in the case, initially the
petitioner was found in possession of 01 kg of poppy straw and thereafter police without any
justification cooked another story that further 500 kg of poppy straw was found in the same vehicle
which he was driving without any reasonable explanation. It is moreso argued, that right from
04.10.2018 the petitioner is in continuous detention and during this period neither he came to
charge sheeted till 25.02.2022 by the trial court nor any witness came to be examined during this
period of near about three years, there is no evidence on the record to show that the petitioner is
likely to defeat the process of law or has in any manner in the past defeated the process of law, long
detention is itself is detention without due process of law and violates Article 21 of the Constitution
guaranteeing right to life and liberty to the accused/petitioner.
4. Mr. Dewakar Sharma, ld. Dy. AG has strongly opposed the bail on the grounds, that from the
possession of petitioner/accused while driving the vehicle No. JK13A/9512, 501 kg of poppy straw of
huge commercial quantity has been recovered, whereby, the accused has committed offences u/ss
8/15 of NDPS Act and the final report/challan after usual investigation has been produced in the
court of Ld. Addl. Sessions Judge Kathua where the trial is being conducted. It is argued, that the
court cannot appreciate evidence at the stage of deciding the bail application, accused has
committed heinous offences against society and his bail application deserves to be rejected and
dismissed, as there is every likelihood that the accused may jump over the conditions of bail and
influence the vital prosecution witnesses.
5. I have heard Ld. Counsel for the petitioner/accused and Ld. Dy. AG for U.T/respondent. I have
perused the record carefully, have bestowed my thoughtful consideration to the material aspects
involved in the case and have gone though the relevant law on the subject matter.
6. Now, I would like to appreciate the decisions in regard to grant or refusal of bail under the
provisions of Section 37 of NDPS Act.
In 2017 (2) DRUGS CASES (NARCOTICS) 158 H.P. HIGH COURT SHIMLA [Kuldeep Chand
Manda....Petitioner Versus State of Himachal Pradesh....Respondent], Hon'ble High Court of
Himachal Pradesh, while rejecting bail to the accused found in possession of 1990 grams of
commercial quantity of contraband [chars 1390 grams & opium 600 grams] and observing that at
the stage of consideration of bail detailed examination of evidence and merit of case are not be to
undertaken and morso the drug abuse is a social malady, in paras 8, 9 &10 of the judgment held as
under:-
(8) It has been categorically held by the Hon'ble Apex Court that courts exercising the
bail jurisdiction normally do and should refrain from indulging in elaborate
reasoning in their orders in justification of grant or non-grant of bail. For in that
manner, the principle of "presumption of innocence of an accused" gets jeopardized;
and the structural principle of "not guilty till proved guilty" gets destroyed, even
though all same elements have always understood that such views are tentative and
not final, so as to affect the merit of the matter. Reference in this regard can be made
to Kashi Nath Roy vs. State of Bihar (1996) 4 SCC 539, wherein the Hon'ble Supreme
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/125623281/ 3
Hardeep Singh Age 42 Years S/O Ajeet ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir on 31 March, 2023
Court has held as follows:-
"6. As embedded in the criminal jurisprudence obtaining in this country, courts
exercising bail indulging in elaborate reasoning in their orders in justification of
grant or non- grant of bail. For, in that manner, the principle of "presumption of
innocence of an accused" gets jeopardized; and the structural principle of "not guilty
till proved guilty"
gets destroyed, even though al same elements have always understood that such views are tentative
and not final, so as to affect the merit of the matter. Here, the appellant has been caught and
exposed to a certain adverse comment and action solely because in reasoning he had disclosed his
mind while granting bail. This may have been avoidable on this part, but in terms not such a glaring
mistake or impropriety so as to visit the remarks that the High Court has chosen to pass on him as
well as to initiate action against him, as proposed." (9) It is further to be remembered that at the
stage of dealing with the cases regarding bail, a detailed examination of evidence and elaborate
documentation of the merits of the case are not to be undertaken. The court is not required to
discuss the merits and demerits of the case at this stage. It is only required to satisfy itself with (i)
the nature of accusation and the severity of the punishment in case of conviction and the nature of
supporting evidence; (ii) reasonable apprehension of tampering of the witnesses or apprehension of
threat to the complainant and (iii) prima facie satisfaction of the court in support of the charge and
any order dehors such consideration suffers from non-application of mind. When all the three
parameters are taken into consideration, it is prima facie established that the nature of accusation
against the petitioner and the severity of punishment for which he has been charged is extremely
grave and serious. Moreover the apprehension of the respondent that tin case the petitioner is let off
on bail, it will be difficult to produce his presence since he is resident of Delhi cannot be said to be
ill- founded. In fact, one of the considerations for grant of bail is also to secure the presence of the
accused.
(10) The drug abuse is a social malady. The drug addicts eat into the vitals of the society, but drug
trafficking not only eats into the vitals of the economy of the country but illicit money generated by
drug trafficking is often used for illicit activities. The constitution Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in State of Punjab Vs. Baldev Singh (1999) 6 SCC 172 has observed as follows:-
"(4) Drug abuse is a social malady. While drug addiction eats into the vitals of the
society, drug trafficking not only eats into the vitals of the economy of a country, but
illicit money generated by drug trafficking is often used for illicit activities including
encouragement of terrorism. There is no doubt that drug trafficking, trading and its
use, which is a global phenomena and has acquired the dimensions of an epidemic,
affects the economic policies of the State, corrupts the system and is detrimental to
the future of a country. It has the effect of producing a sick society and harmful
culture. Anti-drug justice is a criminal dimension of social justice. The United
Nations Conventions Against Illicit Trafficking In Narcotic Drugs & Psychotropic
Substances which was held in Vienna, Austria in 1988 was perhaps one of the first
efforts, at an international level, to tackle the menace of drug trafficking throughout
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/125623281/ 4
Hardeep Singh Age 42 Years S/O Ajeet ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir on 31 March, 2023
the comity of nations. The Government of India has ratified this convention".
Ratio of the judgment (Supra) makes it manifest, that the court exercising the bail jurisdiction
normally should refrain from indulging in elaborate reasoning, discussing the merit and de-merits
of the case & detailed documentation of evidence.
In 2017 (4) Crimes 384 (SC) SUPREME COURT OF INDIA [Union of India--Appellant Versus
Niyazuddin Sk. and Anr-- Respondent] Hon'ble Supreme Court while setting aside the order of the
High Court granting bail to the accused indicted for the allegations of possessing commercial
quantity in paras 7,8&9 of the judgment held as under:-
(7) Section 37 of NDPS Act contains special provisions with regard to the grant of bail
in respect of certain offences enumerated under the said section. They are:-
(1) In the case of person accused of an offence punishable under section 19.
(2) Under section 24.
(3) Under section 27A and (4) Of offences involving commercial quantity.
The accusation in the present case is with regard to the fourth factor namely, commercial quantity.
Be that as it may, once the Public Prosecutor opposes the application for bail to a person accused of
the enumerated offences under section 37 of the NDPS Act, in case, the court proposes to grant bail
to such person, two conditions are to be mandatorily satisfied in addition to the normal
requirements under the provisions of the Cr. PC or any other enactment, (1) the court must be
satisfied that there is reasonable ground for believing that the person is not guilty of such offence;
(2) that person is not likely to commit any offence while on bail.
(8) There is no such consideration with regard to the mandatory requirements, while releasing the
respondents on bail. (9) Hence, we are stratified that the matter needs to be considered afresh by
the High Court. Impugned order is set aside and the matter is remitted to the High Court for fresh
consideration. It will be open to the parties to take all available contentious to the High Court.
Ratio of the judgment (Supra) sets the controversy to rest, that where there are
allegations/accusations regarding the possession of commercial quantity of contraband by the
accused, the court while granting bail must be satisfied, (i)that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that accused person is not guilty of such offence and (ii) he is not likely to commit such
offence on bail, and if these two conditions are not satisfied by the court, the accused is not entitled
bail in terms of section 37 of NDPS Act.
In 2018 (5) Supreme 705 SUPREME COURT OF INDIA [Satpal Singh--Appellants Versus The State
of Punjab--Respondents], Hon'ble Supreme Court while rejecting bail of an accused found in
possession of commercial quantity of contraband in para 15 of the judgment held as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/125623281/ 5
Hardeep Singh Age 42 Years S/O Ajeet ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir on 31 March, 2023
15. Be that as it may, the order dated 21.09.2017 passed by the High Court does not
show that there is any reference to Section 37 of the NDPS Act. The quantity is
reportedly commercial. In the facts and circumstances of the case, the High Court
could not have and should not have passed the order under Sections 438 or
439Cr.P.C. without reference to Section 37 of the NDPS Act and without entering
finding on the required level of satisfaction in case the Court was otherwise inclined
to grant the bail. Such a satisfaction having not being entered, the order dated
21.09.2017 is only to be set aside and we do so.
Ratio of the judgment (Supra) further makes the legal proposition abundantly clear, that a court
inclined to grant bail to an accused indicted for the allegations of possessing of commercial quantity
of contraband has to satisfy itself in regard to the mandatory requirements of, (i) that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that accused person is not guilty of such offence,&(ii) he is not
likely to commit such offence on bail, and where such a satisfaction having not been entered the bail
order is bad and non-est in the eyes of law.
The decisions in "Kuldeep Chand Manda's Case", "NiyazuddinSk's Case" & "Satpal Singh's Case"
(Supra) make the legal proposition abundantly clear and also settles the legal controversy at rest,
that in case of the accusations against accused regarding possession of commercial quantity of the
contraband, the court has to render findings regarding, (i) the court must be satisfied that there are
reasonable grounds for believing that the person is not guilty of such offence & (ii) the person is not
likely to commit any offence on bail, and if these conditions are not satisfied by the court, the
accused is not entitled bail.
It is apt to mention here, that Hon'ble Supreme Court in a case law titled N.C.B versus Krishan Lal
[AIR 1991 S.C 588]handed down/held that "unless conditions prescribed under section 37 of NDPS
Act are not fulfilled, the court has no discretion to relax these conditions in order to give the benefit
of bail to an accused". It is trite law by the authoritative pronouncement by Hon'ble Supreme Court
of India in a case law reported in, AIR 2007 S.C 451 (Rajesh Ranjan Yadav alias Pappu Yadav v.s
CBI through its Director), the Hon'ble Supreme Court held, "that the interest of society outweighs
the individual interest of a person, and the longer period of imprisonment cannot be a ground for
grant of bail".
7. Perusal of the Section 37 & ratios of judgments (Supra) settle the legal controversy that before
granting bail u/s 37 of NDPS Act, the Court is to give an opportunity to oppose the application by
the Public Prosecutor and the Court is to satisfy itself, (i) that there are reasonable grounds for
believing that the accused is not guilty of the offence under the Act and (ii) the Court is further
satisfied that the accused is not likely to commit the offence while on bail. Section 37 makes it
manifestly clear, that where the Court prima-facie found the involvement of the accused then the
bail is not to be allowed. In the case in hand, accused/petitioner has been found in possession of 501
kg of poppy straw which is of huge commercial quantity, therefore, rigor contained in Section 37 of
NDPS Act is attracted with full force. It is trite law, that at the stage of dealing with cases regarding
bail a detailed examination of evidence and elaborate documentation of merits of the case are not to
be undertaken and as in the case in hand this Court prima-facie finds the involvement of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/125623281/ 6
Hardeep Singh Age 42 Years S/O Ajeet ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir on 31 March, 2023
accused, then the bail is not to be allowed/granted to him. On these considerations and in view of
the aforesaid discussion, I am of the considered opinion, that there are accusations against
petitioner/accused for possessing huge commercial quantity of poppy straw, therefore, at this stage
no finding can be rendered, (i) that there are reasonable grounds for believing that accused is not
guilty of such offence, & (ii) he is not likely to commit such offence on bail.
8. Courts cannot lose sight of the fact that the menace of the crime of smuggling of contraband drugs
is on increase and therefore, the perpetrators of the crime who are destroying the society and
younger generations rendering them incapacitated by falling prey to drug abuse, must be dealt with
iron hands. The crime alleged against petitioner/accused is against the society and by his criminal
activities, he is spoiling the young generation of the country. Such types of offences are to be dealt
with severity and with heavy hands. Showing leniency in such matters would be really a case of
misplaced sympathy. The criminal act of petitioner/accused operating in a manner as the smuggler
of contraband poppy straw, is destructive and is aimed to destroy the social fiber of the country,
therefore, curtailment of his liberty is reasonable and rigor contained u/s 37 is applicable with full
vigor. The act of petitioner/accused is not only shocking but outrageous in contours. The granting of
bail to the petitioner/accused would lead to the danger of the course of justice being thwarted. I,
therefore, hold that this is a fittest case where, "Jail" and not "Bail", is the appropriate remedy at this
stage. The case laws relied upon by learned counsel for petitioner/accused viz; (i) Dharambir Vs.
State of Haryana (CRM-M-7123-2022, decided by High Court of Punjab & Haryana on 20-04-2022)
& (ii) Amit Singh Moni Vs The State of Himachal Pradesh [CRIMINAL APPELLATE
JURISDICTION by Supreme Court in Criminal Appeal No. 668 of 2020 (Arising Out of SLP
(Criminal) No. 3813 of 2020, decided by Hon'ble Supreme Court on 12- 10-2020] are squarely
distinguishable and inapplicable to the facts of the case in hand. The bail application being
misconceived under law, is therefore, disallowed, rejected and dismissed.
9. Disposed of accordingly along with connected CM(s), if any.
(MOHAN LAL) JUDGE Jammu:
31.03.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No Whether the order is
reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/125623281/ 7
