Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April, 2025
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April,
2025
THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRLA No.519 of 2009
(In the matter of an appeal under Section 374 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure 1973)
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik ....... Appellant
-Versus-
The State of Orissa ....... Respondent
For the Appellant : Mr. Subir Palit, Senior Advocate along with Ms. S. Sen, Advocate For the
Respondent : Mr. M.S. Rizvi, ASC, Vigilance CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE SIBO SANKAR MISHRA Date of Hearing:
10.03.2025 : Date of Judgment: 10.04.2025 S.S. Mishra, J. The present Criminal
Appeal has been filed by the appellant under Section 374 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973, challenging the Judgment and Order dated 17.11.2009 passed by the
learned Special Judge (Vigilance), Jeypore, in G.R. Case No. 28 of 1995(V)
corresponding to T.R. No. 81 of 2007. By the impugned judgment, the appellant,
along with his co-accused, were convicted under Section 13(2) read with Section
13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988, as well as under Sections 467,
477-A, and 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860. Four persons were convicted by the
impugned judgment, all of whom filed separate appeals before this Court assailing
conviction and sentence passed against them. However, during pendency of appeals,
three of the appellants passed away, resulting in the abatement of their respective
appeals. Consequently, only the present appeal remains for adjudication.
2. The brief fact of this case is that, on 01.10.1995, the Inspector of Vigilance, Berhampur Squad,
submitted the First Information Report (FIR) before the Superintendent of Police, Vigilance,
Berhampur. In the FIR it is alleged that a vigilance inquiry had revealed irregularities in the M.E.
Common Examination for the year 1994, conducted by the Board of Secondary Education, Cuttack,
Orissa, in May 1994.
The examination was conducted under the Chairmanship of the concerned Circle Inspector of
Schools, with the District Inspector (D.I.) of Schools supervising the evaluation of answer sheets.
The answer papers of Jeypore Education District were valued under the supervision of the D.I. of
Schools, Umerkote, who later prepared the result sheets.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76624454/ 1
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April, 2025
During verification, it was found that in the result sheet of Kabisurya M.E. School, U.K. Power
House Colony, 15 students had originally been marked as failed. However, Gananath Joshi, the then
D.I. of Schools, issued a handwritten chit to the Headmaster of Kabisurya M.E. School, instructing
him to bring the result sheet on 04.07.1994. Upon submission of the result sheet, Joshi, along with
other accused persons, manipulated the marks, altering the results by striking off the word "fail" and
rewriting "pass" in columns 8 to 17 of the result sheet, thereby illegally declaring 15 students as
passed without making any corresponding corrections in their answer papers.
Further inquiry established that similar manipulations were made in the result sheets of U.G.M.E.
School, Harijan Sahi, Municipal High School No.2, Chandanbada Sahi, and other schools, allowing
38 additional failed students to be declared as passed through falsification of official records.
The present appellant happened to be the Headmaster of Municipal High School No.2 at the
relevant time.
Based on this report, a vigilance case was registered, and during the investigation, the Vigilance
Inspector examined witnesses and verified relevant documents, including the manipulated result
sheets seized from the concerned schools. Specimen handwriting and signatures of the accused,
including the then D.I. of Schools and attached teacher M. Prasad Rao, were collected and sent for
handwriting analysis. The expert opinion confirmed the manipulations; therefore, the competent
authority accorded sanction to prosecute the accused.
3. After completion of the investigation, a charge sheet was submitted against the accused persons.
During course of trial, Gananath Joshi, the then D.I. of Schools, passed away, resulting in the
abatement of proceedings against him. Consequently, the cases proceeded against the remaining
four accused persons and accordingly after the completion of trial, they were convicted by the
learned Trial Court and awarded various sentences which are under challenge.
Being aggrieved by the aforementioned Judgement and order dated 17.11.2009 of learned Special
Judge, Vigilance, Jeypore, the appellant has preferred the present appeal.
4. Heard Mr. Subir Palit, learned Senior Counsel with Ms. Subhashree Sen, learned Counsel for the
appellant and Mr. M.S. Rizvi, learned Additional Standing Counsel for the Vigilance Department.
5. Mr. Palit, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant contended that the appellant, who was the
Headmaster of Municipal High School No. II, Chandanbada, Jeypore, was on leave from 24.05.1994
to 26.06.1994, during which one Krushna Ch. Panigrahi was in charge. During this period,
manipulations in the result sheets of eleven failed students of 7th Board Eamnination were allegedly
made at the D.I. of Schools level. Upon the appellant(cid:128)s return on 27.06.1994, the D.I. of Schools,
Gananath Joshi, issued a handwritten chit, directing him to submit the result sheets on 04.07.1994,
which he complied with. However, the manipulation of marks and alteration of the results of eleven
students from "fail" to "pass" was done by Gananath Joshi and others, without the appellant(cid:128)s
knowledge or participation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76624454/ 2
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April, 2025
It was further argued that the prosecution failed to establish any pre-arranged plan or prior concert
between the accused persons to prove a common intention under Section 34 of IPC to commit the
alleged crime. The appellant(cid:128)s mere compliance with the direction of his superior does not amount
to active participation in the commission of alleged offence. The learned counsel relied on Dani
Singh v. State of Bihar1, which held:
"20. "Common intention" implies prearranged plan and acting in concert pursuant to
the prearranged plan. Under this section a preconcert in the sense of a distinct
previous plan is not necessary to be proved. The common intention to bring about a
particular result may well develop on the spot as between a number of persons, with
reference to the facts of the case and circumstances of the situation. Though common
intention may develop on the spot, it must, however, be anterior in point of time to
the commission of offence showing a prearranged plan and prior concert. (See
Krishna Govind Patil v. State of Maharashtra [AIR 1963 SC 1413 : (1963) 2 Cri LJ 351]
.) In Amrik Singh v. State of Punjab [(1972) 4 SCC (N) 42 : 1972 Cri LJ 465] it has
been held that common intention presupposes prior concert. Care must be taken not
to confuse same or similar intention with common intention; the partition which
divides their bonds is often very thin, nevertheless, the distinction is real and
substantial, and if overlooked, will result in miscarriage of (2004) 13 SCC 203 justice.
To constitute common intention, it is necessary that intention of each one of them be
known to the rest of them and shared by them. Undoubtedly, it is a difficult thing to
prove even the intention of an individual and, therefore, it is all the more difficult to
show the common intention of a group of persons. But however difficult may be the
task, the prosecution must lead evidence of facts, circumstances and conduct of the
accused from which their common intention can be safely gathered. In Maqsoodan v.
State of U.P. [(1983) 1 SCC 218 :
1983 SCC (Cri) 176 : AIR 1983 SC 126] it was observed that prosecution must lead
evidence from which the common intention of the accused can be safely gathered. In
most cases it has to be inferred from the act, conduct or other relevant circumstances
of the case in hand. The totality of the circumstances must be taken into
consideration in arriving at a conclusion whether the accused had a common
intention to commit offence for which they can be convicted. The facts and
circumstances of cases vary and each case has to be decided keeping in view the facts
involved. Whether an act is in furtherance of the common intention is an incident of
fact and not of law. In Bhaba Nanda Sarma v. State of Assam [(1977) 4 SCC 396 : 1977
SCC (Cri) 602 : AIR 1977 SC 2252] it was observed that prosecution must prove facts
to justify an inference that all participants of the acts had shared a common intention
to commit the criminal act which was finally committed by one or more of the
participants. Mere presence of a person at the time of commission of an offence by
his confederates is not, in itself sufficient to bring his case within the purview of
Section 34, unless community of design is proved against him. (See Malkhan Singh v.
State of U.P. [(1975) 3 SCC 311 : 1974 SCC (Cri) 919 : AIR 1975 SC 12] ) In the Oxford
English Dictionary, the word "furtherance" is defined as "action of helping forward".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76624454/ 3
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April, 2025
Adopting this definition, Russell says that "it indicates some kind of aid or assistance
producing an effect in future" and adds that any act may be regarded as done in
furtherance of the ultimate felony if it is a step intentionally taken, for the purpose of
effecting that felony.
(Russell on Crime, 12th Edn., Vol. I, pp.487 and 488.) In Shankarlal Kacharabhai v. State of Gujarat
[AIR 1965 SC 1260 : (1965) 2 Cri LJ 266] this Court has interpreted the word "furtherance" as
"advancement or promotion". "
Similarly, reliance was placed on Ramesh Singh v. State of A.P.2, wherein the
Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court observed:
" 12. To appreciate the arguments advanced on behalf of the appellants it is necessary
to understand the object of incorporating Section 34 in the Penal Code, 1860. As a
general principle in a case of criminal liability it is the primary responsibility of the
person who actually commits the offence and only that person who has committed
the crime can be held guilty. By introducing Section 34 in the Penal Code the
legislature laid down the principle of joint liability in doing a criminal act. The
essence of that liability is to be found in the existence of a common intention
connecting the accused leading to the doing of a criminal act in furtherance of such
intention. Thus, if the act is the result of a common intention then every person who
did the criminal act with that common intention would be responsible for the offence
committed irrespective of the share which he had in its perpetration. Section 34 IPC
embodies the principle of joint liability in doing the criminal act based on a common
intention. Common intention essentially being a state of mind it is very difficult to
procure direct evidence to prove such intention. Therefore, in most cases it has to be
inferred from the act like, the conduct of the accused or other relevant circumstances
of the case. The inference can be gathered from the manner in which the accused
arrived at the scene and mounted the attack, the determination and concert with
which the attack was made, and from the nature of injury caused by one or some of
them. The contributory acts of the persons who are not responsible for the injury can
further be inferred from the subsequent conduct after the attack. In this regard even
an illegal omission on the part of such accused can indicate the sharing of common
intention. In other words, the totality of circumstances must be taken into
consideration in arriving at the conclusion whether the accused had the common
intention to commit an offence of which they could be convicted. (See Noor
Mohammad Mohd. Yusuf (2004) 11 SCC 305 Momin v. State of Maharashtra [(1970)
1 SCC 696 : 1970 SCC (Cri) 274 : AIR 1971 SC 885] .)."
Mr. Palit, learned Senior Counsel, extensively read out the evidence of the prosecution and
submitted that the prosecution evidences indeed established the innocence of the appellant,
however overwhelming evidence illuminating on record in favour of the appellant has been
mis-appreciated by the trial court. On the strength of Judgement cited at the Bar, Mr. Palit submits
that the appeal deserves merit.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76624454/ 4
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April, 2025
6. The prosecution witness (P.W.7), Krushna Chandra Panigrahi, who was the acting Headmaster
during the appellant(cid:128)s leave, admitted that he handed over the result sheets to Jhadeswar
Pattanaik, a Clerk in the D.I. of Schools Office, and received them back with corrections. He,
however, denied any knowledge of the manipulation. The learned Trial Court, while dealing with the
testimony of P.W.7 has observed as under:
P.W.7, the assistant teacher of Municipality High School no.2 stated in his evidence
that accused Jhadeswar Patnaik was working as a clerk in D.I. of Schools, Jeypore
and he requested the Headmaster to give the result sheets of M.E. common
examination, 1994, and the headmaster gave him the result sheets and those were
returned to the schools with some corrections. But in cross-examination he clarified
that he did not remember who handed over the result sheets to Jhadeswar Patnaik.
Similarly, while dealing with the allegations of manipulation, the Trial Court relied
upon the testimony of P.W.6, who was the handwriting expert. The Trial Court
appreciated the evidence of P.W.6 and returned the following findings:
"Again, according to P.W.6, the person who wrote B-I to B-7 did not write the red
enclosed disputed signature appearing in Exts. 15 and 16, marked as W-1 and W-2,
purported to have been sent from the office of the D.I. of Schools did not belong to
the said D.I. Gananath Joshi and those signatures have been forged. So the corollary
inference would be that the contents of Ext. 15 were stated to have been written by
accused M. Prasad Rao, he also forged the signature of the D.I. in Exts. 15 and 16
without the knowledge of the D.I. or C.I. and abused his official position by putting
the seal of the D.I. of Schools after forging the signature and thereby illegally issued
letters from the office of the D.I. of Schools vide letter no. 5437 of dated 19.9.94
promoting two students vide Ext. 15 and vide letter no. 4624 dated 16.8.94 thereby
promoting 11 students having different roll numbers to have promoted to VIII class
under his consideration. Again P.W.6 found several corrections in the result sheets
and interpolation in the marks as pointed out in X-I to X-50. Again according to
p.w.6 in the result sheets the original word 'fail' has been scored through and 'Pass'
has been written subsequently as noticed in Y-I to Y-52 marked by him either the
'Pass' was written subsequently to the write or decified word 'fail' or the original word
'fail' has been changed to 'pass' by overwriting or has been written separately. So even
though no definite opinion was made by P.W.6 as to who had made the correction of
pass and fail or interpolated the marks in the result sheets, the gist of his evidence
revealed that the then D.I. Gananath Joshi had issued the chit of letter (Ext. 19) to the
Headmaster, Kabisurya M.E. School for the production of his result sheets but the
subsequent letters' vide Exts. 15 and 16 signatures therein, and the result sheets of
the disputed two schools were found to have been manipulated, interpolated and
forged, either by the attached teacher M. Prasad Rao, who stated to have issued Exts.
15 and 16 declaring 13 unsuccessful students to have passed and there were several
manipulations and interpolations in marks of different students who were originally
failed as per the copy of the result sheets of the C.I. of Schools and that of the D.I. of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76624454/ 5
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April, 2025
Schools, Jeypore, but subsequently were shown to have passed as per the said result
sheets of the two schools, vide Exts. 7 and 9,the custodians of which were accused
Harihar Karasudha Patnaik and Smt. Pramila Gantayat.
The opinion of the handwriting expert can be relied upon when supported by other
items of internal and external evidence. A.I.R.2003 SC 282. It is not the law that the
handwriting expert's opinion can never be acted upon unless substantially
corroborated by other evidence in case where the reasons for opinion are convincing
and there is no reliable evidence throwing any doubt, the uncorroborated testimony
of handwriting expert may be relied upon. A.I.R.1980 SC 531 .So basing upon this
when the evidence by P.W.6 has not been shaken by way of cross-examination by any
of the accused particularly M.Prasad Rao, the same can be accepted and can be held
to be reliable with reference to the opinion in Exts. 15 and
16."
The documentary evidence, namely Ext.15 - Letter No. 4624, Ext.16 - Letter No. 5437, and Ext.19 -
Paper chit, were found to have been issued under the forged signature of the D.I. of Schools by
accused No.1, M. Prasad Rao, to dispatch the result sheets through the Clerk, Jhadeswar Pattanaik.
The accused Headmaster, instead of verifying the authenticity of the letters and the paper chit,
simply handed over the result sheets. The Trial Court based its reasoning on this aspect to connect
the appellant to the offence. However, it was contended that the accused Headmaster might be
negligent on the part of his duty, but having no criminal mindset merely cannot be liable in a
criminal offence based on presumption of fact.
7. In its judgment, the Learned Trial court acknowledged the absence of direct evidence against the
appellant and relied solely on Section 114 of the Evidence Act to infer guilt based on presumption.
For ready reference, the relevant part of the impugned judgement is reproduced as under:
Direct evidence is one of the modes through which a fact can be proved but that is not
the only mode envisaged in the Evidence Act. Proof of fact depends upon the degree
of probabilities of its having existed. The standard required for reaching the
supposition is that of a prudent man acting in any important manner concerning
him. In this connection Flatcher Maulton L.J in Hawkins Vrs. Pawels Tillery steam
coal Co. Ltd. 1991(I) KB 988 observed as follows: "Proof does not mean proof
through rigid mathematical demonstration, because that is impossible, it must mean
such evidence as would induce a reasonable man to come to a particular conclusion".
The said observation has stood the test of time and can now to be followed as
standard of proof. In reaching the conclusion, the court can use the process of
inference to be drawn from the facts produced or proved. Such inferences are a kin to
presumption in Law. Law gives absolute discretion to the court to pressure the
existence of any fact which it thinks likely to have happened. In that process the court
may have to regard to common course of natural event, human conduct, public or
private business vis. a vis the fact of particular case. The discretion is clearly
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76624454/ 6
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April, 2025
envisaged in sec.114 of the Evidence Act.
"Presumption" is an inference of certain fact drawn from other proved facts. While
interfering the existence of a fact from another, the court is only applying the process
of intelligent reason which the mind of a prudent man would do under similar
circumstances. Presumption is not the final conclusion to be drawn from other facts
but it could as well be final if it remain undisturbed later. Presumption in law of
evidence is a rule indicating the stage of shifting the burden of proof. From a certain
fact or facts the court can drawn an inference and that would remain until such
inference is either disproved or dispelled as observed on 2001 (I) S.C.C.691.
8. The learned Senior Counsel emphasized that in the absence of concrete evidence proving
common intention or active participation, the conviction of the appellant under Section 34 of IPC is
unsustainable in law.
The learned Senior Counsel for the appellant further submitted that the allegations against the
appellant rest solely on presumption under Section 114 of the Evidence Act, which permits the court
to assume the existence of certain facts unless disproven by a preponderance of evidence. However,
presumption alone cannot substitute for concrete proof, especially when the prosecution's case
hinges on the doctrine of common intention under Section 34 of IPC. Relying on Dani Singh v. State
of Bihar (supra), it was argued that liability under Section 34 of IPC requires the satisfaction of two
essential tests:
1. Existence of a prearranged plan demonstrating common intention.
2. Active participation of the accused in the criminal act.
The Counsel contended that neither of these elements was established in the present case nor any
corroborative evidence born on record to support presumption. The failure of the appellant to verify
the authenticity of the forged signature of M. Prasad Rao and his compliance with instructions from
the D.I. of Schools without waiting for a duly signed letter may at most amount to negligence. The
learned Counsel submits that such an act might attract departmental proceedings but does not
constitute criminal complicity in the alleged offence. Since common intention was neither proved
nor established, the appellant cannot be held vicariously liable under Section 34 of IPC alongside the
co-accused. Therefore, the appellant is not guilty of the offences charged and cannot be convicted on
mere presumption.
9. On contrary, learned Additional Standing Counsel (Vigilance) for the respondent vehemently
opposed the contentions of the appellant and submitted that as sufficient evidences and witnesses
have deposed against the appellant and with the support of such evidences; the learned Trial Court
has rightly convicted the accused appellant. To substantiate his submissions about the sustainability
of conviction the learned Additional Standing Counsel for Vigilance has relied upon the findings of
the Trial Court, which reads under: -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76624454/ 7
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April, 2025
"12. That apart it has been brought out that as per the entries in the despatch register
and despatch number put in Exts. 15 and 16, the contents of those letters and the
subjects thereof were different and did not tally with each other which clearly go to
show that the accused persons like M.Prasad Rao and Jhadeswar Patnaik attached to
D.I. of Schools and the later being the in charge of despatch register issued Exts.15
and 16 by forging the signatures of the D.I. of schools but put the official seal of the
D.I. and put fake despatch numbers in those letters and issued the names and roll
numbers of 13 students who had originally failed to have passed and promoted. That
apart as it is seen from the result sheet of the two impugned schools and the result
sheet of which was admittedly under the strict care and custody of the respective
headmaster/headmistress with that of the result sheet of the C.I. and D.I. originally
in U.G.M.E. school, Harijan sahi, Jeypore 74 students had appeared out of which 33
'passed' and at Municipality High schoo1 no.2,114 students had appeared out of
which 33 'passed' vide Exts.4 and 5 respectively out of 74 students appeared in
U.G.M.E. school. Harijan sahi, Jeypore, 60 students were stated to have passed
instead of 33 and out of 114 students, 42 were stated to have passed instead of 33
from Municipality High School no.2.
It was submitted by the prosecution that after recording among the 114 students sent
by C.I. of Schools, the roll no.3167 was only covering for these two schools and on
comparison of the said result sheets it is sen that the marks in the said roll number
was also manipulated before reaching the letter of recounting in that school to which
the concerned headmaster had not explained. So as stated by the I.0. (P.W.11) and
other witnesses. Exts.3 to 6 were copy of result sheets of C.I. of Schools where no
corrections were made Exts. 30 to 33 were copies of result sheets of D.I.of Schools
and out of it in Exts. 32 and 33, two corrections were made as per the recounting of
the result sheets out of 114 students made by the C.I.of Schools. Exts.7 to 10 are the
result sheets of the four concerned schools out of which the present two head masters
are facing the trial for the result sheets of Exts.7 and 9. So on a comparision of three
copies of the result sheets, as per Ext.7, the result sheet of U.G.M.E. School, Harijan
sahi, Jeypore corrections in 26 roll numbers were made who were shown to have
been passed by overwriting the marks and by striking out the word 'fail' . So also as
per the result sheet. Ext.9 of Municipality High School no.2 out of 114 students as
against 11 roll numbers, the marks were manipulated and they were shown to have
passed by striking out the word 'fail' including th of the roll no.3167.
Prosecution clarified that in the result sheet of Govt. Girls High School, Jeypore, the
Headmaster was not prosecuted, since the consideration was made with respect to
other 7 students as seen from both the result sheets of C.I. copy (Ext.3) and school
copy (Ext.10) out of 18 students.
13. Thus, the result sheets being one of valuable documents to be possessed by the
headmaster himself under his strict custody or vigilance for any alteration or
manipulation therein he or she is to account for the same as to how and under what
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76624454/ 8
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April, 2025
circumstances, the corrections or manipulations in the result sheet with respect to
unsuccessful students were made and the same was in accordance with examination
Regulation and procedure conducted under the chairmanship of the C.I. of schools.
Any deviation or defalcation thereof has to be explained reasonably by the
headmaster. Here in this case, the C.I. had no knowledge regarding the extra
correction or alteration nor there was any official communication by the concerned
D.I. to the Headmasters who were the custodian of the result sheets of the students.
Merely because the D.I. of Schools subsequently died it can not be taken for granted
in the absence of any positive proof that he asked for the result sheets to the
headmasters non-officially and made the manipulations for any unlawful gain and
returned the same without the knowledge of the headmaster under whose authorities
those were handed over and were brought back. So the connivance or conspiracy by
the staffs of the D.I. of schools and the concerned Headmaster or headmistress for
abuse of their official position can not be ruled out in the absence of any official
communication to them either through the C.I. or D.I. The headmasters being the
person in authrotiy for the custody of the result sheets-a valuable security by which
the future of a students is created or remained at stake any deviation on the part of
the headmaster/headmistress has to be reasonably explained by them. So,
considering the opinion evidence by p.w.6 who has found the role of accused attached
teacher M. Prasad Rao in sending forged letters by forging the signatures of the D.I.
by manipulating the despatch register un under the custody of Jhadeswar Patnaik
who also took part in bringing the result sheets privately from one of the schools and
in view of the tampering in the results of 'pass' and fail' of so many students,
indisputeably the role by the concerned headmaster/headmistress can not be stated
to be official or in accordance with examination norms. Instead of simply handing
over the result sheets they should have asked for the official written order or should
have brought it to the notice of the higher authority i.e. the Committee of
examination or the C.I. of Schools, so that such manipulation should have been
prevented."
10. Mr. Rizvi, learned Additional Standing Counsel for Vigilance further contended that the oral
testimonies of all Prosecution Witnesses (PWs) were unequivocal and unambiguous, specifically
establishing the forgery and falsification of the Result Sheet and the credibility of PW-2 (Sr.
Clerk-cum-Jr. Accountant) and PW-6 (G.E.Q.D.) remained unimpeached, even under meticulous
cross-examination.
He further submitted that the learned Trial Court thoroughly analysed the evidence and rightly
concluded that the appellant was responsible for forgery and falsification of the Result Sheet as he
was the custodian of the result sheet. Therefore, there is no legal infirmity or perversity in the
impugned judgment dated 17.11.2009.
11. This Court has carefully examined the precedents cited, the materials on record, the depositions
of witnesses, and the reasoning of the learned trial court. From the collective evidence of
Prosecution the narrative in entirety vis-a-vis the appellants borne on record is that the appellant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76624454/ 9
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April, 2025
was working as Headmaster in Municipal High School No. 2 during the alleged crime happened. He
was on leave from 24.05.1994 to 26.06.1994. In his absentia P.W.7 was in charge. On 04.07.1994,
appellant(cid:128)s boss, the D.I. of Schools send a chit in the form of letter (Ext.19) asking him to send the
result sheet. The said Ext.19 found to be a manipulated letter at the instance of the co-accused
namely M. Prasad Rao. He complied the purported direction of the D.I. of Schools oblivious of the
fact that the chit was a forged one. Prosecution also proved on record that all manipulation in the
result sheet has been done by the co accused persons. However, the appellant(cid:128)s complicity in the
commission of crime has been assumed as he was the custodian of the result sheet being the
Headmaster. Therefore, the conviction is solely based on the inference of presumption u/s 114 of the
Evidence Act, 1872. Appellant is convicted under aid of Section 34 of IPC as admittedly he has not
participated in the forging of the documents. It is well established that a conviction under Section 34
of IPC requires proof of a common intention, which necessitates: (i) A pre-arranged plan or prior
meeting of minds. (ii) Active participation of the accused in the commission of the offence.
12. In the present case, there is no direct evidence establishing that the appellant conspired or acted
in concert with the principal accused to manipulate the result sheets. The evidence of prosecution
witness (P.W.7), Krushna Chandra Panigrahi, clearly suggests that the result sheets were already
altered before they were handed back to the appellant. Furthermore, the handwriting expert's report
(P.W.6) merely confirmed the alteration but did not link the appellant directly to the forgery.
13. The reliance on Section 114 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872, to infer guilt solely based on
circumstantial evidence is misplaced. As held in Dani Singh v. State of Bihar (supra) and Ramesh
Singh v. State of A.P. (supra), mere negligence or omission cannot be equated with guilt of criminal
liability unless there is clear evidence of intent and active participation. The learned trial court erred
in placing undue reliance on "presumption" without substantial proof of common intention.
14. Moreover, in a criminal trial, the burden lies on the prosecution to establish guilt beyond a
reasonable doubt. The absence of any material linking the appellant directly to the act of forgery or
tampering of marks negates the prosecution's case. At best, the appellant's actions amount to mere
procedural negligence on his part which cannot lead to draw a presumptive inference as „mens rea',
hence, does not satisfy the ingredients of the offences charged under Sections 467, 477-A, and 34 of
IPC along with Section 13(2) r/w Section 13(1)(d) of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988.
15. Moreover, the learned Trial Court while recording conviction for the offense U/s 467 of the IPC,
considered the manipulated result sheet to be "Valuable Security". It is an established principle of
law that a valuable security as defined U/s 30 of IPC denotes a document which is or purport to be a
document whereby any legal right is created, extended, transferred, restricted, extinguished or
released, or where by any person acknowledges that he lies under a legal liability or has not
ascertained legal right. At this point it would be apt to rely on the ruling of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme
Court in Shriniwas Pandit Dharamadhikari v. State of Maharashtra3, in which it was held thus: -
"The appellant was convicted of offence under Sections 417, 420 read with Section
511 and Section 471 read with Section 467 of the Penal Code, 1860 and sentenced to
various terms of imprisonment and fine for those offences. Having heard counsel for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76624454/ 10
Harihar Kharasudha Patnaik vs The State Of Orissa on 10 April, 2025
both sides we do not find any reason to disturb the order of conviction in respect of
offences under Sections 417 and 420 read with Section 511 but as regards the offence
under Section 471 read with Section 467 IPC we do not think that the two certificates
the appellant has been found to have forged to get admission in the Arts and
Commerce College affiliated to Poona University could be described as "valuable
security" as the expression is defined in Section 30 of the Penal Code, 1860. We
therefore alter the conviction under the aforesaid sections to one (1980) 4 SCC 551
under Section 471 read with Section 465 of the Penal Code, 1860.
However, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case we set aside the sentences passed
against the appellant and remit the matter to the trial court to consider, as provided in Section 6 of
the Probation of Offenders Act, 1958, whether the appellant should be given the benefit of Section 4
of the said Act. If the trial court does not find it expedient to release the appellant on probation of
good conduct under Section 4 of that Act, it should then pass proper sentences on the appellant for
the offences of which the appellant has been found guilty. The fine imposed on the appellant, if paid,
shall be refunded. The appeal is disposed of as above."
Going with the reasoning given by the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court, the alleged result sheet can(cid:128)t fall under
the definition of "valuable security". Therefore conviction of the co-accused u/s 467 of IPC cast a
shadow of doubt. Under the aid of Section 34 of IPC it is not safe to sustain conviction of the
appellant, when the evidence is doubtful and unclear, which undermines the prosecution case
beyond a reasonable threshold warranting acquittal.
16. Considering the totality of the circumstances, this Court finds that the prosecution has failed to
establish the appellant(cid:128)s guilt beyond a reasonable doubt. The conviction and sentence imposed by
the learned Trial Court are thus unsustainable in law and are hereby set aside.
17. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed. The appellant is acquitted of all charges. Bail bonds, if any,
stand discharged.
(S.S. Mishra) Judge The High Court of Orissa, Cuttack Dated the 10th April, 2025/ Swarna
Designation: Senior Stenographer Location: High Court of Orissa
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76624454/ 11
