Harjit Singh Slathia vs Inder Singh S/O Sh. Baldev Chand on 28 December, 2023
Harjit Singh Slathia vs Inder Singh S/O Sh. Baldev Chand on 28
December, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 15.12.2023
Pronounced on : 28.12.2023
CRMC No. 819/2018
Harjit Singh Slathia, Age 54 .....Petitioners/Appellants
years, S/o Sh. Harish Chander
Singh R/o Sheela Niwas Ward
No. 8, Tehsil Vijaypur District
Samba. Presently posted as
Branch Manager, Prem Nagar,
Doda Branch of Jammu and
Kashmir Bank ltd.
R.
Through: Mr. Ajay K. Gandotra, Advocate
Vs
Inder Singh S/o Sh. Baldev Chand, R/o ..... Respondent(s)
Village Pernote, Prem Nagar, Tehsil
Thatri, District Doda.
Through: Mr. Priyanshu Sharma, Advocate
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1) This petition under Section 561-A Cr. P.C. now, 482 Cr. P.C has been filed by the petitioner for
quashing the proceedings of the criminal complaint, titled, "Inder Singh vs. Harjeet Singh and
another", pending before the court of learned Additional Special Mobile Magistrate, Doda
(hereinafter to be referred as "the trial court") and also for quashing the order dated 28.11.2017 by
virtue of which the learned trial court has issued the process against the petitioner for commission
of offence under Section 409 RPC.
2) It is averred in the petition that one Smt. Rakshu Devi W/o Sh. Munish Kumar had availed
Working Capital Term Loan of Rs. 3.00 lacs from Prem Nagar Branch of Jammu and Kashmir Bank
Ltd. on 06.06.2014 and an instalment of Rs. 7,000/- per month was fixed towards the repayment of
loan. The respondent had stood as a guarantor for the borrower mentioned above and had also
executed Deed of Guarantee on 06.06.2014 in favour of the Bank, which provided that the Bank
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59404043/ 1
Harjit Singh Slathia vs Inder Singh S/O Sh. Baldev Chand on 28 December, 2023
shall have right of set off/appropriation of any money, claims or sale proceeds of the properties of
the guarantors in the hands of the Bank towards adjustment of the loan facility. The borrower
committed default in repayment of the loan and her loan account No. 0605265650000003 was
declared as Non Performing Asset (NPA) on 30.06.2016. In terms of the contractual obligations as
accepted by the respondent through the medium of the Deed of Guarantee and in view of the Bank
having the general lien upon the security of the guarantor as per Section 171 of Contract Act, an
amount of Rs. 10,000/- was deducted from the salary account No. 0449040120025500 of the
respondent maintained with the extension counter of Jammu and Kashmir Bank ltd. Doda on
08.12.2015, when the loan account of the borrower was declared as irregular. On 30.03.2016, an
amount of Rs. 8,000/- was debited from the account of the respondent and credited towards the
loan account of Smt. Rakshu Devi. The respondent on both the occasions did not raise any
objection.
3) The petitioner being In-charge of the branch of the Bank vide communications dated 22.02.2017
and dated 01.03.2017 after informing the respondent debited a sum of Rs. 2,65,295/- from the
account of the respondent on 06.03.2017 and adjusted the said amount in the loan account of said
barrower.
4) The respondent filed the complaint against the petitioner and one more accused before the court
of learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Doda, and the said complaint was assigned to the trial court.
The learned trial court directed an inquiry into the complaint through Chief Prosecutor Officer,
Doda for the purpose of ascertaining the truth or falsehood of the case. The Chief Prosecutor Officer,
Doda after recording the statements of complainant/ respondent herein, Sh. Mohan Lal, Cashier of
Extension Branch of J&K Bank ltd. Doda and SPO Mukhtyar Singh submitted the report before the
learned trial court and the learned trial court after placing reliance upon the report submitted by the
CPO, Doda, issued the process against the petitioner only for commission of offence under Section
409 RPC vide order dated 28.11.2017.
5) The petitioner has impugned the criminal proceedings arising out of the complaint and also the
order dated 28.11.2017 on the grounds that complaint preferred by the respondent was required to
be dismissed at the threshold and even after receipt of the inquiry report, no sufficient ground was
existing so as to necessitate the issuance of the process against the petitioner as the petitioner had
exercised his power as vested in him being the official of the Bank under Section 171 of the Contract
Act and the Deed of Guarantee authorised the petitioner to affect recovery from the deposit and
security of the guarantor, whereas the Inquiry Officer was not made aware of the factum of
execution of the Deed of Guarantee in favour of the Bank. The alleged act of the petitioner was
performed by him in exercise of his official duty and could neither be construed as misappropriation
of funds entrusted to the Bank by the respondent nor as an act of criminal breach of trust. There was
no sufficient ground for proceeding against the petitioner as the complaint was manifestly attended
with mala fide and proceedings have been maliciously instituted so as to bring bad name to the
petitioner's Bank.
6) Notice was issued to the respondent, which was duly served. Mr. Priyanshu Sharma, Advocate
caused appearance on behalf of the respondent. He did not choose to file reply.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59404043/ 2
Harjit Singh Slathia vs Inder Singh S/O Sh. Baldev Chand on 28 December, 2023
7) Mr. Ajay Kumar Gandotra, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently argued that the
respondent had stood as a Guarantor in respect of the credit facility availed by one Rakshu Devi and
the petitioner had debited the amount only in performance of his official duties and pursuant to the
Deed of Guarantee executed by the respondent himself. He further submitted that the petitioner had
not misappropriated any amount for his own benefit as the same was used for the purpose of
settling the loan facility availed by the barrower.
8) Mr. Priyanshu Sharma, learned counsel for the respondent argued that the inquiry conducted by
the Chief Prosecutor Officer, Doda clearly demonstrates that an amount of Rs. 2,83,298/- of the
respondent was misappropriated by the petitioner. He further submitted that as per the Deed of
Guarantee, notice was required to be issued to the respondent.
9) Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
10) From the perusal of the record, it is evident that the respondent filed a complaint against the
petitioner and one more accused on the ground that he was an employee of Power Development
Department and used to receive his salary from the salary counter of the Bank at Doda and in his
account No. 0449040120025500, an amount of Rs. 2,65,295/- was lying. The petitioner and
co-accused without any reason and authorization of the respondent transferred the amount from his
aforementioned account number to the account of the borrower bearing No. 0605265650000003. It
is further stated that by debiting the amount, the petitioner and co-accused committed the breach of
trust.
11) The learned trial court postponed the issue of process and directed the Chief Prosecutor Officer,
Doda to conduct an inquiry in terms of Section 202 Cr.PC. The inquiry was conducted by the CPO,
Doda and during the course of inquiry, he recorded the statements of the complainant and Mohan
Lal, Cashier, J&K Bank, Salary Ext. Branch, Doda and one SPO Mukhtiyar Singh. In his statement,
the respondent admitted that in the year 2014, he stood as a guarantor to his neighbour, namely,
Smt. Raksho Devi, who had obtained a loan of Rs. 3.00 lacs from J&K Bank, Branch Prem Nagar,
Doda. He also admitted that Rs. 7,000/- was fixed as monthly instalment and in the year, 2015 an
amount of Rs. 10,000/- was debited by the petitioner from his salary account and credited the same
in the loan account of Smt. Raksho Devi maintained by her at J&K Bank Branch Prem Nagar
without any prior notice and without seeking his consent. Thereafter, again in the month of March
2016, the petitioner deducted an amount of Rs. 8,000/- from the account of the petitioner and
credited the same in the loan account of Smt. Raksho Devi. After deduction, the accused No. 2
freezed his account so that no withdrawal could be affected from this account, though the money
could be deposited. On 06.03.2017, the petitioner again debited an amount of Rs. 2,65,295/- from
the account of the respondent without prior notice or permission and credited the same to the loan
account of Smt. Raksho Devi, thereby causing huge loss and mental harassment to him. Mohan Lal,
Cashier also deposed about deduction of the amount made from the account of the petitioner and
deposit of the same in the loan account of Smt. Raksho Devi.
12) A perusal of the inquiry report reveals that despite notice, the petitioner did not participate in
the inquiry proceedings and Inquiry Officer, CPO, Doda by virtue of enquiry report dated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59404043/ 3
Harjit Singh Slathia vs Inder Singh S/O Sh. Baldev Chand on 28 December, 2023
30.06.2017 recorded that the petitioner did not associate himself in the enquiry proceedings despite
being informed many times, as such, it could not be ascertained as to whether loanee had committed
any default in re-paying the loan or not. Simultaneously, it was observed by the Inquiry Officer that
only in the eventuality of the non-payment of the loan by the loanee, Raksho Devi, the guarantor
could be made liable. After noting the non-participation of the petitioner in the enquiry proceedings
and drawing adverse inference against the petitioner, the Inquiry Officer opined that the amount
has been debited illegally from the account of the respondent without prior notice to him. The
learned trial court vide order dated 28.11.2017 after placing reliance upon the inquiry report
submitted by the CPO, Doda, issued the process against the petitioner. The following admitted facts
emerge from the inquiry report submitted by the CPO Doda:
i) That the petitioner stood as a guarantor in respect of the loan availed by Smt.
Raksho Devi for an amount of Rs. 3.00 lacs for opening a readymade garments shop
at Prem Nagar, Doda and Rs. 7000/- was fixed as monthly instalment.
ii) That in the year, 2015 an amount of Rs. 10,000/- was deducted from the salary
account of the respondent and credited the same to the loan account of Smt. Raksho
Devi. In the month of March, 2016 again the petitioner deducted an amount of Rs.
8,000/-
without his permission and credited the same in the above mentioned loan account of Smt. Raksho
Devi.
iii) That the account of the respondent was freezed by the accused No. 2 and no withdrawal could be
made from the account of the respondent though the money could be deposited.
iv) On 6th March, 2017, the petitioner debited an amount of Rs.
2,65,295/- from the account of the respondent and credited the same in the loan account of Smt.
Raksho Devi.
13) The respondent has not at all disputed the Deed of Guarantee executed by him. Now, the issue
that is required to be considered by this Court is as to whether the petitioner has committed the
criminal breach of trust or has acted in performance of his official duty. It would be appropriate to
take note of Section 171 of the Contract Act, which is extracted as under:
"171. General lien of bankers, factors, wharfingers, attorneys and policy brokers-
Bankers, factors, wharfringers, attorney of a High Court and policy brokers may, in
the absence of a contract to the contrary, retain as a security for a general balance of
account, any goods bailed to them, but no other persons have a right to retain, as a
security for such balance, goods bailed to them, unless there is an express contract to
that effect."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59404043/ 4
Harjit Singh Slathia vs Inder Singh S/O Sh. Baldev Chand on 28 December, 2023
14) The aforesaid section provides for general lien of bankers and this right of the bank was
specifically incorporated in the Deed of Guarantee. The relevant part of the Deed of Guarantee is
extracted as under:
"The Guarantors agree that during the Borrower's indebtedness the Bank shall have
the right of general lien over all goods/ securities/ negotiable instruments,
documents of title etc, of the Guarantors and shall also have the right of set
off/appropriation of any moneys, claims or sale proceeds of the properties of the
Guarantors in hands of the Bank towards adjustment of the Loan facility. The
appropriation shall be made by Bank towards discharge of the debts in order of time
whether they are not time barred under the law of limitation for the time being in
force. Amongst the debts of same standing the expenses, costs, charges etc. shall be
adjusted first, the interest shall be adjusted next and the loan facility or any other
principal sum shall be adjusted at last. Bank may also consolidate and combine any
to or more loan accounts of the borrower by transferring the balance of one account
into the other as the Bank in its absolute discretion deems fit, at anytime-regardless
of the status of those two accounts at such time. And in addition to the statutory right
of general lien or other similar right of the bank as a banker, the Bank may at any
time and without any notice to the Guarantors combine or consolidate all or any of
their accounts with, and liabilities to, the Bank and set off or transfer any credit
balance/s of these account/s in satisfaction of the liabilities of the
Borrower/Guarantors towards the Bank in any respect, whether such liabilities be
actual, contingent, several or joint, and pending any such action, to the extent
necessary, may hold such amounts as collateral to secure such obligations and
liabilities of the Borrower/Guarantors and to return as unpaid for insufficient funds
any and all checks and other items drawn against any such credits/ deposits so held
as the Bank in its sole discretion may elect."
(Emphasis added)
15) A perusal of the above covenant demonstrates that during the currency of borrower's
indebtedness, the Bank shall have the right of general lien over all the goods/securities/negotiable
instruments, documents of title etc. of the Guarantor and shall also have the right of
set-off/appropriation of any money's claims or sale proceeds of the properties of the guarantors in
hands of the Bank towards adjustment of the loan facility.
16) The respondent has not been able to demonstrate that the amount was debited by the petitioner
when the borrower was not indebted to the Bank. Though Mr. Priyanshu Sharma tried to persuade
this Court that it was obligatory on the part of the Bank to issue notice to the respondent and then
only the amount could have been debited. The argument though appears to be attractive but is
without any substance, as covenant No. 7 of the Deed of Guarantee specifically provides that Bank
can exercise this right without notice to the guarantor. More so, it is not the case of the respondent
that the petitioner misappropriated the money for his personal use. The petitioner had debited the
money and credited the amount in the loan account of the borrower. If criminal prosecution is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59404043/ 5
Harjit Singh Slathia vs Inder Singh S/O Sh. Baldev Chand on 28 December, 2023
allowed on such accusations then it would have devastating effect on the functioning of Banks, as
they are in fact the custodian of the public money. No Bank Officer would be able to work freely so
as to recover loan amount from the borrower. This Court has no hesitation to hold that the criminal
proceedings have been instituted against the petitioner maliciously. Even it is assumed for the sake
of arguments that the petitioner being the employee of the Bank had wrongly debited the amount,
the respondent could have initiated appropriate civil proceedings against the Bank but in no manner
could have resorted to initiation of criminal proceedings against the petitioner and that too without
impleading the Bank as party to the complaint as the amount debited from the account of the
respondent was not used by the petitioner for his benefit but for safeguarding the financial interest
of the Bank.
17) In M.N. Ojha v. Alok Kumar Srivastav, (2009) 9 SCC 682, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India
quashed the criminal proceedings against the Bank employees initiated by the guarantor, with
following observations:
"33. This is one case where the averments and allegations made in the complaint do
not disclose the commission of any offence by the appellants or any one of them.
They were merely discharging their duties to realise and recover the amounts due to
the Bank from the borrower as well as the guarantors. The complaint obviously has
been filed as a counterblast to the proceedings already initiated by the Bank including
the first information report lodged by the first appellant against the complainant and
the borrower for the offences of cheating and misappropriation.
34. Sequence of events undoubtedly suggests that the criminal proceedings have been
maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive of wreaking vengeance on the
appellants and with a view to spite them due to personal grudge. It was clearly
intended to prevent the public servants from discharging their duties. The criminal
law has been set in motion by the learned SDJM on mere asking to do so by the
complainant."
(emphasis added)
18) In "Mahmood Ali v. State of U.P.", 2023 SCC OnLine SC 950, while examining the scope of
interference under section 482 Cr.P.C with the criminal proceedings initiated against the accused,
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India has held as under:
"13. At this stage, we would like to observe something important. Whenever an
accused comes before the Court invoking either the inherent powers under Section
482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure (CrPC) or extraordinary jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution to get the FIR or the criminal proceedings quashed
essentially on the ground that such proceedings are manifestly frivolous or vexatious
or instituted with the ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance, then in such
circumstances the Court owes a duty to look into the FIR with care and a little more
closely. We say so because once the complainant decides to proceed against the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59404043/ 6
Harjit Singh Slathia vs Inder Singh S/O Sh. Baldev Chand on 28 December, 2023
accused with an ulterior motive for wreaking personal vengeance, etc., then he would
ensure that the FIR/complaint is very well drafted with all the necessary pleadings.
The complainant would ensure that the averments made in the FIR/complaint are
such that they disclose the necessary ingredients to constitute the alleged offence.
Therefore, it will not be just enough for the Court to look into the averments made in
the FIR/complaint alone for the purpose of ascertaining whether the necessary
ingredients to constitute the alleged offence are disclosed or not. In frivolous or
vexatious proceedings, the Court owes a duty to look into many other attending
circumstances emerging from the record of the case over and above the averments
and, if need be, with due care and circumspection try to read in between the lines.
The Court while exercising its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the CrPC or Article
226 of the Constitution need not restrict itself only to the stage of a case but is
empowered to take into account the overall circumstances leading to the
initiation/registration of the case as well as the materials collected in the course of
investigation. Take for instance the case on hand. Multiple FIRs have been registered
over a period of time. It is in the background of such circumstances the registration of
multiple FIRs assumes importance, thereby attracting the issue of wreaking
vengeance out of private or personal grudge as alleged."
(emphasis added)
19. In view of the above, this Court is of the considered view that the continuance of the proceedings
against the petitioner would be nothing but an abuse of process of law, as he has only discharged his
official duties and the alleged act, which is being termed by the respondent as an offence, was in fact
committed by him on the basis of Deed of Guarantee in the interest of the Bank and not for his
personal benefit, therefore no criminality is involved in such act of the petitioner.
20. For what has been said and discussed above, the present petition is allowed and the complaint,
titled, "Inder Singh vs. Harjeet Singh and another", pending before the Court of learned Additional
Special Mobile Magistrate, Doda" as well as process issued vide order 28.11.2017, are quashed.
(RAJNESH OSWAL) JUDGE Jammu 28.12.2023 Karam Chand/Secy Whether the order is
speaking: Yes/No Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59404043/ 7
