Harjeet Singh And Others vs Union Territory Of J&K And Another on 8 May, 2023
Harjeet Singh And Others vs Union Territory Of J&K And
Another on 8 May, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
...
CRM(M) No.822/20222
Harjeet Singh and others ....... Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Priyanshu Sharma, Advocate
Versus
Union Territory of J&K and another .........Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. P.D.Singh, Dy. AG
CORAM: HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1) In this petition filed under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the petitioners seek
quashment of Charge-sheet No.20/2017 dated 25/02/2017 titled State of J&K v. Harjeet Singh and
others, pending disposal before the Court of learned Forest Magistrate, Jammu arising out of FIR
No.164/2015 registered with Police Station, Satwari, Jammu under Sections 452, 325 and 34 IPC.
2) Briefly stated, the case of the prosecution is that petitioner No.5 (complainant in the
charge-sheet) and petitioner No.1 did not share cordial relations with each other. As per the
charge-sheet, owing to the personal enmity between petitioner No.1 and petitioner No.5, which was
based upon a piece of land situated at village Rohi, Babliana, District Jammu and in order to
eliminate petitioner No.5, petitioner No.1 along with petitioner Nos. 2 to 4 trespassed into the house
of petitioner No.5 and caused grievous hurt and injuries. It is submitted that charges have been
framed against petitioner Nos. 1 to 4 on 15.11.2021 for offences under Section 452, 325 and 34 RPC.
As per the petitioners, no prosecution witness has been examined so far.
3) During the pendency of the charge-sheet, the parties with the intervention of the relatives and
common friends have decided to dissolve the disputes between them and have entered into a
compromise, which has been executed and registered with notary public on 28th September, 2022.
It is submitted that petitioner No.5 is the real nephew of petitioner No.2 and cousin of petitioner
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27921475/ 1
Harjeet Singh And Others vs Union Territory Of J&K And Another on 8 May, 2023
No.2. As per the compromise deed, which has been executed on 28.09.2022, the parties have settled
their disputes amicably as they want to live peacefully without involving themselves in further
litigation. It is further stated in the compromise deed that the parties will approach the Court
seeking quashment of the charge-sheet impugned in this petition. The petitioners have also made
statements before the Registrar Judicial on 18.12.2022, wherein they have stated that they have
amicably resolved all disputes and issues and the contents of the deed of compromise as well as its
execution have also been admitted.
4) I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
5) So far as the facts alleged in petition pertaining to the compromise arrived at between the parties
in terms of compromise deed dated 28.09.2022, are concerned, the same are not disputed.
However, according to the petitioners, offence under Section 452 RPC is non-compoundable. In the
backdrop of this position, the question arises as to whether this Court has power to quash the
proceedings, particularly when some of the offences alleged to have been committed are
non-compoundable in nature. The Supreme Court in the case of Gian Singh. v. State of Punjab &
another, reported in (2012) 10 SCC 303, while considering this aspect, has observed as under:
"57. The position that emerges from the above discussion can be summarised thus:
the power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to
a criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code.
Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases
power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised
where the offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
and circumstances of each case and no category can be prescribed. However, before
exercise of such power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences
like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not
private in nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise
between the victim and offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like
Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while
working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the purposes of
quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category
of cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27921475/ 2
Harjeet Singh And Others vs Union Territory Of J&K And Another on 8 May, 2023
and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put accused to great oppression
and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise with the victim.
In other words, the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or contrary
to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of law despite
settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end and if
the answer to the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding.."
6) Similarly, the Supreme Court in the case titled Narinder Singh & Ors. Vs. State of Punjab & anr,
reported in (2014) 6 SCC 466, has laid down guidelines for quashing of criminal proceedings. The
guidelines are reproduced as under:
"31. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay down the following
principles by which the High Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
the settlement between c/w CRM(M) No.614/2021 the parties and exercising its
power under Section 482 of the Code while accepting the settlement and quashing
the proceedings or refusing to accept the settlement with direction to continue with
the criminal proceedings:
(I) Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be distinguished from the
power which lies in the Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has inherent power
to quash the criminal proceedings even in those cases which are not compoundable,
where the parties have settled the matter between themselves. However, this power is
to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
(II) When the parties have reached the settlement and on that basis petition for
quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases would be
to secure:
(i) ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
While exercising the power the High Court is to form an opinion on either of the aforesaid two
objectives. (III) Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions which involve heinous and
serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
private in nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for offences alleged to have been
committed under special statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by
Public Servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27921475/ 3
Harjeet Singh And Others vs Union Territory Of J&K And Another on 8 May, 2023
(IV) On the other, those criminal cases having overwhelmingly and pre-dominantly civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship
or family disputes should be quashed when the parties have resolved their entire disputes among
themselves.
(V) While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine as to whether the possibility of
conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases would put the accused to great
oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal cases.
(VI) Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the category of heinous and serious offences and
therefore is to be generally treated as crime against the society and not against the individual alone.
However, the High Court c/w CRM(M) No.614/2021 would not rest its decision merely because
there is a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this provision. It
would be open to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there
for the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if proved, would lead to
proving the charge under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to
go by the nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of
the body, nature of weapons used etc. Medical report in respect of injuries suffered by the victim can
generally be the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis, the High Court can examine
as to whether there is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances of conviction are remote and
bleak. In the former case it can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the criminal proceedings
whereas in the later case it would be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea compounding
the offence based on complete settlement between the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be
swayed by the fact that the settlement between the parties is going to result in harmony between
them which may improve their future relationship. (VII) While deciding whether to exercise its
power under Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of settlement play a crucial role. Those cases
where the settlement is arrived at immediately after the alleged commission of offence and the
matter is still under investigation, the High Court may be liberal in accepting the settlement to
quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is because of the reason that at this stage the
investigation is still on and even the charge sheet has not been filed. Likewise, those cases where the
charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is still at infancy stage, the High
Court can show benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but after prima facie assessment of
the circumstances/material mentioned above. On the other hand, where the prosecution evidence is
almost complete or after the conclusion of the evidence the matter is at the stage of argument,
normally the High Court should refrain from exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code, as
in such cases the trial court would be in a position to decide the case finally on merits and to come a
conclusion as to whether the offence under Section 307 IPC is committed or not. Similarly, in those
cases where the conviction is already recorded by the trial court and the matter is at the appellate
stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the parties would not be a c/w CRM(M)
No.614/2021 ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has already been
convicted by the trial court. Here charge is proved under Section 307 IPC and conviction is already
recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question of sparing a convict found guilty of
such a crime."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27921475/ 4
Harjeet Singh And Others vs Union Territory Of J&K And Another on 8 May, 2023
7) From a perusal of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court, it is clear that in the cases or
disputes which have predominantly civil flavour and where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute, the High Court is well within
its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceedings if it is known that because of the compromise
arrived at between the parties, there is remote possibility of securing conviction of the accused. In
fact, in such cases, the Supreme Court has clearly observed that it would amount to extreme
injustice if despite settlement having been arrived at by the parties, the criminal proceedings are
allowed to continue.
8) Adverting to the facts of the instant case, it is clear that the parties to the dispute, i.e., petitioner
Nos. 1 to 4 and petitioner No.5, have entered into a compromise, whereby they petitioner No.5 has
decided not to pursue the prosecution against petitioner Nos. 1 to 4 in the impugned
FIR/charge-sheet. Therefore, once the rival groups have arrived at a settlement as regards the basis
of the dispute, allowing the prosecutions to continue merely because some of the offences alleged
against the accused are non-compoundable in nature would amount to great injustice to both the
parties and, in fact, it will amount to frittering away the fruits of compromise that has been arrived
at between the parties, who happen to be relatives and want to live peacefully. The continuance of
criminal proceedings against the petitioner Nos. 1 to 4, in these circumstances, will be nothing but
an abuse of process of law.
9) In view of the aforesaid discussion, this petition is allowed. Accordingly, charge-sheet
No.20/2017 dated 25.02.2017 pending disposal before the Court of learned Forest Magistrate,
Jammu arising out of FIR No.164/2015 registered with Police Station, Satwari is quashed.
(Sanjay Dhar) Judge Jammu 08.05.2023 Sanjeevu Whether order is reportable:Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27921475/ 5
