Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control
Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
KHOIROM Digitally signed by
KHOIROM IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
BIPINCHAN BIPINCHANDRA
Date: 2024.12.13
SINGH
AT IMPHAL
DRA SINGH 16:55:11 +05'30'
BAIL APPLICATION No. 12 of 2024
Harshal Desai aged about 55 years, S/o Praful Desai
resident of A-801, Suncity Apartment, Near Bhulka
Bhavan/Surya flats, Adajan, Surat, Gujarat - 395001.
.... Petitioner
- Versus -
The Narcotics Control Bureau (NCB) Imphal through its
Intelligence Officer, CPWD Quarters, Changangei,
Kongba Uchekon, Imphal West, Manipur - 795008.
.... Respondent
BEFORE HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE GOLMEI GAIPHULSHILLU For the petitioner : Mr. Osbert
Khaling, Advocate For the respondents : Mr. W. Darakishwor, Sr. PCCG Date of hearing :
22.08.2024 Date of judgment & order : 13.12.2024 Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 1
JUDGEMENT & ORDER (CAV) [1] Heard Mr. Osbert Khaling, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner and Mr. W. Darakishwor, learned senior PCCG appearing for the respondent.
[2] The present application has been filed on behalf of Harshal Desai under Section 439 of the
Cr.P.C. 1973 with the following prayers:
(i) To issue notice to the respondent.
(ii) To grant regular bail u/s 439 Cr.P.C., 197 to release the
petitioner namely, Harshal Desai in connection with NCB Crime No. 02/NCB/Imp/2023, dated
03.03.2023 U/s 8© & 9A read with Sec. 21©, 25A, 25 & 29 of the ND & PS Act, 1985, and
Additional Complaint dated 03.10.2023, U/s 9A, 25A, 26 and 29 of the ND & PS Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 1
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
(iii) Pass any order/direction which the Hon'ble Court deems fit and proper in the facts and
circumstances of the case as to meet the end of justice.
[3] Brief facts of the case are that upon receiving secret information on 03.03.2023, the
Superintendent of NCB raid the house of Jangminthang Guite, a resident of Moreh, Tengnoupal,
533 numbers of plastic packets of Pseudoephidrine tablets labelled with Cetrizine Hudrochloride
Tabets 10 Mg Levocet manufactured by Sunview Biotech, Gandhinagar were found from the kitchen
of the house. Since the said Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 2 Jangminthang Guite was not
present in the house at the time, his mother namely, Mrs. Nemkhohat Guite was arrested.
In the statement of Nemkhohat Guite, the contraband was received from one Sultani and her
husband Abdul Wakil of Delhi. Further, in the statement of Abdul Wakil, he obtained the said
contraband from Ahmedabad based firm namely, M/s Recover Healthcare located at Sarkhej,
Ahmedabad, Gujarat on 31.01.2023.
[4] Upon being conducted the M/s Recover Healthcare premises, the NCB arrested 3 (three)
persons namely, Mr. Nitin Panchal, Mr. Anil Nayaka and Bhadresh Patel who was the owner of M/s
Recover Healthcare and other 2 (two) employees of the firm.
In the statements of Mr. Nitin Panchal, Mr. Anil Nayaka and Bhadresh Patel, on 19.01.2023 the said
contraband was sent by Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd., village Songadh, District Tapi along with goods,
official and e-way bills issued by Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd. showing Admos-SR tablets.
Further, in the statement of Bhadresh Patel, Hetal Shah rejected the goods received from Ardor
Drugs Pvt. Ltd., to whom the same were tried to sell out. Thereafter, Bhadresh Patel worked with
Abdul Wakil for the same labelling with Levocet in lieu of any Pseudoephedrine content tablets for
free transit. For the said deal of 15 lakhs Pseudoehedrine tablets, Abdul Wakil made payment of Rs.
11.68 lakh in the bank account of M/s Recover Healthcare with Bank of Baroda and Bhadresh Patel
paid Rs. 5 lakhs to Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd. in the account of Bank of India. Further, transportation of
the said goods was made from Delhi to Imphal. Part of Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 3 the
goods was exported to Myanmar and the remaining to Moreh from where the same was seized by
NCB, Imphal Manipur. [5] On many occasions, Harshal Desai who is the managing director of Ardor
Drugs Pvt. Ltd. issued bogus invoices to M/s Recover Healthcare and Bhadresh Patel, owner of the
M/s Recover Healthcare got commission upon such invoices without actual supply of goods.
Bhadresh Patel has been known to Abdul Wakil and they have done similar deal successfully long
time back. In connection with the alleged offence, Harshal Desai along with its employee Mehul
Desai were arrested by NCB, Imphal, Manipur and presently in the judicial custody at Manipur
Central Jail, Sajiwa. [6] According to the petitioner, on 13.08.2023, the petitioner/accused and
another accused, Mehul Desai made a voluntary statement under Section 67 of the NDPS and on the
same day, the petitioner has already retracted his so-called statement by letter of retraction dated
13.08.2023 which has already been submitted on record of Special Judge (NDPS), Manipur.
On 14.08.2023 the petitioner filed a remand objection being registered as Cril. Misc. (B) No. 173 of
2023 before the Ld. Special Judge (NDPS), Manipur for releasing the accused on bail; however the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 2
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
case was rejected on the same day. Even though another remain objection was filed on 16.10.2023
being registered as Cril. Misc(B) No. 249 of 2023 before the same Court, the same was also rejected
vide order dated 30.11.2023. Further, a bail application being Bail Appln. No. 7 of 2024 was filed
before this High Court, but the same was withdrawn by the previous advocate on Bail Application
No. 12 of 2024 Page 4 05.02.2024 without entering into merit with liberty to file a fresh. Therefore,
the petitioner/accused filed the present application on the following grounds:
(i) The so-called purported confessional statement of the petitioner under Section 67
of NDPS Act is not the voluntary statement. The signature obtained upon the
confessional statement has been taken by coercion and under duress and the same is
given involuntarily and without the free will of the applicant who has been made to
testify against his own self which is against the provisions of the law and barred by
Section 25 and 26 of the Indian Evidence Act.
(ii) All the statements given before the Investigating Officer during their custody are
not admissible in evidence in view of clear provision of law under Section 25 and 26
of the Indian Evidence Act as well as law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the
reportable judgment delivered in Criminal Appeal No. 152 of 2023 [Tofan Singh V.
State of Tamil Nadu] and judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court reported in 1984 (1) SC
284. Even otherwise the statements of the co-accused and the present applicant do
not amount to statements u/s 67 of NDPS Act.
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 5
(iii) Except the so-called confessional statement, there is
no material against the present applicant who has already retracted his so-called
statement by letter of retraction dated 13.08.2023 which has already been submitted
on record of Trial Court.
(iv) In the godown of M/s Recover Healthcare, there were many other goods
procured from other various parties.
(v) The present applicant or any person from the Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd. were not in
contact with any drug peddler or any other person namely, Abdul Wakil and has
never communicated or even seen Mr. Abdul Wakil who is known to Bhadresh Patel
from M/s Recover Healthcare.
(vi) The present applicant nowhere attributed any role in the alleged transaction
using false invoices as narrated by the prosecution case itself.
(vii) According to Bhadresh Patel, this was not the first transaction. Not only that,
they were in contact with each other through Trade India, a B2B business platform
for a long time.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 3
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
(viii) The Call Detail Reports collected by the Investigating Agency reveals that the
present applicant has neither talked with Abdul Wakil at any point of time Bail
Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 6 till today. There is nothing wrong or offensive in
the certain periodical telephonic contact of the applicant with Bhadresh Patel, Mehul
Desai. It is not even the case of prosecution that the applicant was having any contact
with Jangminthang Guite and his wife Sultani.
(ix) Prima facie cases can be made out only on the basis of the material which is
legally admissible in evidence. Inadmissible and irrelevant material cannot be the
basis of the prima facie case in criminal jurisprudence.
(x) The Ld. Special Judge failed to deal with or even consider the applicant's written
argument submitted in support of Bail Application being Cril. Misc.(B) No. 249 of
2023.
(xi) The license of the Ardor Drug Pvt. Ltd. is still in existence, which has never been revoked or
cancelled since the company has never breached any conditions mentioned in the license.
(xii) The seized substances are neither the Narcotic nor Psychotropic substances but the same is a
simple controlled substance and not governed by ND & PS Act and therefore, no commercial
quantity or Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 7 otherwise is prescribed for such controlled
substance.
(xiii) Bar under Section 37 of the ND & PS Act would not be applicable in the present case and the
same is only applicable to cases under provisions of Section 19, 24 and 27A.
(xiv) Even Sections 9A, 25A, 26 and 29 of the ND & PS Act are also not applicable on prima facie
case itself as there is no violation of license condition and there has been no complaint or even
inquiry from the Tax Department. Furthermore, all the accounts and GST returns are tallied.
(xv) It is well settled principle, that the bar under Section 37 of the NDPS Act would seize to exist
and bail can be granted even if the quantity involve dis commercial quantity, if the Court is satisfied
that prima facie no offence is made out against the accused after perusing the materials on record.
(xvi) The applicant has in fact no criminal antecedents at all, however the applicant was implicated
in false case of NDPS at Surat, Gujarat by DRI, wherein the applicant was released on bail by High
Court of Gujarat. The order remained confirmed by the Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 8
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India since the SLP by DRI has been rejected by Apex Court.
(xvii) The presence of the applicant can be secured by imposing suitable conditions upon him and
for that purpose, his jail custody is not required. It is a settled principle of law that "bail is a rule ad
jail is an exception". There is a big distinction between pre-trial custody and post trial custody.
(xviii) The trial is likely to take a long time and keeping the applicant behind the bar for an uncertain
long period would amount to pre-trial punishment to him which directly violates his fundamental
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 4
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
right enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
[7] Mr. Osbert Khaling, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner further submits that the
petitioner was arrested on 05.08.2023 and first remanded to judicial custody on 09.08.2023 in
connection with NCB Crime No. 02/NCB/Imp/2023, dated 03.03.2023 U/s 8(c) & 9A to be read
with 21(c), 25(A), 25 & 29 of the ND & PS Act, 1985 and till dater the accused has been languishing
at Manipur Central Jail, Sajiwa for nearly 14 months. When no prima facie case is made out, the
accused must be released on bail, but, even if prima facie case is made out, the accused deserves to
be enlarged on bail if his presence in the trial can be secured by imposing necessary conditions.
Further, there is undue delay in trial and Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 9 till date no framing
of charges has been done after a span of 11 months after having been filed the chargesheet.
After arrest, a person cannot be made a witness against himself as the same has been barred under
Article 30(3) of the Constitution of India. Even otherwise, the other co-accused persons have already
retracted their respective statements. The entire case of the prosecution against the applicant is fully
based on the statement of co-accused Bhadresh Patel and confessional statement of applicant
himself, while he was in custody. Both of these statements are not admissible in evidence and there
is no admissible material available against the applicant. The present petitioner has been
unnecessarily harassed by the respondent as to the fact that even after chargesheet, the petitioner
was detained under PIT NDPS, just to keep him in jail even if bail is granted but the said detention
was set aside by this High Court on 26.07.2024. [8] Mr. W. Darakishwor, learned senior PCCG
appearing for the respondents submits that the present petitioner (Harshal Desai) has
masterminded the entire modus operandi of this illegal trade business by performing himself as the
owner/director of M/S Ardor Drug Pvt. Ltd, Ahmedabad, Gujarat. The seized Pseudoephedrine
tablets fake labelled as "CETRIZINE HYDROCHLORIDE TABLETS 10 MG LEVOCET" weighing
110.5kg was brought from Ahmedabad to Moreh via Delhi during the month of February 2023 in
violation of the existing laws in force under the mastermind of the present petitioner, accused
Harshal Desai, Bradesh Patel in conspiracy with the other co-accused. The accused Harshal Desai is
the Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 10 main kingpin behind this inter-state trafficking of
pseudoephedrine tablets from Gujarat to Myanmar, he was the main supplier who was directly
supplying the drugs to Myanmar through his associates- Mehul Desai, Bradesh Patel, Abdul Wakil
and other co- accused after misusing the unique registration number allotted to its company Ardor
Drugs Pvt. Ltd., in lure of earning more money he diverted Pseudoephedrine to illicit channel.
The accused Harshal Desai is involved in the connivance with Mehul Desai and Bradesh Patel for
generating bogus bill of various pseudoephedrine tablets. For such prior offences they had already
been arrested by the Directorate of Revenue Intelligence, Surat under Crime No. 1 of 2020 and they
were on bail during the execution of arrest of warrant issued by the Special Judge, ND & PS,
Manipur.
It is also clear from the statement of one tempo driver as well as from the statement of Mehul Desai
that under the instruction of Harshal Desai and Bradesh Patel 26 carton boxes were delivered from
the Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd., Songadh-Ukai Road, Tapi to M/s Recover Healthcare, Sarkhej,
Ahmedabad. There has been similar kind of seizure of 13 Lakh Pseudoephedrine tablets affected in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 5
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
Sagaing Region of Myanmar in August 2020. Again 39 lakhs of pseudoephedrine tablets in the
brand Colzen containing Pseudoephedrine were seized in Champai, Mizoram in March, 2023.
The seized Pseudoephedrine tablets is not only controlled medicine, but it is the main raw material
for processing of Methamphetamine (ATS) - a banned drug in neighbouring country Bail
Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 11 Myanmar. And as said earlier also, it is a cause of concern for
National Security. The seized 533 packets in the present case are the part of 1500 packets of
Pseudoephedrine tablets that was manufactured by Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd., Songadh, Tapi. The rest
967 packets got succeeded to go through Moreh border to Myanmar. Thus, this case is also having
international linkage.
The present applicant is the main kingpin who has diverted the huge quantity of Pseudoephedrine
tablets into illegal channel which has somehow crossed Myanmar border either from Mizoram side
or Manipur side. The accused Harshal Desai has criminal antecedents and he is on bail in NDPS
case No. 48/2020 registered at Principal District and Session Court, Surat, Gujarat.
This is the crime committed by the petitioner while being released on bail in connection with NDPS
case no. 48/2020 registered at Principal District and Session Court, Surat, Gujarat which was
initiated by DRI, Surat.
There is still various new aspects which are yet to be explored to ascertain the further linkage or the
source of the seized 110.5 kg of Pseudoephedrine tablets, which will not be possible if the accused is
granted bail at this juncture. During the course of investigation, house search at the residence of
Nitin Panchal (one of the accused in the case from Gujarat) was conducted by NCB and recover
some documents of M/s Elite medical store, Aizawl which surfaced in the instant case. Follow up
was conducted at M/s Elite Medical Store, Aizawl, Mizoram by team NCB, Guwahati on Bail
Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 12 dated 03/11/2023 and statement of the proprietor of M/s Elite
store recorded. Accordingly, letter vide NCB 02/NCB/Imp/2023 dated 03.11.2023 to the State Drug
Controller, Mizoram, Aizawl was requested to enquire and take necessary action as per D&C act and
other relevant laws against diversion of pseudoephedrine tablets. Directorate of Health
Services-Food & Drugs Administration wing- Mizoram vide order dated 21st Feb, 2024 cancelled the
Drug License of Elite Medical store.
The enquiry was conducted at NCB, Ahmedabad on 12.12.2023 regarding details of URN issued to
M/s Ardor Drug Pvt. Ltd. Accordingly, letter issued to ZD, Ahmedabad on dated 19.12.2023 seeking
details on the URN issued by NCB, Ahmedabad. Further, letter was also issued to the Zonal
Director, NCB, Ahmedabad Zonal Unit on 15.03.2024 with a request to cancel the URN of M/s
Ardor Drug Pvt Ltd issued by NCB Ahmedabad Zonal Unit or any other URN issued to the accused.
Previously, NCB, Ahmedabad informed that proposal for cancellation of URN of M/s Ardor Drug
Pvt Ltd in 2021 was sent to concerned DDG(R) for violation of the provision of RCS order 2013 as
the company premises was raided by DRI, Surat, July 2020 and mismatch in quantities of
Ephedrine and Pseudoephedrine found.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 6
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
The statements of 6 (six) employees of M/s Ardor Drug Pvt. Ltd. was recorded at NCB, Ahmedabad
on 12.12.2023 to 14.12.2023, all the 6(six) employees have stated that details of record of
procurement / production/sales/marketing/transportatio of pseudoephedrine/ephedrine Bail
Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 13 are maintained and controlled by Harshal & Mehul Desai. All
bills/invoices are generated by Harshal and Mehul which clearly show that the employees are made
to work as per the instruction of Harshal and Mehul Desai.
Further investigation and financial investigation is going on to trace and break the chain of illegal
trade considering the gravity of the offense committed by the petitioner which are serious in nature.
Therefore, considering the key role being played by the accused in the instant case, mere long
incarceration of an accused in judicial custody should not be a ground to release the accused on bail
as it will frustrate the whole objective of stringent law laid down by the parliament to combat illegal
trafficking of drugs and will perpetuate to further crime, the same principle has been laid in a
plethora of cases.
The present petitioner/accused, Harshal Desai has admitted in his statement during investigation
that he used to generate tax invoice in the name of Recover Healthcare but the products mentioned
in the tax invoice were supplied to some other parties. He repeatedly used to generate false bills with
the name of some other products for the supply of pseudoephedrine-based tablet to Bradesh Patel to
sell the said Pseudoephedrine tablets. For the said purpose he paid 10 lakhs as commission to
Bradesh Patel which is corroborated with the bank account statement.
[9] Furthermore, Mr. W. Darakishwor, learned senior PCCG appearing for the respondent
contended that the petitioner/accused Harshal Desai has criminal antecedent and he is on bail in
ND & PS Case Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 14 No. 48 of 2020 registered at Principal District
and Session Court, Surat, Gujarat. While the petitioner was on bail, he has committed the present
offence which was registered under NCB Crime No. 02/NCB/Imp/2023 U/s 8(c) & 9A R/w S. 21(c),
25A, 25 & 29 of ND & PS Act by the NCB, Division Unit Imphal, Manipur. Because of being an
antecedent criminal, the petitioner/accused was detained under PIT, NDPS Act by issuing a
detention order dated 28.02.2024 through the Joint Secretary, Ministry of Finance and the said
detention order was confirmed from the Advisory Board.
The offences under the ND & PS Act are considered non- bailable offences due to the serious nature
of crime. Therefore, granting bail under these sections is very complex and often depends on the
specific circumstances of the case.
In this regard, the learned senior PCCG appearing for the respondent relied upon the following
judgments:
W.P.(Cril) No. 11 of 2024 passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Manipur
dated 26.07.2024 -
"[4] Mr. PN Lakhani, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner raised only one
ground in assailing the impugned detention orders. The learned counsel submitted
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 7
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
that the detaining authority has knowledge that the petitioner was in judicial custody
in connection with a criminal case involving seizure of a commercial quantity of
contraband drugs, however, while passing the impugned detention order, nothing
has been mentioned or indicated in the said detention order as well as in the grounds
of detention that the petitioner was likely to be released on bail. It has been
submitted that there was no cogent material before the detaining authority to arrive
at its subjective satisfaction that there was/is a real possibility of the petitioner being
released on bail, the face of the provisions of Section37 of ND&PS Act, 1985. The
learned strenuously submitted that there was total non-appliance of mind on the part
of the detaining authority and the impugned detention order had been passed in the
mechanical manner and as such, the same is liable to be quashed and set aside.
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 15
[7] In the present case, the petitioner was already arrested and
kept in judicial custody in connection with the seizure of a commercial quantity of
narcotic drugs and therefore, Section 37 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 would have application and grant of bail would be subject to the
stringent conditions provided thereunder. Nothing is mentioned in the impugned
detention order that the detaining authority has arrived at his subjective satisfaction
that the petitioner is likely to be released on bail. Only in the grounds of detention,
the detaining authority merely referred to the fact that a bail application had been
filed without deciding whether there was a likelihood of the petitioner being released
on bail, notwithstanding the applicability of section 37 of the ND&PS Act and passed
the impugned detention order. Accordingly, we are of the considered view that the
detaining authority passed the impugned detention order without application of
mind and in a mechanical manner and on this ground alone, the impugned detention
orders are liable to be quashed and set aside."
PR Despande V. Maruti Balaram Haibatti [(1998) 6 SCC 507] -
[5] Relying on those decisions Agrawal, J speaking for the two- judge bench in RN Gosain v Yashpal
Dhir has observed thus: (SCC Ppp. 687-88 para 10) "10. Law does not permit a person to both
approbate and reprobate. This principle is based on the doctrine of election which postulates that no
party can accept and reject the same instrument and that 'a person cannot say at one time that a
transaction is valid and thereby obtain some advantage, to which he could only be entitled on the
footing that it is valid, and then turn round and say it is void for the purpose of securing some other
advantages." Asante Pinket Owusu V. Narcotics Control Bureau [(1994) 6 SCC 731] -
3. At the outset, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the applicant submitted that rigors of
Section 37 of the NDPS Act will not apply to the present case, since the recovery is that of a
controlled substance.
4. The learned counsel submitted that the complaint has been filed and charges have been framed by
the learned Trial Court, and till date only three witnesses have been examined. So far as, material
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 8
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
witnesses are concerned, none have been examined till date. He stated that the way and the manner
in which the trial is proceeding it is likely to take substantial time.
5. The learned counsel submitted that the applicant is in incarceration since the date of arrest, i.e.,
05.11.2018, which is more than five years.
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 16
20. It is also crucial to note that maximum punishment, without any minimum, provided for in
Section 25A of the NDPS Act is imprisonment for a term which may extend to 10 years with fine
which may extend to 1,00,000/-.
21. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, while taking note of the delay in disposal of cases under the NDPS
Act, had issued certain directions, subject to general conditions, in Supreme Court Legal Aid
Committee (Representing Undertrial Prisoners) v. Union of India: (1994) 6 SCC 731 which are
reproduced as under:
"15................................................................................
(i) Where the under trial is accused of an offence(s) under the Act prescribing a
punishment of imprisonment of five years or less and fine, such an under trial shall
be released on bail if he has been in jail for a period which is not less than half the
punishment provided for the offence with which he is charged and where he is
charged with more than one offence, the offence providing the highest punishment. If
the offence with which he is charged prescribes the maximum fine, the bail amount
shall be 50% of the said amount with two sureties for like amount. If the maximum
fine is not prescribed bail shall be to the satisfaction of the Special Judge concerned
with two sureties for like amount.
(ii) Where the under trial accused is charged with an offence(s) under the Act
providing for punishment exceeding five years and fine, such an under trial shall be
released on bail on the term set out in (i) above provided that his bail amount shall in
no case be less than Rs. 50,000 with two sureties for like amount.
(iii) Where the under trial accused is charged with an offence(s) under the Act
punishable with minimum imprisonment of ten years and a minimum fine of Rupees
one lakh, such an under trial shall be released on bail if he has been in jail for not less
than five years provided he furnishes bail in the sum of Rupees one lakh with two
sureties for like amount.
(iv) Where an under trial accused is charged for the commission of an offence
punishable under Sections 31 and 31-A of the Act, such an undertrial shall not be
entitled to be released on bail by virtue of this order."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 9
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
22. Section 436A of the CrPC provides that if an accused has undergone detention for a period
extending up to one half of the maximum period of imprisonment specified for that offence under
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 17 that law, he shall be released by the Court on his personal
bond with or without sureties. Section 436A of the CrPC reads as follows:
"[436-A. Maximum period for which an undertrial prisoner can be detained.-- Where
a person has, during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial under this Code of an
offence under any law (not being an offence for which the punishment of death has
been specified as one of the punishments under the law) undergone detention for a
period extending up to one-half of the maximum period of imprisonment specified
for that offence under that law, he shall be released by the Court on his personal bond
with or without sureties:
Provided that the Court may, after hearing the Public Prosecutor and for reasons to
be recorded by it in writing, order the continued detention of such person for a period
longer than one-half of the said period or release him on bail instead of the personal
bond with or without sureties: Provided further that no such person shall in any case
be detained during the period of investigation, inquiry or trial for more than the
maximum period of imprisonment provided for the said offence under the law.
Explanation.--In computing the period of detention under this section for granting
bail, the period of detention passed due to delay in proceeding cause by the accused
shall be excluded.]"
23. Undisputedly, the applicant in the present case has undergone detention for a period in excess of
one-half of the maximum period of imprisonment specified for the offence under Section 25A of the
NDPS Act."
Union of India V. Prateek Shukla [(2021) 5 SCC 430] -
"4. It has been alleged that the disclosure revealed that a huge quantity of the
controlled substance, acetic anhydride, was purchased and diverted to a godown
situated at Village Karheda, Ghaziabad. During the search and seizure of the
premises, a quantity of 9650 kg of acetic anhydride was alleged to have been
recovered and empty drums of acetic anhydride were also found. Notices under
Section 67 of the NDPS Act were also issued to one Shamsuddin and Bismillah Khan
Ahmadzai. It has been alleged that the respondent, the co-accused Himanshu Rana
and Shamsuddin disclosed that Bismillah Khan Ahmadzai is a Director of the
company involved in its day to day affairs. Bismillah Khan Ahmadzai was apparently
residing in the US and was arrested on his return to India. The residential premises
of Shamsuddin Qarizada were searched and 500 gm of acetic anhydride was allegedly
recovered.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 10
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 18 8.1. The respondent is alleged to be a part of
an international syndicate involved in a diversion of a controlled substance.
8.2. The respondent is a Director of Altruist Chemicals Pvt. Ltd.
8.3. Having regard to the incriminating material which has been recovered during the
course of the investigation, as set out in the complaint, the involvement of the
respondent prima facie has been shown to exist.
8.4. In a matter involving serious violations of the NDPS Act, the Single Judge of the
High Court was not justified in granting bail.
8.5. Under the NDPS Act, the burden of proof lies on the accused and not the
prosecution and the High Court has wrongly reversed the burden of proof.
8.6. Absolutely no valid reasons have been indicated in the judgment¹ of the Single
Judge for the grant of bail.
12. Ex facie, there has been no application of mind by the High Court to the rival
submissions and, particularly, to the seriousness of the allegations involving an
offence punishable under the provisions of the NDPS Act. Merely recording the
submissions of the parties does not amount to an indication of a judicial or, for that
matter, a judicious application of mind by the Single Judge¹ of the High Court to the
basic question as to whether bail should be granted. The provisions of Section 37 of
the NDPS Act provide the legal norms which have to be applied in determining
whether a case for grant of bail has been made out. There has been a serious
infraction by the High Court of its duty to apply the law. The order granting bail is
innocent of an awareness of the legal principles involved in determining whether bail
should be granted to accused of an offence under the NDPS Act. The contention of
the respondent a person that he had resigned from the company, Altruist Chemicals
Pvt. Ltd., must be assessed with reference to the allegations in the criminal complaint
which has been filed in the Court of the District and Sessions Judge. Gautam Budh
Nagar (Annexure P-6). The relevant part of the complaint reads as follows:
"18. That during investigation of the case, letter dated 27- 11-2018 was sent to the
Registrar of Companies for providing details of the Directors, etc. of the company in
question i.e. M/s Altruist Chemicals Pvt. Ltd. and vide its report dated 3-12-2018
Registrar of Companies provided the said information and from the perusal of said
information/documents, it reveals that accused Prateek Shukla and Bismillah Khan
are the Directors. Accused Himanshu Rana was also Director but he has resigned
from the directorship. From the perusal of the documents, it also reveals that they
had registered the company i.e. Altruist Chemical Pvt. Ltd. at 001. Block
Ab-Sector-45, Noida, which is a residential area and accused persons also obtained
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 19 Unique Registration No. from the NCB on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 11
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
the abovesaid premises."
14. For the above reasons, we are of the view that the High Court has misapplied the law to the facts
in arriving at a decision for the grant of bail to the respondent. We accordingly allow the appeal and
set aside the impugned judgment and order of the High Court dated 7-5-20191. As a consequence,
the bail which has been granted by the High Court to the respondent shall stand cancelled. The
respondent shall surrender forthwith as a result of the g cancellation of bail by the present order of
this Court." Bail Application No. 5030 of 2012 [Karuthan Ponnaiya & Anr. V. Senior NCB, State of
Kerala] passed by the High Court of Kerala -
"5. It is not disputed that Ephedrine is a controlled substance. There is no
categorization of small quantity or commercial quantity so far as it relates to
controlled substances. As can be seen from the definition of commercial quantity in
Section 2 (viia) of the Act it is clear that it applies only to narcotic drugs or
psychotropic substances. Section 9A deals with the power to control and regulate
controlled substances, which reads:
"(1) If the Central Government is of the opinion that, having regard to the use of any
controlled substance in the production or manufacture of any B.A. No: 5030/2012
narcotic drug or psychotropic substance, it is necessary or expedient so to do in the
public interest, it may, by order, provide for regulating or prohibiting the production,
manufacture, supply and distribution thereof and trade and commerce therein.
(2) Without prejudice to the generality of the power conferred by sub-section(1), an
order made thereunder may provide for regulating by licenses, permits or otherwise,
the production, manufacture, possession, transport, import inter-State, export
inter-State, sale, purchase, consumption, use, storage, distribution, disposal or
acquisition of any controlled substance."
The contravention of orders made under section 9A is made punishable under section 25A. The
punishment prescribed is rigorous imprisonment for a term which may extend to ten years and fine
which may extend to one lakh B.A. No: 5030/2012 rupees.
8. The fact that the rigour mentioned in section 37 (1)(b) of the Act is not applicable to the facts of
the case, does not automatically lead to any conclusion that the B.A. No: 5030/2012 petitioner is
entitled to get bail. Section 37(2) makes it clear that the limitations on granting of bail specified in
clause (b) of sub-section (1) are in addition to the limitations under the Code of Criminal Procedure
or any other law for the time being in force, for the granting of bail.
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 20 Therefore, it is manifest that even if the rigour under
section 37(1)(b) is not applicable, the Court can refuse bail, if the Court is of the view that the
accused persons are likely to flee or will become unavailable to put them to trial or if there are other
circumstances justifying negation of bail. It is pointed out that the final report in this case was filed
on 22.06.2012 and it is now pending before the Sessions Court as S.C. No: 681/2012. It is also
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 12
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
pointed out that the petitioners are actually carriers or peddlers of the controlled substance and
that, it was not carried by them innocuously without knowing the gravity of the offence. It is also
pointed out that the petitioners are from Tamil Nadu and are B.A. No: 5030/2012 persons having
international connections and so once they are released on bail it would be practically impossible to
secure their presence to put them to trial.
10. I have carefully examined the entire available records and particularly the allegations levelled
against the accused. The nature and gravity of the offence, possibility B.A. No: 5030/2012 of the
accused to flee from justice and the likelihood of their indulging in commission of similar offences as
alleged by the prosecution are also taken note of. Considering all these aspects, I am not inclined to
grant bail to the accused, and hence this application is dismissed. The learned trial Judge is directed
to try and dispose of the case at the earliest."
[10] In support of the present case, Mr. Osbert Khaling, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
relied upon the following judgments:
Niranjan Jayantilal Shah V. Directorate of Revenue Intelligence [2013 SCC OnLine
4608] -
"6. During the course of arguments, it was fairly conceded by learned counsel for the
respondent that bar of Section 37 of the NDPS Act is not attracted in the present case
since as per the prosecution 100 kgs. of Pseudoephedrine was recovered which is a
controlled substance within the meaning of Section 2(vii) (b) of the Act.
Pseudoephedrine is not a narcotics drug as envisaged under Section 2(vil)(a) of the
Act. In N.C. Chellathambi (supra) one tonne of ephedrine was recovered, in Ajay
Aggarwal (supra) recovery was of 1600 liters of Acctic Anhydride, In Rajiv Kumar
Sukha (supra) recovery was of 25 kgs powder ephedrine hydrochloride, in Falyaz
Ahmed Rasool Shaikh (supra) and another recovery was of 290 kgs of
pseudoephedrine, in Chakrapani Dutt (supra) recovery was of 100 liters of Acctic
Anhydride, and in all these cases since the accused had remained in custody for
certain period, they were released on ball. As regards Rizwan Ahmed, where the bail
application was dismissed, it is fairly conceded by learned counsel for DRI that DRI
had not taken any plea that the petitioner was not entitled to bail due to rigour of
Section 37 of the NDPS Act on which ground alone the application was dismissed,
however, it was Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 21 submitted that since the SLP
has been dismissed, therefore, the petitioner is not entitled for ball. In Department of
Customs (supra) relied upon by learned counsel for the petitioner, it was observed
that the judgment in Rizwan Ahmad is contrary to the explicit language of Section 37
of NDPS Act and the same is per incuriam.
7. Keeping in view the totality of facts and circumstances of the case, coupled with the
fact that the petitioner is in custody since 15th December, 2011, he is admitted to bail
on his furnishing personal bond in the sum of Rs. 50,000/- with one surety in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the concerned Trial Court. Petitioner shall deposit his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 13
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
passport, If any, with the Trial Court and shall not leave the country without the
permission of the concerned Trial Court. He is further directed to furnish his current
address to DRI and in case of any change in address, DRI be informed immediately."
Rafael Palarox Garcia V. Union of India & Anr. [2008 SCC OnLine Bom 1353 : (2008) 6 AIR Bom R.
709 : (2009) 2 AIR Jhar R (NOC 518) 177 : 2009 Cri LJ 446] -
"29. There is extensive amendment introduced in N.D.P.S. Act. The offence falling
under Section 9-A read with Section 25-A is punishable with imprisonment which
may extend to 10 years and also fine which also may extend to Rs. one lac. There was
an embargo on the powers of the Court in granting ball under the old provisions of
Section 37(1)(b) of the Act. From Section 37(1)(b) the term "imprisonment of five
years or more" has been deleted and substituted by "for offence under Section 19 or
Section 24 or Section 27-A and also for offences involving commercial quantity", the
case of the Applicant is no more covered by Section 37(1)(b) of the Act. The concept
of commercial quantity does not apply to controlled substance in view of the
provisions relating to commercial quantity specially Section 2(viia) and Section
2(vild) of the Act and the notification issued by the Government specifying the small
quantities and commercial quantities also shows that this concept is peculiar to
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances.
30. In view of the above legal position and the decision in the case of Shreeniwas
Bansidhar Somani (supra), I am inclined to grant bail to the Applicant.
31. The Applicant Rafael Palafox Garcia to be released on bail in the sum of
Rs.1,00,000 (Rs. one lac Only) with one or two sureties to make up the said amount.
The sureties shall be local sureties. Before being released on bail the Applicant shall
inform the NCB office the address at which he will reside during the period that he is
on bail. Any change in the address shall also be communicated to the NCB within two
days. The Applicant shall report to the NCB office once in a week, till conclusion of
the trial."
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 22 Sanjeev Chandra Agarwal & Anr. V. Union of
India [(2021) 20 SCC 57] -
"3. The factual position is that no narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances were
recovered from the premises of the two appellants. As per the prosecution, 4 kg of
Acetic Anhydride (Controlled Substance) was allegedly found from the premises of
the appellants located at Gyan Scientific Agency, Varanasi. The High Court was not
correct in relying on the statements made by other accused under Section 67 of the
NDPS Act, in light of the judgment of this Court in Tofan Singh v. State of T.N.2 It is
pointed out that the charges under Sections 9-A and 25 of the NDPS Act have been
framed and to this extent there is no challenge and dispute."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 14
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
State of Haryana V. Samarth Kumar [2022 SCC OnLine SC 2087] -
"7. The order of the Special Court granting regular bail to the respondents shows that
the said order was passed in pursuance of the anticipatory bail granted by the High
Court. Therefore, the same cannot be a ground to hold that the present appeals have
become infructuous."
Criminal Appeal No. 2790 of 2024 [Sheikh Javed Iqbal @ Ashfaq Ansari @ Javed Ansari V. State of
Uttar Pradesh] passed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court -
"29. Going back to K.A. Najeeb (supra), this Court thereafter proceeded to hold that
Section 43D(5) of the UAP Act does not oust the ability of the constitutional courts to
grant bail on grounds of violation of Part III of the Constitution. Long incarceration
with the unlikelihood of the trial being completed in the near future is a good ground
to grant bail. This Court also distinguished Section 43D(5) of the UAP Act from
Section 37 of the NDPS Act. It has been held as follows:
17. It is thus clear to us that the presence of statutory restrictions like Section 43-D(5)
of the UAPA per se does not oust the ability of the constitutional courts to grant bail
on grounds of violation of Part III of the Constitution. Indeed, both the restrictions
under a statute as well as the powers exercisable under constitutional jurisdiction can
be well harmonised. Whereas at commencement of proceedings, the courts are
expected to appreciate the legislative policy against grant of bail but the rigours of
such provisions will melt down where there is no likelihood of trial being completed
within a reasonable time and the period of incarceration already undergone has
exceeded a substantial part of the prescribed sentence. Such an approach would
safeguard against the possibility of provisions like Section 43-D(5) of the UAPA being
used as the sole metric for denial of bail or for wholesale breach of constitutional
right to Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 23 speedy trial.
18. Adverting to the case at hand, we are conscious of the fact that the charges
levelled against the respondent are grave and a serious threat to societal harmony.
Had it been a case at the threshold, we would have outrightly turned down the
respondent's prayer. However, keeping in mind the length of the period spent by him
in custody and the unlikelihood of the trial being completed anytime soon, the High
Court appears to have been left with no other option except to grant bail. An attempt
has been made to strike a balance between the appellant's right to lead evidence of its
choice and establish the charges simultaneously beyond any the doubt and
respondent's rights guaranteed under Part III of our Constitution have been well
protected.
19. Yet another reason which persuades us to enlarge the respondent on bail is that
Section 43-D(5) of the UAPA is comparatively less stringent than Section 37 of the
NDPS Act. Unlike the NDPS Act where the competent court needs to be satisfied that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 15
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
prima-facie the accused is not guilty and that he is unlikely to commit another
offence while on bail;
there is no such precondition under UAPA. Instead, Section 43-D(5) of the UAPA merely provides
another possible ground for the competent court to refuse bail, in addition to the well-settled
considerations like gravity of the offence, possibility of tampering with evidence, influencing the
witnesses or chance of the accused evading the trial by absconsion, etc. W.P.(Cril) No. 11 of 2024
passed by the Division Bench of the High Court of Manipur dated 26.07.2024 -
"[4] Mr. PN Lakhani, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner raised only one
ground in assailing the impugned detention orders. The learned counsel submitted
that the detaining authority has knowledge that the petitioner was in judicial custody
in connection with a criminal case involving seizure of a commercial quantity of
contraband drugs, however, while passing the impugned detention order, nothing
has been mentioned or indicated in the said detention order as well as in the grounds
of detention that the petitioner was likely to be released on bail. It has been
submitted that there was no cogent material before the detaining authority to arrive
at its subjective satisfaction that there was/is a real possibility of the petitioner being
released on bail, the face of the provisions of Section37 of ND&PS Act, 1985. The
learned strenuously submitted that there was total non-appliance of mind on the part
of the detaining authority and the impugned detention order had been passed in the
mechanical manner and as such, the same is liable to be quashed and set aside.
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 24
[7] In the present case, the petitioner was already arrested and
kept in judicial custody in connection with the seizure of a commercial quantity of
narcotic drugs and therefore, Section 37 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 1985 would have application and grant of bail would be subject to the
stringent conditions provided thereunder. Nothing is mentioned in the impugned
detention order that the detaining authority has arrived at his subjective satisfaction
that the petitioner is likely to be released on bail. Only in the grounds of detention,
the detaining authority merely referred to the fact that a bail application had been
filed without deciding whether there was a likelihood of the petitioner being released
on bail, notwithstanding the applicability of section 37 of the ND&PS Act and passed
the impugned detention order. Accordingly, we are of the considered view that the
detaining authority passed the impugned detention order without application of
mind and in a mechanical manner and on this ground alone, the impugned detention
orders are liable to be quashed and set aside."
Noor Aga V. State of Punjab & Anr. [(2008) 16 SCC 417] -
"67. The appellant contended that the purported confessions recorded on 2-8-1997
and 4-8-1997 were provided by an officer of the Customs Department roughly and
later the same were written by him under threat, duress and at gunpoint and had,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 16
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
thus, not been voluntarily made. The High Court should have considered the question
having regard to the stand taken g by the appellant. Only because certain personal
facts known to him were written, the same by itself would not lead to the conclusion
that they were free and voluntary.
68. Clause (3) of Article 20 of the Constitution provides that no person accused of any
offence shall be compelled to be a witness against himself. Any confession made
under Section 108 of the Customs Act must give way to Article 20(3) wherefor there
is a conflict between the two. A retracted confessional statement may be relied upon
but a rider must be attached thereto, namely, if it is made voluntarily. The burden of
proving that such a confession was made voluntarily would, thus, be on the
prosecution. It may not be necessary for us to enter into the question as to whether
the decisions of this Court that a Customs Officer is not a police officer should be
revisited in view of the decision of this Court in Balkrishna Chhaganlal Soni v. State
of W. B. 34, wherein it was stated: (SCC pp. 572-73, para 12) ..."
Sanjay Chandra V. Central Bureau of Investigation [(2012) 1 SCC 40] -
"40. The grant or refusal to grant bail lies within the discretion of the court. The grant
or denial is regulated, to a large extent, by the facts and circumstances of each
particular case. But at the same time, right to bail is not to be denied merely because
of the sentiments of the community against the accused. The primary Bail
Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 25 purposes of bail in a criminal case are to relieve
the accused of imprisonment, to relieve the State of the burden of keeping him,
pending the trial, and at the same time, to keep the accused constructively in the
custody of the court, whether before or after conviction, to assure that he will submit
to the jurisdiction of the court and be in attendance thereon whenever his presence is
required.
41. This Court in Gurcharan Singh v. State (Delhi Admn.) observed that two
paramount considerations, while considering a petition for grant of bail in a
non-bailable offence, apart from the seriousness of the offence, are the likelihood of
the accused fleeing from justice and his tampering with the prosecution witnesses.
Both of them relate to ensure the fair trial of the case. Though, this aspect is dealt by
the High Court in its impugned order, in our view, the same is not convincing.
42. When the undertrial prisoners are detained in jail custody for an indefinite
period, Article 21 of the Constitution is violated. Every person, detained or arrested,
is entitled to speedy trial, the question is: whether the same is possible in the present
case.
43. There are seventeen accused persons. Statements of witnesses run to several
hundred pages and the documents on which reliance is placed by the prosecution, are
voluminous. The trial may take considerable time and it looks to us that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 17
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
appellants, who are in jail, have to remain in jail longer than the period of detention,
had they been convicted. It is not in the interest of justice that the accused should be
in jail for an indefinite period. No doubt, the offence alleged against the appellants is
a serious one in terms of alleged huge loss to the State exchequer, that, by itself,
should not deter us from enlarging the appellants on bail when there is no serious
contention of the respondent that the accused, if released on bail, would interfere
with the trial or tamper with evidence. We do not see any good reason to detain the
accused in custody, that too, after the completion of the investigation and filing of the
charge-sheet."
[11] It is admitted position of fact and law that the seized articles as mentioned in the present case
are controlled drugs as such, Section 37 of the ND & PS Act is not applicable and the
accused/petitioner and his co- accused are right now languishing in jail for about one and half years,
but considering the nature of the case, the prosecution have taken the steps leading to the filing of
charge sheet promptly and the Ld. Trial Court also conducted the case promptly without wasting
time.
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 26
[12] Heard the learned counsels appearing for the parties at length
and also perused the application and replied affidavit. The allegation against the two accused
persons namely Mehul Desai and Harshal Desai, who are said to be a former Director as well as an
employee and one of the Directors of the company viz, Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd respectively
(hereinafter the applicant no. 1 and 2 respectively), is that they were actively involved in an illegal
supply of Pseudoephedrine (a controlled substance under ND&PS Act) based tablets to the other
accused Bhadresh Patel of M/S Recover Healthcare.
As per the Final Report, the said Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd prepares/manufactures pharmaceutical
formulations including Pseudoephedrine containing formulations like Asifed, Phifed, etc. and that
the two accused/applicants were actively involved in an illegal supply of a huge quantity of
Pseudoephedrine based Phifed tablets. It is alleged that the accused/applicants were involved in
supplying 15 lakhs of the said Phifed tablets inside 26 carton boxes to the said accused namely
Bhadresh Patel, owner of M/S Recover Healthcare on 19/01/2023 under a fake billing of Admos-SR.
It is alleged that the accused/applicants gave commission of Rs. 1 per strip of ten tablets of
Pseudoephedrine to the said accused Bhadresh Patel for accepting the bogus billings/tax invoices. It
is alleged that as per Stock Register of the company Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd, the company purchased a
raw material namely, Pseudoephedrine Hydrochloride powder from one GC Chemie Pharmie Ltd.,
Mumbai Andheri for manufacture of said Asifed, Phifed and a scrutiny of the Tax invoices Bail
Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 27 Report from said GC Chemie Pharmie Ltd. revealed that there
was unaccounted distribution of more than 2 crores Pseudoephedrine based drugs (Asifed, Phifed)
by the Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd.
It is alleged that the accused was actively involved in supply of said Pseudoephedrine based tablets
under bogus bills or by generating fake bills with the name of some other products and by actually
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 18
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
supplying the products mentioned in the bills/tax invoices in the name of M/S Recover Healthcare
to some other persons, for which an amount of Rs. 10 lakhs was paid to the account of M/S Recover
Healthcare as a commission for accepting fake/bogus bills. It is also alleged that the Ardor Drugs
Pvt. Ltd. used one "Bhavna Roadways" to show the transportation of drugs to the M/S Recover
Health care looked genuine, but in that transportation, it sent only carton boxes without any
medicinal stuffs mentioned in the invoices but filled with pieces of marbles and scraps to increase
the weight. Photographs of such carton boxes containing pieces of marbles and scraps which were
sent by the Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd to the M/S Recover Healthcare, having the stickers of Bhavna
Roadways are said to have been produced by one Kirti Kumar Patel (apparently a staff of M/S
Recover Health care), whose statement has been recorded under Section 67 of the NDPS Act. As per
his said statement, M/S Recover Health care received only 1500 packets of Phifed tablets containing
Pseudoephedrine, which were sent by the Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd in the billing of Admos-SR on
19/01/2023 and no other pharmceutical drugs from 2020 till 2022 but the relevant record at M/S
Recover Health care shows false entry for receipts of other pharmaceutical Bail Application No. 12 of
2024 Page 28 drugs Asifed T, Bromofed and Prasma including Phifed from the Ardor Drugs Pvt.
Ltd. when the latter has not actually supplied the said other drugs. [13] On further perusal of the
pleadings, it is also seen that the present accused/petitioner was involved in connivance with Mehul
Desai and Bhadresh Patel for generating bogus bills of varioius Pseudoephedrine tablets and its salt.
Because of this, they had already been arrested in one Directorate of Revenue Intelligence (DRI)
Surat Crime No. NDPS 01/2020 and they were on bail during the execution of arrest warrant issued
by the Ld. Special Judge (ND & PS), Manipur.
[14] The Ld. Special Court (ND & PS), after hearing the parties, rejected the bail application of the
present accused and another Shri Mehul Desai and in consideration of the present application, this
Court is of the opinion that the observation made in rejecting the said bail application needs to take
consideration and for the same, the para No. 5 & 6 of the impugned order of the Ld. Special Judge
(ND & PS), Manipur is reproduced herein below:
"5. It is the settled position of law that the provisions of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act,
1940 and the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 are in addition
to the provisions of each other i.e. provisions of both the Acts are required to be
simultaneously complied with in relation to pharmaceutical bulk drugs and
pharmaceutical formulation which also fall under the ambit of the NDPS Act, 1985
(Mohd. Sahabuddin & Another V. State of Assam (2012) 13 SCC 491, Union of India
and another V. Sanjeev V Deshpande (2014) 13 SCC 1). It is to be noted that mere
holding a license under the Dugs and Cosmetics Act and the Rules framed thereunder
does not provide any immunity from the rigors of the applicability of the NDPS Act
and the Rules framed thereunder.
6. It appears prima facie from the materials on record including the statements of the
witnesses under section 67 of the NDPS Act, that the accused persons/applicants,
who are admittedly ex-Director/employee and one of the Directors of the company
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 29 namely Ardor Drugs Pvt. Ltd, are persons
actively engaged for sale or for distribution of pharmaceutical formulations, which
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 19
Harshal Desai Aged About 55 Years vs The Narcotics Control Bureau (Ncb) ... on 13 December, 2024
apparently include drugs and substances covered under the ambit of the Narcotic
Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 and that they were actively involved in
falsifying the accounts or records of the company by supplying the said
Pseudoephedrine (controlled substance under ND&PS Act) based Phifed tablets in
the name of another non-offending drug ADMOS-SR under a bogus or fake bill/tax
invoices. It appears prima facie from materials on record that the two (2) accused
persons are actively involved in trafficking of the said pseudoephedrine based
pharmaceutical drugs. As per record, the stage of the case is production of the rest of
the accused and charge hearing."
[15] After going through the above observation made by the Ld. Special Judge (ND & PS), Manipur,
I am of the considered view that the Ld. Special Judge's observation and reasoning in dismissing the
bail application of the accused/petitioner is reasonable enough considering the seriousness of the
allegation made against the present accused. [16] I have carefully examined the entire available
records, impugned order of the Ld. Special Judge (ND & PS), Manipur and particularly, the
allegations levelled against the accused as narrated above. In view of the nature and gravity of the
offence, I am not inclined to allow the present bail application filed by the present
accused/petitioner.
Hence, this application is dismissed with observation that the Ld. Trial Judge is directed to try and
dispose of the case at the earliest. Liberty is given to the petitioner/accused to approach this Court,
if the Trial Court failed to conclude the trial at the reasonable time.
JUDGE
FR/NFR
Bipin
Bail Application No. 12 of 2024 Page 30
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163284480/ 20
