Harshit Kesharwani vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 July, 2021
Harshit Kesharwani vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 July,
2021
Author: Sujoy Paul
Bench: Sujoy Paul, Anil Verma
1 W.P. No.10355/2021
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH:
BENCH AT INDORE
WP No.10355/2021
Harshit Kesharwani ......................... Petitioner
Vs.
State of MP & Others ..........................Respondents
...............................................................................................................
Coram:
Justice Sujoy Paul, Judge
Justice Anil Verma, Judge
...............................................................................................................
Presence :
Shri Pramod Tomar, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Shri Vivek Dalal, learned Additional Advocate General for the
respondents/State.
...............................................................................................................
Whether approved for reporting : No.
...............................................................................................................
ORDER
(13/07/2021) The present petition is directed against the order of learned District Magistrate, Sagar
whereby he has detained the petitioner by exercising power under Section 3 of the National Security
Act, 1980. The singular ground to assail the impugned order is that in the detention order, the
learned District Magistrate has not mentioned that petitioner has a valuable right to prefer a
representation against the detention order before the same authority namely District Magistrate.
The matter is covered by Full Bench decision in WP No.22290/2019 (Kamal Khare Vs. State of MP).
2) Shri Vivek Dalal, learned Additional Advocate General for the respondents/State fairly admitted
that the detention order does not contain any such stipulation that petitioner can prefer
representation against the detention order before the same authority. He further agreed that on this
ground, Full Bench in Kamal Khare (supra) has held that the detention order stands vitiated because
of infringement of said right.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63880095/ 1
Harshit Kesharwani vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 July, 2021
3) There is no dispute between the parties that the singular point involved is covered by Full Bench
in Kamal Khare (supra) which is consistently followed by this Court in various cases including WP
No.9792/2021 (Yatindra Verma vs. State of MP & Ors.). In WP No.9792/2021, this Court opined as
under:-
31) Indisputably, the detention order does not contain any stipulation that the detenu
has right to prefer representation before the same authority namely, District
Magistrate. The reliance is placed on the recent Full Bench judgment of this Court
passed in the case of Kamal Khare (supra). To counter this argument, the bone of
contention of learned AAG was that the said Full Bench decision is distinguishable.
Full Bench judgment is based on a constitution bench judgment in the case of
Kamleshkumar Ishwardas Patel v. Union of India, (1995) 4 SCC 51. In Kamleshkumar
(supra), the Apex Court was dealing with the provisions of COFEPOSA Act and the
PIT NDPS Act and not with NSA Act. Hence, the said constitution Bench judgment
could not have been relied upon.
32) We do not see much merit in this argument because similar argument was
advanced by the Govt. before Full Bench in the case of Kamal Khare (supra) which is
reproduced in extenso in para-14 of the said judgment.
The similar argument could not find favour by the Full Bench.
33) In Kamleshkumar (supra), Apex Court opined as under:-
"6. This provision has the same force and sanctity as any other provision relating to
fundamental rights. (See: State of Bombay v. Atma Ram Shridhar Vaidya [1951 SCR
167, 186 : AIR 1951 SC 157] .) Article 22(5) imposes a dual obligation on the authority
making the order of preventive detention: (i) to communicate to the person detained
as soon as may be the grounds on which the order of detention has been made; and
(ii) to afford the person detained the earliest opportunity of making a representation
against the order of detention. Article 22(5) thus proceeds on the basis that the
person detained has a right to make a representation against the order of detention
and the aforementioned two obligations are imposed on the authority making the
order of detention with a view to ensure that right of the person detained to make a
representation is a real right and he is able to take steps for redress of a wrong which
he thinks has been committed. Article 22(5) does not, however, indicate the authority
to whom the representation is to be made. Since the object and purpose of the
representation that is to be made by the person detained is to enable him to obtain
relief at the earliest opportunity, the said representation has to be made to the
authority which can grant such relief, i.e., the authority which can revoke the order of
detention and set him at liberty. The authority that has made the order of detention
can also revoke it. This right is inherent in the power to make the order. It is
recognised by Section 21 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 though it does not flow
from it. It can, therefore, be said that Article 22(5) postulates that the person
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63880095/ 2
Harshit Kesharwani vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 July, 2021
detained has a right to make a representation against the order of detention to the
authority making the order. In addition, such a representation can be made to any
other authority which is empowered by law to revoke the order of detention.
14. Article 22(5) must, therefore, be construed to mean that the person detained has a
right to make a representation against the order of detention which can be made not
only to the Advisory Board but also to the detaining authority, i.e., the authority that
has made the order of detention or the order for continuance of such detention,
which is competent to give immediate relief by revoking the said order as well as to
any other authority which is competent under law to revoke the order for detention
and thereby give relief to the person detained. The right to make a representation
carries within it a corresponding obligation on the authority making the order of
detention to inform the person detained of his right to make a representation against
the order of detention to the authorities who are required to consider such a
representation.
38. Having regard to the provisions of Article 22(5) of the Constitution and the
provisions of the COFEPOSA Act and the PIT NDPS Act the question posed is thus
answered: Where the detention order has been made under Section 3 of the
COFEPOSA Act and the PIT NDPS Act by an officer specially empowered for that
purpose either by the Central Government or the State Government the person
detained has a right to make a representation to the said officer and the said officer is
obliged to consider the said representation and the failure on his part to do so results
in denial of the right conferred on the person detained to make a representation
against the order of detention. This right of the detenu is in addition to his right to
make the representation to the State Government and the Central Government where
the detention order has been made by an officer specially authorised by a State
Government and to the Central Government where the detention order has been
made by an officer specially empowered by the Central Government, and to have the
same duly considered. This right to make a representation necessarily implies that
the person detained must be informed of his right to make a representation to the
authority that has made the order of detention at the time when he is served with the
grounds of detention so as to enable him to make such a representation and the
failure to do so results in denial of the right of the person detained to make a
representation."
Emphasis supplied
34) The Full Bench after considering the constitution Bench judgment opined as under:-
"20. The Supreme Court in Life Insurance Corporation of India v. D.J. Bahadur and
Others, (1981) 1 SCC 315 dealing with the aspect whether the Life Insurance
Corporation Act, 1956 is a special statute qua the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 when
it came to a dispute regarding conditions of service of the employees of the Life
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63880095/ 3
Harshit Kesharwani vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 July, 2021
Insurance Corporation of India held that the Industrial Disputes Act would prevail
over the Life Insurance Corporation of India Act as the former relates specially and
specifically to industrial disputes between the workmen and employers. Relevant
discussion in paragraph No.52 of the report would be useful to reproduce
hereunder:-
"52. In determining whether a statute is a special or a general one, the focus must be
on the principal subject-matter plus the particular perspective. For certain purposes,
an Act may be general and for certain other purposes it may be special and we cannot
blur distinctions when dealing with finer points of law. In law, we have a cosmos of
relativity, not absolutes - so too in life. The ID Act is a special statute devoted wholly
to investigation and settlement of industrial disputes which provides definitionally
for the nature of industrial disputes coming within its ambit. It creates an
infrastructure for investigation into, solution of and adjudication upon industrial
disputes. It also provides the necessary machinery for enforcement of awards and
settlements. From alpha to omega the ID Act has one special mission - the resolution
of industrial disputes through specialised agencies according to specialised
procedures and with special reference to the weaker categories of employees coming
within the definition of workmen. Therefore, with reference to industrial disputes
between employers and workmen, the ID Act is a special statute, and the LIC Act
does not speak at all with specific reference to workmen. On the other hand, its
powers relate to the general aspects of nationalisation, or management when private
businesses are nationalised and a plurality of problems which, incidentally, involve
transfer of service of existing employees of insurers. The workmen qua workmen and
industrial disputes between workmen and the employer as such, are beyond the orbit
of and have no specific or special place in the scheme of the LIC Act. And whenever
there was a dispute between workmen and management the ID Act mechanism was
resorted to."
30. Now coming to the question as to what would be the effect of not informing the detenu that he
has a right of making representation, apart from the State Government and the Central
Government, also to the detaining authority itself, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in
Kamlesh Kumar Ishwardas Patel (supra) even examined this aspect in paragraph No.14 of the report
and categorically held as under:-
"14. Article 22(5) must, therefore, be construed to mean that the person detained has
a right to make a representation against the order of detention which can be made
not only to the Advisory Board but also to the detaining authority, i.e., the authority
that has made the order of detention or the order for continuance of such detention,
who is competent to give immediate relief by revoking the said order as well as to any
other authority which is competent under law to revoke the order for detention and
thereby give relief to the person detained. The right to make a representation carries
within it a corresponding obligation on the authority making the order of detention
to inform the person detained of his right to make a representation against the order
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63880095/ 4
Harshit Kesharwani vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 July, 2021
of detention to the authorities who are required to consider such a representation."
33. In view of the above, the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Kamlesh Kumar Ishwardas
Patel (supra) analyzed the effect of not informing the detenu of his right to make a representation to
the detaining authority itself in paragraph No.47 of the report and held that this results in denial of
his right under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India, which renders the detention illegal. The
relevant paragraph No.47 is reproduced hereunder:-
"47. In both the appeals the orders of detention were made under Section 3 of the PIT
NDPS Act by the officer specially empowered by the Central Government to make
such an order. In the grounds of detention the detenu was only informed that he can
make a representation to the Central Government or the Advisory Board. The detenu
was not informed that he can make a representation to the officer who had made the
order of detention. As a result the detenu could not make a representation to the
officer who made the order of detention. The Madras High Court, by the judgments
under appeal dated 18-11-1994 and 17.1.1994, allowed the writ petitions filed by the
detenus and has set aside the order of detention on the view that the failure on the
part of the detaining authority to inform the detenu that he has a right to make a
representation to the detaining authority himself has resulted in denial of the
constitutional right guaranteed under Article 22(5) of the Constitution. In view of our
answer to the common question posed the said decisions of the Madras High Court
setting aside the order of detention of the detenus must be upheld and these appeals
are liable to be dismissed."
Emphasis supplied
35) Another Division Bench in WP No.5866/2015 (Salma vs. State of MP) opined as under:-
"On the last date of hearing opportunity was granted to the learned counsel for the
State to examine the law laid down b the Apext Court, which has been made
applicable in the various cases by the Division Bench of this Court, in the matter of
compliance of provisions of Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India in the matter of
detention itself, intimating the detenu that he/she is entitled to make a
representation before the Detaining Authority himself against the order of
detainsion. Such law was considered and made applicable in view of the law laid
down by the Apex Court in the matter of State of Maharashtra and others Vs. Santosh
Shankar Acharya (2000) 7 SCC 463, vary same law was made application by this
Court in W.P. No.1830/2015, W. P. No.3491/2015, W .P. No.3677/2015 & W. P.
No.3683/2015 in the following manner :
Notably, both these points have been considered by the Supreme Court in the case of
State of Maharashtra and others vs. Santosh Shankar Acharya (2000) 7 SCC 463 in
para 5 and 6 in particular. The Supreme Court following the dictum in the case of
Kamleshkumar restated that non- communication of the fact to the detenu that he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63880095/ 5
Harshit Kesharwani vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 July, 2021
could make a representation to the detaining Authority so long as order of detention
has not been approved by the State Government in case the order of detention has
been issued by the Officer other than the State Government, would constitute
infringement of right guaranteed under Article 22(5) of the Constitution and this
ratio of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Kamlesh kumar would apply
notwithstanding the fact that same has been made in the context of provisions of
COFEPOSA Act. In para 6 of the reported decision, the Supreme Court rejected the
similar objection canvassed by the learned counsel for the State relying on
Veeramanâs(cid:129) case and noted that the said decision does not help the respondents in
any manner. Inasmuch as, in that case the Court was called upon to consider the
matter in the context of situation that emerged subsequent to the date of approval of
the order of detention by the State Government and not prior thereto. In none of the
cases on hand the observation in the case of Veeramani will have any application.
Suffice it to observe that the detention order and the disclosure of the fact that detenu
could make representation to the detaining Authority before the State Government
considered the proposal for approval has abridged the right of detenu under Article
22(5) of the Constitution. As a result, the continued detention of the detenu on the
basis of such infirm order cannot be countenanced.
These petitions, therefore, must succeed. The impugned detention orders in the
respective petitions are quashed and set aside and respondents are directed to set the
petitioners/detenu at liberty forthwith unless required in connection with any other
criminal case."
Emphasis supplied
36) In view of these authoritative pronouncements, there is no manner of doubt that the detenu had
a valuable right to make a representation to the detaining authority and denial of this opportunity
vitiates the impugned order. Resultantly, impugned order of detention dated 10/05/2021 is set
aside.
37) In view of foregoing analysis, the impugned order of detention cannot sustain judicial scrutiny.
38) Before parting with the matter, we deem it proper to observe that the main grievance of
detenue/complainant was that the District Magistrate while passing the order of detention did not
inform him about his valuable right to prefer a representation against the detention order before the
same authority namely District Magistrate. Full Bench recognized the said right of the detenue in
light of the constitutional bench judgment in the case of Kamleshkumar Ishwardas Patel (supra).
Thus, in the fitness of things, it will be proper for the State to ensure that henceforth in the order of
detention, it must be mentioned that the detenue has a right to prefer a representation before the
same authority."
Emphasis Supplied
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63880095/ 6
Harshit Kesharwani vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 July, 2021
4) In view whereof, the impugned order dated 10.05.2021 cannot sustain judicial scrutiny. The
impugned order is accordingly set aside.
5) Petition is allowed.
(SUJOY PAUL) (ANIL VERMA)
JUDGE JUDGE
sourabh
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63880095/ 7
