Hemanta Kumar Mohanty vs Nalinikanta Patra & Ors. .... ... on 23 February, 2024
Hemanta Kumar Mohanty vs Nalinikanta Patra & Ors. .... ... on 23
February, 2024
Author: B. P. Routray
Bench: B. P. Routray
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed
Signed by: SANGRAM DAS
Designation: Sr.Stenographer
Reason: Authentication
Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Date: 05-Mar-2024 11:39:07
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No. 32033 of 2023
Hemanta Kumar Mohanty .... Petitioner
Mr.G.Agarwal, Advocate
-versus-
Nalinikanta Patra & Ors. .... Opp.Parties
Mr.S.K.Nayak, Advocate for O.P.1
CORAM:
JUSTICE B. P. ROUTRAY
ORDER
23.02.2024 Order No.
06. 1. The matter is taken up through Hybrid mode.
2. Heard Mr.Agarwal, learned counsel for the Petitioner and Mr.Nayak, learned counsel for
Opposite Party No.1.
3. The impugned order dated 4th September, 2023 of learned Civil Judge(Jr.Division) Aul,
Kendrapara (the Tribunal) passed in Election Misc Case No.2 of 2022 has been challenged by the
returned candidate. He filed a petition dated 1st July, 2023 under Order 6 rule 16 and Order 7 Rule
11 of the CPC with prayer to strike off certain pleadings and further, to reject the election petition.
Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164055664/ 1
Hemanta Kumar Mohanty vs Nalinikanta Patra & Ors. .... ... on 23 February, 2024
4. Learned Civil Judge while dismissing said petition of the returned candidate held that the
provisions in the Civil Procedure Code, other than the provisions for trial of the proceedings, are not
applicable to the election dispute.
5. This court in a recent judgment dated 06th February 2024 passed in WP (C) No. 1086 of 2023
have observed that, such provisions of the C.P.C., which are not inconsistent with the provisions of
the OGP Act, would be in addition to the provisions of Section 37 of the OGP Act. The relevant
observation is as follows:-
"7. If the provisions of Section 37 and 35 will be read cumulatively, it would be clear
that subject to provisions contained in Section 37, the provisions of the CPC shall be
applicable for trial for the election dispute cases under the OGP Act as nearly as may
be possible. The words 'subject to .. ..' appearing in section 35 mean that such
provisions in the CPC not inconsistent with the provisions of the OGP Act would be
applicable in election dispute cases. Section 87 of the Representation of the People
Act, 1951 contains similar provisions to that of section 35 of the OGP Act. This court
in Tilottama Bhola @ Tilotama Bhol vs- Collector 2013(II) OLR 820, have observed
that, most of the provisions relating to election and election petition in the laws
governing Panchayats are in pari materia with the provisions contained in the
Representation of the People Act, 1951, yet the procedural laws relating to panchayat
elections and election petitions cannot be allowed to be interpreted with too much of
rigidity and by indulging in hair- splitting.
Xx .. .. xx .. .. xx ..
Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
11. Further, a thorough reading of the provisions in Section 35 shows that the
provisions of the CPC beyond the matters described in section 37 and not contrary to
any of the provisions of the OGP Act are in addition to such provisions applicable in
election dispute cases. Therefore, the conclusion would be that, such provisions of the
C.P.C., which are not inconsistent with the provisions of the OGP Act, particularly
Order 11 Rule 1 relating to interrogatories would be in addition to the provisions of
Section 37 of the OGP Act. So, what is contended by Mr. Rath that the provisions of
Order 11, Rule 1 would not be applicable in the present case is not found correct."
6. In Dr Rajendra kumara Bajpai vs- Ram Adhar Yadav and Others (1975) 2 SCC 447, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court have held that;
"12. The matter, however, seems to be concluded by a recent decision of this Court in
Virendra Kumar Saklecha v. Jagjivan, (1972) 1 SCC 826 where the Chief Justice
speaking for the Court interpreted Section 87 of the Act and observed as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164055664/ 2
Hemanta Kumar Mohanty vs Nalinikanta Patra & Ors. .... ... on 23 February, 2024
Under Section 87 of the Act every election petition shall be tried by the High Court as
nearly as may be in accordance with the procedure applicable under the Code of Civil
Procedure to the trial of suits. Under Section 102 of the Code the High Court may
make rules regulating their own procedure and the procedure of the civil courts
subject to their supervision and may by such rules vary, alter or add to any of the
rules in the First Schedule to the Code.
The relevant part of Section 87 runs thus:
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Act and of any rules made thereunder, every
election petition shall be tried by the High Court, as nearly as may be, in accordance
with the procedure applicable under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 to the trial of
suits:
A bare perusal of this section leads to the irresistible conclusion that election
petitions shall have to be tried in accordance with the procedure applicable under the
Code of Civil Procedure to the trial of suits. In other words, election petitions would
be tried like ordinary civil suits.
13. We are unable to agree with counsel for the appellant that Order XI does not form
part of the trial of suits but is a special procedure. This is repelled by a reference to
Order XI of the Code of Civil Procedure itself. It will appear that Order X relates to
the procedure for examination of parties by the Court and Order XI is a part of that
procedure, because it provides that where witnesses Location: High Court of Orissa,
Cuttack are not able to appear before the Court personally they are examined through
interrogatories. In these circumstances, therefore, Order XI is as much a part of the
procedure as Order X relating to trial of suits in matters regarding summoning of
witnesses, documents etc. In these circumstances it cannot be said that Section 87 of
the Act either expressly or impliedly excludes the application of Order XI of the Code
of Civil Procedure. In fact we are clearly of opinion that Section 87 of the Act is of the
widest amplitude so as to cover the entire procedure mentioned in the Code of Civil
Procedure with only two exceptions-- (i) where the Act contains express provision for
certain matters which are inconsistent with the procedure prescribed by the Code;
and (ii) where a particular provision of the Code of Civil Procedure is either expressly
or by necessary intendment excluded by the Act.
Subject to these two exceptions, Section 87 is very wide in its connotation.
14. We, therefore, agree with the learned Single Judge who was trying the election petition that the
application for interrogatories was one of the logical steps in aid of the prosecution of the petition
and was fully covered by Section 87 of the Act. The second contention raised by counsel for the
appellant thus fails."
7. In Kailash vs- Nankhu and others (2005) 4 SCC 480, it is concluded that;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164055664/ 3
Hemanta Kumar Mohanty vs Nalinikanta Patra & Ors. .... ... on 23 February, 2024
"46. We sum up and briefly state our conclusions as under:
(i) The trial of an election petition commences from the date of the receipt of the
election petition by the court and continues till the date of its decision. The filing of
pleadings is one stage in the trial of an election petition. The power vesting in the
High Court to adjourn the trial from time to time (as far as practicable and without
sacrificing the expediency and interests of justice) includes power to adjourn the
hearing in an election petition, affording opportunity to the defendant to file a
written statement.
The availability of such power in the High Court is spelled out by the provisions of the
Representation of the People Act, 1951 itself and rules made for purposes of that Act and a resort to
the provisions of CPC is not called for.
(ii) On the language of Section 87(1) of the Act, it is clear that the applicability of the procedure
provided for the trial of suits to the trial of election petitions is not attracted with all its rigidity and
technicality. The rules of procedure contained in CPC apply to the trial of election petitions under
the Act with flexibility and only as guidelines.
(iii) In case of conflict between the provisions of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 and the
rules framed thereunder or the Rules framed by the High Court in exercise of Location: High Court
of Orissa, Cuttack the power conferred by Article 225 of the Constitution on the one hand, and the
rules of procedure contained in CPC on the other hand, the former shall prevail over the latter."
8. In Smt Punama Sabara vs- Smt Borso Boni Raito 2013 (Supp- II) OLR 268, it is held as follows;
"7. On the rival contentions of the parties, the questions that arise for consideration
by this Court are as follows:
(i) Whether procedure which specifically find place in Section 37 of the Act are
applicable for trial of the election petition and not provisions of the CPC ?
(ii) Whether CPC being the common law, it has no application to the G.P. Act, which
is a special statute and therefore, the concept of counter claim provided in Order 8
Rule-6A of CPC has no application in trial of election cases under the G.P. Act ?
(iii) Whether in view of Section 30 which provides that only election of a person can
be challenged by filing an election petition, elected candidate is not entitled to file
election petition and consequentially cannot maintain a counter claim ?
Xxx .. xxx .. xxx ..
10. Section 35(1) starts with the expression "subject to the provisions of this Act and
the rules made thereunder" every election petition shall be tried by the Civil Judge
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164055664/ 4
Hemanta Kumar Mohanty vs Nalinikanta Patra & Ors. .... ... on 23 February, 2024
(Junior Division) as nearly as may be, in accordance with the procedure applicable
under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908. Therefore, if any provision is available
under the Grama Panchayat Act and Rules made thereunder there is no need to take
aid of CPC. Further, the provisions contained in the Grama Panchayats Act and Rules
made thereunder shall prevail over the provisions/procedure of C.P.C. Under Section
37 certain powers exercisable by the Civil Court are specifically vested with the
Election Tribunal. If the contention of the petitioner is accepted that the CPC will be
applicable only to the extent enumerated under Section 37 then there was no need to
enact Section 35 of which would otherwise render redundant.
11. Therefore, conjoint reading of Sections 35 and 37 makes it clear that in addition to
powers enumerated under Section 37, the Election Tribunal shall apply the other
provisions of CPC, as nearly as may be subject to provisions of Grama Panchayat Act
while trying an Election petition.
12. Further contention of Mr. Dhal is that the Grama Panchayat Act being a special
statute, the concept of counter claim as provided in CPC has no application for trial of
Election petition.
Such a stand cannot be sustainable in law since Section 35(1) of the Grama Panchayats Act itself
provides that every election Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack petition shall be tried by the
Election Tribunal as nearly as may be in accordance with the procedure applicable under the Code of
Civil Procedure, 1908, of course subject to provisions of the Grama Panchayat Act.
xxx .. xxx .. xxx
25. In view of the above settled legal position of law and in the facts and circumstances of the case,
the reasons given by the learned Election Tribunal for rejecting the amendment petition are not
legally sustainable. In any event, if the written statement filed by the defendant has already
contained counter claim in the light of Order VIII, Rule 6A, the learned Tribunal should have
allowed the amendment petition."
9. In the case at hand, the prayer was in respect of the provisions in Order VI rule 16 and Order VII
Rule 11 of the C.P.C. Learned civil judge without getting to the merits of the petition has rejected it
observing that such petition under Order VI R.16 and Order VII R.11 is not maintainable in the
election case. In view of the proposition of law discussed above, the observations of the learned Civil
Judge is found unsustainable. The impugned order is set aside and the Civil Judge is directed to
consider the petition dated 1st July, 2023 of the returned candidate afresh.
10. The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
(B.P. Routray) Judge S.Das
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/164055664/ 5
