Hicks Thermometer (I) Ltd vs Aruna Koul Bhat And Ors on 14 July, 2023
Hicks Thermometer (I) Ltd vs Aruna Koul Bhat And Ors on 14
July, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 12.06.2023
Pronounced on: 14.07.2023
MA No. 25/2019
Hicks Thermometer (I) Ltd. .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
q
Through: Mr. Vishal Goel, Advocate
vs
Aruna Koul Bhat and ors. ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Sanjay K. Dhar, Advocate
Coram: HON(cid:128)BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. This is an appeal against the award dated 24.12.2018 passed by the Assistant Labour
Commissioner, Jammu (hereinafter to be referred as „the Commissioner(cid:128)) under the Employees
Compensation Act, 1923, by virtue of which the appellant has been directed to deposit an amount of
Rs. 9,74,985/- (Rupees Nine Lacs Seventy Four Thousand Nine Hundred Eighty Five Only) within
30 days of the passing of the order.
2. The award has been impugned on the following grounds:-
(i) That the deceased was not an employee within „the meaning of Section 2(dd) read
with Schedule II of the Act (Supra).
(ii) That the award impugned is perverse as the Commissioner completely ignored
the pleadings, facts and relevant material on record.
(iii) That no reasonable opportunity of advancing the final arguments was afforded to
the appellant.
(iv) That the deceased expired while on a private trip to Srinagar and was not on
official duty.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99338935/ 1
Hicks Thermometer (I) Ltd vs Aruna Koul Bhat And Ors on 14 July, 2023
(v) That the respondent No. 1 submitted her examination in chief by way of an
attested affidavit but in her cross examination, she has clearly stated that she never
appeared before anyone for attestation of her affidavit.
(vi) That the claimants and witness, namely, Kamal Jeet Dhar in their cross
examination have admitted that an insurance claim with respect to the accident was
paid by the insurance company, which fact was not disclosed in the claim petition.
(vii) That the respondent No. 1 in her cross examination has admitted that as per the
policy of the company, the deceased was only allowed to travel using the public
transport (Bus), as such, there was wilful disobedience of the deceased as per rules
issued by the company. The approval of the company to the deceased was the bus
travel only but the deceased went in Bolero vehicle.
(viii)That the Commissioner has completely ignored the final investigation report,
wherein the negligence of the deceased was established.
3. The appellant has proposed the following substantial questions of law:-
(i) Whether the award impugned is perverse being passed without considering the
material available and placed on record?
(ii) Whether an-unattested evidence by way of an affidavit can be treated as valid in
the eyes of law?
(iii) Whether the award could have been passed without affording the appellant with
an opportunity of advancing the final arguments?
(iv) Whether after the receipt of compensation from the insurance company, another
compensation award can be passed/claimed ?
4. Mr. Vishal Goel, learned counsel for the appellant vehemently argued that there was no
relationship of employer and employee between the appellant and the deceased and further that the
appellant did not meet with an accident during the course of his employment as he was on a private
visit. He further submitted that the deceased was entitled to travel by bus only and assuming that he
was on official duty, he could not have travelled in a private Bolero vehicle. Mr. Goel further argued
that the vehicle was being plied without registration number and in view of that, the appellant
cannot be fastened with any liability under the Act. Mr. Goel further submitted that the interest
@12% per annum could not have been imposed upon the appellant. Learned counsel for the
appellant has placed reliance upon the judgment of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in case titled,
„United India Insurance Co. Ltd. vs. Sushil Kumar Godara(cid:128)1, and the judgments of this Court in
case titled, „Geeta Devi and others vs. Som Nath and another(cid:128) 2 and „New India Assurance Co. Ltd.
vs. Lal Dei and Ors(cid:128) 3
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99338935/ 2
Hicks Thermometer (I) Ltd vs Aruna Koul Bhat And Ors on 14 July, 2023
5. Per contra, Mr. Sanjay K. Dhar, learned counsel appearing for the respondent Nos. 1 to
3/claimants argued that the award has been passed on the basis of evidence led by the parties and
the witnesses examined by the appellant, namely, Jai Narayan Tiwari and Narendra Pal Singh have
admitted that Sales Executives of the company have to visit the dealers for marketing the products
of the company and further the appellant(cid:128)s witness, namely, Narendra Pal Singh has clearly stated
that he was not having any knowledge about any order issued by the company before the death of
the deceased, whereby he was directed not to deal in Kashmir region. Mr. Dhar further submitted
that both these witnesses have admitted the employment of the deceased as Sale
Executive/Representative for J&K territory. He further argued that statutory interest has been
awarded by the Commissioner and further that no plea was raised by the appellant during (2021) 14
SCC 519 2013(2) J.K.J. 226 2013 AAC 2950.
the proceedings before the Commissioner in respect of denial of its liability due to non-registration
of the vehicle, as such, the same cannot be raised at this stage. Learned counsel for respondent Nos.
1 to 3 has placed reliance upon the judgments of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in cases titled, „Jaya
Biswal & Ors. vs. Branch Manager, IFFCO Tokio General Insurance Company Ltd. & Anr.(cid:128) 4 and
„North East Karnataka Road Transport Corporation vs. Smt. Sujatha(cid:128)5.
6. Heard and perused the record.
7. The facts necessary for disposal of the present appeal are that one Deepak Koul, who was working
as Sales Representative w.e.f. 10.03.2012, met with an accident at Battery Chashma National
Highway, Ramban while he was driving a Bolero vehicle bearing temporary registration No.
9827/AV and going to attend various customers in Kashmir, as a result of which, he died. The
respondent Nos. 1 to 3 filed an application before the Commissioner for grant of compensation. The
appellant was put to notice. Initially, the appellant was proceeded ex-parte but later, the ex-parte
proceedings were set aside. The appellant filed the response, wherein a plea was taken that the
deceased did not die during the discharge of his official duties but he was on a private trip with his
friends. During the trip, he caused accident involving use of private vehicle Bolero by driving it in a
rash and negligent manner. It was also pleaded that the company had appointed a distributor for
Kashmir, who was directly taking care of the company orders for Kashmir, therefore, there was no
question of deceased going to Kashmir for any official work. It was also pleaded that the 2016(11)
SCC 201 [2019] Acci.C.R. 96 (S.C.) deceased was looking after the work of Rajouri and Poonch only.
The appellant admitted that the deceased was having a salary of Rs. 6500/- per month. On these
grounds only, the claim petition filed by the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 was objected by the appellant. In
the objections, no plea was taken by the appellant that the deceased was entitled to travel by bus
only during official visit and also that due to non-registration of the vehicle, the appellant is not
entitled to make any payment of compensation to the claimants/respondent Nos. 1 to 3.
8. This Court is dealing with an appeal under Section 30 of the Act (supra), which can be maintained
only when a substantial question of law is involved in the appeal. The proposed question of law as
raised by the appellant at S. No. (ii) is not the substantial question of law as it pertains to
appreciation of evidence. The proposed question of law at S. No. (iii) also cannot be termed as
substantial question of law as if this court finds that the award passed by the Commissioner is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99338935/ 3
Hicks Thermometer (I) Ltd vs Aruna Koul Bhat And Ors on 14 July, 2023
perverse, the same can be set aside by this court. The proposed question of law at S. No. (iv) as to
whether the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 had already received compensation but did not mention the
same in their petition, in fact does not arise at all. It needs to be noted that the respondent No. 1 has
stated in her cross- examination that the vehicle was not registered on the date of accident but was
insured. They got claim from the insurance company without any court case for an amount of Rs. 2.5
lacs as compensation, which was paid to her father-in-law as the vehicle was owned by father-in-law
i.e. father of the deceased. The witness of the respondents namely- Kamal Jeet Dhar has stated that
the vehicle was registered in the name of father of the deceased and insurance claim from the
National Insurance Company was received by the father of the deceased. Thus, it is evident that no
compensation was received by the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 on account of death of the deceased but
father of the deceased had received Rs. 2.5 lacs as compensation for the damage caused to the
vehicle.
9. So far as the contentions of the appellant that there was no relationship of employer and
employee between the parties and the deceased was on a private visit and not on an official duty are
concerned, the same cannot be considered as substantial question of law being factual issues. The
para-9 of the judgment of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in case of North East Karnataka Road
Transport Corporation (supra) is very relevant. Paragraph „9(cid:128) of the judgment is reproduced as
under:-
"9. At the outset, we may take note of the fact, being a settled principle, that the
question as to whether the employee met with an accident, whether the accident
occurred during the course of employment, whether it arose out of an employment,
how and in what manner the accident occurred, who was negligent in causing the
accident, whether there existed any relationship of employee and employer, what was
the age and monthly salary of the employee, how many are the dependents of the
deceased employee, the extent of disability caused to the employee due to injuries
suffered in an accident, whether there was any insurance coverage obtained by the
employer to cover the incident etc. are some of the material issues which arise for the
just decision of the Commissioner in a claim petition when an employee suffers any
bodily injury or dies during the course of his employment and he/his LRs sue/s his
employer to claim compensation under the Act."
10. Now, this Court will examine as to whether there is any perversity in the award or not. From the
record, it is evident that the appellant has not been able to prove by leading any cogent evidence that
separate distributor for Kashmir was appointed and the deceased was not dealing in the Kashmir
region rather the appellant(cid:128)s witnesses, namely, Narendra Pal Singh and Jai Narayan Tiwari have
admitted that the deceased was appointed as Sales Executive of the company for territory of J&K..
The appellant(cid:128)s witness, namely, Narendra Pal Singh has admitted that the deceased was appointed
as Sales Executive for J&K territory and he further admitted that Sales Executive of the company
has to visit the dealers for marketing the products of the company. He expressed ignorance with
regard to appointment of dealer at Srinagar. He also expressed ignorance to any order issued by the
company before death of the deceased, whereby he was directed not to deal in Kashmir region.
Similarly, PW-Jai Narayan Tiwari stated that he did not remember the name of the dealer appointed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99338935/ 4
Hicks Thermometer (I) Ltd vs Aruna Koul Bhat And Ors on 14 July, 2023
in Srinagar. The plea of the appellant that the deceased was entitled to travel in a bus only, also does
not arise from the pleadings of the parties. Though the reference of the same in the evidence has
been made. In the statements of the two witnesses examined by the appellant, there is no whisper
that the deceased was entitled to travel by bus only. The appellant cannot take advantage of passing
reference in the cross-examination of the respondent No. 1 in respect of the deceased travelling to
Rajouri by bus, more particularly, when she has stated only bus travel was approved by the company
and for all official visits, the company used to pay fare of bus. The whole statement of witness is
required to be read and not a particular sentence and that too out of context. A perusal of the
statement of the respondent No. 1 reveals that the appellant approved the bus fare only. The other
contention raised by the appellant that once the vehicle was not registered so the appellant cannot
be held liable, was not pleaded by the appellant in its reply to the application for compensation filed
by the respondent Nos. 1-3. A perusal of the judgment in case „United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v.
Sushil Kumar Godara (supra) reliance whereupon has been placed by Mr. Goel, would reveal that
the dispute was between the owner of the vehicle and the Insurance Company and because of
violation of the condition of the policy, the insurance company was not held liable. The relevant
portion of the judgment is extracted as under:
"14. In the present case, the temporary registration of the respondent's vehicle had
expired on 28-7-2011. Not only was the vehicle driven, but also taken to another city,
where it was stationed overnight in a place other than the respondent's premises.
There is nothing on record to suggest that the respondent had applied for registration
or that he was awaiting registration. In these circumstances, the ratio of Narinder
Singh was in the context of an accident, is immaterial. Despite this, the respondent
plied his vehicle and took it to Jodhpur, where the theft took place. It is of no
consequence, that the car was not plying on the road, when it was stolen; the material
fact is that concededly, it was driven to the place from where it was stolen, after the
expiry of temporary registration. But for its theft, the respondent would have driven
back the vehicle. What is important is this Court's opinion of the law, that when an
insurable incident that potentially results in liability occurs, there should be no
fundamental breach of the conditions contained in the contract of insurance.
Therefore, on the date of theft, the vehicle had been driven/used without a valid
registration, amounting to a clear violation of Sections 39 and 192 of the Motor
Vehicles Act, This results in a fundamental breach of the terms and conditions of the
policy, as held by this Court in Narinder Singh , entitling the insurer to repudiate the
policy."
The judgment (supra) is not applicable in the present facts and circumstances of the case.
11. It was also urged by Mr. Goel that interest @12% per annum cannot be granted. He placed
reliance upon the judgments of this Court in cases titled, „Geeta Devi and others vs. Som Nath and
another(cid:128) and „New India Assurance Co. Ltd. vs. Lal Dei and Ors(cid:128) (supra). A perusal of the both the
judgments reveal that there is no discussion in respect of rate of interest payable to the claimants
except awarding the interest at the rate 6% and 7% per annum. Both the judgments have not laid
down any ratio in respect of rate of interest payable to the claimants under the Act(supra) but in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99338935/ 5
Hicks Thermometer (I) Ltd vs Aruna Koul Bhat And Ors on 14 July, 2023
terms of sub-section-3(a) of Section 4A of the Act (supra), simple interest @12% per annum is
payable from the date of incident. Reliance is placed upon the judgment of the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court
in case titled, „Shobha & Ors. vs. The Chairman, Vithalrao Shinde Sahakari Sakhar Karkhana Ltd. &
Ors(cid:128)6. It was further contended by Mr. Goel that the deceased died because of his own negligence
therefore, the appellant cannot be held responsible for compensating the legal representatives of the
deceased. This contention of the appellant is taken note of for the purpose of rejection only as, in
„Jaya Biswal & Ors. vs. Branch Manager, IFFCO Tokio General Insurance Company Ltd. & Anr.(cid:128)
(supra), the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court has held that section 3 of E.C Act does not create any exception of
the kind, which permits the employer to avoid his liability if there was negligence on the part of
workman. In view of the above, this Court does not find any perversity in the award impugned and
rather the award has been passed on the basis of evidence brought on record by the parties.
12. Viewed thus, there is no merit in the present appeal, as such, the same is dismissed.
(RAJNESH OSWAL) JUDGE Jammu 14.07.2023 Neha Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No.
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No. 2022 AIR(SC) 1410
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/99338935/ 6
