Himanshu @ Soljar vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
Himanshu @ Soljar vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February,
2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:15669
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 43046 of 2024
Applicant :- Himanshu @ Soljar
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Sushil Kumar Dubey
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Learned State Law Officer has stated that notice to the informant has been served on 16.11.2024.
3. Heard Sri Sushil Kumar Dubey, learned counsel for the applicant as well as Sri Jai Kishan
Chaurasia, learned State Law Officer for the State and perused the record.
4. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No.191 of 2024, under Sections 137(2), 87, 64 B.N.S. and
3/4(2) POCSO Act, Police Station- Jaswantnagar, District- Etawah, during the pendency of trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16790281/ 1
Himanshu @ Soljar vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
PROSECUTION STORY:
5. The FIR was instituted against unknown person of having enticed away the minor daughters of
the informant aged about 16 years and a neighbour aged about 15 years on 6.9.2024 at about 06:30
a.m. ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT:
6. The applicant is absolutely innocent and has been falsely implicated in the present case.
7. The FIR was instituted against unknown person. The FIR itself is delayed by about one day and
there is no explanation of the said delay caused.
8. The victim is a consenting party as is but evident from her statement recorded U/s 183 B.N.S.S.,
whereby she has stated that the trio of the girls have their own boyfriend and the applicant is stated
to be the boyfriend of the victim herein. He is stated to have raped her thrice.
9. The allegations are false as there is no medical corroboration of the prosecution story. The victim
by her looks seems to be major, although she is 16 years old as per her own statement and her
father.
10. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
11. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since 9.9.2024
and is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the
liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE/OPPOSITE PARTY:
12. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed.
CONCLUSION:
13. In light of the judgement of the Supreme Court passed in Niranjan Singh and another vs
Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and others AIR 1980 SC 785, this Court has avoided detailed
examination of the evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the case as no party
should have the impression that his case has been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is
needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive exploration of the merits in the order itself.
14. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16790281/ 2
Himanshu @ Soljar vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
15. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
16. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that ?bail is a rule and jail is an exception?.
17. Learned State Law Officer could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would
warrant denial of bail to the applicant.
18. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned State Law Officer.
19. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
20. Let the applicant- Himanshu @ Soljar involved in aforementioned case crime number be
released on bail on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C./351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
21. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
22. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16790281/ 3
Himanshu @ Soljar vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 4 February, 2025
witnesses.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025 Vikas (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/16790281/ 4
