Hira Lal @ Heera Lal vs Board Of Revenue, U.P. Lko. Thru. ... on 3 March, 2025
Hira Lal @ Heera Lal vs Board Of Revenue, U.P. Lko. Thru. ... on
3 March, 2025
Author: Saurabh Lavania
Bench: Saurabh Lavania
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:12556
Court No. - 12
Case :- CIVIL MISC REVIEW APPLICATION DEFECTIVE No. - 31 of 2025
Applicant :- Hira Lal @ Heera Lal
Opposite Party :- Board Of Revenue, U.P. Lko. Thru. Chairman And Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Abhisht Saran,Rahul Kumar Kashyap
Hon'ble Saurabh Lavania,J.
This review application in relation to the judgment and order dated 02.01.2024 dismissing the
Writ-B No. 1002681 of 2007 (Hira Lal vs. Board of Revenue and others) was instituted in the
Registry of this Court on 12.02.2025 along with an application seeking condonation of delay which
according to office note is of 377 days.
The applicant has tried to explain the delay of 377 days in the affidavit filed in support of the
application seeking condonation of delay. The relevant paras of the said affidavit are extracted
hereinbelow:-
"2. That the intimation regarding the judgment passed by the Hon'ble High Court
dated 02.01.2024, dismissing the writ petition concerned with present application,
was telephonically conveyed to the local counsel of the sole-applicant/appellant, who
use to accompany the sole-applicant/appellant every time during the pendency of the
case in High Court, as the applicant was only in touch with his High Court Counsel at
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87140930/ 1
Hira Lal @ Heera Lal vs Board Of Revenue, U.P. Lko. Thru. ... on 3 March, 2025
Lucknow through his local counsel from Malihabad.
3. That the deponent on 03.02.2025, came to meet his High Court counsel at
Lucknow, at his residence, during Basant Panchami holidays and enquired about the
status of the case and to the utter shock and surprise of the counsel, the deponent
was totally unaware and unknown regarding the judgment and order passed by the
Hon'ble High Court dated 02.01.2024, in spite of the information and intimation
given by the counsel for the applicant/petitioner to his local counsel at Malihabad.
4. That during the conversation, the deponent revealed that the
deponent/sole-applicant suffered from Acute asthma/Bronchitis hypertension and
other critical illness relating to high blood pressure and blood sugar shoot-up
resulting in the stiffening of the blood vessels resulting into diabetes and thus, got
bed-ridden and during the same illness only he got attacked by a serious eyes
problem due to high blood pressure and blood sugar levels, which also added in the
numbness of limbs in body and lastly also got one of his eyes visually impaired. Thus,
the petitioner failed to remain in touch with his counsel at High Court. The deponent
was running from hospital to hospital in and out of Lucknow, for his treatment, as
the sole-applicant /appellant was diagnosed with high levels of blood sugar and blood
pressure and was being taken care of his illness and medicines, this resulted in him
falling short and tight monetary conditions and due to paucity of funds after getting
discharged, firstly, he took recommended complete bedrest, hence due to this, most
of the time the sole applicant/deponent remained away from their case and also lost
contact with his local counsel at Malihabad, Sri Saadiq Ali Advocate and the present
counsel conducting his case at High Court, Lucknow, and further also failed to take
note of the regular course of action taking place in the case in High Court.
5. That the deponent/applicant also discloses that as he is more than 65 years of age,
apart from being suffering from asthma, bronchitis, hypertension, blood pressure
and Blood Sugar fluctuation type illness, he is also facing partial fading memory loss
or memory flashes, presently since the year 2022-23, which got aggravated in the
year 2024 after month of June, and lastly in month of august till November remained
under treatment of Dr. Firoz Alam of Bharat Hospital at Rahimabad, he is suffering
from acute loss of eye sight from his left eye also an additional side effect of
abovementioned disease, which restricted the deponent/sole- applicant/petitioner to
bed only, he is also facing problems in recalling even minutest details of his case and
about his local counsel at Malihabad, "Sri Saadiq Ali - Advocate", hence, the
deponent was unable to contact his local counsel earlier, although now deceased, but
when somehow he managed his address from his acquaintances and then went to
meet him at his home, but to his utter shock, he was informed that the local counsel
at Malihabad has already got expired in the year 2017.
6. That the deponent after many visits was able to find the clerk of the Local Counsel
at Malihabad Tehsil and then somehow he arranged the information/address
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87140930/ 2
Hira Lal @ Heera Lal vs Board Of Revenue, U.P. Lko. Thru. ... on 3 March, 2025
regarding the High Court Counsel at Lucknow from the files kept at deceased
counsel's chamber and then the deponent immediately came to Lucknow to meet him
and enquire about the case proceedings, when the deponent met his counsel, he
immediately informed the deponent about the order dated 02.01.2024 passed in Writ
Petition bearing W.P. No. 2681 of 2007 (M/S) Uttar Pradesh Heera Lal Vs. Board of
Revenue, Lucknow and also revealed that many attempts were made to contact the
local Counsel at Malihabad, "Advocate Late Saadiq Ali", in the case but all in vain for
some reasons, he remained uncontacted and later the news of his death got
acknowledged through his clerk, hence, has not applied for the certified copy of the
order. after getting the whole information the deponent/legal heir of the
applicant/appellant sought time to inform the same to the sole- applicant/appellant.
7. That on 26.01.2025, the deponent came to Lucknow and met his counsel and
informed that as the sole-applicant/appellant's condition being very bad sue to illness
in year 2024 and then he requested the counsel at high court to move a Review
Application against the order dated 02.01.2024, else the court below was also
adamant upon deciding his another case pertaining to house pending before the
Court of Civil Judge (J.D.) Havali. Hence, the fear arose in the mind and
applicant/petitioner and he started enquiry of case proceedings pending before
Hon'ble Court Lucknow. After getting the information about the case, the deponent
promised to revert soon after arranging the required expenses for the for filing of the
present Review Case.
8. That on 03.02.2025, the deponent telephonically contacted the counsel for
sole-applicant/appellant and informed about successful arrangement of the funds for
the case and asked for the day to come for preparation of the Review Application.
Then immediately the counsel for the applicant/appellant informed him and asked
him to come for the preparation of the same.
9. That on 08.02.2025, the deponent came to Lucknow and contacted his counsel in
his chamber and deposited some part-payment in the case, and the counsel for the
sole-applicant/petitioner applied for the certified copy of the order dated 02.01.2024
passed by the Hon'ble High Court in WRIB No. 1002681/2007, Hira Lal Vs. Board of
Revenue and thereafter the instant review application was drafted and prepared,
which is being filed today.
10. That the delay in filing the instant review application was caused due to old age
ailments along with Bronchitis/Asthma, blood pressure and Blood sugar etc.; as
mentioned above and as being suffering from lack of knowledge and untimely demise
of the local counsel at Malihabad and most importantly the deteriorating health
condition of the sole-applicant/petitioner and his confinement to bed, therefore, after
he regained his health, he initiated all legal proceedings in the instant case on his
behalf. The delay caused is Bonafide, unintentional and non-deliberate, hence,
deserves to be condoned. The Annexure No. 1 is the Medical Certificate issued in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87140930/ 3
Hira Lal @ Heera Lal vs Board Of Revenue, U.P. Lko. Thru. ... on 3 March, 2025
name of Hira Lal regarding his illness and bed rest prescribed issued by the
Hospital."
Upon due consideration of the above extracted paras, this Court finds that delay has not been
explained for the following reasons:-
(i) The judgment and order dated 02.01.2024 was duly communicated to the local
counsel of the applicant with whom the applicant was in touch meaning thereby the
local counsel conveyed the fate of petition to the applicant within a reasonable time
and therefore the explanation with regard to period between the date of judgment
under review i.e. 02.01.2024 to 03.02.2025 on which date according to the para 3 the
applicant met his counsel at Lucknow, therefore, the delay has not been properly
explained.
(ii) To support the averment related to acute asthma/bronchitis/hypertension and
other critical illness relating to high blood pressure, blood sugar etc. relevant
documents related to treatment have not been filed and the certificate of Bharat
Hospital dated 09.02.2025 filed on record does not indicate that the applicant was
bedridden for a long period. This also shows that delay for period which starts from
the date of judgment dated 02.01.2024 upto preparation of affidavit has not been
explained properly.
For the aforesaid reasons, this Court finds no force in the application seeking condonation of delay.
It is hereby rejected. Consequently, the review application is also dismissed.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025/Renu
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/87140930/ 4
