Iffco Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Om Parkash on 23 February, 2023
Iffco Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Om Parkash on 23
February, 2023
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 09.02.2023
Pronounced on: 23.02.2023
Mac App No. 57/2021 c/w
Mac App No. 58/2021
Mac App No. 59/2021
Mac App No. 60/2021
Mac App No. 61/2021
Mac App No. 62/2021
IFFCO TOKIO General Insurance Co. Ltd. ...Appellant(s)
Through:- Mr. Vipan Gandotra Advocate
V/s
Om Parkash ...Respondent(s)
Through:- Mr. A.S.Azad, Advocate
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. By this common judgment/order, the afore-titled six connected appeals arising out of a common
award dated 24.12.2020 passed by the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Jammu (hereinafter
referred to as the „Tribunal(cid:129)) are proposed to be disposed of.
2 It appears that deceased Malkiyat Singh, Shanker Singh, Balwant Raj and injured Om Parkash,
Anuradha and Sunil Kumar were travelling in a Eco Car bearing No. JK-11-A/4856 from Badkot
Uttar Kashi towards Jammu. On 26.02.2015 at about 11 pm, when the vehicle in question reached
Hathyari, Uttrakhand, it suffered an accident as a result of which it fell into a deep gorge. Due to the
said accident, the deceased as well a/w connected matters.
as the injured above named, who were travelling in the vehicle in question, suffered grievous
injuries which led to the death of the deceased and permanent disablement of the injured. The
accident also resulted in death of the owner cum driver of the vehicle in question.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82563609/ 1
Iffco Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Om Parkash on 23 February, 2023
3 The legal heirs/dependents of the deceased as also the injured filed as many as six different claim
petitions before the Tribunal claiming compensation from the appellant-Insurance Company and
the owner of the offending vehicle. During pendency of the said claim petitions, the name of owner
was deleted from the array of parties as he had died in the same accident which was subject matter
of the claim petitions. 4 The claim petitions were contested by the appellant-Insurance Company by
filing reply thereto. In its reply, it was contended by the appellant-Insurance Company that the
driver of the vehicle in question was not holding a valid and effective driving licence at the relevant
time and even the documents of the vehicle were not valid. Although the accident was not
specifically denied by the appellant-Insurance Company, but it was pleaded that the claimants
should be put to strict proof with regard to the alleged occurrence. The appellant-Insurance
Company, inter alia, sought to take up all defences available to it under the policy of insurance as
also those defences that are available to the owner in terms of Section 170 of the Motor Vehicles Act,
1988 (for short „the Act of 1988(cid:129)). In fact, an application under Section 170 of the Act was also
made by the appellant- Insurance Company before the Tribunal. Having regard to the manner in
which the appellant-Insurance Company was allowed to cross-examine the witnesses on the aspect
relating to quantum of compensation, it appears that a/w connected matters.
the appellant-Insurance company was permitted to plead and take up all defences as are available to
an owner of the insured vehicle. 5 On the basis of pleadings of the parties, the following issues came
to be framed by the Tribunal:
"(i) Whether an accident took place on 26.02.2015 at Hathyari, Bhadwala, Juddo
Road District Dehradoon involving offending vehicle bearing registration No. JK11-
A/4856 as a result of which deceased Malkiyat Singh, Shanker Singh and Balwant Raj suffered fatal
injuries and petitioners namely Om Parkash, Anuradha and Sunil Kumar received grievous injuries
?OPP
(ii) If issue No.1 is proved in affirmative, whether petitioner is entitled to compensation ? If so, to
what amount and from whom ?
(iii) Whether there was any violation of terms and conditions of insurance policy with respect to the
vehicle No. JK11- A/4856 on the date of occurrence, if yes, what is its effect?" 6 The claimants led
evidence in support of their case, whereas no evidence was led by the appellant-Insurance Company
before the Tribunal. 7 The Tribunal vide the impugned award held that the accident had occurred
due to rashness and negligence of the deceased driver. So far as the violation of terms of the policy of
insurance is concerned, the same was not proved because no evidence was led by the
appellant-Insurance Company before the Tribunal. The Tribunal awarded a sum of Rs.8,06,400/- as
compensation in favour of claimant Om Parkash who had suffered injuries due to the accident, a
sum of Rs.6,56,000/- was awarded as compensation in favour of injured claimant Sunil Kumar, a
sum of Rs.25,000/- was awarded as compensation in favour of injured claimant Anuradha, a sum of
Rs.33,37,160/- was awarded in favour of dependents of the deceased Balwant Raj, a sum of
Rs.23,96,162/- was awarded as compensation in favour of dependents of the deceased Shanker
Singh and a a/w connected matters.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82563609/ 2
Iffco Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Om Parkash on 23 February, 2023
sum of Rs. 8,66,800/- was awarded as compensation in favour of dependents of the deceased
Malkiyat Singh.
8 The appellant-Insurance Company has challenged the impugned award on the grounds that the
claimants have not impleaded the legal heirs of owner of the offending vehicle as parties to the claim
petitions and, as such, the claim petitions are not maintainable. It has also been contended that, in
the instant case, no FIR relating to the accident was registered by the concerned Police Station, as
such, the accident is not established. Lastly, it has been argued that, in the case of claim petition
arising out of death of deceased Balwant Raj, who was working as a Sub Inspector in J&K Police, the
Tribunal while assessing compensation has not taken into consideration the fact that as per the
Service Rules applicable to the deceased, his widow is entitled to full pension up to a period of 7
years from the date of his death and the same was required to be deducted while assessing the
compensation. In this regard, reliance has been placed upon a judgment of this Court in the case of
New India Assurance Co. Ltd vs. Usha Baloria and others (MA No. 291/2012 and connected matters,
decided on 24.07.2020).
9 I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
10 The first ground that has been urged by learned counsel for the appellant-Insurance Company is
that, without impleading the legal heirs of the deceased insured, the claim petitions are not
maintainable. It has been submitted that owner cum driver of the offending vehicle had died in the
same accident and the claimants, after deleting him from array of the parties, a/w connected
matters.
did not take steps to implead his LRs thereby rendering the claim petitions incompetent.
11. In the above context, it would be appropriate to refer to the provisions contained in Section 155
of the Act of 1988 which provides for effect of death on the cause of action. It reads as under:
"155. Effect of death on certain causes of action:
Notwithstanding anything contained in section 306 of the Indian Succession Act,
1925 (39 of 1925), the death of a person in whose favour a certificate of insurance had
been issued, if it occurs after the happening of an event which has given rise to a
claim under the provisions of this Chapter, shall not be a bar to the survival of any
cause of action arising out of the said event against his estate or against the insurer".
12 From a bare perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that if death of an insured has occurred
after the happening of accident which has given rise to a claim, the same would continue to survive
against the estate of the insured or against the insurer. The question that arises for consideration is
that whether, in the face of aforesaid provision, the present claim petitions without impleading the
LRs of the deceased owner as parties, are maintainable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82563609/ 3
Iffco Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Om Parkash on 23 February, 2023
13 A Division Bench of the Karnatka High Court in the case of New India Assurance Co. Ltd vs. H.
Siddalinga Naika and others, 1985 ACJ 1989, has dealt with a similar issue as has been raised in the
present case. In the said case, a grievance was projected by the insurance company that owner of the
vehicle had died during the pendency of the claim petition before the Tribunal and since his legal
heirs were not brought on record, the Tribunal could not have passed the award against the
Insurance company. The Division Bench rejected the contention and observed as under:
a/w connected matters.
"There is no substance in the contention so raised because section 102, Motor
Vehicles Act,states:
"Notwithstanding anything contained in section 306, Succession Act, 1925, the death
of person in whose favour a certificate of insurance had been issued, if it occurs after
the happening of an event which has given rise to a claim under the provisions of this
Chapter, shall not be a bar to the survival of any cause of action arising out of the said
event against his estate or against the insurer."
In this case, the claim petition was already filed before the Tribunal and insurance company had
issued the policy. That being so, the fact that the owner of the lorry dies, makes no difference. The
Tribunal has rightly passed award against the insurer. Hence, there is no substance in this appeal
and it is liable to be dismissed. Accordingly it is dismissed. No costs in the appeal"
14 Again in Natha Singh vs. Gurdial Singh and others, AIR 1982 Punjab and Haryana 38, a similar
issue was raised before Punjab and Haryana High Court. In the said case, an objection was raised by
the insurance company that it was not liable to satisfy the claim for compensation because the legal
representatives of the insured, who died during the pendency of the proceedings, were not brought
on record. The objection was rejected by the Punjab and Haryana High Court with the following
observations:
"Section 96 of the Act provides for the duty of the insures to satisfy judgments against
persons insured in respect of third party risks. It also provides that the insurance
company or the insurer to whom the notice of the bringing of any such proceedings is
given, shall be entitled to be made a party thereto and to defend the action on any of
the grounds given therein. Section 102 of the Act provides,-
"Notwithstanding anything contained in Section 306 of the Indian Succession Act,
1925 (XXXIX of 1925), the death of a person in whose favour a certificate of
insurance had been issued, if it occurs after the happening of an event which has
given rise to a claim under the provisions of this Chapter, shall not be a bar to the
survival of any cause of action arising out of the said event against his estate or
against the insurer."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82563609/ 4
Iffco Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Om Parkash on 23 February, 2023
In view of these provisions of the Act, it cannot be said that the insurance company is not liable to
satisfy the claim for a/w connected matters.
compensation to be awarded in the claim application simply because the legal representatives of
Amrit Lal Gupta insured who died during the pendency of the proceedings, were not brought on the
record. It is particularly so because in the insurance policy, Exhibit R-11, it has been provided inter
alia vide Cl. (4) of Section II, thereof that the company may, on its own option, undertake the
defence of proceedings in any Court of law in respect of any act or alleged offence causing or relating
to any event which may be the subject of indemnity under that section. It was because of this term of
the policy that the insurance company took a specific plea in paragraph 3 of their additional grounds
that it had taken over the defence of the claim petition in the name of the insured to contest the
claim, as they had reserved the right under the policy of insurance. As observed earlier, this claim
was accepted by the Tribunal and on that account, it was allowed to cross-examine the witnesses, on
merits, as well. Under the circumstances, the ratio of the decision in Norati Devi's case, (AIR 1978
Punj. & Har 113) (supra), is most relevant. It has been held therein (at p. 114):-
"Section 96 only clarifies that if an award is made, it would be the duty of the
insurance company to meet the claim. It nowhere lays down that if the insurance
company is allowed to contest the liability in the absence of the insurer, it should not
be held liable. Therefore, it cannot be contended that an insurance company can
never be held liable so long as the insured is not impleaded as a party to the
proceedings, or having been impleaded his name is ordered to be struck off from the
array of the respondents on the basis that he enjoys diplomatic immunity from being
sued in a Court."
In view of the abovesaid decision of this Court, the claim application of Natha Singh, appellant,
could not be dismissed on the ground that the legal representatives of Amrit Lal Gupta, deceased,
were not brought on the record."
15 A Coordinate Bench of this Court in the case of Bajaj Allianz General. Insurance. Co. Ltd. vs.
Naresh Kumar and another, (MA No. 18/2016, decided on 25.10.2021), has also observed that
Section 155 of the Act of 1988 clearly states that the death of the person, in whose favour a certificate
of insurance had been issued, after the happening of the accident, which gave rise to filing of claim
petition, is no bar to the proceedings and, therefore, proceedings do not abate.
a/w connected matters.
16 From the foregoing enunciation of law on the subject, it is clear that if death of the insured takes
place after the cause of action for filing the claim petition has arisen in favour of the claimant, the
claim petition cannot be thrown out merely because the legal heirs of the insured have not been
impleaded as parties to the claim petition.
17 Learned counsel for the appellant-Insurance Company has submitted that, in the instant case, the
insured has died in the same accident which was the subject matter of the claim petitions, as such,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82563609/ 5
Iffco Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Om Parkash on 23 February, 2023
Section 155 of the Act of 1988 would not come to the rescue of claimants. The argument raised by
learned counsel for the appellant-Insurance Company is misconceived for the reason that, in section
155 of the Act, the expression used is "if it occurs after the happening of an event which has given
rise to a claim" meaning thereby that if death of the insured has taken place after the accident which
gives rise to cause of action for filing a claim petition, the petition can survive against the insurer
without impleading the legal heirs of the owner.
18 In the instant case, no doubt, death of the insured has taken place in the same accident which has
given rise to cause of action in favour of the claimants, but it cannot be stated that death of the
owner had taken place prior to the accident. His death certainly took place after the occurrence of
the accident and not prior to that, so, at the time of the accident, the certificate of insurance issued
by the appellant-Insurance company in favour of the deceased owner was in force. Therefore,
provisions of Section 155 of the Act would certainly save the claim petitions filed by the claimants in
the instant case. In this regard, I am supported by the judgment of High Court of Karnataka in the
case of Regional Manager a/w connected matters.
vs CR lolakshi (Misc. Appeal No. 47, decided on 17.03.2016). In the said case, in a similar situation
where death of the insured had taken place in the same accident that had given rise to cause of
action in favour of the claimants, the High Court of Karnataka observed that even if insured had
expired in the said accident, the claimants are entitled to submit a claim petition against the insurer.
Accordingly, the contention raised by the insurer was held to be not acceptable.
19 Even otherwise, in the instant case, as already noted, the appellant-Insurance company has taken
up all the defences before the Tribunal that are available to an owner/insured which is clear from
the pleadings of the appellant-Insurance Company as also from the manner in which it has been
allowed to cross-examine the witnesses of the claimants. Thus, non-impleadment of legal heirs of
the deceased owner has not made any adverse impact on the merits of the case. Therefore, the
insurer cannot escape its liability to pay compensation to the claimants on the ground that the legal
heirs of the deceased owner were not made parties to the claim petitions.
20 The next argument raised by learned counsel for the appellant- Insurance Company is that the
claimants have not placed on record the FIR relating to the accident so as to prove the occurrence.
The argument is without any merit for that the reason that no FIR in the instant case has been
registered by the police and instead the police has conducted the inquest proceedings under Section
174 of Cr.P.C and concluded that the cause of death of the deceased and injuries to the injured has
arisen out of use of motor vehicle and the person responsible for the accident has also died. Even
otherwise, three injured, namely Sunil Kumar, Anuradha and Om a/w connected matters.
Parkash, who were travelling in the vehicle in question, have clearly stated that, due to mechanical
defect, the driver of the vehicle could not control the same and it fell into a deep gorge. They have
further stated that the accident was caused due to the carelessness and negligence of driver of the
offending driver. In this view of the matter, merely because FIR was not registered, but only inquest
proceedings were conducted by the police, it cannot be stated that the occurrence has not been
proved . The contention of learned counsel for the appellant-insurance company is without any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82563609/ 6
Iffco Tokio General Insurance Co. Ltd vs Om Parkash on 23 February, 2023
merit. 21 Lastly, it has been argued that, while calculating the compensation in the claim petition
arising out of death of deceased Balwant Raj, the Tribunal has not deducted the amount of full
pension that his widow/claimant Anuradha would have got in terms of the Service Rules. As already
noted, reliance in this regard has been placed on a judgment of this Court in the case of Usha Baloria
(supra) wherein this Court has held that the actual amount of family pension equivalent to the salary
of the deceased employee for a period of seven years or till the date of superannuation, as the case
may be, if received by the family of the deceased, will be deductible from the amount of
compensation assessed . The said ratio has been laid down by this Court on the basis of Rule
20(ii)(aaa) of Jammu and Kashmir Family Pension-cum-Gratuity Rules, 1964 according to which if
a Government servant dies while in service after having rendered not less than 7 years continuous
service, the rate of family pension admissible to the beneficiary of the deceased shall be equal to the
pay last drawn by the deceased officer before his death.
22 In the instant case, there is nothing on record to show that the claimant Anuradha, the widow of
the deceased Balwant Raj, has, at any a/w connected matters.
stage, received full pension in terms of the aforesaid Rule. Not even a suggestion has been made to
her by the counsel for the insurer during her cross-examination before the Tribunal. Even otherwise,
the aforesaid Rule, which is the basis of ratio laid down by this Court in Usha Baloria's case (supra)
has been amended vide SRO 94 dated 15.04.2009 and now a widow of an employee, who dies in
harness is entitled to family pension only @ 50% of the past pay drawn. The death of the deceased
Balwant Raj has taken place on 26.02.2015 when the said Rule had been amended. Obviously, there
was no occasion for the widow of deceased Balwant Raj to receive the full pension for a period of
seven years in terms of the aforesaid Rule. Thus, ratio laid down in Usha Baloria's case (supra) is
otherwise not applicable to the instant case. The argument advanced by learned is, therefore,
without any merit.
23 For the foregoing reasons I do not find any merit in any of the aforesaid appeals. The same are,
accordingly, dismissed and the impugned award passed by the Tribunal is upheld. Registrar Judicial
is directed to release the amount deposited by the appellant-insurance company, if any, in favour of
the claimants as per the terms of the impugned award.
(Sanjay Dhar) Judge JAMMU 23.02.2023 Karam Chand Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/82563609/ 7
