In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K
(Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
Supple-2
Sr. No. 61
IN THE HIGH C0URT 0F JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
WP ( c) 236/2025
Reserved on: 21.02.2025.
Pronounced on: 27.02.2025.
xxxx ...Petitioner
Through: Mr. Shabir Ahmad, adv.
vs
UT of J&K (Health and Medical Education ...Respondent(s)
Dept and ors.
Through: Mr. Mubashhir Majid Dy AG with Ms. Shaila Shameem, AC
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHD. YOUSUF WANI, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
Per
1. Through the medium of the instant petition, filed under the Provisions of Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, on behalf of petitioner-
victim, a helpless father labouring under acute mental trauma has sought the appropriate
directions/orders in respect of the termination of pregnancy of the petitionr her minor mentally
retarded daughter who as on date is carrying an unwanted pregnancy of about 28-29 weeks.
2. The father of the petitioner-victim has inter alia mentioned in the petition, that victim being
minor of unsound mind is hardly possessing the ability to recognize the person who has subjected
her to sexual assault about some more than six months earlier leading to her unwanted pregnancy
and the said fact was not known to anyone in his family. That the family was shocked to hear about
the unfortunate incident only on 14th January, 2025, when the victim after falling from upstairs at
her home was taken to a nearby hospital for treatment, where doctors advised for her USG abdomen
and informed them about 24-25 weeks pregnancy of the victim. That the hospital authorities
informed the police concerned and an FIR came to be registered with the concerned Police Station.
That the victim is presently lodged in the Shelter Home at Baramulla run by the Social Welfare
Department. That the respondents (Police Department) is on their job to ascertain and arrest the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 1
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
accused person involved in the commission of the offence, however, till date (date of filing of the
petition) the accused could not be traced out despite the details of two persons having been given by
the victim. That the life of the victim may be saved and protected by allowing the termination of the
pregnancy at this stage as the minor victim is supposed to be suffering from great mental and
physical injury. That since the DNA profiling is to be done for ascertaining the accused as such the
same may also be directed to be conducted.
3. This Court on the very day of presentation of the instant petition through order dated 07.02.2025
inter alia directed the Director Health Services, Kashmir to constitute a Medical Board or if the
competent Board stands already constituted under the „Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act,
1971" (hereinafter referred to as the "Act" for short) then to refer the case of the petitioner-victim for
her immediate and the complete medical examination and thereupon to submit a detailed status
report with respect to her state of health, physical, mental as well as pregnancy related and scope
and suggestion for pregnancy termination within a period of ten days from the date of passing of the
order.
Through the said order appropriate directions were also passed to police concerned.
4. Status report was filed by the respondents in pursuance of the directions of this Court dated
07.02.2025 on the basis of the reports of the competent Medical Board constituted under the Act
and the Psychiatry Board on 18.02.2025. The relevant portions of the report are reproduced herein
under:-
"As per the MTP Act fetus has already crossed age of visibility (USG documented)
and is capable of independent assistance. So not a candidate for
MTP"............................................................ ............... "It is apposite to state that as
per the opinion of Psychiatry Board furnished on 14.02.2025 petitioner is suffering
from Mild Intellectual Disability. Further it is stated that the Consultant Radiologist
in his report dated 14.02.2025 has not reported any substantial congenital anomaly."
5. In pursuance of the order dated 07.02.2025, report was furnished for perusal of the court on
17.02.2025 and filed in the Registry on 18.02.2025.
6. Vide order dated 17.02.2025, this Court for passing of appropriate orders in the case directed the
Director Health Services Kashmir to submit a further report of the Medical Board which has already
examined the victim to the following effect:-
i) Whether termination of the pregnancy of the victim can be done even at this stage
without any danger to the life of the victim. ?
ii) Whether the fetus of the victim is normal or suffering from any sort of
abnormality. ?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 2
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
7. Besides, Consultant Gynecologist Dr Rafia Aziz, AH GMC Baramulla and Dr Asim, Radiologist,
Block Sopore, were also directed to appear before the Court on the next date of hearing fixed as
19.02.2025 at 3:30 PM for assistance of the Court to address some medical issues involved in the
case.
8. It is also needful to mention that SHO concerned who was present in person before the Court
submitted that he has already questioned some suspects and has also taken their samples for DNA
profiling in connection whereof he needs the samples from the victim mother also.
The police officer concerned also submitted that he is going to conduct a test identification parade of
the suspects. He also apprised the Court that there are adequate arrangements of lodging in the
Shelter Home where the victim is presently lodged.
9. Through the same order dated 17.02.2025, Director Health Services, Kashmir and Medical
Superintendent, Associated Hospital GMC Baramulla, were directed that they shall in co-ordination
ensure that the victim is kept under complete medical supervision and surveillance so that no
inconvenience/difficulty is faced by her on medical side.
In-charge Shelter Home, was also requested to co-operate with the SHO /Investigating officer police
station concerned of case FIR No. 4 of 2025 in connection with the investigation of the case. Besides
district Social Welfare Officer Baramulla, was directed to ensure that the proper arrangement for the
lodging of the victim are kept in the Shelter Home so that no inconvenience is being caused to her in
terms of food, bedding and wash room facilities etc.
10.The Judicial Magistrate concerned (Chairman Tehsil Legal Service Committee) was directed to
ensure the initiation of process for compensation in favor of the victim under the relevant victim
compensation Scheme at an earliest under report of the compliance to the Court.
11.The respondent Director Health Services Kashmir filed the status report in terms of the order
dated 17.02.2025 of this Court on 19.02.2025. The relevant part of the report bearing the requisite
opinion of the medical Board is reproduced as herein below:-
S.No. Observation Remarks
1. Whether the termination of As per MTP Act, the foetus has
the pregnancy of the victim already crossed the age of viability can be done even at this (that is 24
weeks). However stage without any danger to termination can be done at any stage the life of the
victim? but the victim being anemic with documented HB of 8.2 gm and needs to be build up before
termination as the same poses a risk to victim.
2. Whether the foetus of the As per the USG report issued by victim is normal or Consultant
Radiologist GMC suffering from any sort of Baramulla dated 14.02.2025, the abnormality? foetus is
of 27 weeks gestational age and there is no evidence of any substantial foetal abnormality.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 3
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
12.Dr. Rafia Aziz, Consultant Gynecologist, AH GMC Baramulla and Dr. Asim Radiologist, Block
Sopore, appeared before the Court on 19.02.2025 as per previous direction whose advice was taken
in respect of the issues involved in the case. However, the reply to one of the important issues made
through written report hereinbefore mentioned was not found in agreement with the clarified
replies made by the appearing doctors in the open court. Dr. Rafia Aziz, Consultant Gynecologist,
submitted in response to the queries of the court that the fetus of the victim is capable of
independent existence and as such this court has to consider the permission for termination of
pregnancy by premature delivery/birth of the baby through a medical procedure/surgery. It was also
reported and stated that there is no abnormality in the fetus of the victim as per the Radiologist
report.
13.Learned AAG, Mr. Allau ud din Ganaie, appearing for the respondent/UT of J&K in the back drop
of the situation was directed to get a clarified report from the Director Health Services Kashmir,
which was filed before this Court on 21.02.2025. The relevant portion of the report based on the
opinion of the Medical Board is reproduced as under:-
S.No. Observation Remarks
1. Whether the termination The foetus has already crossed
of the pregnancy of the the age of viability that is (Foetus
victim can be done even is 27-28 weeks by USG) and as
at this stage without any per the MTP Act, no pregnancy danger to the life of the beyond 24 weeks
should be victim ? terminated unless there is some substantial abnormality in the foetus not
compatible with life.
Moreover victim is anaemic with
documented HB of 8.2 needs to
be build up for the delivery at the
proper time to avoid
complications associated with
anaemia.
The foetus has the probability to
survive as well.
Baby born will be extremely
premature associated with
number of complications
(physical/mental disability) if
baby survives.
2. Whether the foetus of the As per the USG report issued by victim is normal or Consultant
Radiologist GMC suffering from any sort of Baramulla dated 20.02.2025, the abnormality? foetus is
of 27 weeks gestational age and there is no evidence of any substantial foetal abnormality.
14.It is also needful to mention that as informed by the SHO concerned in the open court on
19.02.2025, the accused has been arrested in the case FIR.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 4
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
15.The father of the minor/petitioner-victim who has been desperately pursuing the instant petition
and remaining present during the hearing days has been interacted with 2 to 3 times by myself in
my office chamber and he has all the times requested for termination of the pregnancy of the victim.
He revealed that victim who is lodged in the shelter Home is not feeling well and uses to shed her
tears. He also revealed that his family can donate the blood for her daughter if required. He further
revealed that the condition of grand-father of victim suffering from Hypertension deteriorated badly
out of the trauma with which his entire family is suffering on account of the unfortunate incident.
16.The statement of the guardian/father of the victim was recorded on today i.e 27.02.2025 by the
Registry by way of his consent/option in respect of the matter; who stated that he prays for and as
such has no objection in case of the termination of pregnancy of her daughter/petitioner. He stated
that he willingly and without any coercion consents for the termination of the pregnancy of the
victim.
17.Now this court is required to address in the given situation as to whether permission for
termination of the pregnancy as prayed for, needs to be accorded or not ?
18.Admittedly, the case of the present victim for termination of her pregnancy is not covered under
the Provisions of the Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act, 1971 and the Rules of 2003 framed
thereunder. As per the opinion of the Competent Medical Board, which stands constituted by the
Government for the concerned District under the Provisions of Section 3 Sub Section 2 (c) and 2 (d)
of the Act conveyed to this Court in compliance to its orders through the status reports filed by the
respondent/Director Health Services, Kashmir, the age of the fetus of the victim as on 20.02.2025 is
27-28 weeks by USG. There is also no evidence of any substantial fetal abnormality.
19.It is felt appropriate to reproduce the relevant Provisions of the Section 3 of the Act and Rule 3-B
of the Rules of 2003:-
"3. When pregnancies may be terminated by registered medical practitioners.--(1)
Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860), a
registered medical practitioner shall not be guilty of any offence under that Code or
under any other law for the time being in force, if any pregnancy is terminated by him
in accordance with the provisions of this Act.
(2) Subject to the provisions of sub-section (4), a pregnancy may be terminated by a
registered medical practitioner,--
(a) where the length of the pregnancy does not exceed twenty weeks, if such medical
practitioner is, or
(b) where the length of the pregnancy exceeds twenty weeks but does not exceed
twenty-four weeks in case of such category of woman as may be prescribed by rules
made under this Act, if not less than two registered medical practitioners are, of the
opinion, formed in good faith, that--
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 5
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
(i) the continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to the life of the pregnant
woman or of grave injury to her physical or mental health; or
(ii) there is a substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer from any
serious physical or mental abnormality.
Explanation 1.--For the purposes of clause (a), where any pregnancy occurs as a result of failure of
any device or method used by any woman or her partner for the purpose of limiting the number of
children or preventing pregnancy, the anguish caused by such pregnancy may be presumed to
constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
Explanation 2.--For the purposes of clauses (a) and (b), where any pregnancy is alleged by the
pregnant woman to have been caused by rape, the anguish caused by the pregnancy shall be
presumed to constitute a grave injury to the mental health of the pregnant woman.
(2-A) The norms for the registered medical practitioner whose opinion is required for termination of
pregnancy at different gestational age shall be such as may be prescribed by rules made under this
Act.
(2-B) The provisions of sub-section (2) relating to the length of the pregnancy shall not apply to the
termination of pregnancy by the medical practitioner where such termination is necessitated by the
diagnosis of any of the substantial foetal abnormalities diagnosed by a Medical Board.
(2-C) Every State Government or Union territory, as the case may be, shall, by notification in the
Official Gazette, constitute a Board to be called a Medical Board for the purposes of this Act to
exercise such powers and functions as may be prescribed by rules made under this Act.
(2-D) The Medical Board shall consist of the following, namely--
(a) a Gynecologist;
(b) a Paediatrician;
(c) a Radiologist or Sonologist; and
(d) such other number of members as may be notified in the Official Gazette by the
State Government or Union territory, as the case may be.
(3) In determining whether the continuance of pregnancy would involve such risk of
injury to the health as is mentioned in sub-
section (2), account may be taken of the pregnant woman's actual or reasonably foreseeable
environment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 6
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
(4) (a) No pregnancy of a woman, who has not attained the age of eighteen years, or, who, having
attained the age of eighteen years, is a mentally ill person], shall be terminated except with the
consent in writing of her guardian.
(b) Save as otherwise provided in clause (a), no pregnancy shall be terminated except with the
consent of the pregnant woman; 3-B. Women eligible for termination of pregnancy up to twenty-
four weeks.--The following categories of women shall be considered eligible for termination of
pregnancy under clause (b) of sub-section (2) Section 3 of the Act, for a period of up to twenty- four
weeks, namely--
(a) survivors of sexual assault or rape or incest;
(b) minors;
(c) change of marital status during the ongoing pregnancy (widowhood and divorce);
(d) women with physical disabilities [major disability as per criteria laid down under the Rights of
Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (49 of 2016)];
(e) mentally ill women including mental retardation;
(f) the foetal malformation that has substantial risk of being incompatible with life or if the child is
born it may suffer from such physical or mental abnormalities to be seriously handicapped; and
(g) women with pregnancy in humanitarian settings or disaster or emergency situations as may be
declared by the Government."
20.From the perusal of the above referred Provisions of the Law, it reveals that the pregnancy of a
woman may be terminated where the length of pregnancy does not exceed 20 weeks, by a registered
medical practitioner if he is of the opinion that continuance of the pregnancy would involve a risk to
the life of the pregnant woman or of grave injury to her physical or mental health. It can also be
done by the medical practitioner if there is substantial risk that if the child were born, it would suffer
from such physical or mental abnormalities as to be seriously handicapped. The statute further
provides that in case length of pregnancy exceeds 20 weeks but does not exceed 24 weeks, such
opinion has to be formed by not less than two registered medical practitioners.
21.Likewise it is again revealed by the Provisions of Rule 3-B of the Rules of 2003, hereinbefore
reproduced that a survivor of sexual assault or rape or incest or minor shall be considered eligible
for termination of pregnancy for a period up to 24 weeks. It is also needful to mention that as per
Explanation-2 appended to the Sub Section-2 of Section-3 of the Act, the anguish caused by a
woman being pregnant as a result of sexual assault shall be presumed to constitute a grave injury to
her mental health.
22.In the instant case as hereinbefore mentioned the victim carries pregnancy of 28-29 weeks.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 7
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
23.In the attending facts and circumstances of the case, this Court feels compelled to invoke its
extraordinary discretionary jurisdiction vested under the Article 226 of the Constitution of India
and to permit the termination of the pregnancy of the victim through the applicable medical
procedure/surgical intervention. The victim who is a minor and a diagnosed case of Mild
Intellectual Disability (MID) is deemed to be suffering from grave mental injury. On account of her
mild mental retardation, she is supposed to be, not in a position to express her deep pain. Her
helpless father and guardian has all along as hereinbefore mentioned been desperately requesting
for her termination of the pregnancy. The family out of social stigma, apathy and abhorrence has
preferred to keep the victim in shelter home run by the Government Social Welfare Department.
The expected date of delivery as per USG of the victim is reported as 11th May 2025 and it is felt
intolerable for the family to wait till such time. In a conservative rural society, the chastity of a girl is
of very importance in connection with her marriage and the society looks up with great hatred and
abhorrence an un-chaste girl, notwithstanding the fact of her becoming so as a result of forced act
and without her consent.
24. In its opinion this Court feels fortified with the order passed by the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court in case
titled A (Mother of x) vs. State of Maharashtra & anr, SLPL (C) No. 9163/2024 decided on
24.04.2024, in which the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court was pleased to express its inclination to exercise its
powers under Article 142 of the Constitution for permitting termination of pregnancy of a minor
rape victim who had a pregnancy of 28 weeks. It is felt apt to reproduce the paras 9 to 11 of the
authoritative order for the sake of convenience:-
"9. In view of the urgency of the situation, we are inclined, while reserving judgment,
to issue the following directions. We have duly borne in mind the provisions of the
Medical Termination of Pregnancy Act 19712. This Court is inclined to exercise its
powers under Article 142 of the constitution. In a similar case which is reported as X
v Union of India and Another3, this Court had adverted to its constitutional
jurisdiction under Article 142.
10 The following circumstances have been borne in mind, at this stage:
(i) The medical termination of pregnancy is sought in respect of a minor who is 14
years old;
(ii) The pregnancy is alleged to be an emanation from a sexual assault which has
resulted in the registration of a First Information Report. The FIR was recorded on
20 March 2024 beyond the period of 24 weeks envisaged in the MTP Act;
(iii) The minor was unaware of the fact that she was pregnant until a very late stage;
(iv) The Medical Board at Sion Hospital has clearly opined that the continuation of
the pregnancy against the will of the minor "may impact negatively on physical and
mental well being of the minor who is barely 14 years old"; and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 8
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
(v) While a certain degree of risk is involved in every procedure for medical
termination, the Medical Board has opined that the threat to life of the patient if
termination of pregnancy is carried out at this stage is not higher than the risk of
delivery at full term of pregnancy.
11. We will further elaborate on the guiding parameters in a reasoned order which will be delivered
separately. However, bearing in mind the exigencies of the situation, the welfare of the minor, which
is of paramount importance and her safety, we pass the following order:
(i) The judgment and order of the High Court of Judicature at Bombay dated 4 April
2024 shall stand set aside for reasons to follow;
(ii) The Dean at Sion Hospital is requested to immediately constitute a team for
undertaking the medical termination of pregnancy of the minor in respect of whom
the Medical Board has submitted its report dated 20 April 2024;
(iii) Arrangements shall be made by the State for transportation of the minor to the
Hospital and for her return home after the completion of the procedure;
(iv) The State has agreed to bear all the expenses in connection with the procedure
and all medical expenses required in the interest of the safety and welfare of the
minor; and
(v) Post-termination if any further medical care is required, this may be ensured in
the interest of the minor."
25.This Court also feels supplemented in its opinion with the authoritative law laid down by the
Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court of India in xyz vs. State of Gujrat and ors. (Cr. Appeal No......2023 arising
out of SlP (Crl) Dy No. 33790/2023) decided on August 21st 2023, in which the Hon(cid:129)ble Court
permitted the termination of pregnancy of a victim of rape at the stage of 27-28 weeks of her
pregnancy. It is felt apt to reproduce the relevant paras (i.e 13 to 21) of the authoritative judgment of
the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court for the sake of convenience:-
"13. In Indian society, within the institution of marriage, generally pregnancy is a
reason for joy and celebration and of great expectation, not only for the couple but
also for their families and friends. By contrast, pregnancy outside marriage, in most
cases, is injurious, particularly, after a sexual assault/abuse and is a cause for stress
and trauma affecting both the physical and mental health of the pregnant woman the
victim. Sexual assault or abuse of a woman is itself distressing and sexual abuse
resulting in pregnancy compounds the injury. This is because such a pregnancy is not
a voluntary or mindful pregnancy.
14. In Suchita Srivastava v. State (UT of Chandigarh), (2009) 9 SCC 1, this Court
expressed that the right of a woman to have reproductive choice is an insegregable
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 9
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
part of her personal liberty, as envisaged under Article 21 of the Constitution. She has
a sacrosanct right to her bodily integrity.
15. In Sarmishtha Chakrabortty and Another v. Union of India Secretary and Others,
(2018) 13 SCC 339; this Court, considered the medical report and held that unless the
pregnancy was terminated, the life of the mother and that of the baby to be borne
would be in great danger and, therefore, permitted termination of the pregnancy.
16. A three-Judge Bench of this Court in Murugan Nayakkar v. Union of India & Ors.,
Writ Petition (Civil) No.749 of 2017, disposed of on 06.09.2017, while considering
the case of a minor petitionersurvivor of alleged rape and sexual abuse, held that it
would be appropriate that termination of pregnancy be allowed in accordance with
the opinion of the Medical Board constituted by an order of this Court, to the effect
that termination of pregnancy should be carried out. A direction was issued that on a
very next date i.e. 07.09.2017, the petitioner was to be present so that on 08.09.2017
the termination of pregnancy could be carried out.
17. More recently, in the case of X vs. The Principal Secretary, Health and Family
Welfare Department, Government of NCT of Delhi and Ors., AIR 2022 SC 4917; this
Court, in another three-judge Bench led by Dr. D.Y. Chandrachud, J. (as the learned
Chief Justice then was) observed that a woman can become pregnant by choice
irrespective of her marital status. In case the pregnancy is warranted, it is equally
shared by both the partners. However, in case of an unwanted or incidental
pregnancy, the burden invariably falls on the pregnant woman affecting her mental
and physical health. Article 21 of the Constitution recognizes and protects the right of
a woman to undergo termination of pregnancy if her mental or physical health is at
stake. Importantly, it is the woman alone who has the right over her body and is the
ultimate decision-maker on the question of whether she wants to undergo an
abortion.
18. In the context of abortion, the right of dignity entails recognizing the competence
and authority of every woman to take reproductive decisions, including the decision
to terminate the pregnancy. Although human dignity inheres in every individual, it is
susceptible to violation by external conditions and treatment imposed by the State.
The right of every woman to make reproductive choices without undue interference
from the state is central to the idea of human dignity. Deprivation of access to
reproductive healthcare or emotional and physical well-being also injures the dignity
of women.
19. The whole object of preferring a Writ Petition under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India is to engage with the extraordinary discretionary jurisdiction of
the High Court in exercise of its constitutional power. Such a power is vested with the
constitutional courts and discretion has to be exercised judiciously and having regard
to the facts of the case and by taking into consideration the relevant facts while
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 10
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
leaving out irrelevant considerations and not vice versa.
20. In view of the above discussion and on perusal of the latest medical report we
permit the appellant to terminate her pregnancy. We direct the appellant to remain
present before the KMCRI Hospital, Bharuch, Gujarat during the course of the day,
today (21.08.2023) or 09:00 A.M. tomorrow (22.08.2023) as she deems fit so that
the termination of pregnancy could be carried out preferably during the course of the
day today (21.08.2023) or tomorrow i.e. 22.08.2023.
21. Subsequently to the medical procedure to be carried out either today or
tomorrow, in the event, the fetus is found to be alive, the hospital shall give all
necessary medical assistance including incubation either in that hospital or any other
hospital where incubation facility is available in order to ensure that the fetus
survives. Further, in case the fetus survives, then State shall take steps for ensuring
that the child could be adopted in accordance with law."
26.The fundamental right to life of a person available under Article 21 of the Constitution of India
guarantees a life which is free from mental trauma and worries. It is the obligation of the state to
take all steps for ensuring that a citizen within his own standard of his life lives free from worries.
Not only the minor victim but her entire family and all her nears and dears are supposed to be
labouring under trauma. The State through its concerned instrumentalities viz Health and Medical
Education as well as Social Welfare Departments is always under a legal obligation to address to the
issues of the sensitive nature as involved in the instant petition under the provisions of the Medical
Termination of Pregnancy Act and the Rules framed thereunder when a case is covered under the
provisions of the aforesaid legislation. The petitioner has approached this Court invoking its
extraordinary powers vested under Article 226 of the Constitution for redressal of her agony as her
case is not covered under the provisions of the Act.
27.The competent Medical Board in its latest report submitted pursuant to the direction of this
Court dated 19.02.2025 has inter alia reported that the victim is anemic with documented HB of 8.2
gms and needs to be buildup for delivery at the proper time to avoid complications associated with
anemia. It has been further reported that fetus has the probability to survive as well and the baby
born will be extremely premature associated with number of complications (physical/mental
disability) if baby survives. The fetus has been reported to be of the age of 27 weeks and with no
evidence of any substantial abnormality. The petitioner/victim can be buildup as opined by the
competent medical board so that her HB level raises up to a desired mark. The Board has not
reported that in case HB level of the victim is raised by proper treatment/management, there can be
any danger to her life by terminating her pregnancy through medical procedure/surgical
intervention. The baby if born alive can be managed in the NICU for any known complications.
28.The petition accordingly needs to be disposed of at this stage by treating the status reports of the
respondents as their replies.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 11
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
29.In the backdrop, the petition is allowed and the minor petitioner through her guardian/father is
permitted to undergo medical termination of her pregnancy through a recognized Medical
procedure in connection whereof the following directions are passed:-
(i) Director Health Services, Kashmir in co-ordination with Superintendent,
Associated Hospital GMC, Baramulla, shall take steps to buildup the
petitioner-victim for the proposed procedure so that her HB level and other vital
parameters are maintained up to normal desired level, by her proper treatment to
achieve that end. The needful should be done without lapse of any time and a
bonafide and affectionate exercise should be done so that she is prepared for the
procedure within few days.
(ii) Since the baby if born alive may need the immediate treatment in Neonatal ICU,
as such, the petitioner-victim needs to be admitted in the tertiary care maternity
Hospital where NICU facilities are available, therefore, the Commissioner Secretary
Health and Medical Education Department UT of J&K shall pass immediate
orders/instructions regarding the termination of the pregnancy of the
petitioner-victim through a competent team of doctors at LD Hospital Srinagar, with
the liberty to refer the mother and/or baby if alive to any other hospital if needed at
any time for their further management/incubation facilities. The petitioner-victim
upon being built-up for proposed procedure for termination of her pregnancy shall be
immediately moved to the LD Hospital, Srinagar in the company of her
parent(s)/home people so that her pregnancy is terminated as hereinbefore directed.
However, fresh consent should be obtained at the hospital from the father/guardian
of the petitioner-victim as per the Medical Protocol.
(iii) That it shall be the duty of the UT of J&K through Health and Medical Education
as well as Social Welfare Departments to take care of the petitioner-victim until the
petitioner-mother is discharged from the Hospital and handed over to her parent(s)
and that of the baby if alive until he/she is managed for overcoming of any
complications and until he/she is given in adoption by the Government authorities
(Social Welfare Deptt) in accordance with law.
(iv) Government through Social welfare Department shall bear all the expenditure for
the treatment/nourishment of petitioner-
mother as well as the neonate if born alive which may not be available at the Govt. Hospitals.
(v) Secretaries to the Government of J&K Health and Medical Education and Social Welfare
Departments shall pass appropriate directions/instructions in accordance with this order of the
Court.
(vi) The Hospital authorities shall, at the request of the SHO/IO concerned of the criminal case/FIR
(04/2025 P/S Kunzer), facilitate the taking of samples for DNA profiling.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 12
In The High C0Urt 0F Jammu & Kashmir And ... vs Ut Of J&K (Health And Medical Education on 27 February, 2025
(vii) Chairman District Legal Services Authority Baramulla shall see that the process for payment of
compensation to victim, under the relevant victim compensation Scheme is initiated and finalized at
an earliest, in connection whereof directions have already been conveyed to Tehsil Legal Services
Committee concerned. (Case FIR No. 04 of 2025 of Police Station Kunzer Baramulla).
(viii) Copies of this order shall be forwarded for compliance to the Commissioner Secretary Health
and Medical Education Department; Commissioner Secretary Social Welfare Department UT of
J&K; Senior Superintendent of Police, Baramulla; Director Health Services Kashmir;
Superintendent LD Hospital, Srinagar; Superintendent Associated Hospital GMC Baramulla.
(ix) A copy of the order be also forwarded to Chairman District Legal Services Authority Baramulla
for information and necessary action.
30. Disposed of.
(MOHD YOUSUF WANI) JUDGE SRINAGAR 27.02.2025 Ayaz
i)Whether the judgment is speaking ? Yes
ii) Whether the judgment is reportable in law journal ? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/198816314/ 13
