Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May,
2025
Author: Savitri Ratho
Bench: Savitri Ratho
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRLREV No. 213 of 2025
An application under Section 442 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita (BNSS), 2023 , which corresponds to Section 397 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure Code.
--------------
Indrajit De ..... Petitioner
-versus-
Republic of India (CBI) ..... Opp. Party
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
For Petitioner : Mr. S.K. Padhi, Senior Advocate
along with by Mr. R. Hota, Advocate
For Opp. Party : Mr. Sarthak Nayak, Advocate (CBI)
-------------------------------------------------------------------------------
CORAM:
HONOURABLE MISS JUSTICE SAVITRI RATHO
JUDGMENT
15.05.2025 Savitri Ratho, J This application under Section 442 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha
Sanhita (BNSS), 2023, has been filed challenging the order dated 03.04.2025 passed by the learned
Sessions Judge, Khurda at Bhubaneswar in Crl. Misc. Case (CMC) No. 48 of 2025 rejecting the
prayer of the petitioner made under Section 483 (b) of BNSS (corresponding to Section 439 (b) of
Cr.P.C.) for setting aside/modification of the bail condition no.(ii) of the petitioner. fixed by the
learned Special C.J.M cum A.C.J.M C.B.I Bhubaneswar while allowing the prayer for bail of the
petitioner on 09.10.2023.
ALLEGATIONS
2. An FIR was lodged on 15.05.2013 in Baliapal Police Station
- Baliapal P.S. case No 85 of 2013, against M/s Tower Infotech Ltd and its directors for collecting
public deposits and thereby cheated the innocent depositors without returning their amount. On the
direction of the Hon'ble Apex Court made on 09.05.2014 in the case of Subrata Chattoraj Vs. Union
of India, the investigation of the case was transferred to the C.B.I and FIR no. 10(S) / 2014 -Kol
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 1
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
corresponding to Special Case No. 5 of 2014 in the Court of Special C.J.M, (C.B.l), Bhubaneswar.
was registered under Sections - 420, 120 B, 34 IPC read with Sections- 4, 5, and 6 of the PCMC Act
against M/s Tower Infotech Ltd and its Directors. Charge sheet dated 06.07.2016 was submitted
Sections
- 420, 120 B, 34 IPC read with Sections - 4,5, and 6 of the PCMC Act against M/s Tower Infotech Ltd
and its Directors. Supplementary charge sheet dated 26.12.2022 was submitted under Sections-
420, 120 B, 34 IPC read with Sections-4, 5, and 6 of the PCMC Act in which the petitioner was
arrayed as an accused.
3. The accused Directors of the accused company M/s. Tower Infotech Ltd., in criminal conspiracy
with the directors of M/s. EDEN Infraprojects Pvt. Ltd. namely Shri Amitav Patro and Shri Indrajit
De, (the petitioner) pursuant to a fraudulent agreement, have dishonestly siphoned off the funds to
the tune of Rs. 2.5 Crores, illegally collected by the accused company M/s. Tower Infotech Ltd. from
gullible investors. The petitioner Indrajit De and Shri Amitav Patra, the two Directors of M/s. Eden
Infra Projects Pvt Ltd. On basis of an oral agreement, for construction of a housing project at
Maheshtala with Shri Ramendu Chattopadhyay, the CMD of M/s. Tower Infotech Ltd., the money
was taken. By entering into criminal conspiracy money was diverted from M/s. Tower Infotech Ltd.
Which had collected the money illegally from the investors, without having necessary permissions
regulatory authorities to collect the funds, with criminal intent to misappropriate the same.
BACKGROUND
4. N.B.W. had been issued against the petitioner by the trial Court. The petitioner along with other
accused had approached this Court n CRLMC 1054 of 2023 for quashing the proceedings in S.P.E
No.05 of 2014 pending before the Court of the learned Special C.J.M, (C.B.l), Bhubaneswar and the
impugned Charge Sheet No. 21 dated 26.12.2022. Vide judgment dated 28.07.2023, the CRLMC was
allowed in part. While rejecting the payer to quash the proceedings, the order dated 27.12.2022
issuing NBW against the petitioner was quashed. The subsequent orders dated 06.01.2023,
20.01.2023 and 03.02.2023 in so far as they related to the petitioner were quashed and the trial
Court was directed to issue summons to him for his appearance. The judgment in CRLMC No. 1054
of 2023 has been annexed as Annexure 2 to this CRLMC.
5. On 09.10.2023, the petitioner had appeared before the trial Court is response to summons. His
application under Section - 205 of the Cr.P.C was rejected, but his application to release him on bail
was allowed, imposing different conditions. The operative portion of the order containing the
conditions is extracted below:
i) He shall furnish cash security of Rs.5,00,000/- (rupees five lakhs);
ii) He shall surrender his passport before the Court;
iii) He shall not tamper with the prosecution evidence in any manner whatsoever;
iv) He shall not default in personal attendance of Court as and when required."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 2
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
6. Before surrendering his passport, the petitioner had been abroad on a number of occasions which
would be evident from the copy of the passport annexed as Annexure 3 to this CRLMC.
7. After surrendering his passport in the Court, he had filed an application before the Special C.J.M.
(C.B.L), Bhubaneswar on 02.11.2023, for temporary release of his passport and to allow him to visit
USA for two months. The application was rejected by the learned Court below for which he had filed
CRL REV No. 690 of 2023. The CRL REV was allowed and it was directed that the passport of the
petitioner would be released in his favour for a period of two months to facilitate his travel abroad.
The operative portion of the judgment is extracted below:-
"Conclusion:
In view of the foregoing discussions, the impugned order dated 06.12.2023 passed by
the learned Special C.J.M.(C.B.I.), Bhubaneswar is hereby set aside. The original
passport bearing no. Z6948595 of the petitioner which has been deposited before the
learned trial Court in pursuance of the order dated 09.10.2023 shall be released in
favour of the petitioner for a period of two months to facilitate his travel to abroad
subject to submitting the itinerary/travel schedule and details of the duration and
place of stay in the USA before the learned trial Court and the Court may impose such
other conditions as would be found necessary and expedient. The petitioner shall
strictly abide by the terms and conditions.
In the result, the criminal revision petition is allowed."
8. The petitioner proceeded to USA and after his return on 22.06.2024 deposited the passport in the
Court below on 25.06.2024.
9. As wife of the petitioner who is staying in USA, tested positive for COVID -19, the petitioner had
filed CMC No. 909 of 2024 on 26.07.2024 before the learned trial court for modifying / setting aside
condition no ii of the of the bail order dtd.09.10.2023 as he was required to go to the US At short
notice. By order dt.23.08.2024, his application was rejected. The operative portion of the order is
extracted below:
"It is pertinent to mention here that a criminal court has no power of review and
accordingly has no power to modify its own order. Once a criminal court has signed
its judgment or final order disposing of a case, then the power of the Court ceases to
modify or alter its own order or judgment being a functus officio in view of the
mandate of Section 362 of Cr.P.C. Considering the above facts and the mandate of
Section 362 of Cr.P.C., this court is of the considered view that the petition filed by
the accused-petitioner to modify the order dtd. 09.10.2023 by deleting the second
condition of the said order is beyond the purview of law and not sustainable.
In the result, the petition dtd. 26.07.2024 filed by the accused petitioner stands
rejected. Accordingly, the Misc. case is disposed of."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 3
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
10. Challenging the order dated 23.08.2024, the petitioner had filed CRLMA/169/2024 before this
Court. During pendency of the CRLMA, by order dated 27.09.2024, this Court had granted time to
the counsel for the CBI to file an objection as he claimed that the petitioner was a "flight risk" and in
the interregnum, permitted the petitioner to travel to the US and directed for interim release of his
passport for a period of two months. The operative portion of the order is extracted below:
"18. Regard being had to the aforementioned discussion and the fact that earlier the
petitioner was granted two months travel permission to USA, to which he has
meticulously complied with and returned back to the country within stipulated time,
this Court feels it appropriate to allow the prayer of the petitioner for two months
travel to USA.
19. Accordingly, the learned trial Court is directed to release the original passport
bearing No.Z6948595 in favour of the petitioner forthwith for a period of two months
to facilitate his travel to abroad, subject to submitting the itinerary/travel schedule
and details of the duration and place of stay in USA before the learned trial Court and
the trial Court may impose any condition may deem fit and proper and expedient in
the present case. The petitioner shall furnish undertaking that he would return to
India and deposit the passport back in the Court below."
11. The petitioner went to the US and after his return from the US on 03.01.2025 deposited his
passport in the Court below on 07.01.2025 On 03.02.2025 CRLMA was disposed permitting the
petitioner to move the learned Sessions Judge for redressal of his grievances.
12. The petitioner filed Crl. Misc. Case No. 48 of 2025 of 2025 under Section 483(b) of BNSS before
the learned Sessions Judge, Bhubaneswar praying for modification of the condition No.ii of the bail
order dtd.09.10.2023 passed in SPE No.5 of 2014 by Id. Special CJM(CBI)-cum-ACJM, The Crl.M.C
was rejected on by order dated 03.02.2025 SUBMISSIONS PETITIONER
13. Mr. S.K. Padhi, learned Senior Advocate appearing on behalf of the petitioner has submitted that
on two earlier occasions, the passport of the petitioner has been released in order to enable him to
travel to the USA. He has complied with the conditions imposed and has resubmitted his passport
after his return from the USA on both occasions.
14. He has submitted his family (wife and daughter) resides in the USA and is wife is ailing for which
he required to go to the USA frequently and sometimes at short notice. Meena De, wife of the
petitioner is ailing. Certificate dated 24.02.2025 (Annexure 5) mentions that Ms. Meena De she is
suffering from Chronic Fatigue Syndrome (ME/CFS) and Mast Cell Activation Syndrome Report
dated 09.04.2025 of the GoHeath - Rockville (Annexure
8) reveals that she had earlier been suffering from respiratory viral infection.
15. The petitioner is a green card holder and as per the green card norms is required to stay at least
six months in every year in USA to retain his Green Card status which he is enjoying since the year
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 4
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
1996. Recently, as the US administration has become strict with non-immigrants and Green Card
holders, if the petitioner fails to visit the USA and stay with his family, there is every possibility of
cancellation of his Green Card by the US Administration.
16. During his last visit to USA from 06.11.2024 to 03.01.2025, the petitioner had been questioned
at the USA immigration point at the USA Airport for his delayed return to USA being a USA Green
Card holder for which an additional stamping was made on his passport which is not the normal
procedure. He is required at times to go at short notice to the USA, but obtaining permission takes
time for which he is not able to go on time.
17. He has submitted that if the condition no. (ii) is modified passport and / or his passport is
released permitting him to travel abroad and and at any time, he is required to go abroad, he will
inform the court in advance. He has also submitted that at any time if his presence is required, he
will return within four days , without fail and submit an undertaking to that effect . He also
submitted that as the case is fixed for appearance of other accused persons, so the chance of the trial
commencing in the near future is bleak.
18. He has further submitted that he has filed an interim application in this CRLREV, for permission
to go the USA for two months to be with his family.
19. In support of his submissions for waiving condition No.ii and release his passport , he has relied
on the decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Suresh Nanda vrs. Central Bureau of
Investigation : (2008) 3 SCC 674 and the decision dated 05.02.2025 of the Bombay High Court in
the case of Mohammad Hanif Nurani vrs. The State of Maharashtra & Another , in Criminal
Application No. 434 of 2024 . decided on ) OPPOSITE PARTY
20. Mr. Sarthak Nayak, learned counsel appearing on behalf of CBI has submitted that in view of the
observation of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Republic of India (CBI) vs Shubhra Kundu,
on 20.10.2023, that the CBI which is created under a Statute cannot represent "Republic of India",
the cause title of the CRL REV should be amended. He opposed the prayer of the petitioner for
modifying condition No.(ii) in the bail order regarding deposit of passport mainly on three grounds:
-
i) Imposing a condition while granting bail, for deposit of passport is not illegal.
ii) The allegations against the petitioner are serious, so he may not return to face the
trial if the passport is released.
iii) If the petitioner does not return to India to face the trial, the trial will be delayed.
He however does not refute the submission that the case in the Court below is pending for
appearance of some co-accused persons.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 5
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
21. A written objection has been filed where it has been stated that imposition of the condition to
deposit the passport is not illegal and he had voluntarily deposited his passport and when orders
were passed by this Court in the CRLMA to deposit the passport after his return from the USA, he
has complied with the order without challenging the same. It has also been stated that the petitioner
is involved in a serious offence if the passport is released the petitioner may not return to the
country to face trial and extradition proceedings to secure his presence is a complex and protracted
process which will delay the trial.
22. Mr. Nayak has also submitted that a Criminal Revision is not maintainable against a bail order
and relies on the decision of the Gujarat High Court in the case of Kaushikbhai Balubhai Bavarva
vrs. State of Gujarat decided on 28.04.2017 (Special Criminal Application (Quashing) No. 1790 of
2017), the decision of the Kerala High Court in the case of T.M. Sajil vrs. Union of India reported in
2018 SCC Online Ker 3544 and the decision of this Court in the case of Abhisek Acharya and Others
vrs. State of Odisha (CRLREV No. 331 of 2022, decided on 02.08.2022). In support of his
submission that condition to deposit passport while granting bail has been done by the Supreme
Court so it cannot be illegal , he also relies on the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Prabal
Pratap Singh Yadav vrs. Republic of India (SLP (Criminal) No. 11441-11442 of 2023 dated
10.01.2024). STATUTORY PROVSIONS
23. Section 438 and 442 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 ( in short BNSS deal with
the powers of revision of the High Court and are extracted below:-
Section 438. Calling for records to exercise powers of revision.
(1)The High Court or any Sessions Judge may call for and examine the record of any
proceeding before any inferior Criminal Court situate within its or his local
jurisdiction for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself as to the correctness, legality
or propriety of any finding, sentence or order, recorded or passed, and as to the
regularity of any proceedings of such inferior Court, and may, when calling, for such
record, direct that the execution of any sentence or order be suspended, and if the
accused is in confinement that he be released on his own bond or bail bond pending
the examination of the record.
Explanation.-All Magistrates, whether Executive or Judicial, and whether exercising original or
appellate jurisdiction, shall be deemed to be inferior to the Sessions Judge for the purposes of this
sub-section and of section 439. (2)The powers of revision conferred by sub-section (1) shall not be
exercised in relation to any interlocutory order passed in any appeal, inquiry, trial or other
proceeding.(3)If an application under this section has been made by any person either to the High
Court or to the Sessions Judge, no further application by the same person shall be entertained by the
other of them.
This is similar to Section 397 of the Old CrPC- Section 442. High Court's powers of revision. (1)In
the case of any proceeding the record of which has been called for by itself or which otherwise comes
to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its discretion, exercise any of the powers conferred on a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 6
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
Court of Appeal by sections 427, 430, 431 and 432 or on a Court of Session by section 344, and,
when the Judges composing the Court of revision are equally divided in opinion, the case shall be
disposed of in the manner provided by section 433.
(2)No order under this section shall be made to the prejudice of the accused or other person unless
he has had an opportunity of being heard either personally or by advocate in his own defence.
(3)Nothing in this section shall be deemed to authorise a High Court to convert a finding of acquittal
into one of conviction .(4)Where under this Sanhita an appeal lies and no appeal is brought, no
proceeding by way of revision shall be entertained at the instance of the party who could have
appealed.(5)Where under this Sanhita an appeal lies but an application for revision has been made
to the High Court by any person and the High Court is satisfied that such application was made
under the erroneous belief that no appeal lies thereto and that it is necessary in the interests of
justice so to do, the High Court may treat the application for revision as a petition of appeal and deal
with the same accordingly.
This is similar to Section 401 of the Old CrPC. Section- 102 of the Crl.P.C
102. Power of police officer to seize certain property. (1)Any police officer may seize any property
which may be alleged or suspected to have been stolen, or which may be found under circumstances
which create suspicion of the commission of any offence.(2)Such police officer, if subordinate to the
officer-in-charge of a police station, shall forthwith report the seizure to that officer.(3)[ Every police
officer acting under sub-section (1) shall forthwith report the seizure to the Magistrate having
jurisdiction and where the property seized is such that it cannot be conveniently transported to the
Court, [or where there is difficulty in securing proper accommodation for the custody of such
property, or where the continue retention of the property in police custody may not be considered
necessary for the purpose of investigation] [Inserted by Act 45 of 1978, Section 10 (w.e.f.
18-12-1978).], he may give custody thereof to any person on his executing a bond undertaking to
produce the property before the Court as and when required and to give effect to the further orders
of the Court as to the disposal of the same.][Provided that where the property seized under
sub-section (1) is subject to speedy and natural decay and if the person entitled to the possession of
such property is unknown or absent and the value of such property is less than five hundred rupees,
it may forthwith be sold by auction under the orders of the Superintendent of Police and the
provisions of Sections 457 and 458 shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to the net proceeds
of such sales.] [Added by Act 25 of 2005, Section 13 (w.e.f. 23-6-2006).] JUDICIAL
PRONOUNCEMENTS-
Maintainability of Revision Application
24. In the case of Kaushikbhai Balubhai Bavarva vrs. State of Gujarat decided on 28.04.2017
(Special Criminal Application (Quashing) No. 1790 of 2017), it has been held as follows:
"9. It has been observed by the Supreme Court i n the case of Usmanbhai
Dawoodbhai Memon v State of Gujarat, (1988) 2 SCC 271, thus : "It cannot be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 7
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
doubted that the grant or refusal of a bail application is essentially an interlocutory
order. There is no finality to such an order for an application for bai I can always be
renewed from time to time.... There is no finality attached to an order of a Designated
Court granting or refusing bail. Such application for bail can always be renewed from
time to time. That being so, the contention advanced on behalf of the Government
that the impugned orders refusing to grant bail were not interlocutory and therefore
appealable cannot be ассерted."
10. Relying on the above decision, the Bombay High Court in the case of Mohan alias Mannu
Basantani v. State of Maharashtra, 1989 Mah. L.R. 1556 ruled as follows:
"The order granting or refusing bail is an interlocutory order and in view of
sub-section (2) of section 397 the revisional powers could not be exercised in respect
of such interlocutory order."
11. Similarly, the Bombay High Court in the case of The State of Maharashtra v. Namdeo Raoji and
others, (1991)1 Mah. L.R. 379, held that the orders of bail are essentially interlocutory orders and
the revision is barred under Section 397(2) of the Cr.P.C. The above decisions support the
contentions that order granting or refusing bail is an interlocutory one and the reason is that the
application for gr ant of bail can be renewed from time to time.
12. Thus, in the first instance, there was a inherent lack of jurisdiction on the part of the Sessions
Court in entertaining the criminal revision application. If at all the Sessions Court wanted to cancel
the bail, the same could have been in exercise of power under Section439(2) of the Cr.P.C. It can be
argued that what difference would it make. If ultimately there is a power, the Sessions Judge could
have exercised the same. It makes a lot of difference because the considerations would differ and
vary. The rejection of bail in a non bailable case at the initial stage and the cancellation of bail
already granted, have to be considered and dealt with on different basis. Very cogent and
overwhelming circumstances are necessary for an order directing the cancellation of the bail,
already granted. It is not the case of the Department that the Magistrate had no jurisdiction to grant
the bail. If the offence under Section
- 9 of the Central Excise Act would have been punishable with life imprisonment, then it could
definitely be argued that the Magistrate had no jurisdiction to grant bail. Generally speaking, the
ground for cancellation of bail, broadly (the illustrative and not exhaustive) are interference or akin
to interference with the due course of administration of justice or evasion or attempt to evade the
due course of justice or abuse of the concession granted to the accused in any manner. However, bail
once granted should not be cancelled in a mechanical manner without considering whether any
supervening circumstances have rendered it no longer conducive to a fair trial to allow the accused
to retain his freedom by enjoying the concession of bail during the trial. (See: Dolat Ram And Others
Vs. State of Haryana, (1995) 1 SCC 349). In the case of T.M. Sajil vrs. Union of India reported in
2018 SCC Online Ker 3544, the court has observed that-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 8
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
"9. It is settled law that orders passed in bail applications are in the form of
interlocutory orders. It is for that reason that S.21(4) has been incorporated in the
NIA Act by which an order granting or refusing bail is treated as an interlocutory
order. The position of law had been well settled in Usmanbhai Dawoodbhai Memon
v. State of Gujarat [(1988) 2 SCC 271], wherein the Apex Court after referring to V.C.
Shukla v. State [(1980) Supp SCC 92], held at para 24 as under:-
"24. At the conclusion of the hearing on the legal aspect, Shri Poti, Learned Counsel
appearing for the State Government contended, on instructions, that an order passed
by a Designated Court for grant or refusal of bail is not an "interlocutory order"
within the meaning of Section 19(1) of the Act and therefore an appeal lies. We have
considerable doubt and difficulty about the correctness of the proposition. The
expression "interlocutory order" has been used in Section 19(1) in contradistinction
to what is known as final order and denotes an order of purely interim or temporary
nature. The essential test to distinguish one from the other has been discussed and
formulated in several decisions of the Judicial Committee of the Privy Council,
Federal Court and this Court. One of the tests generally accepted by the English
Courts and the Federal Court is to see if the order is decided in one way, it may
terminate the proceedings but if decided in another way, then the proceedings would
continue. In V.C. Shukla v. State, Fazal Ali, J. in delivering the majority judgment
reviewed the entire case law on the subject and deduced therefrom the following two
principles, namely, (i) that a final order has to be interpreted in contradistinction to
an interlocutory order; and (ii) that the test for determining the finality of an order is
whether the judgment or order finally disposed of the rights of the parties. It was
observed that these principles apply to civil as well as to criminal cases. In criminal
proceedings, the word "judgment" is intended to indicate the final order in a trial
terminating in the conviction or acquittal of the accused. Applying these tests, it was
held that an order framing a charge against an accused was not a final order but an
interlocutory order within the meaning of Section 11(1) of the Special Courts Act,
1979 and therefore not appealable. It cannot be doubted that the grant or refusal of a
bail application is essentially an interlocutory order. There is no finality to such an
order for an application for bail can always be renewed from time to time. It is
however contended that the refusal of bail by a Designated Court due to the
non-fulfilment of the conditions laid down in Section 20(8) cannot be treated to be a
final order for it affects the life or liberty of a citizen guaranteed under Article
21. While it is true that a person arraigned on a charge of having committed an
offence punishable under the Act faces a prospect of prolonged incarceration in view
of the provision contained in Section 20(8) which places limitations on the power of a
Designated Court to grant bail, but that by itself is not decisive of the question as to
whether an order of this nature is not an interlocutory order. The court must
interpret the words "not being an interlocutory order" used in Section 19(1) in their
natural sense in furtherance of the object and purpose of the Act to exclude any
interference with the proceedings before a Designated Court at an intermediate stage.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 9
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
There is no finality attached to an order of a Designated Court granting or refusing
bail. Such an application for bail can always be renewed from time to time. That
being so, the contention advanced on behalf of the State Government that the
impugned orders passed by the Designated Courts refusing to grant bail were not
interlocutory orders and therefore appealable under Section 19(1) of the Act, cannot
be accepted".
In the case of Abhishek Acharya (supra), This case was deciding a criminal revision challenging the
order rejecting the discharge petition filed by the petitioners - accused. This Court quoted
paragraphs 19 and 20 of the decision in Amit Kapoor vs Ramesh Chander : (2012) 9 SCC 460 in
which duty of the Court at the stage of framing of charge and jurisdiction of the Court under Section
- 397 Cr.P. was stated. This Court thereafter went into the case records minutely and held that the
discharge application had been rightly rejected. Seizure or Impounding of Passport.
In the case of Suresh Nanda vrs. Central Bureau of Investigation reported in (2008) 3 SCC 674, the
Supreme Court had observed as follows-
"13. Hence, while the police may have power to seize a passport under Section 102 Cr.P.C. if it is
permissible within the authority given under Section 102 of Cr.P.C., it does not have power to retain
or impound the same, because that can only be done by the passport authority under Section 10(3)
of the Passports Act. Hence, if the police seizes a passport (which it has power to do under Section
102 Cr.P.C.), thereafter the police must send it along with a letter to the passport authority clearly
stating that the seized passport deserves to be impounded for one of the reasons mentioned in
Section 10(3) of the Act. It is thereafter the passport authority to decide whether to impound the
passport or not. Since impounding of a passport has civil consequences, the passport authority must
give an opportunity of hearing to the person concerned before impounding his passport. It is well
settled that any order which has civil consequences must be passed after giving opportunity of
hearing to a party vide State of Orissa Vs. Binapani Dei [Air 1967 SC 1269].
14. In the present case, neither the passport authority passed any order of impounding nor was any
opportunity of hearing given to the appellant by the passport authority for impounding the
document. It was only the CBI authority which has retained possession of the passport (which in
substance amounts to impounding it) from October, 2006. In our opinion, this was clearly illegal.
Under Section 10A of the Act retention by the Central Government can only be for four weeks.
Thereafter it can only be retained by an order of the Passport authority under Section 10(3).
15. In our opinion, even the Court cannot impound a passport. Though, no doubt, Section 104
Cr.P.C. states that the Court may, if it thinks fit, impound any document or thing produced before it,
in our opinion, this provision will only enable the Court to impound any document or thing other
than a passport. This is because impounding a passport is provided for in Section 10(3) of the
Passports Act. The Passports Act is a special law while the Cr.P.C. is a general law. It is well settled
that the special law prevails over the general law vide G.P. Singh's Principles of Statutory
Interpretation (9th Edition pg. 133). This principle is expressed in the maxim Generalia specialibus
non derogant. Hence, impounding of a passport cannot be done by the Court under Section 104
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 10
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
Cr.P.C. though it can impound any other document or thing."
In the case of Mohammad Hanif Nurani vrs. The State of Maharashtra & Another (Criminal
Application No. 434 of 2024 decided on 05.02.2025 ), the High Court of Judicature at Bombay has
observed as follows:-
"7. I have perused the record placed before me. At the outset it is seen that passport is
not an incriminating document in the prosecution case and hence seizure of passport
permanently prima facie would stand contrary to the provisions of the Passports Act,
1967 and more specifically Sections 10(3)(e) and 10-A thereof. The condition of
permanent seizure of passport by the Court would indirectly amount to impounding
of the passport. The Passports Act is a special Act and it would override the
provisions of Cr.P.C. for the purpose of impounding / retention of passport.
8. The present case before me is such that considering the business profile and
antecedents of the Applicant he would be required to travel abroad at short notice
and therefore if he has to seek release of his passport on every occasion, the time
spent in doing so is clearly detrimental to his prospects given the existential
conditions in Court. This is not a case where the Applicant has misused the liberty
given to him. Submission on behalf of the DRI that he is a flight risk therefore cannot
be countenanced as previously Court has released his passport thrice and Applicant
has travelled aboard and diligently complied with the condition of return. Employing
such an onerous condition in a bail order clearly amounts to indirectly impounding of
the passport in substance. Even under the provisions of the Passport Act and more
specifically Sections 10-A read with 10 (3)(e), passport can be retained by the Central
Government for four weeks and thereafter it can only be retained by the order of the
Passport Authority under Section 10(3) of the Passports Act. The Act of repeatedly
depositing the passport after undertaking every travel itinerary indirectly amounts to
retention of the passport by the Court. As delineated above, the Passports Act is a
special law while Cr.P.C. is a general law and it is well settled that the special law
prevails over the general law. This principle is expressed in the maxim generalia
specialibus non derogant.
9. In view of the my above observations and decisions of the Supreme Court in the
case of Suresh Nanda (1st Supra) followed by decisions in the case of M.T. Enrica
Laxie Vs. Doramma³; S. Sathyanarayana Vs. State of Karnataka; Sir Mohammed
Tasnim Vs. State of Karnataka; Devashish Garg Vs. Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence; Veenita Gupta Vs. State; State of Maharashtra Vs. Tapas D. Neogy:
Avinash Bhosale Vs. Union of India and Jignesh Prakash Shah (2nd Supra), the
subject condition in question deserves to be interfered with.
10. Nevertheless to state that if the Prosecuting Agency /Authority desires to retain
the passport in the Court's custody or with itself due to any reason it shall be open to
the Prosecuting Agency /Authority to seek such relief under the Passports Act in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 11
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
accordance with law. It is clarified that this Court has not expressed any opinion on
the merits of the pending case of the Applicant and any observation made herein
shall not influence the pending case.
11. I am of the opinion that it will be unjust to deny the Applicant the opportunity to
travel abroad for his future business prospects, if such an opportunity would stand
defeated due to the delay in the present system for seeking permission of the Court
for release of the passport on every such occasion which is practically not possible
due to the existential delay that occurs. It is seen that Applicant has deep roots in the
Society and no criminal antecedents whatsoever.
12. Condition No.3 in the bail order dated 21.05.2021 therefore stands deleted. Rest
of the order is retained.
Resultantly the impugned order dated 13.12.2022 is quashed and set aside.
13. It is however directed that whenever the Applicant travels abroad in future, he shall furnish all
details of his travel itinerary alongwith all documentary material relating to his purpose of travel,
dates and details of travel and return, tickets, visa etc. with the Respondent No.2 DRI at least one
week in advance before he undertakes the travel and intimate about his return back within one week
of his return so as to enable the DRI to apply its mind to the same."
In the case of Prabal Pratap Singh Yadav vrs. Republic of India (SLP (Criminal) No. 11441-11442 of
2023 dated 10.01.2024) the court has observed that-
"5. During the course of arguments, the learned counsel for the appellant handed
over a copy of the order passed by this Court in Criminal Appeal No.2060 of 2023
dated 21.07.2023 in respect of the co-accused of the appellant- herein, in the
selfsame crime number. As per the said order, the application for bail of the
co-accused was allowed. After a careful consideration of the entire aspects, we are of
the view that the conditions viz., "that
(i) one of such sureties shall be his relative, (ii) that, the petitioner shall furnish cash
security of Rs.18,00,000/-
(eighteen lakhs) in the form of bank deposit and (iii) that shall also furnish property security free
from all encumbrances and legal impediment worth of Rs.36,32,900/-" shall be deleted while
upholding the grant of Bail. Ordered accordingly. In the said circumstances, while maintaining the
order granting bail to the appellant-herein, the condition that he should furnish surety for a sum of
Rs.50,000/- with three sureties of the like sum is retained. Further conditions can be imposed by
the Trial Court. However, we make it clear that there shall also be a condition that the appellant
shall surrender his passport before the Trial Court, if not surrendered earlier. If he does not possess
a passport, he shall file an affidavit in that regard before the Trial Court."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 12
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
DISUSSION AND CONCLUSION ..
25. As regards challenge to the maintainability of the Criminal Revision, there can be no quarrel
over the settled principle of law that grant or refusal of bail ins an interlocutory order. But in this
Criminal Revision, the petitioner has not challenged the bail order of the learned trial Court. He had
prayed for waiver / modification of one of the bail conditions by filing an application before the
learned Sessions Judge Khurda, at Bhubaneswar , which having been rejected, he has filed the
Criminal Revisions challenging the order of the learned Sessions Judge, Bhubaneswar . So in my
considered view, the Criminal Revision is maintainable . That apart in CRL REVISION No. 690 of
2023 , this Court had entertained the application and directed for release of the passport of the
petitioner for two months .
26. It is also to be noted that this Bench has been given the assignment of Criminal Appeals and
Revisions relating to CBI , Vigilance and ED cases as well applications under Section 528 of BNSS
2023 / Section 482 of the Crl.P.C., 1973 , so even if a CRLMC had been filed, the same would have
been listed before this Bench. The scope of an application filed under Section 528 of the BNSS is
definitely wider than an application filed under Section 442 of the BNSS .Considering the
assignment of this Bench , I can also exercise inherent power under Section 528 of the Cr.P.C, if the
same is warranted in the circumstances.,
27. It is the settled principle of law that while exercising revisional power, the Court has to examine
the correctness, legality or propriety of an order passed by a trial court or a lower court. The
jurisdiction can be exercised when there is a palpable error in any order, non-compliance of
provisions of law, or the order or decisions is erroneous or exercised arbitrarily
28. The learned Sessions Judge, has rejected the application of the petitioner in view of the gravity
of the offence and as this Court had directed him to resubmit his passport after his interim visits
abroad . Such order is erroneous and liable for interference as in CRL REV No.690 of 2023 prayer to
release the passport for two months had been allowed . In the second instance , during pendency of
the CRLMA , as the counsel for the CBI had sought for an adjournment , prayer for interim release
of the passport had been allowed and the matter had not been decided finally .
29. The impugned order is therefore liable for interference for interference as being erroneous . vof
the said decision is liable for interference as the conduct of the petitioner during both the times the
passport was released in his favour has not been considered nor the submission of the petitioner
that he would return within 72 hrs., wherever directed by the Court.
30. The passport have the petitioner has not been seized by the police under Section 102 of the
CRl.P.C during investigation. He was required to surrender his passport as one of the conditions for
granting him bail.
31. I find no illegality in the condition to surrender the passport, while granting bail to the
petitioner, as it was to prevent him from leaving the country without the knowledge of the trial
Court during the trial and as such condition is being imposed in numerous cases by various High
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 13
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
Courts as well as the Supreme Court. As he has been permitted to travel abroad on two occasions, it
is apparent that his passport has not been retained indefinitely and there will not amount to
impounding which can only be done by the passport authorities.
32. It is true that on similar facts , the Bombay High Court has directed for release of the passport of
the petitioner of the accused who was accused of an offence under Section 135(1) (i) of the Customs
Act while in this case the petitioner has been chargesheeted for committing offences under Section-
420, 120 B, 34 IPC read with Sections-4, 5, and 6 of the PCMC Act and is a green card holder.
33. On two occasions, thereafter his passport has been directed to be released by this Court to enable
him to travel to the USA. On both these occasions, he has complied with the conditions and has
deposited the passport in the trial Court after his return.
34. I find merit in the submissions of the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner that on account
of the fact that the wife and daughter of the petitioner are staying in the USA and his wife is not
keeping good health and the petitioner is a green card holder, for which he has to travel to the USA
frequently and sometimes at short notice, which is not possible if he has to apply for release of the
passport, each time he is required to travel .
35. I also appreciate the apprehension of the learned counsel for the C.B.I., that the petitioner is a
green card holder and if he does not appear subsequently, trial may be delayed.
36. But the case is not ready for trial and is pending for appearance of some of the co accused
persons, this apprehension at this stage and in view of the conduct of the petitioner is unwarranted.
37. So in view of the present status of the trial and the conduct of the petitioner when the passport
was released on two earlier occasions, I am satisfied that the petitioner is not a "flight risk"
and the passport should be released in his favour by imposing suitable conditions, till
the date is fixed for framing of charge.
38. Once trial starts, he shall deposit his passport in the trial Court on or before the date is posted
for framing of charge and remain present on the date fixed for framing of charge.
39. Thereafter, if he is required to travel abroad, he may file fresh application before the learned trial
court for release of his passport along with his itinerary and an undertaking to return as and when
his presence is required by the learned trail court which will be considered by the learned trial court
in accordance with law, keeping in view his conduct during release of his passport.
40. The impugned order of the learned Sessions Judge, is set aside and it is directed as follows:
(i) Condition No. ii in bail order dated 19.10.2023 is modified to the extent that the
passport of the petitioner shall be released to the petitioner immediately to enable
him to proceed abroad.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 14
Indrajit De vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ..... Opp. Party on 15 May, 2025
(ii) After the passport is released, whenever he proposes to leave the country, the
petitioner shall furnish his travel itinerary along with details of his place and stay and
active contact and whatsapp numbers and email address at least four days before his
departure from India.
(iii) He shall submit an undertaking that he will return without fail when the case is
posted for framing of charge.
(iv) He shall submit the photostat copies of the relevant pages/entries in his passport
within seven days of his return, before the learned trial Court.
(v) He shall re-deposit the passport in the court of the learned Special C.J.M, (C.B.l),
Bhubaneswar, when S.P.E No.05 of 2014, is posted for framing of charge.
41. The Criminal Revision is allowed. I.A. No. 285 of 2025 is disposed of.
...........................
(Savitri Ratho, J) Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 15th May, 2025.
Puspanjali Mohapatra, Personal Assistant. Signed by: PUSPANJALI MOHAPATRA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159932730/ 15
