Intezar Ahmad And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 3 March, 2025
Intezar Ahmad And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief
Secy. ... on 3 March, 2025
Author: Saurabh Lavania
Bench: Saurabh Lavania
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:12560
Court No. - 12
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 1538 of 2025
Applicant :- Intezar Ahmad And Another
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. Home Lko. And Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Ram Raj Ojha
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Saurabh Lavania,J.
1. Heard learned counsel appearing for the applicants and learned Additional Government Advocate
on behalf of State-respondent.
2. Present application has been filed for the following main reliefs:
"Wherefore, it is most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may graciously be
pleased to set aside/quash the entire proceeding of Criminal Case No.14877 of 2023
(State Versus Intezar Ahmad & Another) arising out of F.I.R. No.0223 of 2022, under
Section 2/3 of Prevention of Damages to Public Property Act, 1984, Police Station
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62286203/ 1
Intezar Ahmad And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 3 March, 2025
Mohanganj, District Amethi, pending before the First Additional Civil Judge (Junior
Division)/Judicial Magistrate, Raebareli, as well as the Charge Sheet No.221 of 2022
dated 23.8.2022 and summoning order dated 7.8.2023 passed by II Additional Civil
Judge (Junior Division)/Judicial Magistrate, Raebareli.
It is further respectfully prayed that during the pendency of present petition, the
further proceedings ofCriminal Case No.14877 of 2023 (State Versus Intezar Ahmad
& Another) as well as summoning order dated 07.08.2023 passed by II Additional
Civil Judge (Junior Division)/Judicial Magistrate, Raebareli, may kindly be stayed."
3. Contention of learned counsel appearing for the applicants with regard to main relief sought,
quote above, is to the effect that the case of the prosecution set forth is that the applicants are the
encroachers of the Gata No. 931 recorded as 'Naveen Parti' situated at Village - Materiya Majre
Janapur, P.S.- Mohanganj, District- Amethi and by doing agriculture work and poultry farm the
portion occupied by the applicants and taking note of the same, the FIR was lodged by lekhpal
namely Mahendra Dev Shukla. Thereafter, the Investigating Officer carried out the investigation and
after completion of investigation submitted the charge-sheet under Sections 2 / 3 of Prevention of
Damage to Public Property Act 1984 (in short "Act, 1984") and thereafter, the Trial Court on printed
proforma took the cognizance on 07.08.2023.
4. He further submitted that in the above factual background of the case the present application
seeking main relief, quoted above, has been filed particularly on the ground(s) that (i) Offense under
Sections 2/3 of Act, 1984 is not made out against the applicant; (ii) the Magistrate has passed the
cognizance order on an printed proforma as such the Magistrate has not applied his judicial mind;
(iii) U.P. Revenue Code, 2006 (in short "Code, 2006"), is self-contained code and encroacher can be
dealt with in the manner prescribed therein particularly Section 67 read with relevant rules. Under
Section 67 of Code, 2006, after following the due process of law, the encroacher can be evicted and
the penalty can also be imposed on the encroacher by the Revenue Authority namely Tehsildar and
order of the Tehsildar passed in exercise of power under Section 67 of Code, 2006, is appealable.
5. He further submitted that tenure holder can file declaratory suit under Section 144 of Code, 2006
and the Gram Panchayat can file a suit for declaration under Section 145 of Code, 2006.
6. He further submitted that in view of scheme of Code, 2006, the FIR lodged by the lekhpal is
nothing but an abuse of process of law as such, the indulgence of this Court is required in the
matter.
7. He further submitted that this Court in the judgment passed in the case of Prabhakant And
Another Vs. State of U.P. and others reported in 2023 SCC OnLine All 397, after considering the
provisions of the Act, 1984 and the Code, 2006, interfered in the proceedings under Sections 2/3 of
Act, 1984.
8. He further submitted that a perusal of Paras 14 to 22 of the judgment of this Court in the case of
Prabhakant (supra) would show that the present application is squarely covered by the judgement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62286203/ 2
Intezar Ahmad And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 3 March, 2025
passed in the case of Prabhakant (supra). Relevant paras, referred, on reproduction, are as follows:
"(14). Now coming to yet another aspect of the issue, learned counsel for the
applicants in order to buttress their contention have drawn attention of the Court to
the provisions of Section 67 of the U.P. Revenue Code which speaks about the power
to prevent damages, misappropriation and wrongful occupation of Gram Panchayat
property:-
(i) Where any property entrusted or deemed to be entrusted under the provisions of
this Code to a Gram Panchayat or other local authority is damaged or
misappropriated, or where any Gram Panchayat or other authority is entitled to take
possession of any land under the provisions of this Code and such land is occupied
otherwise than in accordance with the said provisions, the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti
or other authority or the Lekhpal concerned, as the case may be, shall inform the
Assistant Collector concerned in the manner prescribed.
(ii) Where from the information received under sub-section (i) or otherwise, the
Assistant Collector is satisfied that any property referred to in sub-section (i) has
been damaged or misappropriated, or any person is in occupation of any land
referred to in that sub-section in contravention of the provisions of this Code, he shall
issue notice to the person concerned to show cause why compensation for damage,
misappropriation or wrongful occupation not exceeding the amount specified in the
notice be not recovered from him and why he should not be evicted from such land.
(iii) If the person to whom a notice has been issued under sub-section (ii) fails to
show cause within the time specified in the notice or within such extended time as
the Assistant Collector may allow in this behalf, or if the cause shown is found to be
insufficient, the Assistant Collector may direct that such person shall be evicted from
the land, and may, for that purpose, use or cause to be used such force as may be
necessary, and may direct that the amount of compensation for damage or
misappropriation of the property or for wrongful occupation as the case may be, be
recovered from such person as arrears of land revenue.
(iv) If the Assistant Collector is of opinion that the person showing cause is not guilty
of causing the damage or misappropriation or wrongful occupation referred to in the
notice under sub-section (ii), he shall discharge the notice.
(v) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Assistant Collector under Sub-section
(iii) or Sub-Section (iv), may within thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an
appeal to the Collector.
(vi) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Code, and
subject to the provisions of this section every order of the Sub-Divisional Officer
under this section shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (5) be final.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62286203/ 3
Intezar Ahmad And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 3 March, 2025
(vii) The procedure to be followed in any action taken under this section shall be such
as may be prescribed.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, the word "land" shall include the trees and building
standing thereon."
(15). Further, under Rule 67(1) of U.P. Revenue Code, 2016, it is incumbent upon the Assistant
Collector to make an inquiry as he deems proper and obtain further information regarding the
following issues :
(a) full description of damage or misappropriation caused or the wrongful occupation
made with details of village, plot number, area, boundary, property damaged or
misappropriated and market value thereof;
(b) full address along with parentage of the person responsible for such damage,
misappropriation or wrongful occupation;
(c) period of wrongful occupation, damage or misappropriation and class of soil of
the plots involved;
(d) value of the property damaged or misappropriated calculated at the circle rate
fixed by the Collector and the amount sought to be recovered as damages."
(16). Thus, from the above it is clear that as per the U.P. Revenue Code, it is the
Assistant Collector of the area who is the authority concerned to act a pivotal role in
demarcation and holding and declaring the land in dispute is encroached by the
applicants. The Investigating Officer of criminal cases is not even remotedly
connected to conduct this exercise. The entire procedure has been laid down in
Section 67(2) that only after getting a reply from the alleged encroacher, the Assistant
Commissioner/Sub Divisional Officer has to pass an order giving reasons for not
exceeding the explanation, if so offered by the person concerned. The eviction from
the land in dispute can only be recorded after disposal of the explanation offered by
the person concerned keeping in line with the cardinal principle of natural justice by
passing a well reasoned and speaking order while disposing of the said explanation.
The Act is itself contained the amount of compensation of damage or
misappropriation of the property or for wrongful occupation, as the case may be, may
be recovered from such person as arrears of land revenue. Section 210 of the Revenue
Code, 2006 confers supervisory power on the Board or the Commissioner to call for
the record of any proceeding decided by the subordinate revenue court in which no
appeal lies for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself as to the legality or propriety
of any order passed in such suit or proceeding.
(17). A careful reading of the provisions of the Revenue Code, 2006, thus, makes it
clear that the proceeding for causing damage to the public property can be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62286203/ 4
Intezar Ahmad And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 3 March, 2025
undertaken against any person who is in wrongful occupation of the same or causes
damage or misappropriations to the said property. The nature of eviction proceeding
under Section 67 of the Revenue Code, 2006, is, however, summary in nature. The
rights of the parties claimed, if gives rise to a dispute requiring adjudication on the
questions of fact, a suit for declaration has to be instituted against such person. The
Gram Sabha may institute a suit under Section 145 of the U.P. Revenue Code, 2006
for declaration of its right or to seek any further relief. In case of institution of such a
suit, a temporary injunction may be granted by the Court concerned to prevent
wastage, damage or alienation of the suit property. The Revenue Code, 2006 is a
Special enactment providing for the law relating to the 'land' defined under Section
4(14) of the Code.
(18). As far as criminal proceeding for illegal encroachment, damage or trespass over
the land belonging to Gram Sabha is concerned, the same can be undertaken but it
would be subject to the adjudication of rights of the parties over the land in dispute as
the said determination can be done only by the revenue Court.
LEGALITY OF CRYPTIC/SUMMONING ORDER ON A PRINTED PROFORMA :
(19). In addition to above, learned counsel for the applicants have drawn attention of
the Court to the impugned summoning order whereby the concerned Magistrate,
despite of the repeated directions of the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as of this Court,
have adhered to the old fashion by taking the cognizance of offences on a printed
proforma. Needless to mention here that on the previous occasion at least a dozen of
the cases of different Benches of this Court in different proceedings have condemned
and deprecated this practice of taking cognizance on a printed proforma, but it seems
that the concerned Magistrates repeatedly in utter defiance of the directions of this
Court are still taking cognizance on a printed praforma without applying their
judicial mind. This is wholly unacceptable and condemned in strong term. The
Session Judges of respective sessions divisions are required to look into the matter
and issue an specific order that the cognizance order must be speaking and showing
application of judicial mind.
(20). It was noted by Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Abdul Rashid vs. State of
U.P., 2010 SCC online Alld 2819, wherein it has been held that the judicial order
cannot be allowed to be passed in a mechanical fashion either by filling in the blanks
in a printed proforma or by affixing a readymade seal etc. of the order on a plain
paper. Such tendency must be deprecated and cannot be allowed to perpetuate. This
reflects not only lack of judicial mind to the facts of the case but is also against the
settled judicial norms.
(21). Similarly in the case of Bhushan Kumar vs. State (NCT of Delhi), 2012 5 SCC
424, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed that Section 204 of the Code does
not mandate the Magistrate to explicitly state the reasons for issuance of summons. It
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62286203/ 5
Intezar Ahmad And Another vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 3 March, 2025
clearly states that if in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence,
there is sufficient ground for proceeding, then the summons may be issued. While
explaining the true import of expression "sufficient ground for proceeding" the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Sunil Bharti Mittal vs. Central Bureau of
Investigation, AIR 2015 sc 923 has held as under :
"47. However, the words "sufficient grounds for proceeding" appearing in the Section
are of immense importance. It is these words which amply suggest that an opinion is
to be formed only after due application of mind that there is sufficient basis for
proceeding against the said accused and formation of such an opinion is to be
swtated in the order itself?."
(22). As mentioned above, taking into account the gravity of offence and its nature in which there is
no criminality as such and the apt remedy would be to proceed against the erring so called
encroacher u/s 67 of the U.P. Revenue Code and get the land in dispute demarcated. It is the case
exclusively falls within the domain of concerned revenue authority to impose the fine, if any, after
taking the whole exercise as per the provisions of law contained u/s 67 of the U.P. Revenue Code. "
9. Prayer is to allow the present application.
10. Learned AGA for the State opposed the present application but he could not dispute
observations made by this Court in the judgment passed in the case of Prabhakant (supra).
11. Upon due consideration of the facts of the present case, indicated above, and the observation in
the judgment, referred above, this Court is of the view that the present case is squarely covered by
the judgement of this Court passed in the case of Prabhakant (supra).
12. Having considered, the present application is allowed. The charge-sheet dated 23.08.2022 in
Crime No.0223/2022, Under Sections 2 / 3 of Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act 1984, as
also cognizance/summoning order dated 07.08.2023 passed byII Additional Civil Judge (Junior
Division)/Judicial Magistrate, Raebareli inCriminal Case No.14877 of 2023 (State Versus Intezar
Ahmad & Another) " contained in Annexure Nos.1 & 2 to this application, respectively, are quashed.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Renu/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62286203/ 6
