Irfan Ahmed Khatana vs Union Territory Of J & K & Anr on 4 February, 2023
Irfan Ahmed Khatana vs Union Territory Of J & K & Anr on 4
February, 2023
Sr. No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
Bail App No. 432/2022
Reserved on: 31.01.2023
Pronounced on:04.02.2023
Irfan Ahmed Khatana .....Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. K. K. Pathan, Advocate
v/s
Union Territory of J & K & Anr. .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
ORDER
1. Petitioner through the medium of this bail application under Section 439 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure seeks to be admitted to bail, in a case arising out of FIR No. 10/2022 registered at Police
Station Anti Narcotics Task Force (ANTF), Jammu, for the commission of offences punishable
under Sections 8/15/25/29 of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (for short
„NDPS Act(cid:129)).
2. The factual matrix of the case as pleaded is that the petitioner is registered owner of the truck
bearing No. JK02AD-0568 which was seized by the Anti Narcotics Task Force (ANTF) Jammu, in a
false, frivolous and baseless case; that the said truck was driven by his driver, namely, Javid Ahmad
Chichi S/O Mukhtar Ahmed Chichi R/O Hillar Arhama Anantnag Kashmir; that the petitioner
didn(cid:129)t know about the alleged offence committed by his driver and moreover, the petitioner has
committed no offence nor is involved in the commission of any offence and nothing has been
retrieved from the possession of the owner (applicant/petitioner), who is under custody of the
respondents; the applicant/petitioner is the only bread earner of his family and in case the
petitioner is not enlarged on bail, the family of the petitioner will suffer badly.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/11249323/ 1
Irfan Ahmed Khatana vs Union Territory Of J & K & Anr on 4 February, 2023
3. Respondent No. 1 filed objections to this application pleading inter alia that the present
application is not maintainable in the present form as petitioner has filed the petition without
availing the alternate remedy provided under the law. The application of the accused is completely
devoid of merit and is baseless as the accused is deliberately making false submissions without any
factual basis. It is averred, that on 11.09.2022 information was received through reliable sources at
Police Station ANTF Jammu, that one truck bearing registration No. JK02AD-0568 driven by Javid
Ahmad Chichi S/O Mukhtar Ahmed Chichi R/O Hillar Arhama Anantnag Kashmir is coming from
Kashmir Valley towards Jammu loaded with concealed large quantity of Poppy Straw. On this
information offence u/s 8/15 NDPS Act made out and the investigation entrusted to I.O namely
Inspector Waseem Raja who along with Inspector Ankush Chib, Sgct Sanjay Kumar, Sgct Ravi Jee
Bhat and Sgct Rakesh Kumar left towards NH-44 Sidhra-Narwal Bye Pass Road, Jammu equiped
with weighing machine, Laptop, portable printer, etc. After reaching near Baghe Bahu Morh Jammu
team as briefed with regard to the reliable information, established Naka and started searching of
the above- mentioned truck.
4. During search of the truck in the presence of Executive Magistrate, three plastic bags concealed
under the blue color tirpal, from conscious possession of the driver of truck namely Javid Ahmed
Chichi were recovered from the truck. On opening the same Poppy Straw like Substance was found
inside the plastic bags. Recovered plastic bags containing Poppy Straw like Substance was seized in
the instant case as evidence. The recovered contraband was weighed with calibrated weighing
machine. The total weight found to be 70.850 kg with plastic bags and 70.350 kg without plastic
bags (Commercial Quantity). Two samples each weighing 200 grams were extracted from each bag,
exhibits/sample prepared and marked as Al, B1 and Cl for Chemical analysis from FSL Jammu and
A2, B2 and C2 as reserved samples. A, B and C as main exhibits. All the exhibits/samples got sealed
by Executive Magistrate Rakh Bahu Jammu with seal brought by him on the spot. Truck bearing
registration No.JK02AD/0568 was seized as evidence in instant case and parked at
Drug-de-Addiction Centre Channi Jammu. The accused, namely, Javid Ahmed Chichi S/O
Mukhtyar Ahmed Chichi R/O Hillar Arhama, Anantnag was arrested and is lodged in District Jail
Ambphalla on judicial remand.
5. It was further pleaded that during further course of investigation and questioning from the
accused driver namely Javed Ahmad Chichi, it has been found that owner of the seized truck,
namely, Irfan Ahamed S/O Mohd Rufail Khatana R/O Chairhard, Hillar Ashama Kukernag
Anantnag is the main supplier of the Poppy Straw and he has loaded the consignment of Poppy
straw in the said truck and after loading truck was handed over to driver Javed Ahmed Chichi. On
the analysis of J&K bank account statement of accused owner of the truck Irfan Ahmad Khatana it
has been found that he has received huge amount of money from main receiver of consignment of
Poppy Straw, namely, Shinder Pal @ Bittu of Ludhiana Punjab who has credited the money into the
account of Irfan Ahmad Khatana via money transfer agents, the forward chain of the case is under
acute investigation. It is further contended that accused/owner of the truck lrfan Ahmad Khatana
deliberately permited his truck for the transportation of Narcotics and Psychotropic Substances
from Kashmir to Punjab, as such offences U/S 25/29 NDPS Act were added in the above cited case
and owner of the truck namely lrfan Ahamed S/O Mohd Rufail Khatana R/O Chairhard, Hillar
Ashama Kokernag Anantnag was arrested on 22.11.2022. The seized Truck bearing registration No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/11249323/ 2
Irfan Ahmed Khatana vs Union Territory Of J & K & Anr on 4 February, 2023
JK02AD/0568 has been released and handed over to registered owner by the order of the Learned
Additional Sessions Judge Jammu. Investigation of the case with regard to the forward link is going
on. The FSL report of the seized samples is obtained from the FSL Jammu and as per the FSL report
Morphine was detected in all the samples.
6. Learned counsel for the petitioner argued that petitioner is a registered owner of the truck
bearing No. JK02AD-0568, which has been seized by the Anti Narcotics Task Forces (ANTF) in a
false, frivolous and baseless case, the said truck was driven by petitioner(cid:129)s driver, namely, Javid
Ahmad Chichi, who is already in the judicial custody, the petitioner didn(cid:129)t know about the alleged
offence committed by his driver and moreover nothing has been recovered from the possession of
the owner (petitioner herein). The call records of the mobiles will ultimately nail the petitioner in
the present case is a matter of trial. Merely because Section 37 of the NDPS Act comes into play in
the case in hand as the commercial quantity of contraband is involved, does not mean that the
accused cannot be entitled to bail, whatever may be the circumstances that may borne out from the
record. In support of arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the judgments of
this Court in cases titled (i) "Phool Chand vs Narcotics Control Bureau, in Bail App No. 301/2022,
(ii) "Ghulam Mohd Bhat vs Narcotics Control Bureau", in Bail App No. 409/2021 and (iii) "Rayees
Ahmad Dar vs Union Territory of J&K" in Bail App No. 05/2022.
7. Ms. Monika Kohli, learned Sr. AAG, ex adverso, argued that allegations against petitioner are
serious and any concession of bail in favour of the petitioner would not be in the interest of the
society at large. She further argued that the bail application filed by the petitioner earlier had been
rejected by the Trial Court vide order dated 10.12.2022 and without any change of circumstances,
the petitioner has chosen to file this subsequent bail application, which is liable to be dismissed. She
further argued that on the analysis of bank account statement of accused-Irfan Ahmad Khatana, it
has been found that he has received huge amount of money from main receiver of consignment of
Poppy Straw, namely, Shinder Pal @ Bittu of Ludhiana Punjab who has credited the money into the
account of Irfan Ahmad Khatana via money transfer agents. The prosecution strongly apprehends
that the petitioner in case of grant of bail may tamper with the prosecution evidence and influence
the witnesses detrimental to the cause of justice and prayed that the application be rejected.
8. Heard learned counsel for both the sides and perused the case file.
9. In "Phool Chand vs Narcotics Control Bureau" (Bail App No. 301/2022), it was held by this Court
in Para 6 as under:-
"6. The perusal of the complaint filed by the respondent reveals that the
petitioner-accused has been roped in the case on the basis of the statements recorded
of the petitioner as well as the other accused Muzaffar Ahmed. As per prosecution,
the contraband has been seized from co- accused Muzaffar Ahmed. The court is
prima facie in agreement with the argument of counsel for the petitioner that the
statements of the accused persons are hit by the judgment of the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court
cited in (2021) 4 SCC 1 titled „Toofan Singh vs. State of Tamil Nadu(cid:129) wherein the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/11249323/ 3
Irfan Ahmed Khatana vs Union Territory Of J & K & Anr on 4 February, 2023
court in more than clear terms held that the statement recorded in terms of Section
67 of the NDPS Act cannot be used as a confessional statement in the trial of an
offence under the Act as the officers who are vested with powers under Section 53 of
the NDPS Act are police officers within the meaning of Section 25 of the Evidence
Act. In view of the said verdict the statements by the accused persons recorded in
terms of Section 67 of the NDPS Act cannot be the mere reason for disallowing the
bail unless other circumstances also call for rejection of bail. It is also profitable to
note herein that the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in case reported 2022 Live Law (SC)
878 titled „Union of India (NCB) Etc. Vs. Khalil Uddin Etc.(cid:129) has relied upon the
earlier judgment of the court to hold that the rigour of law as laid down by the court
in Toofan Singh(cid:129)s case was applicable even at the stage of grant of bail. The
statement of the accused is not admissible against the co-accused is trite proposition
of law. The perusal of the statement of the petitioner before NCB does not mention
that he had supplied the contraband to the co-accused Muzaffar Ahmed for the
occurrence which took place on 18.03.2020 and apparently appears to have made
general statement that he used to supply the contraband to Muzaffar Ahmed in
consideration for money. The statement as recorded of the petitioner does not
disqualify him for bail on the ground of his statement"
10. In "Ghulam Mohd Bhat vs Narcotics Control Bureau" (Bail App No. 409/2021), this Court again
held in Para-24 as under:
"24.Having held that the confession recorded before a Magistrate other than a
Judicial Magistrate/Metropolitan Magistrate is not admissible in evidence, it
becomes clear that the statement of the co-accused Zahid Ahmad Dar recorded in the
presence of Executive Magistrate while he was in police custody and in presence of
police officials, is clearly inadmissible in evidence. There is no other material on
record of the Case Diary to connect the petitioner with the alleged crime. Even
though the quantity of contraband drugs recovered by the investigating agency from
the co- accused falls under the category of commercial quantity, yet, prima facie,
there is no admissible evidence on record to connect the petitioner to the recovery of
the aforesaid quantity of contraband drug or to suggest that he is a party to the
conspiracy."
11. In "Rayees Ahmad Dar vs Union Territory of J&K" (Bail App No. 05/2022) relied upon by the
learned counsel for the petitioner, this Court, where the statement of the co-accused involving the
accused was discussed, held that the statement made by the co-accused involving the accused which
is not admissible, as such, the bail can be granted to the accused as the rigor of Section 37 of the
NDPS Act is not complete bar to grant on bail.
12. Hon(cid:129)ble the Supreme Court in a case titled "Anil Kumar Yadav vs State (NCT) of Delhi" reported
as (2018) 12 SCC 129 has spelt out some of the significant considerations which may be placed in the
balance in deciding whether to grant bail. Para 17 of the judgment is profitable to be extracted for
ready reference:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/11249323/ 4
Irfan Ahmed Khatana vs Union Territory Of J & K & Anr on 4 February, 2023
"17. While granting bail, the relevant considerations are:-
(i) nature of seriousness of the offence; (ii) character of the evidence and
circumstances which are peculiar to the accused; (iii) likelihood of the accused fleeing
from justice;
(iv) the impact thathis release may make on the prosecution witnesses, its impact on
the society; and (v) likelihood of his tampering. No doubt, this list is not exhaustive.
There are no hard and fast rules regarding grant or refusal of bail, each case has to be
considered on its own merits. The matter always calls for judicious exercise of
discretion by the Court."
13. Petitioner seeks bail in a case where he alleged to have committed offence punishable under
sections 8/15/25/29 NDPS Act along with his co- accused. The quantity of contraband is of
commercial nature, therefore, rigor contained u/s 37 (1)(b)(ii) of the NDPS Act applies with full
force as law is settled, that a person accused of offences punishable under Sections 19, 24 or 27-A of
NDPS Act and also for offences involving commercial quantity shall only be released on bail if the
court is satisfied that, (i) there are reasonable grounds for believing that he is not guilty of such
offence, and (ii) that he is not likely to commit any offence on bail.
14. The simple case, as projected by learned counsel for the petitioner only on the basis of statement
of the co-accused, is not wholly correct as the investigating agency has pointed out that huge sum of
amount have gone to the account of the petitioner from a drug/narcotic smuggler of Punjab and in
such a situation of the matter, there may be sufficient evidence to connect the accused with the
commission of alleged offence, moreover, he being owner of the vehicle from which the narcotic
consignment was recovered cannot say that he was not knowing of it when his driver has stated that
it was the owner who had loaded the consignment in the truck. The citations relied upon by the
learned counsel for the petitioner are not applicable to the facts of his case.
15. It is trite law, that at the stage of dealing with cases regarding bail, a detailed examination of
evidence and elaborate documentation of merits of the case are not to be undertaken and as in the
case in hand. This Court prima-facie finds the involvement of the accused then the bail is not to be
allowed/granted to him. Even at this stage, no finding can be rendered, (i) that there are reasonable
grounds for believing that accused is not guilty of such offence, & (ii) he is not likely to commit such
offence on bail. Courts cannot lose sight of the fact that the menace of the crime of smuggling of
contraband drugs is on increase, and therefore, the perpetrators of the crime who are destroying the
society and younger generations rendering them incapacitated by falling prey to drug abuse, must be
dealt with iron hands.
16. The crime alleged against petitioner is against the society at large and by his criminal activities
he is alleged to be spoiling the young generation of the country. Such types of offences are to be dealt
with severity and with heavy hands. Showing leniency in such matters would really be a case of
misplaced sympathy. The alleged criminal act of petitioner, operating in a manner as the smuggler
of contraband, is destructive and is aimed to destroy the social and economic fabric of the country,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/11249323/ 5
Irfan Ahmed Khatana vs Union Territory Of J & K & Anr on 4 February, 2023
therefore, curtailment of his liberty is reasonable in view of rigor contained u/s 37 of NDPS Act. The
act of petitioner is not only shocking but outrageous in contours and granting of bail to the
petitioner would lead to the danger of the course of justice being thwarted, therefore, it is held that
no indulgence is required in the matter by this court at this stage, when the matter is under
investigation only.
17. In view of the aforesaid reasons, petitioner, in my considered opinion, is not entitled to be
granted bail at this stage. For the foregoing reasons and the observations made hereinabove, this
petition for grant of bail moved by the petitioner, is found devoid of any merit and substance and is
liable to be dismissed.
18. Petition is, accordingly, dismissed.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge JAMMU 04.02.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes Whether the
order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/11249323/ 6
