Irfan Sadiq And Anr vs Ut Of J&K & Ors on 3 July, 2023
Irfan Sadiq And Anr vs Ut Of J&K & Ors on 3 July, 2023
Author: Rahul Bharti
Bench: Rahul Bharti
Sr. No. 29
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP(C) no. 1697/2023
CM No. 3974/2023.
Irfan Sadiq and anr ....Petitioners
Through :- Mr. Wasim A Khan, Advocate.
V/s
UT of J&K & ors. ....Respondent(s)
Through :-
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAHUL BHARTI, JUDGE
ORDER
03.07.2023 The petitioners, both being of the age of majority, have exercised their free will to enter
into marital relationship and for that have earned displeasure of their respective families. To lend
confirmation to the fact of their marriage having been solemnized out of their free will and volition,
the petitioners have put on record a Nikahnama dated 09.01.2022. Along with the writ petition, the
petitioner no. 2's Aadhar Card evidencing her date of birth is also annexed which confirms the fact
that the petitioner no. 2 is and was major at the time of solemnizing marriage with petitioner no. 1.
The petitioners are in hiding, fearing about safety and security of their person suffering wrong at the
hands of respondent nos. 3 and 4 who being the father and brother of the petitioner no. 2 are
carrying hard feelings against the petitioners for their act of marrying each other.
Keeping in view the mandate and dictate of the Hon'ble Supreme Court as laid down in case of Lata
Singh vs. State of UP and anr, 2006 (5) SCC 475 in terms whereof a direction has been set into effect
for the Govt. Administration and Police Authorities throughout the Country to see to it that if any
boy or girl who is a major undergoes inter-caste or inter-religious marriage with a girl or boy who is
also major, then the marrying individuals are not to be harassed by any one nor to be subjected to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72213418/ 1
Irfan Sadiq And Anr vs Ut Of J&K & Ors on 3 July, 2023
threats or acts of violence, and in case any such threat or harassment is confronted to be inflicted on
the individuals then the persons responsible for holding out such threats/harassments are to be
taken to task by instituting criminal proceedings by the Police against such persons and further
stern action to be taken as provided by law.
Article 144 of the Constitution of India mandates all Authorities, Civil and Judicial, in the territory
of India to act in aid of the Hon'ble Supreme Court. Bearing this constitutional sanction in
perspective and the directions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court set into place, it is a matter of duty for
the Police Officials as well as officials of the concerned Civil Administration, irrespective of
hierarchical position, to ensure that marrying individuals who are major and have chosen to become
husband and wife out of their free will and volition are not to fear anybody causing any harm to their
life and limb.
This petition at the threshold is disposed of with a direction to the respondent no. 1-Senior
Superintendent of Police, Poonch to ensure by issuing appropriate directions to the respondent no.
2-SHO Police Station, Surankote district Poonch that the petitioners, namely Irfan Sadiq and Iram
Rashid are not subjected to any harassment/intimidation/threats at the hands of the respondent
nos. 3 and 4 or any other person acting at the behest and/or on behalf of the respondent nos. 3 and
4. Furthermore, in case the Police Station, Surankote, district Poonch has registered any FIR at the
instance of the respondent nos. 3 and 4 against the petitioners or either of the petitioners then also
no arrest of the petitioners shall be carried out by the Police Station, Surankote, district Poonch.
(RAHUL BHARTI) JUDGE JAMMU 03.07.2023 NARESH/PS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72213418/ 2
