J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others on 24 February, 2023
J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others
on 24 February, 2023
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 15.02.2023
Pronounced on: 24 .02.2023
WP(C) No.815/2022
c/w
WP(C) No.196/2023
J&K Public Service Commission ...Petitioner(s)
Rauf Ahmad Dar
Through:- Mr.F.A.Natnoo, Advocate in WP(C)
No.815/2022
Mr. R.A.Jan, Sr. Advocate with Mr. Vikas
Magotra, Advocate in WP(C) No.196/2023
V/s
Tajinder Kour and others ...Respondent(s)
Tajinder Kour and others
Through:- Mr. Abhinav Sharma, Sr. Advocate
with Mr. Abhirash Sharma, Advocate
for R-1
Mr. Eishan Dadhichi, GA for R-2
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Sanjeev Kumar-J
1. In these two writ petitions, one filed by the Jammu & Kashmir Public Service Commission ["PSC"]
and another by one Rauf Ahmed Dar, are directed against the judgment of Central Administrative
Tribunal ["CAT"] dated 03.02.2022 passed in OA No.61/234/2021 titled Tajinder Kour v. UT of J&K
and others. The CAT has allowed the petition (OA) filed by Tajinder Kour (hereinafter referred to as
"original petitioner") and has directed the PSC to recommend the name of original petitioner to the
Commissioner/Secretary to Government, Higher Education Department, UT of Jammu & Kashmir
for her appointment as Assistant Professor in the discipline of Geography under open merit
category.
2. The case set up by the original petitioner before the CAT 2.1. The PSC in the year 2007 issued an
advertisement for conducting direct recruitment to the vacancies of Assistant Professors including
three posts of Assistant Professor in the discipline of Geography. On the basis of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114374320/ 1
J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others on 24 February, 2023
recommendations made by the PSC, the Government vide G.O. No.201-HE of 2007 dated
12.09.2007 issued appointment orders in respect of three selectees. In the year 2009, another
selection process for direct recruitment was conducted by the PSC and on the recommendations
made by it, the Government vide G.O. No.272-HE of 2009 dated 03.12.2009 issued appointment
orders in favour of four selected candidates as Lecturer/Assistant Professor in Geography. It is
submitted by the original petitioner that the PSC issued another notification in the year 2014
bearing No. 12- PSC(DR-P) of 2014 dated 29.05.2014 for making selection against the vacancies of
Assistant Professors in different disciplines and amongst them 43 vacancies of Assistant Professor in
Geography were also notified for selection. The PSC having regard to horizontal reservation
provided for handicapped category, earmarked one vacancy for the aforesaid category. The selected
candidates including the person selected under PHC category, it is claimed, were appointed and the
select list was exhausted.
2.2. That PSC vide notification No.10-PSC(DR-P) of 2017 dated 27.10.2017, yet again invited
applications for the vacancies of Assistant Professor in Higher Education Department, which
included 10 posts of Assistant Professor in Geography with the following breakup:-
Open Merit : 04
RBA : 02
SC : 01
ST : 01
ALC : 01
SLC : 01
In addition, one vacancy under horizontal reservation for PHC category was also kept reserved.
2.3. The original petitioner participated in the aforesaid selection process and was shown as
candidate last selected under the open merit category (S.No.4) in the Provisional Select List issued
by the PSC vide notification nNo.03-PSC (DR-S) of 2021 dated 05.01.2021.
2.4. It is stated that the mistake committed by the PSC in keeping one vacancy reserved for PHC
candidate was, accordingly, rectified while issuing Provisional Select List. Apprehending that with a
view to give effect to the advertisement notification, the PSC may rectify the provisional select list
and dislodge him, giving benefit of horizontal reservation meant for PHC to the private repsondent,
the original writ petitioner approached the CAT seeking inter alia a direction to the PSC to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114374320/ 2
J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others on 24 February, 2023
de-reserve one post/vacancy of Assistant Professor in Geography earmarked for PHC category, as
the same was in violation of the Government Order No.62-SW of 2001 dated 13.03.2001 and the
Reservation Rules. The original petitioner also prayed for a direction to the respondents not to
disturb him from the select list wherein her name figured at Serial No.4 under open merit category.
2.5. The claim of the original petitioner was primarily based on his contention that after the
enactment of Jammu & Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004 and the Rules of 2005 framed thereunder,
the first process of selection for filling up the vacancies of Assistant Professor in Geography in
Higher Education Department was undertaken in the year 2007 when three vacancies were notified
and filled up. Again in the year 2009, four more posts/vacancies were advertised and filled up. In
the year 2014, PSC notified 43 fresh vacancies of Assistant Professors in Geography, in which one of
the posts was kept reserved for horizontal reservation of PHC. It is claimed that from the year 2007,
till issuance of advertisement notification of 2017, the respondents had consumed 50 vacancies and
had, thus, reached the roster point 50 and the next vacancy under horizontal reservation for PHC
was to be provided at S.No.67. It was submitted that since only 10 posts were notified in the year
2017, which took the selection/appointment to the roster point 60 and, therefore, there was no
warrant to earmark one out of ten posts for PHC category. Strong reliance was placed by the original
petitioner on Government Order No.62-SW of 2001 dated 13.03.2001 wherein for the purposes of
granting horizontal reservation in favour of PHC category, three blocks have been created i.e. 1 to
33; 34 to 67 and 68 to
100. It is on the basis of the provisions of aforesaid Government Order, it was contended by the
original petitioner that next vacancy would fall to the share of PHC category at roster point No.67
i.e. when seven more vacancies are notified in future.
3. The petition was contested both, by PSC as well as private respondent.
Stand of the PSC 3.1 Precise and concise stand of the PSC is that the indenting department i.e.
Department of Higher Education referred only 10 vacancies of Assistant Professors in the discipline
of Geography providing further that one post shall be filled up from PHC category, which, as per the
reservation rules, is entitled to 3% horizontal reservation. The original petitioner, private
respondent and other eligible candidates participated in the selection process, which was set in
motion by the PSC vide advertisement No.10-PSC(DR-P) of 2017 dated 27.10.2017.
3.2 On the basis of performance of candidates in the interview and other related parameters, the
select list was notified vide Notification No.03-PSC(DR-S) of 2021 dated 05.01.2021. It was also
submitted by the PSC that though, one post was specifically earmarked for PHC category but while
preparing the provisional select list, the candidature of PHC candidates was
erroneously/inadvertently not considered and as a consequence whereof, the original petitioner
came to be shown as last selected candidate in the open merit. When this error was noticed by the
PSC, the matter was got re-examined and it was found that private respondent Mr. Rauf Ahmad
Dar, who happens to be a PHC/OM category have secured 50.32 was supposed to be selected against
the 4th vacancy earmarked under the open merit. Consequently, the original petitioner i.e. the last
selected candidate in the open merit category was sought to be replaced by PHC/OM candidate i.e.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114374320/ 3
J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others on 24 February, 2023
by private respondent. It is, thus, submitted that the select list in which the name of original
petitioner appeared was only provisional and nothing prevented the PSC to rectify its mistake,
which it had inadvertently committed.
3.3 Going beyond its brief, the PSC in its reply affidavit also sought to explain the legal position
viz-a-viz the application of roster for horizontal reservation meant for specially abled candidates
(PHC). It was submitted by the PSC that even if the claim of the original petitioner is admitted to be
correct that after promulgation of reservation rules only 60 vacancies have been notified for
selection and appointment as Assistant Professor in the discipline of Geography, yet the second
vacancy meant for PHC would fall in the 2 nd block between 34 to 67. The PSC appears to have
suggested that with a view to give horizontal reservation meant for PHC category, the first vacancy
in the blocks created under Government Order No.62-SW of 2001 is required to be earmarked for
PHC category. The PSC seems to have derived support from the view taken by Hon'ble the Supreme
Court in the case of Union of India and another v. National Federation of the Blind, 2013 (10) SCC
772.
4. Stand of the Higher Education Department (respondent No.2 herein) 4.1. The Department of
Higher Education in its affidavit filed through Additional Secretary has not clearly and
unequivocally refuted the contention of the original petitioner that after the promulgation of the
Reservation Rules, the department has so far filled up only 60 vacancies including 10 vacancies in
contention in these petitions. It is, however, submitted that since 3% horizontal reservation is meant
for handicapped (PHC) category, as such, while notifying ten vacancies in the year 2017, one
vacancy was identified to be filled up from the said category and that there is no violation of
Government Order No.62-SW of 2001 or the Reservation Rules. The Department of Higher
Education has not made any attempt or effort to explain the manner in which the reservation roster
including roster meant for PHC category has been adhered to.
5. Reply affidavit of the private respondent and the stand taken therein.
5.1. While replicating the stand of the PSC and the department of Higher Education, the private
respondent in his reply affidavit has submitted that since one vacancy was specifically earmarked for
PHC category, therefore, private respondent, a candidate belonging to PHC category with highest
merit was entitled to be adjusted under the open merit. The PSC, which had not applied the
reservation roster while preparing the provisional select list, corrected its mistake so as to bring its
select list in tune with the requisition made by the Higher Education Department and the
advertisement notification issued by it. It is, thus, contended that by earmarking one vacancy under
horizontal reservation for PHC category, the official respondents have only complied with and
followed the mandate of Reservation Act and the Rules framed thereunder.
5.2 The private respondent in its reply affidavit has taken serious exception to the conduct of the
original petitioner, who had remained silent when advertisement notification was issued and raked
up the issue only when he apprehended that he may have to give way to adjust a physically
challenged person for which one vacancy stood earmarked in the advertisement notification itself.
Arguments
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114374320/ 4
J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others on 24 February, 2023
6. From a reading of the impugned judgment, it transpires that the learned counsel appearing for
their respective clients primarily rallied around their stand taken by them in their respective reply
affidavits. The CAT considered the entire matter in light of the rival contentions and having regard
to various provisions of the Jammu & Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004 ["Reservation Act"] and the
Jammu & Kashmir Reservation Rules, 2005 ["Reservation Rules"] framed thereunder as also the
provisions of Government Order No.62-SW of 2001 dated 13.03.2001 came to the conclusion that
there was substance in the plea of the original petitioner that next vacancy for PHC category was to
be offered at roster point 67 and that the selection and appointment to the vacancies of Assistant
Professor in the discipline of Geography had reached only upto 60 point and, therefore, no vacancy
for the PHC category was required to be earmarked for PHC category. Upholding the contention of
the original petition and rejecting the plea of the official respondents as well as private respondent,
CAT allowed the OA and issued directions referred to herein above vide its judgment impugned
dated 03.02.2022. It is this judgment of the CAT, which is assailed before us by the PSC as well as
private respondent on various grounds.
7. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, we are of the
considered opinion that the decision of these two petitions hinges on determination of following
points:-
i) Whether original petitioner being fully aware that one vacancy in the discipline of
Geography, as per the advertisement notification No.10-PSC(DR-P) of 2017 dated
27.10.2017, was earmarked for PHC category under horizontal reservation and
having participated in the selection is estopped by his conduct to later on claim that
no vacancy under horizontal reservation for PHC category could have been
earmarked in the advertisement notification?
ii) Whether with a view to give effect to 3% horizontal reservation meant for PHC
category, the first vacancy in each of the three blocks created under Government
Order No.62-SW of 2001 dated 13.03.2001 is required to be earmarked or that the
three vacancies meant for PHC category are to be earmarked at roster point No.33, 67
and 100?
iii) Whether the appointing authority/indenting department under the Reservation
Rules and the provisions of Government Order No.62-SW of 2001 has the flexibility
or discretion in earmarking any of the vacancy in the block for PHC category?
Point No.(i)
8. We have noticed the stand of the PSC as well as Higher Education Department and the private
respondent before the CAT. The PSC as well as the Department of Higher Education have not
questioned the conduct of the petitioner in any manner. However, private respondent in his reply
affidavit as taken an exception to the conduct of the original petitioner, who, after having
participated in the selection process and being fully aware that one vacancy out of the notified
vacancies was earmarked for PHC category under 3% horizontal reservation, had chosen to file
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114374320/ 5
J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others on 24 February, 2023
petition only when the private respondent was sought to be adjusted against the vacancy meant for
PHC candidate.
9. It was submitted before the CAT and argued before us that the original petitioner is disentitled by
his conduct to raise such plea after the selection process was about to be concluded. The original
petitioner, it is contended by Mr. R.A.Jan, learned senior counsel representing the private
respondent, never questioned the advertisement notification which unequivocally earmarked one
vacancy for PHC by way of 3% horizontal reservation. In the OA also, he has not challenged the
advertisement notice, but has only sought a direction to de-reserve the vacancy earmarked for PHC
category, which course is not permissible in law.
10. Per contra, Mr. Abhinav Sharma, learned senior counsel appearing for the original petitioner
submitted that since four vacancies were earmarked for the open merit category and one post
separately under horizontal reservation for PHC, it did not occur to the original petitioner to raise
the issue at the time of issuance of the advertisement notification or subsequently when the
selection was undertaken. He submits that no separate vacancy is required to be earmarked in the
advertisement notification for giving effect to horizontal reservation. Dwelling upon applicability of
the roster, Mr. Sharma submits that the PSC vide its notification issued in the year 2017
misrepresented that apart from ten vacancies notified under different categories, one vacancy was
also reserved for the handicapped category. It was only when the original petitioner came to know
that candidate selected under PHC category was to be adjusted in open merit, that too, by dislodging
the original petitioner, he got cause of action to raise his grievance before the competent Court of
law. He submits that it is in these special circumstances, the original petitioner filed the OA before
the CAT.
11. We have given our anxious consideration to the rival contentions. It is true that a selecting body
is not supposed to earmark a vacancy separately for making selection from the reserved
category(ies) entitled to horizontal reservation. It is sufficient for the selection body to say that with
a view to give effect to horizontal reservation one or more vacancy out of the notified vacancies shall
be filled up from the reserved categories under horizontal reservation.
12. In the instant case, the PSC has surely deviated from this principle and has in the advertisement
notification earmarked one vacancy to be filled up under horizontal reservation from the PHC
category. We will not be surprised, if some of the candidates misunderstood that this one vacancy
earmarked for PHC category is a vacancy notified in addition to the ten posts in terms of the
advertisement notification of 2017. We, however, cannot give our imprimatur to the contention of
Mr. Abhinav Sharma, learned senior counsel that the original petitioner had no cause of action to
challenge the advertisement notification. As per the case set up by the original petitioner in OA, the
second vacancy for PHC category was to be earmarked at roster point of 67 and the department of
High Education had only filled up 60 vacancies. One vacancy in the category of PHC, as per the
contention of the original petitioner, stood filled up in the year 2014. If that being the stated position
of the original petitioner, it is difficult to comprehend as to why the original petitioner kept mum
and raised no protest when one more vacancy came to be earmarked for PHC category in the
advertisement notification of 2017. Even the advertisement notification of 2017 was not subject
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114374320/ 6
J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others on 24 February, 2023
matter of challenge before the CAT, though, the original petitioner had prayed for de- reserving one
vacancy kept reserved for PHC category.
13. Indisputably, original petitioner has participated in the selection process and taken a chance. It
is only when he came to be placed at the bottom of the open merit list and was to be dislodged by the
PHC category candidate belonging to open merit, he thought of filing the petition. This aspect,
though, highlighted by the private respondent in his reply affidavit has missed the consideration of
the CAT. The explanation tendered by the original petitioner before this Court for not preferring
writ petition immediately after the advertisement notification was issued is totally illusory and
without any substance.
14. Whether or not the reservation roster was correctly applied; whether or not any vacancy was
available for the category of physically handicapped are the questions which cannot be permitted to
be raised or considered by the Court after the conclusion of the selection process . The right to be
selected and appointed has accrued to the private respondent strictly, as per the requisition given by
the indenting department and the advertisement notification issued by the PSC. There is no dispute
that the private respondent is a candidate with highest merit in the PHC/open category and his
name for selection is required to be considered against one vacancy earmarked for the purposes.
15. Since the private respondent belongs to the general category and, therefore, he would eat away
the last candidate selected under the open merit category. Unfortunately, the original petitioner is
the last candidate selected under open merit and, therefore, it is the mandate of law that he gives
way to the candidate entitled under horizontal reservation i.e. private respondent belonging to
PHC/OM category. The PSC has done nothing wrong by correcting its mistake and considering the
candidature of the private respondent in place of the original petitioner, moreso, when no right had
accrued to the original petitioner by her mere placement in the provisional select list.
16. In the case of Anupal Singh and others vs. State of Uttar Pradesh, (2020) 2 SCC 173, one of the
issues before the Hon'ble Supreme Court was whether the private respondents before it, who had
participated in the interview, could challenge the Office Memorandum dated 12.10.2014 and the
selection. The issue had arisen in the context of similar fact situation as we are confronted with in
the case on hand. The Hon'ble Supreme Court, after referring to catena of judgments on the issue,
held that it is a settled law that a person having consciously participated in the interview cannot turn
around and challenge the selection process. The private respondents knew that by the revised
notification dated 12.10.2014, the number of vacancies of different categories have been changed
and knowing the same, they participated in the interview and have taken a chance and opportunity
thereon without any protest. Having participated in the interview and having failed in the final
selection, it is not open to the private respondents to turn around and challenge the revised
notification dated 12.10.2014 and the revised requisition of a number of vacancies in different
categories.
17 The discussion on the issue is made in paras (55) to (61) of the judgment which, for facility of
reference, is set out below:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114374320/ 7
J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others on 24 February, 2023
"55. Having participated in the interview, the private respondents cannot challenge
the Office Memorandum dated 12.10.2014 and the selection. On behalf of the
appellants, it was contended that after the revised notification dated 12.10.2014, the
private respondents participated in the interview without protest and only after the
result was announced and finding that they were not selected, the private
respondents chose to challenge the revised notification dated 12.10.2014 and the
private respondents are estopped from challenging the selection process. It is a
settled law that a person having consciously participated in the interview cannot turn
around and challenge the selection process.
56. Observing that the result of the interview cannot be challenged by a candidate
who has participated in the interview and has taken the chance to get selected at the
said interview and ultimately, finds himself to be unsuccessful, in Madan Lal and
Others v. State of J&K and Others (1995) 3 SCC 486, it was held as under:-
"9. ..... The petitioners also appeared at the oral interview conducted by the Members
concerned of the Commission who interviewed the petitioners as well as the
contesting respondents concerned. Thus the petitioners took a chance to get
themselves selected at the said oral interview. Only because they did not find
themselves to have emerged successful as a result of their combined performance
both at written test and oral interview, they have filed this petition. It is now well
settled that if a candidate takes a calculated chance and appears at the interview,
then, only because the result of the interview is not palatable to him, he cannot turn
round and subsequently contend that the process of interview was unfair or the
Selection Committee was not properly constituted. ....."
57. In K.H. Siraj v. High Court of Kerala and Others (2006) 6 SCC 395, it was held as under:-
"73. The appellant-petitioners having participated in the interview in this
background, it is not open to the appellant-petitioners to turn round thereafter when
they failed at the interview and contend that the provision of a minimum mark for
the interview was not proper."
58. In Union of India and Others v. S. Vinodh Kumar and Others (2007) 8 SCC 100, it was held as
under:-
"19. In Chandra Prakash Tiwari v. Shakuntala Shukla (2002) 6 SCC 127, it was
further observed:-
"34. There is thus no doubt that while question of any estoppel by conduct would not
arise in the contextual facts but the law seem to be well settled that in the event a
candidate appears at the interview and participates therein, only because the result of
the interview is not „palatable(cid:129) to him, he cannot turn round and subsequently
contend that the process of interview was unfair or there was some lacuna in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114374320/ 8
J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others on 24 February, 2023
process."
59.Same principle was reiterated in Sadananda Halo and Others v. Momtaz Ali Sheikh and Others
(2008) 4 SCC 619 wherein, it was held as under:-
"59. It is also a settled position that the unsuccessful candidates cannot turn back and
assail the selection process. There are of course the exceptions carved out by this
Court to this general rule. This position was reiterated by this Court in its latest
judgment in Union of India v. S. Vinodh Kumar (2007) 8 SCC 100. The Court also
referred to the judgment in Om Prakash Shukla v. Akhilesh Kumar Shukla 1986 Supp
SCC 285, where it has been held specifically that when a candidate appears in the
examination without protest and subsequently is found to be not successful in the
examination, the question of entertaining the petition challenging such examination
would not arise."
60. Before the declaration of the result of the written examination on 15.09.2014, the State
Government by its Government order dated 20.08.2014 revised the requisition thereby revising the
number of vacancies in different categories. UP Public Service Commission issued Office
Memorandum dated 12.10.2014 specifically mentioning the number of vacancies to be filled up in
various categories in accordance with the requisition sent by the State Government. The said Office
Memorandum dated 12.10.2014 published by UP Public Service Commission reads as under:-
"UPPSC INTERVIEW PROGRAMME Month October/November/December, 2014
(24) OFFICE MEMORANDUM
98. Post Subordinate Agricultural Service Class III (Provisional Asstt. Group C)
Agricultural Deptt. U.P. October - 27, 28, 29, 30 Reservation November - 05, 07, 10,
11, 12 2515 posts-Non-reserved 14 15, 17,18,19,20,21,22,25,26 1882 posts - SC 27, 28,
29 201 posts - ST December - 01, 02, 03, 04, 05,06 2030 posts - OBC 08, 09, 10, 11,
12, 15, 16,17, 18,19 Pay Scale Rs.5200-20200/- 20, 22, 23, 24, 2014 Grade Pay
Rs.2400/- Before 10.00 a.m. Advertisement No.A-5/E-1/2013 Last Date: 21.11.2013
It is thus clear that the candidates who appeared in the interview were well aware
about the modification/revision in number of vacancies of Technical Assistants in
different categories. The private respondents/intervening applicants have appeared
in the interview with their eyes wide open regarding the modified vacancies to be
filled up in various categories of the posts. Having appeared in the interview without
any demur or protest, it is not open to the candidates to challenge the selection
process on the ground that there was modification in the number of vacancies in
different categories and they are estopped by the principle of estoppel from
challenging the same.
61. The private respondents knew that by the revised notification dated 12.10.2014, the number of
vacancies of different categories have been changed and knowing the same, they participated in the
interview and have taken a chance and opportunity thereon without any protest. Having
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114374320/ 9
J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others on 24 February, 2023
participated in the interview and having failed in the final selection, it is not open to the private
respondents to turn around and challenge the revised notification dated 12.10.2014 and the revised
requisition of the number of vacancies in different categories. Having regard to the consistent view
taken by the Supreme Court, the High Court should not have granted any relief to the private
respondents/intervenors.
18. We are aware that Rule of Estoppel, particularly, in the matter of recruitment, is not absolute
and is differentiated where a candidate by agreeing to participate in the selection process only
accepts the prescribed procedure and not the illegality in it. In a case where a candidate, who has
participated in the selection process, alleges misconstruction of statutory rules and discriminating
consequences arising therefrom, the same cannot be ignored merely because a candidate has taken
part in the selection process. In many cases, it is possible that a candidate may not have even locus
to assail the incurable illegality or violation of any provision of the Constitution, unless he/she
participates in the selection process. This is so held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Dr.
Meeta Sahai vs. State of Bihar and others, (2019) SCC 17. Except for the aforesaid exceptions and the
exceptions of the similar nature, a candidate, who acquiesces in the procedure and the terms and
conditions of selection, cannot be allowed to turn around later to throw challenge to the selection
only after he finds the result of selection not palatable. The issue was recently considered by the
Supreme Court in the case of State of Uttar Pradesh vs. Karunesh Kumar and others, 2022 SCC
Online SC 1706. Placing strong reliance on Anupal Singh's case, the Supreme Court has reiterated
the same principle. Para (20) and relevant extract of Para (21) is reproduced hereunder:
"20. We have already placed the relevant rules and considered their import. Clause
15(1) of the 1978 Rules deals with a Selection Committee, while we are concerned
with the recruitment made by the Selection Commission statutorily created by an
enactment, the 2014 Act. Under the 1978 Rules, no written examination was
contemplated as against a mere interview. This was consciously given a go-by, to the
knowledge of the candidates who willingly participated in the selection process by
taking the written examination, and thereafter, the interview. This process was
adopted in tune with the 2015 Rules, and in terms of the powers conferred to the
Commission under the 2014 Act. Therefore, the 1978 Rules are put into cold storage
qua a selection even at the time of conducting the written examination.
21. A candidate who has participated in the selection process adopted under the 2015
Rules is estopped and has acquiesced himself from questioning it thereafter, as held
by this Court in the case of Anupal Singh (supra):
........................................................................
........................................................................
........................................................................
19 From the above, the legal position is clear that, a candidate, who has participated in the selection
process, shall be deemed to have acquiesced in the terms and conditions of selection laid down in
the Advertisement Notification and is, thus, estopped from questioning it thereafter. The original
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114374320/ 10
J&K Public Service Commission vs Tajinder Kour And Others on 24 February, 2023
petitioner was well aware that one of the vacancies notified for selection was earmarked for PHC
category and if the selected PHC candidate happens to be the general category candidate, he/she
would eat away the candidate last selected under the open merit category. The petitioner kept quite
and allowed the process to proceed. It is true that because of his merit, the original petitioner came
to be placed at the bottom of the general category/open merit list. Since the private respondent was
PHC/general candidate with highest merit in the category of PHC, as such, he was to be necessarily
adjusted against the last vacancy meant for open merit category which, in the provisional list, was
occupied by the original petitioner. Simply because the original petitioner could not visualize such
eventuality which otherwise was most likely if not inevitable, he cannot be permitted to assail the
selection of private respondent whose selection is in complete conformity with the requisition as
well as the Advertisement notification issued by the PSC.
20 In view of the above, determination of other points/questions becomes purely academic, as such,
these questions are left open to be determined in appropriate proceedings. Accordingly, these
petitions are allowed and, accordingly, the judgment impugned dated 03.02.2022 passed by the
CAT is set aside. Consequently, OA No. 61/234/2021 is dismissed. The PSC shall proceed to finalize
the selection in accordance with law.
Record be returned back to the learned counsel appearing for the PSC.
(Puneet Gupta) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
JAMMU
24 .02.2023
Vinod,PS
Whether the order is speaking : Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114374320/ 11
