J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And
Others on 8 June, 2023
Author: N. Kotiswar Singh
Bench: Chief Justice, Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
Reserved on: 14.03.2023
Pronounced on: 08.06.2023
LPA No.1/2019
J&K Board of School Education through
its Secretary. ...Appellant.
Through: Ms. Aruna Thakur, Advocate.
Vs.
Nirmala Devi and others. ....Respondents
Through: Mr. Abhinav Sharma, Sr. Advocate, with Ms. Supriya Gandotra, Advocate.
J&K Board of School Education through its Secretary. ...Appellant.
Through: Ms. Aruna Thakur, Advocate.
Vs. Pawan Singh and others. ....Respondents Through: Mr. Abhinav Sharma, Sr. Advocate, with Ms.
Supriya Gandotra, Advocate.
Parvinder Kumar Lehria ...Appellant.
Through: Mr. Jasbir Singh Jasrotia, Advocate.
Vs. J&K State Board of School Education & Others ....Respondents Through: Ms. Aruna Thakur,
Advocate, for the Board.
Mr. Abhinav Sharma, Sr. Advocate, with Ms. Supriya Gandotra, Advocate, for private respondents.
Parvinder Kumar Lehria ...Appellant.
Through: Mr. Jasbir Singh Jasrotia, Advocate.
Vs.
J&K State Board of School Education & another. ....Respondents
Through: Ms. Aruna Thakur, Advocate, for the Board.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 1
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
(N. Kotiswar Singh, CJ)
01. The three Letters Patent Appeals, LPA Nos. 1 of 2019, 2 of 2019 and 79 of 2019 which have been
preferred against the common judgment and order dated 24.10.2018 passed in the writ petitions,
being SWP Nos. 367/2013 and 157/2016, are tagged together and heard and disposed by this
common judgment.
LPA Nos. 1 of 2019 and 2 of 2019 have been preferred by the Jammu and Kashmir Board of School
Education whereas, the other LPA No. 79 of 2019 has been preferred by one Parvinder Kumar
Lehria who initially challenged successfully the appointment of the present private respondents as
Desk Job Workers on consolidated basis in the Jammu and Kashmir Board of Secondary Education.
02. Parvinder Kumar Lehria, appellant in LPA No.79/2019, has also preferred a writ petition, being
SWP No.2631/2017 which has been tagged with these LPAs, in view of the fact that relief claimed in
the writ petition is co-related with the issues raised and relief claimed in the three LPAs. In this writ
petition, the petitioner-Parvinder Kumar Lehria, is seeking a direction upon the respondents to
finalise the select list for the post of Desk Job Workers in J&K State Board of School Education
which were advertised vide Employment notice no.F(Admn- B)CU/13 which is the subject matter of
aforesaid three LPAs(cid:128), and to appoint him as Desk Job Worker claiming to be the most eligible and
meritorious candidate and restraining the respondents from engaging any other person against the
said posts.
03. The aforesaid two writ petitions SWP Nos. 367/2013 and 157/2016 out of which the present
three Letters Patent Appeals have arisen, were allowed by the Ld. Single Judge vide impugned
common judgment and order dated 24.10.2018 holding that the writ petitioners, the present private
respondent Nos. 3 to 8 herein, shall be deemed to have been engaged afresh on consolidated basis in
their respective jobs with effect from 08.11.2011. Further, the Ld. Single Judge also held that the writ
petitioners were entitled to regularization of their services in terms of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil
Services (Special Provisions) Act, 2010 on completion of 7 years services to be reckoned with effect
from 8.11.2011 with all consequential benefits.
04. The grievance of the appellant-Parvinder Kumar Lehria in LPA No.79 of 2019 is not confined
only to the aforesaid common judgment dated 24.10.2018, and it can be traced back to the year
2004 when he successfully challenged the engagement of these private respondents as Desk Job
workers by the Jammu and Kashmir State Board of School Education (for short the „Board') on
consolidated pay for a period of 60 days which was extendable from time to time depending on the
need and satisfactory performance, by filing the writ petition, SWP No. 1520 of 2004, primarily on
the ground that their appointments were arbitrary, improper and were hastily made by the then
Chairman of the Board just six days before his retirement, thus vitiated by favouritism and undue
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 2
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
influence.
05. The learned Single Judge in the aforesaid writ petition, SWP No. 1520 of 2004 after hearing all
the parties and considering the materials on record made available before the Court, took a very
dismal view of the manner in which the appointments were made, casting serious doubts on the
fairness and transparency of the recruitment process and, accordingly, held that their appointments
were unjustified and unwarranted and consequently, directed discontinuance of their engagement
within a period of one month and to hold a fresh selection for engagement of persons for the Desk
Job workers by ensuring fair and transparency in the selection on the basis of merit and suitability
in accordance with the Rules, Regulations or Instructions governing such engagements.
06. In order to properly appreciate the serious concern and opprobrium by the Ld. Single Judge in
SWP No. 1520 of 2004 regarding the irregularities and lapses and lack of transparency in the
recruitment process by which the private respondents came to be engaged, we are of the view that it
would be more appropriate if the observations and the conclusions arrived at by the Ld. Single
Judge in the aforesaid writ petition are reproduced in the words of the Ld. Single Judge.
The Ld. Single Judge noted the lack of any criteria to assess the merit of the candidates in the
following words.
" I have heard learned counsel for the parties and gone through the selection record
of the Board of School Education which was made available at the time of hearing of
this petition.
Perusal of the selection record of the Board of School Education indicates that
interview for engagement of persons for Desk and Menial Jobs had been conducted
by a Committee constituted of M/s. H. K. Gupta, Joint Secretary Administration, I. K.
Kotwal, Accounts Officer and Chand Rani, Joint Secretary Administration,
on26th/28th of February, 2004 when out of 103 candidates applying for the Desk
Job and 300 candidates applying for the Menial Jobs, only87 had appeared for the
Desk Job and 230 for the Menial Jobs. The selection records contain a copy of order
No. 483-B of 2004 dated 23rdof June, 2004, a note sheet shown to have been signed
on 10th of June,2004 and an unsigned list of candidates who had applied for the
Desk/Menial Jobs in the Board of School Education with some notings on this list of
24th of February, 2004.
There is nothing in the records to indicate as to how the Committee had assessed the
merit of the candidates who had appeared before the Committee on 26th and 28th of
February, 2004. The Board of School Education does not appear to have prepared
any criteria for selection of candidates for the Desk and Menial Jobs. It is not
discernable from the records as to how the selection Committee would recollect the
individual rating of the candidates who had appeared in the interview on 26th and
28th of February, 2004 on 10th ofJune, 2004 i.e. after a period of more than three
months when they had prepared a note for its onward transmission to the retiring
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 3
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
Chairman of the Board of School Education."
07. The learned Single Judge also observed that there were excessive appointments made from the
Jammu District by making all the appointments from Jammu District except only one from Poonch
District, without indicating how these candidates were better in merit from other candidates, thus
showing lack of fairness and transparency, as evident from the following observation.
"The records of the Board of School Education depict a dismal picture indicating an
unfair approach of the Board and its selection committee in playing with the
aspirations of those who had competed for the Desk Job and Menial Jobs pursuant to
issuance of Notification dated 17.2.2004. The records of the Board of School
Education further demonstrate that the Board had exceeded the quota of posts which
were required to be filled up from the candidates belonging to Jammu District. Only
one candidate Ms. Shamma Bhat, respondentNo. 10, a resident of Poonch had been
selected whereas the candidates who had appeared from other Districts had been
ignored consideration for selection. I am thus constrained to hold that the selection
of private respondent Nos. 4 to 10 was unjustified for there is no records to indicate
their having been adjudged better in merit to the others who had competed in the
interview. Approval accorded by respondent No. 3, the then Chairman of the Board of
School Education, who was at the verge of retirement too demonstrates that the
selection had been unfair.
Unfairness in any form whatsoever breads discontent, spreading outrageous and, at
times, rebellious ripples thereby polluting individual minds and ultimately affecting
the society adversely. Administrative Heads and Selection Authorities owe a duty to
the public to act fairly. Their actions are thus required to be transparent, fair and
objective. Decisions taken by the authorities at the verge of their retirement, are seen
with suspicion by the public. The authorities are, therefore, required to act in such a
manner that the confidence of public is not shaken in the Institutions which have to
decide about the recruitment of millions of unemployed youth in the Country.
08. The Ld. Single Judge also noted that though the engagements were meant to be a temporary one
for a period of 60 days, the private respondents were continuing in service for about 3 (three) years,
which the writ Court found unjustified and unwarranted, as observed below.
"Yet another thing which come up for discussion at the time of hearing of this
petition was that the respondent- Board of School of Education had been continuing
the engagements meant only for a transitory period of 60 days and it was admitted by
the learned counsel for the parties that the engagement of the private respondents
was still continuing.
This appears to be a device employed by the Board of School Education to continue
casual/temporary, engagements thereby sacrificing the Rules, Guidelines and
Instructions governing engagement of permanent, temporary or casual employees.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 4
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
Casual, adhoc or temporary engagements cannot be a substitute for regular
employment de hors the Rules in force governing such recruitment and
appointments. Casual, ad hoc or temporary engagements are permissible only for a
short period. These engagements, cannot be continued beyond the prescribed period
lest these engagements may deprive all those who may be entitled to seek permanent
employment to these positions in accordance with the Rules. Engagement of private
respondents beyond a period of 60 days too is this unjustified. Appointment order of
the private respondents incorporating a clause that their engagements would be
extendable on the basis of their satisfactory performance, was contrary to what was
contained in the Notification of the Board of School Education. This clause in the
impugned Notification is, therefore, un-warranted.
09. Accordingly, the Ld. Single Judge issued the following directions for disengaging the private
respondents and for initiating a fresh recruitment process.
"For all what has been said above, while holding the selection of private respondents
for their engagements for Desk Job and their appointments as such, extendable on
the basis of their satisfactory performance of duties, to be unjustified and un-
warranted. I, would, direct the Jammu and Kashmir State Board of School Education
to discontinue the engagement of private respondent Nos. 4 to 10 within a period of
one month and to hold fresh selection for engagement of persons for the Desk Job
during this period ensuring fair and transparent selection on the basis of merit and
suitability in accordance with the Rules, Regulations or Instructions governing such
engagements. Petitioner shall also be entitled to consideration in the fresh selection
for such engagement and if found fit and suitable, the Competent authority shall
consider relaxing his age if he was found to be overaged at the time of selection and
appointment.
The writ petition is disposed of accordingly."
10. Naturally, being aggrieved by the aforesaid decision of the Writ Court in the judgment and order
dated 10.04.2007 in the aforesaid SWP No. 1520/2004 disengaging the private respondents from
service, they preferred two Letters Patent Appeals being LPA No. 61 of 2007 and LPA No. 64 of
2007 which were clubbed and heard together and disposed of vide a common judgment dated
11.10.2010. The Division Bench dismissed the aforesaid appeals in view of the seriousness of
irregularities and lack of transparency in the recruitment process.
11. The Division Bench in the aforesaid decision dated 11.10.2010 observed that in a selection
process the Administrative Authorities are duty bound to demonstrate administrative fair play,
transparency, fairness, and that objectivity must reflect in every action in the selection process so
that the confidence of the pubic in those Institutions is not eroded. Due to absence of fair and
transparent actions in the selection to the posts of Desk Job, the Division Bench unhesitatingly
opined that there was no cogent ground to disturb the impugned judgment, thus upheld the decision
of the Ld. Single Judge in the aforesaid writ petition, SWP No. 1520 of 2004.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 5
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
12. The Division Bench was also of the view that the selection was not transparent and fair, but
slightly modified the directions issued by the Ld. Single Judge by extending the time frame for
having the fresh appointments by another three months and granted interim relief to the said
appellants present private respondents by directing that till such fresh selection is made, the private
respondents shall not be disengaged. This continuance in engagement can not by any means
considered to be giving a stamp of approval to their initial appointment, which were declared illegal,
but only as a stop gap arrangement so that there is no void in the service which were required by the
Board. Thus, no benefit or advantage can be said to be given to them by virtue of this interim
arrangement inasmuch as the illegality attached to their initial appointment does not get wiped out
by the interim protection granted to them.
13. Thus, from the above, it is quite evident that the process by which the present private
respondents were engaged as Desk Job workers on consolidated basis in 2004, was found to be not
fair, arbitrary and without any transparency because of which their engagements were directed to be
discontinued and that the authorities were required to initiate a fresh recruitment process for
engagement of the Desk Job Workers on consolidate basis. Unfortunately, inspite of such directions
issued by the learned Single Judge, which were reiterated by the Division Bench in the aforesaid two
appeals, the Board for reasons best known to it, did not initiate any process for fresh recruitment.
However, subsequently, only in the year 2013, after about 3 years of the dismissal of the letters
patent appeals in 2010 and after filing a contempt petition for implementation of the order of the
writ court (Contempt (SWP) No. 65 of 2011), a fresh advertisement was issued on 09.02.2013 for
appointment/ engagement as Desk Job workers on consolidated basis in which ten posts each for
Jammu and Kashmir Divisions respectively were notified vide Notification No. F(Adm-B)CU/13
dated 09.02.2013.
14. Pursuant to the said advertisement issued in 2013, the appellant-Parvinder Kumar Lehria again
applied for the said advertised posts, for which the written test was belatedly conducted on
10.02.2016 in which the appellant qualified and was called for interview which was held on
28.04.2016.
15. According to the appellant-Parveen Kumar Lehria, while he was expecting the results of the said
recruitment process to be declared, in the meantime, the private respondents approached the writ
Court by filing two writ petitions being SWP Nos. 367/2013 and 157/2016 challenging the
Advertisement issued on 09.02.2013 and notice dated 22.01.2016 calling the candidates for written
test in terms of the aforesaid Advertisement dated 09.02.2013.
16. In SWP Nos. 367/2013 the private respondents while challenging the advertisement issued on
09.02.2013 sought regularisation of their services, and in SWP No. 157/2016, the notice issued on
22.01.2016 calling for written was challenged contending, inter alia, that the same is contrary to the
mandate of judgment passed in SWP No. 1520/2004 and LPA Nos. 61 and 64 of 2007 and seeking
directions to allow them to serve at the respective places of posting till fresh selection is made in
terms of the directions issued in the above case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 6
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
17. It may be observed that in the said two writ petitions filed by the private respondents, the
present appellant was not impleaded as a party, though he was instrumental in challenging the
appointments of the private respondents and seeking quashing of their appointments, and for
initiating a fresh recruitment process, and the private respondents were very much aware of the
locus standi of the appellant-Parvinder Kumar Lehria in the recruitment process.
18. Be that as it may, the Ld. Single Judge after referring to the background of the case and
directions issued in the earlier writ petition, SWP No. 1520 of 2004 and the Letters Patent Appeals,
LPASW No. 64 of 2007 and LPASW No. 61 of 2007, was of the view that the Board authorities could
not have resorted to fresh selection process once again for making temporary engagements for a
transitory period of 60 days with the provision for extension subject to satisfactory performance of
the incumbents. The Ld. Single Judge was of the view that the Board ought to have conducted the
recruitment process for filling up the posts on regular basis and not for temporary period and
accordingly, held that the employment notice, consequential actions were contrary to and in
violation of the Division Bench judgment dated 11.10.2010 passed in the two Letters Patent Appeals.
19. The Ld. Single Judge was also of the view that as the Board respondent had not complied with
the directions of the Division Bench for making recruitment on regular basis and instead proceeded
to make recruitment on temporary basis again, the Board had created a situation where the private
respondents have been continuing for the last fourteen years and consequently, most of them have
become overaged for Government employment and as such, the Court cannot remain a mute
spectator to injustice perpetrated and that they deserve to be regularized by observing and
concluding in the following words.
"11. Be that as it is, the respondents have not complied with the Division Bench
judgment dated 11.10.2010 till date and have rather acted contrary thereto. They have
not come up with any advertisement notification to make the regular selection but
have resorted to the device of regularizing the services of temporary and consolidated
workers. By their sheer neglect and by not complying with the directions issued by
the Division Bench to undertake and complete the selection within three months, the
respondents have created a situation where the petitioners have been continued in
their engagements for the last fourteen years. Resultantly most of them have by now
become overaged for Government employment. Had the respondents initiated the
fresh process of selection within the time stipulated by the Division Bench, the
petitioners would have, at least, got the opportunity to compete and who knows,
maybe all or some of them would have been selected. In such situation and in the
circumstances narrated above, this Court cannot afford to be mute spectator to the
injustice perpetrated on the petitioners and is of considered view that substantial
justice in the matter can only be done through innovative interpretative process. It is,
thus, held that failure of the respondents to adhere to the time schedule fixed by the
Division Bench for conducting selection process has given new dimension to the
rights of the petitioners. The continuation of the petitioners beyond the period of
three months fixed by the Division Bench for making regular selection, would,
therefore, be deemed to be a fresh engagement. That being so, the petitioners are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 7
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
entitled to be considered for regularization of their services in terms of the provisions
of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Special Provisions) Act, 2010 on
completion of seven years of their services. 12.
12. For the forgoing reasons, these writ petitions are allowed. The petitioners shall be
deemed to have been engaged afresh on consolidated basis with effect from
08.01.2011 i.e. immediately on the expiry of three months from the date of Division
Bench judgment dated 11.10.2010 (supra) rendered in LPASW Nos. 64/2007 and
61/2007. The petitioners are also held entitled to regularization of their services in
terms of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Special Provisions) Act, 2010 on the
completion of seven years services to be reckoned with effect from 08.11.2011 with all
consequential benefits. Respondent-Board to consider the case of the petitioners as
directed hereinabove and pass appropriate orders of their regularization within a
period of two months from the date a certified copy of this judgment is made
available to the respondents. Respondent-Board shall also take into consideration
that persons similarly engaged as Desk Job Workers (some even engaged without any
selection process) have been regularized by the Board from time to time".
It is this order which has been challenged before us through these three Letters Patent Appeals.
20. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the materials on record.
21. Ld. Counsel for the appellant Board in LPA Nos. 1 of 2019 and 2 of 2019 submits that the initial
engagements of the private respondents were need based and not against clear vacancies and any
direction to regularize their services would be contrary to the directions issued in State of Karnataka
v. Umadevi (3), (2006) 4 SCC 1.
22. Ld. Counsel has further submitted that the initial engagement of private respondents were found
to be illegal as the writ Court held it to be lacking in transparency and directions were issued for
taking fresh steps for appointment by issuing public advertisement. It was submitted that the
purport of the judgment by the writ Court and the Division Bench in the two Letters Patent Appeals
was to conduct a fair and transparent selection process and no direction could have been issued to
regularize their services without availability of posts.
23. It has been also contended that the provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Special
Provisions) Act, 2010, hereinafter referred to as the "Act of 2010", are not applicable to the Jammu
and Kashmir Board of School Education and hence, the consideration of regularization of the
private respondents will be beyond the scope of the aforesaid Act of 2010.
24. Ld. Counsel for the appellant, Parveen Kumar Lehria in LPA No. 79 of 2019 also has submitted
in similar lines.
The Appellant-Parveen Kumar Lehria in LPA No. 79 of 2019, however, has laid great emphasis on
the fact that the engagements of the private respondents were found to be illegal because of lack of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 8
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
transparency and fairness by the Ld. Single Judge which was affirmed by the Division Bench, and a
such any direction to regularize their services would be contrary to the earlier decisions.
25. From the above contentions and records, we can draw the following conclusions.
(i) There is a judicial finding in SWP No. 1520 of 2004 that the appointments of private respondents
in 2004 were bad in law, due to lack of fairness, transparency in the recruitment process, and
accordingly directed their disengagement and proceed for fresh recruitment process, which was
affirmed by the Division Bench in the judgment and order passed in the Letters Patent Appeals,
LPASW No. 61 of 2007 and LPASW No. 64 of 2007.
(ii) If the impugned judgment dated 24.10.2018 passed in SWP No. 367 of 2013 and SWP No. 157 of
2016 directing regularization of the services of the private respondents which were found to be bad
in law is to be implemented, it would certainly be not in consonance with, rather, would be contrary
to the earlier judicial decisions referred to above.
(iii) The impugned judgment dated 24.10.2018 would have the effect of effacing the findings and
directions in SWP No. 1520 of 2004 which was affirmed by the Division Bench in LPASW No. 61 of
2007 and LPASW No. 64 of 2007.
(iv) The impugned order, thus, virtually amounts to reviewing and overruling the order passed by
the Writ Court in SWP No. 1520 of 2004 which was affirmed by the Division Bench in LPASW No.
61 of 2007 and LPASW No. 64 of 2007, which in our opinion would be impermissible.
(v) Since there is a judicial finding that the initial appointments of the private respondents are bad
in law, being arbitrary, unfair without any transparency, the very foundation on which the private
respondents has built the edifice of their appointments is intrinsically devoid of legal basis, hence,
continuation of their service, much less their regularization becomes untenable in law.
(vi) In our opinion, the defect in the initial appointment of the private respondents hits at the root of
their appointment, being based on favouritism, unreasonableness, lack of transparency, which
violates the mandate of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution and such defect is incurable as it has
the effect of destroying the very foundation of their appointments. The defect is not a mere
irregularity in the recruitment process which could be cured, as in the case of non-production of
certain documents or lack of experience, etc. which could be relaxed by the competent authority. But
the defects which were found by the writ court in the present case are of such nature that these could
not be condoned or relaxed. As such, these incurable defects could not have been overlooked. These
defects cannot be also erased by sheer passage of time.
(vii) In our opinion, if such defects were merely alleged, the matter would have been different. But
once these are judicially determined, passage of time cannot have the effect of erasing the same and
thus cannot be condoned. In our opinion, in the present case, the defect, judicially noticed and
determined, in addition to being incurable, will continue to afflict the private respondents. Only a
higher judicial forum perhaps could have the competence to nullify such defect, not by a Ld. Single
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 9
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
Judge.
(viii) The effect of the impugned order will be that, the private respondents who inspite of being
specifically directed to be disengaged because of the foundational defect in their appointment by a
judicial order of the Division Bench, would be deemed to be appointed with entitlement of
regularization, which in our view would be impermissible.
(ix) It would, in our view, also amount to giving a premium to the beneficiaries of arbitrary, illegal,
and unconstitutional acts of the Board merely because of passage of time. While we also understand
that the private respondents have rendered a long service, unfortunately, so is the unemployment of
the appellant for a long time who had been pursuing his claim to be considered for appointment
along with others in equal terms since 2004, and he had successfully challenged the illegal
appointments of the private respondents. Yet, all his efforts for equal treatment have remained
frustrated for a long period. If the private respondents have become overaged by this time and may
not get opportunity to seek appointment at this stage of life as observed by the Ld. Single Judge, so
is the case of the appellant Parveen Kumar Lehria in LPA No. 79 of 2019 and petitioner in SWP
No.2631/2017 who also has become overaged by now. The only difference between the
appellant-Parvinder Kumar Lehria and the private respondents is that Parvinder Kumar Lehria, is a
victim of an unfair selection process and the private respondents are the beneficiaries of an unfair
selection process. Since the private respondents are beneficiaries of an unfair selection process
specifically meant to benefit them, conferring further benefit of continuation in service and
regularization appears not to be fair to those who were unjustly left out from the competition.
(x) There is yet another aspect highlighted by the appellant Board, which is that there are no vacant
posts available for regular appointment of the private respondents. If that is so, regularization of
private respondents under the circumstances would require the creation of posts to accommodate
them. We are doubtful, whether the writ court could issue any such direction to the Board to
regularize their services without existence of regular vacancies, when they were directed to be
disengaged by judicial orders as their appointments were found to be illegal.
(xi) Under certain situations, when parties are victims of circumstances of illegal acts of the
authorities, extraordinary powers of the writ court could be invoked to mitigate any hardship caused
to such persons. But in the present case, the private respondents were not victims of circumstances
or unintended victims of illegal acts of the authority, but the illegal acts of the authority were
designed to benefit the private respondents as is clearly evident from the findings of the writ court
as well as the appellate court.
Under such circumstances, invoking extraordinary powers of the writ court to grant benefit to those
who were beneficiary of illegal acts of the authority intended to grant undue favour to them, by
obliterating adverse judicial findings of a higher forum does not appear to be an equitable and
legally permissible act on the part of the writ court.
(xii) We have also noted that the provisions of the Act of 2010 is not applicable to the Board as also
contended by the appellant Board. It has been mentioned under Section 3(c) of the Act of 2010 that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 10
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
the provisions of the Act are not applicable to non-governmental agencies, or autonomous bodies or
public sector undertakings, or government companies or other local authorities which have their
own rules and regulations governing their functioning.
Thus, unless the Act of 2010 is adopted by the Board, the provisions of the aforesaid Act of 2010 will
not be applicable.
(xiii) Even if the Board is directed to apply the provisions of the aforesaid Act of 2010, the same
cannot be applied unless the appointments made are on ad-hoc basis or contractual basis including
those appointed on consolidated pay, provided such appointments have been made against clear
vacancies as mentioned under Section 3 of the Act.
Section 3 of the Act of 2010 reads follows:
"3. Application of the Act:-- The provisions of this Act shall apply to such posts under
the Government as are held by any person having been appointed on ad hoc or
contractual basis including those appointed on consolidated pay provided such
appointments have been made against the clear vacancies, but shall not apply : -----
(a) persons appointed in terms of government order number 125 dash gad of 2001
dated one 2 2001on contract basis in the personal sections of the ministers or other
authorities enjoying the status of a minister;
(b) persons appointed on tenure posts court terminus with the life of the project or
scheme of the state or central government is a case may be n rows appointed on
academic arrangement for fixed term in any government department;
(c) non-governmental agencies or autonomous bodies or public sector undertakings
or corporations or government companies or societies or other local authorities
which have their own service rules and regulations governing their functioning;
(d) part time or seasonal employees including those wages are paid from out of the
local funds or contingent grants."
(emphasis added) Thus, from the above it is clear that, unless the appointments have been made
against clear vacancies, the provisions of the aforesaid Act of 2010 will not be applicable, and it is
the specific stand taken by the Board that the private respondents were not appointed against clear
vacancies. Hence, if the appointments of the private respondents were not made against clear
vacancies, obviously the provisions of the Act of 2010 cannot be made applicable, even if the Board
adopts a resolution to follow the Act.
(xiv) We are of the view that when the writ court in SWP No. 1520 of 2004 directed disengagement
of the private respondents and initiate a fresh recruitment process, the said direction was issued
primarily because the writ court found the recruitment process vitiated due to unfairness and lack of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 11
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
transparency in the recruitment process. However, we have not seen any specific direction by the
writ court to the effect that instead of making recruitment for a temporary period of 60 days on
consolidated pay, recruitment process be made for regular appointment. In fact, whether the
appointments should be made on regular basis or on consolidated basis, does not appear to be an
issue in the said writ proceeding.
(xv) The writ Court expressed dissatisfaction and observed that though the appointments were
meant for a transitory period of 60 days, the Board had been continuing the engagements, which
appears to be a device employed by the Board to continue casual/temporary engagements thereby
sacrificing the Rules, Guidelines and Instructions governing engagement of permanent/ temporary
or casual employees. It was also observed that casual/ad hoc or temporary engagements cannot be a
substitute for regular employment dehors the rules in force governing such recruitment and
appointments. It was also observed that casual, ad hoc, or temporary engagements are permissible
for a short period, but these engagements cannot be continued beyond the prescribed period, lest
these engagements may deprive all those who may be entitled to seek permanent employment to
these positions in accordance with the Rules. Therefore, the engagement of the private respondents
beyond the period of 60 days was unjustified. It was also observed that appointment order of the
private respondents incorporated a clause that their engagements would be extendable on the basis
of their satisfactory performance which was contrary to what was contained in the Notification of
the Board of School Education, and hence, this clause in the impugned Notification was
unwarranted.
Thereafter, the writ Court after directing disengagement of the private respondents directed to hold
a fresh selection process for engagement of persons for the Desk Job by ensuring fair and
transparent selection on the basis of merit and suitability in accordance with the Rules, Regulations
or Instructions governing such engagements.
We do not see, how such observations can be read as a direction for initiating the process for
recruitment on regular basis.
We have also not seen any such direction by the Division Bench in the aforesaid two LPAs directing
the Board to make recruitment on regular basis.
Therefore, we are not able to agree with the finding of the Ld. Single Judge in the impugned order
that the Board could not have resorted to a fresh selection process once again for making temporary
engagements for transition period of 60 days and that the private respondents were right in their
submission that in terms of the directions issued by the Division Bench they were entitled to
continue till a fresh selection process is conducted and the posts held by them are regularly filled up.
The Ld. Single Judge also held that the Board has not conducted any fresh selection process for
filling up the posts on regular basis, and therefore, as per mandate of the directions of the Division
Bench, the private respondents were entitled to continue till they are replaced by incumbents
substantively appointed pursuant to the selection process and accordingly, the employment Notice
issued by the Board was held to be contrary to and in violation of the Division Bench judgement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 12
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
dated 11.10.2010.
(xvi) We are of the view that no direction could have been issued by the Ld. Single Judge to
regularise the services of the private respondents without first ascertaining as to whether there are
regular vacancies or not, especially in the light of the stand taken by the Board that there were no
regular vacancies of Desk Jobs which were sought to be filled up on consolidated basis.
26. Under the facts and circumstances and for the reasons discussed above, we are of the opinion
that the impugned judgement and order dated 24.10.2018 passed by the ld. Single Judge in SWP
No. 367 of 2013 and SWP No. 157 of 2016 cannot be sustained in law and accordingly, the same is
set aside.
Consequently, the Jammu and Kashmir Board of School Education is directed to complete the
process of recruitment initiated under the employment Notification issued under Notice No.
F(Admn-B)CU/13 dated 09.02.2013. Since, it has been stated that the written test and interview are
over, there should not be any difficulty on the part of the Board to declare the result.
Accordingly, we direct the Board to declare the result within a period of one month and make
appointments in terms of the advertisement and the result so declared immediately, irrespective of
whether any of the selected candidates in the meantime has crossed the age limit fixed in the
advertisement. Those private respondents who had taken part in the said selection process and have
been selected, their engagements may not be disturbed. Since their engagements were continued by
virtue of the direction of the Division Bench in LPASW No. 64 of 2007 and LPASW No. 61 of 2007
by way of an interim measure, till fresh selection is made, once fresh selection is made in terms of
the aforesaid employment Notice dated 09.02.2013, except for such private respondents who are
found successful in the said recruitment process initiated in 2013, the private respondents cannot
continue in service and they have to be disengaged.
27. We are of the view that the relief claimed in SWP No.2631/207 is taken care of by the directions
issued in the above referred three LPAs(cid:128) and is accordingly allowed in terms of the aforesaid
observations and directions.
28. However, inspite of the aforesaid directions for disengagement of the private respondents,
considering the fact that the private respondents have been continuing in service for about 19 years
as of now and have gained experience, the Board would be at liberty to engage them without
adjusting with any of the posts already advertised by the employment Notice dated 09.02.2013, if
there are sufficient number of selected candidates. In other words, after filling up the posts
advertised under employment Notice dated 09.02.2013 as per the select list prepared, if the Board
so desires, the Board will be at liberty to continue with the engagement of the private respondents
with the Board.
29. With the above observations and directions, all the three LPAs, LPA No.1 of 2019, LPA No. 2 of
2019 and LPA No. 79 of 2019, are allowed by setting aside the judgment and order dated 24.10.2018
passed by the Ld. Single Judge in SWP No. 367 of 2013 and SWP No. 157 of 2016.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 13
J&K Board Of School Education Through vs Nirmala Devi And Others on 8 June, 2023
30. SWP No.2631 of 2017 is allowed to the extent indicated above.
31. Other connected applications, if any pending, stands disposed of in the light of the above
directions.
(VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL) (N.KOTISWAR SINGH)
JUDGE CHIEF JUSTICE
JAMMU
08.06.2023
SUNITA/PS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/95544030/ 14
