J.Ravi vs The District Collector on 16 December, 2020
J.Ravi vs The District Collector on 16 December, 2020
Bench: N.Kirubakaran, B.Pugalendhi
W.P.(MD)No.18477 of 2020
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED : 16.12.2020
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE N.KIRUBAKARAN
AND
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE B.PUGALENDHI
W.P.(MD)No.18477 of 2020
J.Ravi ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The District Collector,
Trichy District, Trichy.
2.The Sub Collector cum
Revenue Divisional Officer,
Musiri, Trichy District.
3.The Tahsildar,
Thuraiyur Taluk,
Trichy Distrit.
4.The Revenue Inspector,
Uppiliyapuram Firka,
Thuraiyur Taluk,
Trichy District.
5.Akhila,
ADW Special Tahsildar,
District Collectorate,
Trichy District.
1/17
http://www.judis.nic.in
(cid:12) W.P.(MD)No.18477 of 2020
6.Rajendran,
The Revenue Inspector,
Uppiliyapuram Firka,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161590014/ 1
J.Ravi vs The District Collector on 16 December, 2020
Thuraiyur Taluk,
Trichy District.
7.The Special Commissioner/
Government Secretary,
Revenue Department, Secretariat,
Chennai-9. ... Respondents
(R.7 is suo motu impleaded by this Court
vide order dated 16.12.2020)
Prayer : Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, to
issue a Writ of Mandamus to direct the first respondent to take action
against the respondents 5 and 6, based on the representation given by the
petitioner, dated 01.07.2020.
For Petitioner : Mr.K.Sivabalan
For Respondents : Mr.M.Muthugeethaiyan
Special Government Pleader
for R.1 to R.4
ORDER
(Order of the Court was made by N.KIRUBAKARAN,J) This Writ Petition has been filed by the
petitioner as a Public Interest Litigation seeking for issuance of a Writ of Mandamus, to direct
http://www.judis.nic.in the first respondent to take action against the respondents 5 and 6, based
on the representation given by the petitioner, dated 01.07.2020.
2. The petitioner has filed this Public Interest Litigation by stating that the third respondent
Tahsildar, contrary to the Government Orders and Regulations, has issued Legal Heir Certificate to
one group, wherein the deceased person had two wives. In this case, the petitioner pointed out that
one Veerappan and Subash Chandrabose had two wives.
The respective wives of the aforesaid persons filed petitions for Legal Heir Certificates to the third
respondent. The third respondent is said to have issued Legal Heir Certificate, which is contrary to
the letter issued by the Special Commissioner/Government Secretary, Revenue Department
St.George Fort, Chennai-9, in letter No.1534, dated 28.11.1991.
3. As per the said guidelines, when there are two contrary claims from two wives for Legal Heir
Certificate, the Tahsildar does not have jurisdiction and the competent Civil Court alone can declare
as to who are all the legal heirs.
http://www.judis.nic.in
4. Similarly, in the year 2017, the Principal Secretary/ Commissioner of Revenue Administration,
Disaster Management and Mitigation Department, Chepauk, Chennai-600 005, also issued Circular
No.11/2017, Rc.No.RA5(3)/180/2017, dated 09.08.2017. In spite of that, the third respondent had
issued certificates to one of the wives of the aforesaid persons.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161590014/ 2
J.Ravi vs The District Collector on 16 December, 2020
5. In this regard, the petitioner gave a representation, dated 01.07.2020 to the respondents 1 and 2
to take action against the third respondent for having issued Legal Heir Certificate to one of the
wives of the aforesaid deceased persons.
6. Based on the representation of the petitioner, an enquiry has been contemplated by the
Sub-Collector, Musiri, Trichy District, as evident from the proceedings, dated 09.07.2020, issued by
the Sub-
Collector, Musiri, Trichy District.
http://www.judis.nic.in
7. From the above, it is clear that action has already been taken, based on the petitioner's
representation, dated 01.07.2020 and enquiry is being conducted against the third respondent by
the Sub-Collector.
Therefore, the Sub-Collector, viz., the second respondent shall conduct enquiry and take a decision
within a period of eight weeks, after hearing all the parties.
8. It is evident from the records that when there are two contrary claims by two wives for issuance of
Legal Heir Certificates, the Authorities time and again, gave instructions to the Tahsildar not to
issue Legal Heir Certificates in those cases and the parties have to be advised to approach the
competent civil Court.
9. It is relevant to extract hereunder the Letter No.1534, dated 28.11.1991, issued by the Special
Commissioner/Government Secretary, Revenue Department St.George Fort, Chennai-9:
“ghh;it xd;wpy; fz;Ls;s murhizapy; Fwpg;gpl;Ls;sgo tl;lhl;rpah;fs; thhpRr;
rhd;wpjH;fs;
http://www.judis.nic.in tHq;FtJ bjhlh;ghf rpy tHpKiwfs; tFf;f khepy fzf;fhah;
tHq;fpa[s;s Mnyhridapd; mog;gilapy; rpwg;g[ Mizah; kw;Wk; tUtha; eph;thf
MizaUld; fye;J Ma;t[ bra;ag;l;lJ.
2. tl;lhl;rpah;fs;> thhpRr; rhd;wpjH; tHq;Fjy;
bjhlh;ghd tHpKiwfs; (guidelines) kw;Wk; eilKiwfs; (procedure) gw;wpMnyhrid tHq;fpaJld;>
mt;thW thhpRr; rhd;wpjH; tHq;f Xh; gl;oiaa[k; (format) Fwpg;gpl;Ls;shh;. muR> thhpRr;
rhd;wpjH; tHq;Fjh; bjhlh;ghf rpwg;g[ Mizah; kw;Wk; tUtha; eph;thf Mizah; tHq;fpa[s;s
Mnyhridfisa[k; gl;loiaa[k; (format) Vw;W mitfs; bray;Kiwg;gLj;j xg;g[jy; mspf;fpwJ. mitfs;
,f;fojj;Jld; ,izf;fg;gl;Ls;sd. mitfisj; jtwhJ gpd;gw;WkhW nfl;Lf;bfhs;fpnwd;.
3. rpy tl;lhl;rpah; tHq;Fk; thhpRr;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161590014/ 3
J.Ravi vs The District Collector on 16 December, 2020
rhd;wpjH;fspy; “ MW khjj;jpw;F kl;Lnk bry;YgoahFk; (valid for six months only)vd;Wk; “mit chpik
,ay; ePjpkd;wq;fspy; bry;yhJ (not valid in any court of law)vd;Wk; epge;jid thrfq;fs; vGjg;gl;og;gjhf
bjhpfpwJ. tl;lhl;rpah;fshy; tHq;fg;gLk; thhpRr; rhd;wpjH;fisa[k; ePjpkd;wq;fshy; 1925 Mk; Mz;L
,e;jpa neuo thhpRr;rl;lj;jpd; fPH; tHq;fg;gLk; neuo thhpRr; rhd;wpjH;fisa[k; rkkhff; fUj KoahJ.
nkYk; epge;jidfs; tpjpg;gjw;F tpjpKiwfspy; tif ,y;iy. vdnt> thhpRr; rhd;wpjH; tHq;Fk;nghJ
http://www.judis.nic.in nkny Fwpg;gpl;Ls;s epge;jidfs; vija[k; tpjpf;f ntz;lhk; vdf;
nfl;Lf;bfhs;fpnwd;.
4. nkw;fz;l Mizfspd; mog;gilapy;> bjhlh;g[ila midj;J mYtyh;fSf;F jFe;j mwpt[Wj;jq;fs; tHq;FkhWk;
nfl;Lf;bfhs;fpnwd;.
5. ,f;fojj;jpidg; bgw;Wf;bfhz;likf;fhd xg;g[ifia cld; mDg;gp itf;FkhWk; nfhUfpnwd;.”
10. Similarly, it is relevant to extract hereunder the Circular No.11/2017, Rc.No.RA5(3)/180/2017,
dated 09.08.2017 issued by the Principal Secretary/ Commissioner of Revenue Administration,
Disaster Management and Mitigation Department, Chepauk, Chennai-600 005:
“ The Government have issued detailed instructions vide G.O.(Ms) No.2006, Revenue
Department, dated 04.11.1981, G.O.(Ms) No.581, Revenue Department, dated
03.04.1987 and Government letter No.1534, Revenue Department, dated 28.11.1991
on the guidelines to be followed for issue of Legal Heir Certificate manually.
http://www.judis.nic.in
2) It is proposed to issue the Legal Heir Certificate through online web based
application in addition to the other Revenue certificates. In order to enable quicker
processing and for effective implementation, the following procedures and guidelines
are issued to be followed.
3.Direct Legal heir Direct Legal heirs are sons, daughters, husband, widows, mothers, sons of a
pre-deceased son, widows of a pre-deceased son, son of a pre-deceased sons of a predeceased son,
and widows of a pre- deceased son of a predeceased son. Son of a predeceased daughter of a
predeceased daughter, daughter of a predeceased daughter of a predeceased daughter, daughter of a
predeceased son of a predeceased daughter, daughter of a predeceased daughter of a predeceased
son.
4.Procedure to be followed:
Legal Heir Certificates shall be issued by Tahsildars for all direct legal heirs applying
for http://www.judis.nic.in certificate through online. The petitioner can apply
electronically from any of the CSCs or online to the Tahsildar in whose jurisdiction,
the deceased person ordinarily resided before his death. (If the person has resided for
less than 6 months, then the Tahsildar shall obtain a report from the Tahsildar in
whose jurisdiction the deceased resided for more than a year).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161590014/ 4
J.Ravi vs The District Collector on 16 December, 2020
5.The applicant should compulsorily submit the following details while submitting the application:
* Death certificate of the deceased or Late Registration Certificate from RDO.
* Any one of the following documents should be submitted as Proof of residence of
the deceased person.
(i) Aadhaar Card
(ii)Vote ID Card
(iii)Passport
(iv)Bank Pass Book/Postal Savings Book
(v) Driving License
(vi)Pension payment Order http://www.judis.nic.in 5-1) If any one spouse
survives-then they shall be the applicant and submit following documents:
* Marriage Registration Certificate or Passport or Voter ID orAadhaar cards or NPR
document should be submitted to establish relationship.
* Birth Certificate of all children or T.C., of all children * Self declaration of the
spouse indicating all other legal heirs (including Mother-in-law if the wife is the
applicant) 5-2) If parents are deceased, then any one child shall be the applicant and
submit the following documents:
a) If applicant is a Major * Death certificate of parents * Birth certificate or
Community Certificate or Passport or Aadhaar (all eligible heirs) or T.C., or NPR or
Employee Service Record.
http://www.judis.nic.in
b) If applicant is a Minor, Guardian can apply and submit the following documents:
* Death certificate of parents * Birth certificate or T.C., or NPR or Employee Service
Record or Community certificate or Passport or Voter ID or Aadhaar of all eligible
heirs.
* Guardianship order issued by the Hon'ble Civil Court to prove relationship to the
heirs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161590014/ 5
J.Ravi vs The District Collector on 16 December, 2020
5-3) In case of unmarried Children-Parents or Siblings shall be the applicant and
submit the following documents:
* Death certificate of deceased. * Any proof to establish relationship of deceased (ie.,)
Birth certificate/T.C., of deceased etc., * Self-declaration of the parents/siblings.
6) Legal heir application will be processed by the following system:
On an application of fee of Rs.60/-, the applicant shall apply at the CSC or online, the
certificate will be issued within 15 working days.
http://www.judis.nic.in The work flow will be CSC - VAO – RI – HODT – Tahsildar
The VAO must verify the documents and recommended with reasons for acceptance
or rejection and forward to the Revenue Inspector in 5 Days. Revenue Inspector has
to enquire in 4 days and the certificate will be issued by Tahsildar in 6 days on receipt
of report from the RI after conducting necessary enquiry.
The applicant can download the legal certificate from CSC or from anywhere on
receipt of an SMS.
The District website should have an exclusive window for viewing Taluk wise issued
legal heirship certificates.
A copy of the issued Legal Heir Certificate should be marked to Department of
Registration to be linked to the Reginet Software.
7.General Instructions:
Tahsildars shall not issue Legal Heir Certificates for the following cases and to inform
the http://www.judis.nic.in applicants to approach the Competent Court for
obtaining the Legal Heir Certificates.
(i) If more than one wife/husband exist for the deceased.
(ii) When there is a dispute for settlement/partition of properties of the deceased.
(iii) In case of the person treated as death who is missing for the period of 7 years or
staying away from the family.
(iv) In the case of adopted child or No children.
(v) No certificate, shall be issued under Indian Succession Act, 1925.
8) Appeal Provision:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161590014/ 6
J.Ravi vs The District Collector on 16 December, 2020
If any legal heir disputes the issued Legal Heir Certificate, an appeal petition shall be
filed to the respective Revenue Divisional Officer within a period of one year from the
date of issue of the certificate for making alterations, corrections – deletions or
inclusions.
http://www.judis.nic.in
9) Power of Revision:
The power of revision lies with the District Collector and Revision Petition shall be
filed by the applicant within a period of 3 years from the date of issue of the appeal
order.
All the District Collectors are instructed to follow the circular and communicate to
the concerned subordinate officers and instruct them to follow the procedures and
guidelines scrupulously without fail. The receipt of the circular may be
acknowledged.
Sd/- K.Satyagopal Principal Secretary/ Commissioner of Revenue Administration.”
12. The above proceedings would make it clear that the Tahsildars have got no power
and jurisdiction to issue the Legal Heir Certificates, when the deceased had two wives
during his life time and the parties have to be directed to approach the competent
civil Court.
http://www.judis.nic.in Therefore, it is made clear that the Tahsildars shall not issue any Legal Heir
Certificate contrary to the above proceedings.
13. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, this Court suo motu impleads “ The Special
Commissioner/Government Secretary, Revenue Department, Secretariat, Chennai-9” as seventh
respondent in this writ petition. No notice is necessary to the newly impleaded seventh respondent,
as this Court only directs the second respondent to conduct enquiry and take a decision, after
issuing notice to all the parties including the petitioner and the respondents 5 and 6 and other
connected persons.
14. With the above observations, the Writ Petition is disposed of. No costs.
[N.K.K.J.,] [B.P.J.,]
16.12.2020
Index :Yes/No
Internet :Yes/No
SSL
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161590014/ 7
J.Ravi vs The District Collector on 16 December, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
Note: In view of the present lock down owing to COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the order may
be utilized for official purposes, but, ensuring that the copy of the order that is presented is the
correct copy, shall be the responsibility of the advocate/litigant concerned.
To
1.The District Collector, Trichy District, Trichy.
2.The Sub Collector cum Revenue Divisional Officer, Musiri, Trichy District.
3.The Tahsildar, Thuraiyur Taluk, Trichy Distrit.
4.The Revenue Inspector, Uppiliyapuram Firka, Thuraiyur Taluk, Trichy District.
5.The Special Commissioner/ Government Secretary, Revenue Department, Secretariat, Chennai-9
http://www.judis.nic.in N.KIRUBAKARAN,J.
AND B.PUGALENDHI,J.
SSL 16.12.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/161590014/ 8
