Jagar Singh vs Ut Of J&K Through on 15 November, 2023
Jagar Singh vs Ut Of J&K Through on 15 November, 2023
Author: Javed Iqbal Wani
Bench: Javed Iqbal Wani
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on:- 20.10.2023
Pronounced on:- 15 .11.2023
WP (C) No. 612/2023
CM No. 1427/2023
Jagar Singh
S/o Sh. Kohla Ram
R/o 25 CC, Gandhi Nagar, Jammu ...Petitioner (s)
Through: Mr. Parag Sharma, Advocate
V/s
1. UT of J&K through
Director General of Police,
Jammu.
2. Senior Superintendent of Police,
Jammu.
3. Station House Officer,
P/S Gandhi Nagar, Jammu. ...Respondent(s)
Through: Mrs. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr. Justice Javed Iqbal Wani, Judge.
JUDGMENT
15. 11.2023
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76208031/ 1
Jagar Singh vs Ut Of J&K Through on 15 November, 2023
1. Extraordinary writ jurisdiction enshrined in Article 226 of the Constitution of India is invoked by
the petitioner herein while praying following reliefs:-
i. Writ of mandamus directing and commanding the respondents
2 and 3 to remove/delete the name of the petitioner from Police Surveillance Register No. 10 kept in
Police Station, Gandhi Nagar, Jammu and quash/close the history sheet of the petitioner under
Jammu and Kashmir Police Rules 1960. ii. Writ of mandamus directing and commanding the
respondents 2 & 3 not to harass the petitioner under the cover of history sheet which is totally
against the Jammu and Kashmir Police, Rules 1960.
iii. Any other order to be passed as additional/alternate relief to which the petitioner is found
entitled to in the given facts and circumstances of the case in hand in order to delivery fair and
impartial justice.
2. The background facts under the shade and cover of which the reliefs aforesaid are being prayed by
the petitioner as pleaded in the petition are that the petitioner is an A-Class Contractor registered
with the Government of Jammu and Kashmir besides being high tax payer.
3. It is stated that the petitioner herein came to be arraigned as an accused in FIR No. 247/2009
registered with Police Station Gandhi Nagar for offences under section 302/34/201/120-B RPC and
3/25/27 Arms Act.
4. The petitioner states to have got acquitted in the said case and the charge sheet laid under the
said FIR tried by the Court of 2nd Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu on 10.08.2020 came to be
dismissed besides others against the petitioner herein.
5. It is stated that during the pendency of the aforesaid case, the petitioner also came to be falsely
implicated in FIR No. 164/2010 registered with Police Station Channi Himmat under sections
307/34/120-B RPC, section 3/25 Arms Act, wherein the petitioner came to be released on bail by
the Court of Additional Sessions Judge, Jammu on 10.03.2011 though one of the witness in the said
FIR namely Bupinder Singh made a statement before the Court on 11.08.2014 that he does not
identify the petitioner and have seen him for the first time.
6. It is being next stated that during the pendency of the FIR 247/2019 supra, the respondent 3
herein entered the name of the petitioner in Surveillance Register No. 10 maintained by the police
station under Rule 698 of the Jammu and Kashmir Police Rules 1960 (for short the Rules of 1960)
and that the respondents continued with the incorporation of the name of the petitioner in the said
Register in breach and violation of the Article 21 of the Constitution enjoyed by the petitioner.
7. Response/status report to the petition has been filed by the respondents, wherein it is being
stated that the name of the petitioner is incorporated in the Surveillance Register since 2009 while it
is being admitted that the petitioner though was involved in FIR No. 247/2009 supra, wherein the
petitioner stands acquitted by the Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76208031/ 2
Jagar Singh vs Ut Of J&K Through on 15 November, 2023
8. It is further stated that the petitioner has been involved in FIR No. 275/2009 registered with
Police Station Gandhi Nagar for offence under section 5(2) of Prevention of Corporation Act and a
final report presented thereof before the competent court stands rejected by the said Court on the
ground that the investigation has not been conducted properly and that the said case is being further
investigated by SP City South.
9. It is being also stated that the a complaint had also been filed by one Tajpal Singh S/o Late Sohan
Singh R/o 569/3 Nanak Nagar Jammu against the petitioner for extending threats to him and
consequently the petitioner was bound down and entries thereof came to be recorded in the history
sheet on 09.05.2010.
Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
10. Before proceedings to address to the issues involved in the petition, it would be appropriate to
refer to the relevant provisions of the Police Rules of 1960 being germane herein.
Rule 698 of the Rules of 1960 deals with Surveillance Register No. 10 and provides that in every
police station a Surveillance Register shall be maintained, wherein in Part I of such Register names
of the classes of persons residing within the local jurisdiction of a police station have to be entered
being all persons who have been proclaimed under section 87 Cr PC, all released convicts in regard
to whom an order under section 565 Cr PC has been made, all convicts the execution of whose
sentence is suspended in whole or any part of whose punishment has been remitted conditionally
under section 401 Cr.P.C and all persons restricted under Rules of Government made under section
16 of Habitual Offenders (Control and Reforms) Act, 1956, whereas in Part II of such Register with
the discretion of the Superintendent the names of following class of persons can be entered being
those persons who have been convicted thrice or more than three times of offences mentioned in
Rule 681, and those persons who are reasonably believed to be habitual offenders or receivers of
stolen property whether they have been convicted or not, those persons under security under
sections 109 and 110 Cr PC. Rule 699 of the Rules of 1960 deals with entries in and cancellation
from Surveillance Register and provides that the Surveillance Register shall be written up by an
Officer Incharge of the Police Station personally or by an Assistant Sub Inspector and no entry shall
be made in Part I except by the order of a Gazatted Officer and that ordinarily before the name of a
person is entered in Part II of the Register, a History Sheet shall be opened for such person,
providing further that when the Superintendent of Police on his own accord or on the report of the
Subordinate Officer deems proper to enter the name of a person in Register No. 10, he has to hear
the objections of that person and after fully satisfying himself, order the entry of the person in
Register No. 10. Rule 702 of the Rules of 1960 deals with preparation of History Sheet and provides
that the initial preparation of History Sheet requires great care and invariably be done by the Officer
Incharge of the Police Station himself or by a thoroughly experienced Assistant Sub Inspector under
specific orders and the description of the criminal should be such as will enable the person reading it
to form for himself a picture of the individual and the space for relations and connections has to be
filled in with a view to afford clues to those persons with whom the criminal is likely to harbour
when wanted by the police, including relations or friends living at a distance from his home, and his
associates in crime abettors and receivers, and that the particulars of the property, mode or earning
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76208031/ 3
Jagar Singh vs Ut Of J&K Through on 15 November, 2023
livelihood has also to be entered for facilitating a judgment as to whether a criminal is at any time
living beyond his means and whether he is an owner of property, a tenant or a wage earner and that
a description of the crime to which the criminal is addicted to has also to be entered in some detail,
showing not merely the class of crime, but the particular type of that crime, methods followed,
localities frequented, weapons or instruments used and the copies of the History Sheet so prepared
had to be published in Criminal Investigation Department and published in Central Intelligence
Gazette.
11. A perusal of the aforesaid rules ex facie suggest that the entries in the Surveillance Register have
to be prepared and drawn both objectively meaning making an unbiased balanced observation
based on facts which can be verified and subjectively as well meaning making assumptions,
interpretations based on personal opinions without any verifiable facts. A reference hereunder to the
judgment of the Apex Court passed in the case titled as "Malak Singh & Ors. Vs. State of P&H & Ors.
reported in 1981 SCC 420" would be relevant herein, wherein at paras 6 & 9 following has been
provided:-
"6. Prevention of crime is one of the prime purposes of the Constitution of a police
force. The preamble to the Police Act 1861 says : Whereas it is expedient to reorganise
the police and to make it a more efficient instrument for the prevention and detection
of crime. Section 23 of the Police Act prescribes it as the duty of police officers "to
collect and communicate intelligence affecting the public peace, to prevent the
commission of offences and public nuisances". In connection with these duties it will
be necessary to keep discreet surveillance over reputed bad characters, habitual
offenders and other potential offenders. Organised crime cannot be successfully
fought without close watch of suspects. But, surveillance may be intrusive and it may
so seriously encroach on the privacy of a citizen as to infringe his fundamental right
to personal liberty guaranteed by Article 21 of the Constitution and the freedom of
movement guaranteed by Article 19(1)(d). That cannot be permitted. This is
recognised by the Punjab Police Rules themselves. Rule 23.7, which prescribes the
mode of surveillance, permits that the close watch over the movements of the person
under surveillance but without any illegal interference. Permissible surveillance is
only to the extent of a close watch over the movements of the person under
surveillance and no more. So long as surveillance is for the purpose of preventing
crime and is confined to the limits prescribed by Rule 23.7 we do not think a person
whose name is included in the surveillance register can have a genuine cause for
complaint. We may notice here that interference in accordance with law and for the
prevention of disorder and crime is an exception recognised even by European
Convention of Human Rights to the right to respect for a person's private and family
life. Article 8 of the Convention reads as follows:
(1) Everyone's right to respect for his private and family life, his home and his
correspondence shall be recognized.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76208031/ 4
Jagar Singh vs Ut Of J&K Through on 15 November, 2023
(2) There shall be no interference by a public authority with the exercise of this right,
except such as is in accordance with law and is necessary in a democratic society in
the interests of national security, public safety, for the prevention of disorder and
crime or for the protection of health or morals.
9. But all this does not mean that the police have a licence to enter the names of whoever they like
(dislike?) in the surveillance register; nor can the surveillance be such as to squeeze the fundamental
freedoms guaranteed to all citizens or to obstruct the free exercise and enjoyment of those freedoms;
nor can the surveillance so intrude as to offend the dignity of the individual. Surveillance of persons
who do not fall within the categories mentioned in Rule 23.4 or for reasons unconnected with the
prevention of crime, or excessive surveillance falling beyond the limits prescribed by the rules, will
entitle a citizen to the Court's protection which the court will not hesitate to give. The very rules
which prescribe the conditions for making entries in the surveillance register and the mode of
surveillance appear to recognise the caution and care with which the police officers are required to
proceed. The note following Rule 23.4 is instructive. It enjoins a duty upon the police officer to
construe the rule strictly and confine the entries in the surveillance register to the class of persons
mentioned in the rule. Similarly Rule 23.7 demands that there should be no illegal interference in
the guise of surveillance. Surveillance, therefore, has to be unobstrusive and within bounds." Thus
what emanates from the above is that though organized crime cannot be successfully fought without
close watch of suspects, yet surveillance may be intrusive and may seriously encroach on the privacy
of a citizen, infringe his/her fundamental right to personal liberty guaranteed under Article 21 of the
Constitution and the freedom of movement guaranteed under Article 19(I) (d) of the Constitution,
therefore, enjoining a duty upon the police officer to construe the rule strictly and confine the
entries in the Surveillance Register un-obstrusive and within bounds without squeezing the
fundamental freedoms guaranteed to a citizens or to obstruct the free exercise and enjoyment of
those freedoms also keeping in mind that the surveillance should not be so intrude as to offend the
dignity of an individual and that the very rules which prescribe the conditions for making entries in
the Surveillance Register and the mode of surveillance must recognize the caution and care with
which the police officers are required to proceed.
12. Reverting back to the case in hand, it is not in dispute that the case of the petitioner does not fall
within Part I of Rule 698 supra. Perusal of the record would reveal that the name of the petitioner
has been entered into Surveillance Register purportedly falling in Part II of Rule 698 supra on
account of his being involved in FIR No. 247/2009 registered at P/S Gandhi Nagar for commission
of offences under sections 302, 201, 34, 409, 120-B RPC, 3/25/27 Arms Act, having been entered on
05.02.2009 by Inspector Mohammad Rafiq, SHO P/S Gandhi Nagar. It is pertinent to mention here
while risking repetition that the petitioner stands acquitted in the said case by a competent court on
10.08.2020.
13. Perusal of the record would also reveal that the entry of the petitioner is being continued to be in
the Surveillance Register by the respondents ever since his name was entered therein on 05.02.2009
though the said fact of the acquittal of the petitioner has also been entered in the Register in
question by the respondent on 23.01.2021 yet his name has been continuously entered in the said
Register, thereafter and lastly on 06.04.2023 by SHO Police Station Gandhi Nagar, Jammu, though
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76208031/ 5
Jagar Singh vs Ut Of J&K Through on 15 November, 2023
it has been provided therein that the petitioner is involved in FIR No. 275/2009 for offences u/s
5(2) PC Act pending before Anti Corruption Court, Jammu and that the entry of the petitioner has
been ordered to be continued in the Register under the instructions of the SP Jammu, although the
said case stands rejected by the said Court and is presently under further investigation.
14. Having regard to the aforesaid facts and circumstances as also the principles of law laid down by
the Apex Court in the judgment supra, the continuation of the entry of the name of the petitioner in
the Surveillance Register seemingly is being continued by the respondents without drawing any
subjective satisfaction in this regard mechanically being a person reasonably believed to be habitual
offender. No reasons muchless cogent and credible have been recorded in the Surveillance Register
for continuing the name of the petitioner therein on a mere belief without drawing any subjective
satisfaction of possessing a reasonable belief that the petitioner is a habitual offender or is a person
habitually addicted to crime thus necessitating to continuation of entering of his name in the
Surveillance Register.
Here a reference to the judgment of the Apex Court in regard to a "habitual offender" passed in case
titled as "Dhanji Ram Sharma V.s Superintendent of Police, North reported in AIR 1966 SC 1766"
would be relevant herein wherein at para 7 following has been laid down.
"A habitual offender or a person habitually addicted to crime is one who is a criminal
by habit or by disposition formed by repetition of crimes. Reasonable belief of the
police officer that the suspect is a habitual offender or is a person habitually addicted
to crime is sufficient to justify action under Rules 23.4 (3) (b) and 23.9 (2). Mere
belief is not sufficient. The belief must be reasonable, it must be based on reasonable
grounds. The suspect may or may not have been convicted of any crime. Even apart
from any conviction, there may be reasonable grounds for believing that he is a
habitual offender."
15. Viewed thus what has been observed and considered hereinabove, the instant petition deserves
to be allowed. Accordingly, petition is allowed and the continuation of the name of the petitioner in
the Surveillance Register maintained by the respondents under and in terms of Rule 698 of Police
Rules 1960 is held to be arbitrary, unfair, unreasonable and illegal, as such, the respondents are
commanded to discontinue the entering of the name of the petitioner in the said Surveillance
Register qua the activities referred therein since 09.05.2010 till 06.04.2023.
16. Disposed of.
17. Registry is directed to remit the record back to the counsel for the respondents.
(Javed Iqbal Wani) Judge SRINAGAR 15 .11.2023 "S.Nuzhat"
i. Whether the order is speaking: Yes/ No
ii. Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76208031/ 6
