Jagdish Prasad Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 19 August, 2019
Jagdish Prasad Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 19
August, 2019
Author: Sanjay Dwivedi
Bench: Sanjay Dwivedi
1 WP-2049-2019
The High Court Of Madhya Pradesh
WP-2049-2019
(JAGDISH PRASAD MISHRA Vs THE STATE OF MADHYA PRADESH)
Jabalpur, Dated : 19-08-2019
Shri Arun Pandey, learned counsel for the petitioner.
Shri H.K. Upadhyay, learned Government Advocate for the
respondents/ State.
Heard on the question of admission.
By the instant petition, the petitioner is challenging the order dated 16.11.2018 (Annexure-P/7)
whereby the disciplinary authority has passed an order in respect of the period of suspension
holding that since the petitioner has not been exonerated from the charges levelled against him in a
departmental proceeding, the said period shall be treated as the period under suspension, meaning
thereby he would be entitled to get only subsistence allowance during that period.
There was a disciplinary proceeding initiated against the petitioner, in which he was held guilty and
punishment of withdrawing 15% pension for a period of three years has been inflicted. Although
separate order regarding period of suspension was passed on 16.11.2018 (Annexure-P/7), which is
impugned in this petition.
Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the order impugned is illegal as has been passed
contrary to the requirement of fundamental Rule 54-B of the M.P. Fundamental Rules, 1956. He
further submits that the disciplinary authority is under obligation to decide the period of suspension
and as per the requirement of fundamental Rule 54-B, the competent authority is under an
obligation to pass a specific order in respect of suspension indicating 2 WP-2049-2019 therein for
what amount of pay and allowances, the petitioner would be entitled during the period of
suspension, after giving notice to the government servant of the quantum of pay and allowances
proposed and after considering the representation, if any, submitted by the government servant in
that connection. He further submits that if ultimately the petition succeeds, the authority shall be
given direction to consider the claim of the petitioner by giving him an opportunity of hearing.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134025710/ 1
Jagdish Prasad Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 19 August, 2019
In support of his contentions, learned counsel has relied upon a decision of the Division Bench of
this Court reported in 2008(2) MPHT 26 parties being Smt. Mahmoodan Khan Vs. State of M.P. &
Others.
It is observed by the Division Bench of this Court that as per the provision of fundamental Rule
54-B, the disciplinary authority is under obligation to pass an order in respect of entitlement of the
employee who has been placed under suspension and thereafter, reinstate as to on what rate, pay
and allowances should have been paid to him or he should be paid on the basis of the principle of
'No Work No Pay'. It is further observed that the petitioner should be given notice indicating
proposed pay and allowances for which he is being held entitled so that he may make a
representation before the authority and the same shall be decided by the authority. The Division
Bench, in Paragraphs-6 and 7, has held as under:-
"6. It will be clear from the provisions of Fundamental Rule 54-B quoted above that
the aforesaid Fundamental Rule makes elaborate provisions how a Government
servant will be dealt with after revocation of his suspension and on re-instatement in
service. Sub-rule (1) of Fundamental Rule 54-B provides that when a
3 WP-2049-2019 Government servant who has been suspended is re- instated or would have been
so re-instated, the authority competent to order re-instatement shall consider and make a specific
order; (a) regarding the pay and allowances to be paid to the Government servant for the period of
suspension ending with re-instatement and (b) whether or not the period of suspension shall be
treated as period spent on duty. Sub-rule (3) of Fundamental Rule 54-B further provides that where
the authority competent to order re-instatement is of the opinion that the suspension was wholly
unjustified, the Government servant shall subject to the provisions of Sub-rule (8), be paid the full
pay and allowances to which he would have been entitled, had he not been suspended. Sub-rule (4)
of Fundamental Rule 54-B states that in a case falling under Sub-rule (3), the period of suspension
shall be treated as a period spent on duty for all purposes. Sub-rule (5) of Fundamental Rule 54-B
further states that in cases other than those falling under Sub-rule (3), the Government servant,
shall subject to the provisions of Sub-rules (8) and (9) be paid such amount of the pay and
allowances to which he would have been entitled had he not been suspended, as the Competent
Authority may determine, after giving notice to the Government servant of the quantum proposed
and after considering the representation, if any, submitted by him in that connection within such
period as may be specified in the notice. Sub-rule (7) of Fundamental Rule 54-B states that in a case
falling under Sub-rule (5), the period of suspension shall not be treated as a period spent on duty,
unless the Competent Authority specifically directs that it shall be so treated for any specified
purpose.
7. It is, thus, clear that the authority competent to order re-instatement has to form an opinion
whether the suspension was justified or unjustified and if he finds that the suspension was wholly
unjustified, he will treat the period of suspension as spent on duty for all purposes and in that case
the Government servant would be entitled to his full pay and allowances subject to the provisions of
Sub-rule (8). But in cases where he finds some justification for the suspension of the Government
servant he has to pass a specific order indicating therein what amount of pay and allowances he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134025710/ 2
Jagdish Prasad Mishra vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 19 August, 2019
would be entitled during the period of suspension after giving notice to the Government servant of
the quantum of pay and 4 WP-2049-2019 allowances proposed and after considering the
representation, if any, submitted by the Government servant in that connection. It appears that
these provisions of Fundamental Rule 54-B have not been complied with by the District Education
Officer, Rewa, in the present case before issuing the direction in the order dated 23-2- 2007 that the
appellant will not be entitled to pay and allowances during the period of suspension on the principle
of "no work no pay."
Learned Government Advocate submits that if the order is defective to that aspect, then this petition
can be allowed and order impugned can be set-aside giving liberty to the respondent authority to
consider the said aspect and decide the entitlement of the employee/petitioner for the period of
suspension after giving him a notice and opportunity for making representation.
Considering the contentions of learned counsel for the petitioner that no notice was issued to the
petitioner before passing the impugned order and the petitioner was not given any opportunity to
make a representation before the competent authority in respect of the proposed pay and
allowances, for which the petitioner was held entitled, I find substance in the contentions advanced
by learned counsel for the petitioner. Accordingly, this petition is allowed. The order impugned
dated 16.11.2018 (Annexure-P/7) in respect of the present petitioner, is hereby set-aside.
The disciplinary authority is granted liberty to issue show-cause notice to the petitioner asking him
to submit representation in respect of the proposed wages and allowances for which he is being held
entitled and thereafter, appropriate order be passed by the authority in accordance with law,
especially keeping in view the requirement of fundamental Rule 54-B of the M.P. Fundamental
Rules, 1956.
With the aforesaid directions, this petition stands allowed and 5 WP-2049-2019 disposed of.
Certified Copy as per rules.
(SANJAY DWIVEDI) JUDGE Prachi
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/134025710/ 3
