Jai Prakash Gupta @ Nate vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
Jai Prakash Gupta @ Nate vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1
May, 2025
Author: Vivek Varma
Bench: Vivek Varma
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:69174
Court No. - 69
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION U/S 482 BNSS No. - 1145 of 2025
Applicant :- Jai Prakash Gupta @ Nate
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Prabhakar Singh,Rajeev Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Vivek Varma,J.
1. The applicant was granted interim anticipatory bail by the co-ordinate Bench of this Court vide
order dated 28.2.2025. The order is quoted herein below:-
"1. Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned A.G.A for the State and perused
the record.
2. The instant Anticipatory Bail Application has been filed with a prayer to grant an
anticipatory bail to the applicant in Case Crime No. 04 of 2025, under Sections 419,
406, 420, 467, 468, 471, 323, 504, 506 I.P.C, Police Station- Moolganj, District-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159878128/ 1
Jai Prakash Gupta @ Nate vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
Kanpur Nagar, during the pendency of trial.
3. Allegation is that applicant took money from the informant for providing him
'theka' for parking place. Learned counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant
is innocent and has been falsely implicated in the present case due to ulterior motive.
Instant first information report has been lodged through an application under
Section 156(3) Cr.P.C. after about four years. On perusal of contents of first
information report, no offence under alleged sections is made out. It is a civil nature
dispute. Applicant has no criminal history to his credit. In case, applicant is granted
anticipatory bail, he would not misuse the liberty of bail and would co-operate with
the investigation. Applicant has definite apprehension of his arrest by the police.
4. Learned AGA has vehemently opposed the prayer for anticipatory bail of the
applicant with the contention that the applicant is not entitled for anticipatory bail
as, prima facie, case is made out.
5. Learned A.G.A. granted four week's time to file counter affidavit. Rejoinder
affidavit, if any, may be filed within two weeks thereafter.
6. List this case after six weeks.
7. As an interim protection, till the next date of listing fixed for hearing on this
application, the applicant is granted anticipatory bail in the aforesaid case crime
number. In the event of arrest, the applicant shall be released on interim anticipatory
bail on furnishing a personal bond of Rs. 50,000/- with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the Station House Officer of the police station
concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) The applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by the police officer as
and when required;
(ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade from
disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer;
(iii) The applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court
and if applicant has passport, the same shall be deposited before the
S.S.P./S.P./C.P./A.C.P concerned;
(iv) The applicant shall not tamper with the evidence during the trial;
(v) The applicant shall not pressurize/intimidate the prosecution witness;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159878128/ 2
Jai Prakash Gupta @ Nate vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
(vi) The applicant shall appear before the trial court on each date fixed unless
personal presence is exempted.
8. In default of any of the conditions, the Investigating Officer/Govt. Advocate/concerned court is at
liberty to file appropriate application for cancellation of anticipatory bail granted to the applicant. "
2. Counsel for the applicant submits that pursuant to the interim order dated
28.2.2025 the applicant had furnished bail bonds before the S.H.O. concerned and
had joined the investigation. The investigation is still pending. Counsel for the
applicant further contends that a business dispute between the parties has been given
colour of a criminal case. The applicant has not forged or manipulated any
documents. Further during the pendency of investigation the parties have entered
into settlement. Copy of the compromise has been submitted to the concerned
investigating officer. He further contends that the application may be disposed of at
this stage.
3. Heard learned counsel for the applicant, Sri Nagendra Kumar Mishra, learned
AGA for the State and perused the material on record.
4. No adverse material has been produced by learned AGA against the applicant,
which may warrant any modification in the order dated 28.2.2025. Therefore, no
useful purpose would be served by keeping this application pending.
5. Accordingly, the order dated 28.2.2025 is hereby made absolute till filing of police
report under Section 173(3) Cr.P.C. for the reasons as given in the said order on his
furnishing a fresh personal bond of Rs. 50,000/- with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the Station House Officer of the police station
concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) the applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by a police office as
and when required;
(ii) the applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer;
(iii) the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court
and if he has passport the same shall be deposited by him before the S.S.P./S.P.
concerned.
6. In default of any of the conditions, the Investigating Officer is at liberty to file appropriate
application for cancellation of anticipatory bail granted to the applicant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159878128/ 3
Jai Prakash Gupta @ Nate vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
7. The Investigating Officer is directed to conclude the investigation of the present case in
accordance with law expeditiously preferably within a period of three months from the date of
production of a copy of this order independently without being prejudice by any observation made
by this Court while considering and deciding the present anticipatory bail application of the
applicant.
8. The applicant is directed to produce a copy of this order before the S.S.P./S.P. concerned within
ten days from today, who shall ensure the compliance of present order.
9. The application stands disposed of.
Order Date :- 1.5.2025 S.S.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159878128/ 4
