Jamal Ahamad vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 4 February, 2025
Jamal Ahamad vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ...
on 4 February, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:7402
Court No. - 15
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION U/S 438 CR.P.C. No. - 2595 of 2024
Applicant :- Jamal Ahamad
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. U.P. And Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Utkarsh Misra,Abhishek
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Shree Prakash Singh,J.
1. From perusal of the order sheet, it transpires that the notice has been issued to complainant/
informant/ opposite party no.2 and as per the office report the same has also been served but no one
is present for the opposite party no.2.
2. Heard learned counsel for the applicant, learned AGA for the State and perused the material
placed on record.
3. Instant application has been filed with the prayer to enlarge the accused-applicant on anticipatory
bail in Case Crime No.839 of 2018, under Sections 419, 420, 467, 468 & 471 I.P.C., Police
Station-Kotwali Nagar, District-Gonda.
4. From perusal of the order sheet, it appears that on 22.11.2024, the following order was passed:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83300732/ 1
Jamal Ahamad vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 4 February, 2025
"1.Heard Sri Abhishek, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Hari Shanker Bajpai,
learned Additional Government Advocate-I for the State.
2. The present applicant has filed the instant application under Section 438 Cr.P.C.
having apprehension that he may be arrested in Case Crime No.839 of 2018, under
Sections 419, 420, 467, 468 & 471 I.P.C., Police Station-Kotwali Nagar,
District-Gonda, as the charge-sheet has been filed against the present applicant.
3. Issue notice to opposite party No.2 returnable at an early date, for which,
necessary steps be taken within a week.
4. Office to proceed accordingly.
5. Let the counter affidavit be filed within a period of four weeks. Rejoinder affidavit,
if any, may be filed within two weeks thereafter.
6. List this case in the third week of January, 2025.
7. At the very outset, attention has been drawn towards Annexure No.8 of the
application which is an interim anticipatory bail order dated 09.12.2019 granted by
the learned Additional Session Judge, Gonda upto the stage of investigation. The
charge-sheet has been filed on 22.12.2019. The applicant filed petition before this
Court challenging the charge-sheet bearing U/S 482/378/407 No.699 of 2020;
Rajesh Bansal & another vs. State of U.P. and another and that petition was disposed
of vide order dated 06.02.2020 (Annexure No.11) giving liberty to the petitioner to
approach the learned trial court by filing appropriate application. The petitioner filed
discharge application which was rejected by the learned trial court. Thereafter, the
petitioner filed revision before the learned Session Court which was also rejected vide
order dated 04.09.2023 (Annexure No.12). After rejection of the aforesaid revision,
the petitioner could not appear before the learned trial court and the bailable warrant
has been issued against him.
8. Learned counsel for the applicant has stated that when the applicant was granted
an anticipatory bail by the learned court of Sessions till completion of investigation
and filing of the police report, the applicant duly participated in the investigation,
thereafter the charge-sheet has been filed. Though his discharge application has been
rejected but he is in apprehension that if he appears before the learned trial court he
may be taken into judicial custody. However, the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case in
re: Aman Preet Singh vs. C.B.I. through Director, Criminal Appeal No.929 of 2021
(arising out of SLP (Crl.) No.5234/2021) has held that if any accused person has not
been arrested during investigation and has co-operated with the investigation, there
is no need to arrest him after filing charge sheet unless there is a specific and cogent
reason.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83300732/ 2
Jamal Ahamad vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 4 February, 2025
9. Learned counsel for the applicant has further submitted that the present applicant
is ready to co-operate in the trial proceedings and shall not misuse the liberty of
anticipatory bail, if granted, therefore, his liberty may be protected till conclusion of
trial in view of the dictum of Apex Court rendered in re: Sushila Aggarwal Vs. State
(NCT of Delhi)-2020 SCC online SC 98 wherein it has been observed that
anticipatory bail may be extended till conclusion of trial. The present applicant is
having no prior criminal history of any kind whatsoever.
10. Learned Additional Government Advocate has however opposed the prayer for
anticipatory bail of the present applicant, but he could not dispute the aforesaid
contentions of learned counsel for the applicant.
11. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having perused the material
available on record and considering the fact that the applicant was granted interim
bail by the learned court below upto the completion of investigation and filing of the
police report; there is no criminal history against the present applicant and the
undertaking that he shall not misuse the liberty of anticipatory bail and shall
cooperate in the trial proceedings properly, I am of the considered view that liberty of
the present applicant may be protected.
12. Accordingly, the application for interim relief is allowed.
13. Therefore, without entering into merits of the issue, it is directed that in the event
of arrest, present applicant (Jamal Ahamad) shall be released on anticipatory bail in
the aforesaid case crime number till conclusion of trial on his furnishing a personal
bond with two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial court/
court concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) that the applicant shall appear before the trial court on each date fixed unless his
personal presence is exempted;
(ii) that the applicant shall not, directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade from
disclosing such facts to the court or to any police officer or tamper with the evidence;
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without prior permission of the court;
(iv) that the applicant shall not pressurize/ intimidate the prosecution witnesses and
shall not tamper with evidence during trial;
(v) that in case of breach of any of the above conditions the court below shall have the
liberty to cancel the bail;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83300732/ 3
Jamal Ahamad vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 4 February, 2025
(vi) that in default of any of the conditions mentioned above, the learned counsel for
the State shall be at liberty to file appropriate application for cancellation of
anticipatory bail granted to the applicant.
14. Before parting with, it is expected that the trial shall be concluded with expedition, strictly in
accordance with law, without adjourning the case for any unnecessary reason. Further, the learned
trial court may take all coercive measures, as per law, if either of the parties do not co-operate in the
trial proceedings properly."
5. From perusal of the order dated 22.11.2024, it transpires that State counsel has failed to
demonstrate that there is any adversarial fact which are pleaded in the bail application. This Court
finds that the applicant was enlarged on an interim anticipatory bail after thorough considering the
merits of the case. The learned counsel for the State has also failed to substantiate that the present
applicant is not cooperating with the investigation proceedings.
6. In view of the aforesaid, the present anticipatory bail application is hereby allowed while
extending anticipatory bail to the applicant, namely, Jamal Ahamad till disposal of the trial subject
to the following conditions:-
(i) that the applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer
as and when required;
(ii) that the applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence;
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the
court;
(iv) that the applicant shall appear before the trial court on each date fixed, unless
personal presence is exempted; and
(v) that the applicant shall not pressurize/intimidate the prosecution witness.
7. In case of default, it would be open for the Investigating Agency to move application for vacation
of this interim protection.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025 Mohd. Sharif
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83300732/ 4
