Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
Bench: G.Narendar, P.N.Desai
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 28TH DAY OF JUNE, 2022
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE G. NARENDAR
AND
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE P.N.DESAI
WRIT PETITION NO.35043 OF 2018 (S-KSAT)
BETWEEN:
JAMEER PASHA,
AGED ABOUT 50 YEARS,
S/O. ABDUL NAZEER,
WORKING AS SECOND DIVISION
ASSISTANT, O/O TAHSILDAR,
KOLAR.
... PETITIONER
(BY SRI. K.N.PHANINDRA., SENIOR ADVOCATE FOR
SRI. KARTHIK.V., ADVOCATE)
AND:
STATE OF KARNATAKA
REPRESENTED BY ITS PRINCIPAL
SECRETARY TO GOVERNMENT,
REVENUE DEPARTMENT,
M.S BUILDING, BENGALURU-560 001.
... RESPONDENT
(BY SRI. RAJENDRA PRASAD.,HCGP)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226 AND
227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO SET ASIDE THE
ORDER DTD 30.03.2017 PASSED BY THE KARNATAKA STATE
ADMINISTRATIVE TRIBUNAL AT BANGALORE IN APPLICATION
NO.9730 OF 2016 VIDE ANNX-A AND ALLOW APPLICATION
2
NO.9730 OF 2016 FILED BY THE PETITIONER BEFORE THE
TRIBUNAL VIDE ANNX-B AS PRAYED FOR THEREIN AND GRANT ALL
CONSEQUENTIAL BENEFITS AND ETC.,
THIS WRIT PETITION COMING ON FOR PRELIMINARY
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 1
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
HEARING IN 'B' GROUP, THIS DAY, P.N.DESAI J., PASSED THE
FOLLOWING:
ORDER
This petition is filed challenging the order dated 30.03.2017 passed in Application No.9730/2016 by
the Karnataka State Administrative Tribunal, Bengaluru, wherein the tribunal dismissed the
application.
2. In brief the contention of the petitioner is that he was working as Group-D employee in the
Department of Revenue with effect from 25.05.1988 and at the relevant point of time, the petitioner
was working at NadaKacheri, Byrakur, Kolar District. The petitioner was promoted as Second
Division Assistant on 31.07.2003. On 21.05.2009, an application was made by one
Mr.Thimmanabhovi for issue of grant certificate and Saguvali chit in respect of land bearing
Sy.No.10 to the extent of 02 acres 20 guntas of Kaggalanatha Village. It was alleged by the said
Thimmanabhovi that for issuance of RTC, the petitioner demanded bribe amount of Rs.2,000/- and
the same was complained to the office of the Lokayukta. In this regard, a trap was laid in the office
of the petitioner. On the basis of the said trap, a criminal case was filed against the petitioner before
the Principal Sessions Judge, Kolar. Then in the criminal case, the learned Sessions Judge vide
order dated 07.03.2011, acquitted the petitioner. Subsequently, after acquittal, a departmental
enquiry was initiated and the enquiry was entrusted to the office of the Lokayukta under Rule 14A of
the Karnataka Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules (for short hereinafter
referred to as 'KCS (CCA), Rules) by the State Government. Thereafter, the Government by referring
to the enquiry report vide order dated 26.09.2016, has imposed the punishment of compulsory
retirement from service against the petitioner. The said order came to be challenged by the
petitioner before the tribunal.
The tribunal dismissed the said application. Aggrieved by the same, this present writ petition is
filed.
3. We have heard Sri. K.N.Phanindra, learned Senior counsel for Sri.Karthik V, learned counsel for
petitioner and Sri. B.Rajendra Prasad, learned HCGP for respondent.
4. Learned Senior counsel for the petitioner argued that the tribunal has dismissed the application
of the petitioner on the ground that the acquittal of the petitioner by the criminal court was not a
honorable acquittal, wherein, the criminal court has given a categorical finding that there was no
evidence to prove the demand and acceptance of bribe by the petitioner. The phraseology employed
by the criminal court cannot said to be illegal. On the other hand, it is a clear case of an honorable
acquittal. The learned counsel further argued that the criminal court has fully exonerated the
accused from the charge leveled against him, after holding a full fledged trial. Again on the same set
of facts and evidence disciplinary enquiry was initiated in order to trouble the petitioner. The
learned counsel argued that both the complainant and shadow witnesses have not supported the
case of the prosecution and except the investigating officer, the other witnesses have not supported
the charge against the petitioner. Evidence of shadow witness is also not enough to prove the charge
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 2
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
against the petitioner. The tribunal without considering the pleadings and the materials placed on
record, rejected the application. Hence, prayed to allow the writ petition.
5. On the other hand, learned HCGP argued that the consideration of departmental enquiry are
different from appreciation of evidence in criminal case. It is based on preponderance of
probabilities and strict rules of Evidence Act is not applicable. Learned HCGP submitted that the
Enquiry Officer after considering the evidence placed against the Delinquent Government Officer
(for short hereinafter referred to as 'DGO') has held the charges are proved. The disciplinary
authority after considering the explanation imposed appropriate penalty of compulsory retirement.
Therefore, merely because the petitioner is acquitted in the criminal case, is not a ground to set
aside finding of the Departmental Enquiry and the punishment imposed on the petitioner. Hence,
prayed to dismiss the petition.
6. We have perused the records.
7. Having heard the submissions made by learned counsel for the parties, the point that would arise
for our consideration is:
"When there is a criminal case and departmental enquiry are instituted against the petitioner on the
identical set of evidence, facts and circumstances, what is the effect of acquittal of petitioner in
criminal case on the departmental proceedings against him?"
In this regard, it is useful to refer to the principles stated by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court.
8. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of G.M.Tank Vs. State of Gujarat and others - (2006) 5
SCC 446 held that normally where the accused is acquitted honorably and completely exonerated of
the charges, it would not be expedient to continue departmental enquiry on the very same charge or
grounds or evidence. At paragraph No.21 to 24 it is held as under:
"21. We shall now scan through the judgments on this issue.
22. In Capt. M. Paul Anthony v. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd. (1999) 3 SCC 679, the
question before this Court was as to whether the departmental proceedings and the
proceedings in a criminal case launched on the basis of the same set of facts can be
continued simultaneously. In Paragraph 34, this Court held as under:
"34. There is yet another reason for discarding the whole of the case of the
respondents. As pointed out earlier, the criminal case as also the departmental
proceedings were based on identical set of facts, namely "the raid conducted at the
appellant's residence and recovery of incriminating articles therefrom". The findings
recorded by the enquiry officer, a copy of which has been placed before us, indicate
that the charges framed against the appellant were sought to the proved by police
officers and panch witnesses, who had raided the house of the appellant and had
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 3
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
effected recovery. They were the only witnesses examined by the enquiry officer and
the enquiry officer, relying upon their statements, came to the conclusion that the
charges were established against the appellant. The same witnesses were examined in
the criminal case but the Court, on a consideration of the entire evidence, came to the
conclusion that no search was conducted nor was any recovery made from the
residence of the appellant. The whole case of the prosecution was thrown out and the
appellant was acquitted. In this situation, therefore, where the appellant is acquitted
by a judicial pronouncement with the finding that the "raid and recovery" at the
residence of the appellant were not proved, it would be unjust, unfair and rather
oppressive to allow the findings recorded at the ex parte departmental proceedings to
stand."
23. In R.P. Kapur vs. Union of India - (1964) 5 SCR 431, a Constitution Bench of this Court
observed: "If the trial of the criminal charge results in conviction, disciplinary proceedings are
bound to follow against the public servant so convicted. Even in case of acquittal proceedings may
follow, where the acquittal is other than honourable." (emphasis supplied)
24. In Corpn. of the City of Nagpur, Civil Lines, Nagpur & Anr. Vs. Ramchandra G. Modak & Ors. -
(1981) 2 SCC 714, the same question arose before this Court. This Court, in paragraph 6, held as
under:
"6. The other question that remains is if the respondents are acquitted in the criminal
case whether or not the departmental inquiry pending against the respondents would
have to continue. This is a matter which is to be decided by the department after
considering the nature of the findings given by the criminal court. Normally where
the accused is acquitted honorably and completely exonerated of the charges it would
not be expedient to continue a departmental inquiry on the very same charges or
grounds or evidence, but the fact remains, however, that merely because the accused
is acquitted, the power of the authority concerned to continue the departmental
inquiry is not taken away nor is its direction (discretion) in any way fettered. "
(emphasis supplied)."
9. In the case of Roop Singh Negi Vs. Punjab National Bank and others - (2009) 2 SCC 570 Hon'ble
Supreme Court dealt with the manner in which the charges are required to be proved in a
departmental enquiry and at paragraph Nos.16, 17, 18, 21, 22 and 23 it is held as under:
"16. In Union of India vs. H.C.Goel [(1964) 4 SCR 718, it was held:
"22.....The two infirmities are separate and distinct though, conceivably, in some
cases, both may be present. There may be cases of no evidence even where the
Government is acting bona fide; the said infirmity may also exist where the
Government is acting mala fide and in that case, the conclusion of the Government
not supported by any evidence may be the result of mala fides, but that does not
mean that if it is proved that there is no evidence to support the conclusion of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 4
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
Government, a writ of certiorari will not issue without further proof of mala fides.
That is why we are not prepared to accept the learned Attorney General's argument
that since no mala fides are alleged against the appellant in the present case, no writ
of certiorari can be issued in favour of the respondent.
23. That takes us to the merits of the respondent's contention that the conclusion of
the appellant that the third charge framed against the respondent had been proved, is
based on no evidence. The learned Attorney General has stressed before us that in
dealing with this question, we ought to bear in mind the fact that the appellant is
acting with the determination to root out corruption, and so, if it is shown that the
view taken by the appellant is a reasonably possible view, this Court should not sit in
appeal over that decision and seek to decide whether this Court would have taken the
same view or not. This contention is no doubt absolutely sound. The only test which
we can legitimately apply in dealing with this part of the respondent's case is, is there
any evidence on which a finding can be made against the respondent that Charge 3
was proved against him? In exercising its jurisdiction under Article 226 on such a
plea, the High Court cannot consider the question about the sufficiency or adequacy
of evidence in support of a particular conclusion. That is a matter which is within the
competence of the authority which deals with the question; but the High Court can
and must enquire whether there is any evidence at all in support of the impugned
conclusion. In other words, if the whole of the evidence led in the enquiry is accepted
as true, does the conclusion follow that the charge in question is proved against the
respondent? This approach will avoid weighing the evidence. It will take the evidence
as it stands and only examine whether on that evidence legally the impugned
conclusion follows or not. Applying this test, we are inclined to hold that the
respondent's grievance is well founded because, in our opinion, the finding which is
implicit in the appellant's order dismissing the respondent that Charge 3 is proved
against him is based on no evidence."
17. In Moni Shankar v. Union of India and Anr. [(2008) 3 SCC 484], this Court held:
"17. The departmental proceeding is a quasi- judicial one. Although the provisions of
the Evidence Act are not applicable in the said proceeding, principles of natural
justice are required to be complied with. The Court exercising power of judicial
review are entitled to consider as to whether while inferring commission of
misconduct on the part of a delinquent officer relevant piece of evidence has been
taken into consideration and irrelevant facts have been excluded therefrom.
Inference on facts must be based on evidence which meet the requirements of legal
principles. The Tribunal was, thus, entitled to arrive at its own conclusion on the
premise that the evidence adduced by the department, even if it is taken on its face
value to be correct in its entirety, meet the requirements of burden of proof, namely -
preponderance of probability. If on such evidences, the test of the doctrine of
proportionality has not been satisfied, the Tribunal was within its domain to
interfere. We must place on record that the doctrine of unreasonableness is giving
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 5
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
way to the doctrine of proportionality."
18. In Narinder Mohan Arya vs. United India Insurance Co. Ltd. & ors. - (2006) 4 SCC 713,
whereupon both the learned counsel relied upon, this Court held:
"26. In our opinion the learned Single Judge and consequently the Division Bench of
the High Court did not pose unto themselves the correct question. The matter can be
viewed from two angles. Despite limited jurisdiction a civil court, it was entitled to
interfere in a case where the report of the Enquiry Officer is based on no evidence. In
a suit filed by a delinquent employee in a civil court as also a writ court, in the event
the findings arrived at in the departmental proceedings are questioned before it
should keep in mind the following: (1) the enquiry officer is not permitted to collect
any material from outside sources during the conduct of the enquiry. [See State of
Assam and Anr. v. Mahendra Kumar Das and Ors. [(1970) 1 SCC 709] (2) In a
domestic enquiry fairness in the procedure is a part of the principles of natural justice
[See Khem Chand v. Union of India and Ors. (1958 SCR 1080) and State of Uttar
Pradesh v. Om Prakash Gupta (1969) 3 SCC 775]. (3) Exercise of discretionary power
involve two elements - (i) Objective and (ii) subjective and existence of the exercise of
an objective element is a condition precedent for exercise of the subjective element.
[See K.L. Tripathi v. State of Bank of India and Ors. (1984) 1 SCC 43]. (4) It is not
possible to lay down any rigid rules of the principles of natural justice which depends
on the facts and circumstances of each case but the concept of fair play in action is
the basis. [See Sawai Singh v. State of Rajasthan (1986) 3 SCC 454] (5) The enquiry
officer is not permitted to travel beyond the charges and any punishment imposed on
the basis of a finding which was not the subject- matter of the charges is wholly
illegal. [See Director (Inspection & quality Control) Export Inspection Council of
India and Ors. v. Kalyan Kumar Mitra and Ors. 1987 (2) Cal. LJ 344. (6) Suspicion or
presumption cannot take the place of proof even in a domestic enquiry. The writ
court is entitled to interfere with the findings of the fact of any tribunal or authority
in certain circumstances. [See Central Bank of India Ltd. v.
Prakash Chand Jain (1969) 1 SCR 735, Kuldeep Singh v. Commissioner of Police and Ors. (1999) 2
SCC 10]."
23. Furthermore, the order of the disciplinary authority as also the appellate authority are not
supported by any reason. As the orders passed by them have severe civil consequences, appropriate
reasons should have been assigned. If the enquiry officer had relied upon the confession made by
the appellant, there was no reason as to why the order of discharge passed by the Criminal Court on
the basis of self-same evidence should not have been taken into consideration. The materials
brought on record pointing out the guilt are required to be proved. A decision must be arrived at on
some evidence, which is legally admissible. The provisions of the Evidence Act may not be applicable
in a departmental proceeding but the principles of natural justice are. As the report of the Enquiry
Officer was based on merely ipse dixit as also surmises and conjectures, the same could not have
been sustained. The inferences drawn by the Enquiry Officer apparently were not supported by any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 6
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
evidence. Suspicion, as is well known, however high may be, can under no circumstances be held to
be a substitute for legal proof.
10. Further the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Allahabad Bank and others Vs. Krishna
Narayan Tewari reported in (2017) 2 SCC 308 at paragraph Nos.7 and 10 it is held as under:
7. We have given our anxious consideration to the submissions at the Bar. It is true
that a writ court is very slow in interfering with the findings of facts recorded by a
Departmental Authority on the basis of evidence available on record. But it is equally
true that in a case where the Disciplinary Authority records a finding that is
unsupported by any evidence whatsoever or a finding which no reasonable person
could have arrived at, the writ court would be justified if not duty - bound to examine
the matter and grant relief in appropriate cases. The writ court will certainly interfere
with disciplinary enquiry or the resultant orders passed by the competent authority
on that basis if the enquiry itself was vitiated on account of violation of principles of
natural justice, as is alleged to be the position in the present case. Non-application of
mind by the Enquiry Officer or the Disciplinary Authority, non-recording of reasons
in support of the conclusion arrived at by them are also grounds on which the writ
courts are justified in interfering with the orders of punishment. The High Court has,
in the case at hand, found all these infirmities in the order passed by the Disciplinary
Authority and the Appellate Authority. The respondent's case that the enquiry was
conducted without giving a fair and reasonable opportunity for leading evidence in
defense has not been effectively rebutted by the appellant. More importantly the
Disciplinary Authority does not appear to have properly appreciated the evidence nor
recorded reasons in support of his conclusion. To add insult to injury the Appellate
Authority instead of recording its own reasons and independently appreciating the
material on record, simply reproduced the findings of the Disciplinary Authority. All
told, the Enquiry Officer, the Disciplinary Authority and the Appellate Authority have
faltered in the discharge of their duties resulting in miscarriage of justice. The High
Court was in that view right in interfering with the orders passed by the Disciplinary
Authority and the Appellate Authority.
10. The next question is whether the respondent would be entitled to claim arrears of
salary as part of service/retiral benefits in full or part. The High Court has been
rather ambivalent in that regard. We say so because while the High Court has
directed release of service/retiral benefits, it is not clear whether the same would
include salary for the period between the date of removal and the date of
superannuation. Taking a liberal view of the matter, we assume that the High Court's
direction for release of service benefits would include the release of his salaries also
for the period mentioned above. We are, however, of the opinion that while
proceedings need not be remanded for a fresh start from the beginning, grant of full
salary for the period between the date of dismissal and the date of superannuation
would not also be justified.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 7
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
11. It is evident from the principles stated in the above referred decisions that the writ
court would be slow in interfering with the findings of fact recorded by a
departmental authority on the basis of evidence available on record. But it is equally
true, that in a case, where the disciplinary authority records a finding that is
unsupported by any evidence, whatsoever or a finding which no reasonable person
could have arrived at, the writ court would be justified if not duty-bound to examine
the matter and grant relief in appropriate cases. The writ court will certainly interfere
with disciplinary enquiry or the resultant orders passed by the competent authority.
Non-application of mind by the enquiry officer or the disciplinary authority,
non-recording of reasons in support of the conclusion arrived at by them are also
grounds on which the writ courts are justified in interfering with the orders of
punishment. When there is no infirmity in the order passed by the disciplinary
authority and appellate authority, the writ court is justified in not interfering with the
order passed by such order of the tribunal. In the light of these decisions, we have
considered the petitioner's contention.
12. Admittedly, a criminal case was instituted against the petitioner stating that the
petitioner/accused demanded a sum of Rs.2,000/- as bribe for official favour, it was
subsequently reduced to a sum of Rs.1,500/-. The petitioner received an advance of
Rs.1,000/- on 27.05.2009. It is alleged that if the complainant pays the balance sum
of Rs.500/-, petitioner would proceed to make an entry of his name in the Pahani
(RTC). Admittedly, the criminal case ended in acquittal of petitioner on 07.03.2011.
Thereafter, in the year 2011, respondent No.2 moved for entrustment of an enquiry
and after enquiry, the punishment of compulsory retirement from service was
imposed on petitioner on 26.09.2016. Totally six witnesses were examined as PWs.1
to 6 on behalf of the prosecution before the criminal court and out of them in the
disciplinary enquiry proceedings, except PW.3 - Gangadharaiah and PW.5 -
Vasanthkumar, other witnesses i.e., PW.1 - Thimmanabhovi, PW.2 - Shivashankar,
PW.4 - Thimmagangaiah and PW.6 - Manjunath/I.O. were examined. The
complainant who was examined as PW.1, did not support the case of the prosecution.
PW.2 has clearly stated during the evidence in criminal case and during the enquiry
proceedings that he has not heard DGO demanding Rs.500/- from the complainant
and he was standing about 10- 15 feet away. Due to the distance, he could not hear
the conversation. Investigating Officer/PW.6 - Manjunath has admitted before the
criminal court that during the course of investigation, he came to know that name of
the complainant has already been entered in the computerised pahani (RTC) much
before filing of the complaint by the complainant against the petitioner. PW.6 also
stated that the complainant was not fluent either in writing or reading Kannada and
put his signature on the written complaint drafted by some other person. PW.4
admitted that he was unable to identify the voice of the DGO and he stated that the
voice recorded was not of the DGO. It is clear from the evidence that name of the
complainant was appearing in computerized RTC from the year 2003-2004.
Therefore, it cannot be believed that for entering the name of complainant to RTC,
the petitioner demanded bribe amount. The phani's are computerized and anybody
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 8
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
can take the computerized phani by going to "Bhoomi" app. a Government of
Karnataka Website. Hence, as on the date of filing of the complaint, admittedly no
work of the complainant was pending with the petitioner/DGO. Therefore, the
question of the petitioner demanding money for showing the official favour does not
arise. The finding of the tribunal is based on some guess work. There is no iota
evidence against DGO. The tribunal ought to have exonerated the petitioner from the
charges leveled against him. We have perused the order dated 29.06.2016
(Annexure-13) passed by the Government imposing penalty on petitioner of
compulsory retirement.
There is no discussion or reasons as to why the report is to be accepted. Even the reply of the
petitioner/Delinquent Employee is not referred and no reasons are found as to why the reply was
not acceptable?
13. In order to appreciate that as to whether the acquittal of petitioner in criminal case is honorable
acquittal or not, it is necessary to refer to the judgment passed in PCA C.C.No.5/2010 dated
07.03.2011 by the learned Sessions Judge, Kolar in PCA C.C.No.5/2010
14. Learned Principal Sessions Judge at paragraph No.16 of judgment observed as under:
"16. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the accused that, the entire case of
prosecution is false. PW1 Thimmanabovi and PW2 Shivashankar are the two
witnesses examined by the prosecution to prove that accused demanded and accepted
the bribe.
Unfortunately, for the prosecution PW.1 Thimmanabovi, complainant has not
supported the case of prosecution and has totally turned hostile.
It is the case of prosecution that, the land bearing Sy.No.10 of Kaggalanatha village
was granted to the complainant by Tahsildar, Mulbagal by an order dated
29.06.2009 under No.LND RUO 195/1991-92 dated 29.06.1996. This fact has not
been denied by the accused.
The prosecution is able to prove that, the said land was granted to the complainant. It
is further case of prosecution that, even as on 27.05.2009 the date on which
complaint was filed, the name of complainant was not appearing in computerized
pahani in respect of the said land. In this regard, he had approached the Taluka office
many times. Hence, the prosecution was required to prove that the name of
complainant was not appearing in computerized pahani.
The learned counsel has cross-examined PW3 Gangadharaiah and PW6 Manjunatha
in this regard. PW3 Gangadharaiah in his cross- examination states that, from the
year 2003-04 the name of complainant was appearing in computerized pahani.
Similarly, PW6 Manjunatha states that, when he made enquiry, he came to know
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 9
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
that, the name of complainant was already entered in computerized pahani before the
complainant filed his complaint. It means that, complainant had filed a false
complaint alleging that his name was not entered in computerized pahani in respect
of Sy.No.10 of Kaggalanatha village and in this connection he approached the
accused. The very basis of the case of prosecution is shaken by this evidence."
15. Therefore, in view of the clear finding given by the learned Principal Sessions Judge in criminal
case, the tribunal without considering the said judgment had opined that acquittal of the petitioner
is not a honorable acquittal, such a observation of Tribunal is illegal and not based on any material.
16. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of S.Bhaskar Reddy and another Vs. Superintendent of
Police and another - (2015) 2 SCC 365 and at paragraph No.22 as under:
22. The meaning of the expression "honourable acquittal" was discussed by this Court
in detail in Inspector General of Police v. S. Samuthiram- (2013) 1 SCC 598, the
relevant paragraph from the said case reads as under :-
"24. The meaning of the expression "honourable acquittal" came up for consideration
before this Court in RBI v. Bhopal Singh Panchal - (1994) 1 SCC 541.. In that case,
this Court has considered the impact of Regulation 46(4) dealing with honourable
acquittal by a criminal court on the disciplinary proceedings. In that context, this
Court held that the mere acquittal does not entitle an employee to reinstatement in
service, the acquittal, it was held, has to be honourable. The expressions "honourable
acquittal", "acquitted of blame", "fully exonerated" are unknown to the Code of
Criminal Procedure or the Penal Code, which are coined by judicial pronouncements.
It is difficult to define precisely what is meant by the expression "honourably
acquitted". When the accused is acquitted after full consideration of prosecution
evidence and that the prosecution had miserably failed to prove the charges levelled
against the accused, it can possibly be said that the accused was honourably
acquitted."
(Emphasis supplied)."
17. The Coordinate Bench of this Court where one of us (Hon'ble GNJ) was a member, in
W.P.No.114543/2015 dated 08.01.2021 in the case of Srikrishna Nagendrappa Megalamani Vs. The
State of Karnataka referred the decision of Hon'ble Supreme Court on the same set of facts and at
paragraph nos.8 and 9 it is held as under:
8. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of A.P SRTC vs. Mohd. Yousuf Miya
reported in (1997) 2 SCC "8. ... The purpose of departmental enquiry and of
prosecution are two different and distinct aspects. The criminal prosecution is
launched for an offence for violation of a duty, the offender owes to the society or for
breach of which law has provided that the offender shall make satisfaction to the
public. So crime is an act of commission in violation of law or of omission of public
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 10
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
duty. The departmental enquiry is to maintain discipline in the service and efficiency
of public service. It would, therefore, be expedient that the disciplinary proceedings
are conducted and completed as expeditiously as possible. It is not, therefore,
desirable to lay down any guidelines as inflexible rules in which the departmental
proceedings may or may not be stayed pending trial in criminal case against the
delinquent officer. Each case requires to be considered in the backdrop of its own
facts and circumstances. There would be no bar to proceed simultaneously with
departmental enquiry and trial of a criminal case unless the charge in the criminal
trial is of grave nature involving complicated questions of fact and law. Offence
generally implies infringement of public (sic duty), as distinguished from mere
private rights punishable under criminal law.
When trial for criminal offence is conducted it should be in accordance with proof of the offence as
per the evidence defined under the provisions of the Evidence Act. Converse is the case of
departmental enquiry. The enquiry in a departmental proceeding relates to conduct or breach of
duty of the delinquent officer to punish him for his misconduct defined under the relevant statutory
rules or law. That the strict standard of proof or applicability of the Evidence Act stands excluded is
a settled legal position. The enquiry in the departmental proceedings relates to the conduct of the
delinquent officer and proof in that behalf is not as high as in an offence in criminal charge. It is
seen that invariably the departmental enquiry has to be conducted expeditiously so as to effectuate
efficiency in public administration and the criminal trial will take its own course. The nature of
evidence in criminal trial is entirely different from the departmental proceedings. In the former,
prosecution is to prove its case beyond reasonable doubt on the touchstone of human conduct. The
standard of proof in the departmental proceedings is not the same as of the criminal trial. The
evidence also is different from the standard point of the Evidence Act. The evidence required in the
departmental enquiry is not regulated by the Evidence Act. Under these circumstances, what is
required to be seen is whether the departmental enquiry would seriously prejudice the delinquent in
his defence at the trial in a criminal case. It is always a question of fact to be considered in each case
depending on its own facts and circumstances. In this case, we have seen that the charge is failure to
anticipate the accident and prevention thereof. It has nothing to do with the culpability of the
offence under Sections 304-A and 338 IPC. Under these circumstances, the High Court was not
right in staying the proceedings."
The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Ajit Kumar Nag v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd. reported in (2005) 7
SCC 764 in paragraph No.11 has held as under:
"11. As far as acquittal of the appellant by a criminal court is concerned, in our
opinion, the said order does not preclude the Corporation from taking an action if it
is otherwise permissible. In our judgment, the law is fairly well settled. Acquittal by a
criminal court would not debar an employer from exercising power in accordance
with the Rules and Regulations in force. The two proceedings, criminal and
departmental, are entirely different. They operate in different fields and have
different objectives. Whereas the object of criminal trial is to inflict appropriate
punishment on the offender, the purpose of enquiry proceedings is to deal with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 11
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
delinquent departmentally and to impose penalty in accordance with the service
rules. In a criminal trial, incriminating statement made by the accused in certain
circumstances or before certain officers is totally inadmissible in evidence. Such strict
rules of evidence and procedure would not apply to departmental proceedings. The
degree of proof which is necessary to order a conviction is different from the degree
of proof necessary to record the commission of delinquency. The rule relating to
appreciation of evidence in the two proceedings is also not similar. In criminal law,
burden of proof is on the prosecution and unless the prosecution is able to prove the
guilt of the accused "beyond reasonable doubt", he cannot be convicted by a court of
law. In a departmental enquiry, on the other hand, penalty can be imposed on the
delinquent officer on a finding recorded on the basis of "preponderance of
probability". Acquittal of the appellant by a Judicial Magistrate, therefore, does not
ipso facto absolve him from the liability under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the
Corporation. We are, therefore, unable to uphold the contention of the appellant that
since he was acquitted by a criminal court, the impugned order [Ajit Kumar Nag v.
Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd., 2004 SCC On Line Cal 59: (2004) 4 LLN 512] dismissing him
from service deserves to be quashed and set aside."
The Hon'ble supreme Court in the case of Shashi Bhusan Prasad Vs. Inspector General, CISF
reported in (2019) 7 SCC 797 in paragraph Nos.19, 20, 21 and 22 has held as under:
"19. We are in full agreement with the exposition of law laid down by this Court and it
is fairly well settled that two proceedings criminal and departmental are entirely
different. They operate in different fields and have different objectives. Whereas the
object of criminal trial is to inflict appropriate punishment of an offender, the
purpose of enquiry proceedings is to deal with the delinquent departmentally and to
impose penalty in accordance with the service rules. The degree of proof which is
necessary to order a conviction is different from the degree of proof necessary to
record the commission of delinquency. Even the rule relating to appreciation of
evidence in the two proceedings is also not similar. In criminal law, burden of proof is
on the prosecution and unless the prosecution is able to prove the guilt of the accused
beyond reasonable doubt, he cannot be convicted by a court of law whereas in the
departmental enquiry, penalty can be imposed on the delinquent on a finding
recorded on the basis of "preponderance of probability".
Acquittal by the court of competent jurisdiction in a judicial proceeding does not ipso facto absolve
the delinquent from the liability under the disciplinary jurisdiction of the authority. This what has
been considered by the High Court in the impugned judgment [Shashi Bhusan Prasad v. CISF, 2008
SCC On Line Ori 544 : 2008 Lab IC 3733] in detail and needs no interference by this Court.
20. The judgment in M.Paul Anthony case (M.Paul Anthony V. Bharat Gold Mines Ltd., (1999) 3
SCC 679: 1999 SCC (L &S) 810] on which the learned counsel for the appellant has placed reliance
was a case where a question arose for consideration as to whether the departmental proceedings and
proceedings in a criminal case on the basis of same sets of facts and evidence can be continued
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 12
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
simultaneously and this Court answered in para 22 as under:
(SCC p.691) (Emphasis supplied by this Court) "22. The conclusions which are
deducible from various decisions of this Court referred to above are:
(i) Departmental proceedings and proceedings in a criminal case can proceed
simultaneously as there is no bar in their being conducted simultaneously, though
separately.
(ii) If the departmental proceedings and the criminal case are based on identical and
similar set of facts and the charge in the criminal case against the delinquent
employee is of a grave nature which involves complicated questions of law and fact, it
would be desirable to stay the departmental proceeding still the conclusion of the
criminal case.
(iii) Whether the nature of a charge in a criminal case is grave and whether
complicated questions of fact and law are involved in that case, will depend upon the
nature of offence, the nature of the case launched against the employee on the basis
of evidence and material collected against him during investigation or as reflected in
the charge-
sheet.
(iv) The factors mentioned at (ii) and (iii) above cannot be considered in isolation to
stay the departmental proceedings but due regard has to be given to the fact that the
departmental proceedings cannot be unduly delayed.
(v) If the criminal case does not proceed or its disposal is being unduly delayed, the
departmental proceedings, even if they were stayed on account of the pendency of the
criminal case, can be resumed and proceeded with so as to conclude them at an early
date, so that if the employee is found not guilty his honour may be vindicated and in
case he is found guilty, the administration may get rid of him at the earliest."
21. It may not be of assistance to the appellant in the instant case for the reason that
the charge leveled against the appellant in the criminal case and departmental
proceedings of which detailed reference has been made were on different sets of facts
and evidence having no nexus/co-relationship. The kind of criminal act/delinquency
which he had committed in discharge of his duties in the course of employment. That
apart, much before the judgment of the criminal case could be pronounced, the
departmental enquiry was concluded and after the enquiry officer had held him guilty
, he was punished with the penalty of dismissal from service.
22. The judgment in G.M, Tank case [G.M. Tank v. State of Gujarat, (2006) 5 SCC 446:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 13
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
2006 SCC (L&S) 1121] on which the learned counsel for the appellant has placed
reliance was a case where this court had proceeded on the premise that the charges in
the criminal case and departmental enquiry are grounded upon the same sets of facts
and evidence. This may not be of any assistance to the appellant as we have observed
that in the instant case the charge in the criminal case and departmental enquiry
were different having no nexus/co-relationship based on different sets of facts and
evidence which has been independently enquired in the disciplinary proceedings and
in a criminal trial and acquittal in criminal proceedings would not absolve the
appellant from the liability under the disciplinary proceedings instituted against him
in which he had been held guilty and in sequel thereto punished with the penalty of
dismissal from service." (emphasis supplied)
9. Thus, as per the ratio laid down in the aforementioned judgments, a single act can
lead to initiation of departmental proceedings and also a criminal case against the
person.
When a trial for criminal offence is conducted, it should be in accordance with the proof of offence
as per the evidence defined under the provisions of the Evidence Act, the guilt of the accused needs
to be proved beyond all reasonable doubt. However, the nature of evidence in a departmental
proceedings is entirely different from that of criminal trial. The standard of proof is not the same.
The evidence required in the departmental enquiry is not regulated by the Evidence Act. Here
malfeasance or misfeasance of the delinquent officer is proved based on the preponderance of
probabilities. Thus, it is possible that a person can be acquitted in a criminal trial, but found guilty
of the misconduct in a departmental proceedings, both arising out of the same act.
However, when the charges in both proceedings of the criminal case and the disciplinary
proceedings are similar and the evidence let in is also same and in the criminal trial when the
accused has been acquitted honourablly for want of evidence, in that event it is not advisable to hold
that the said person guilty in the departmental proceedings on the same piece of evidence. However,
it should be noticed that the acquittal needs to be honourable. When the accused is acquitted after
full consideration of prosecution evidence and that the prosecution had miserably failed to establish
the charge leveled against the accused, we can term it an Honourable acquittal. In those
circumstances, a divergent finding of the departmental enquiry can be set aside."
18. Therefore, in view of the principles stated in the above decisions, if the charges leveled against
the petitioner in criminal case and disciplinary enquiry are one and the same, then it is evident that
they are based on identical set of facts, evidence. They are co-related with each other. The witnesses
which are examined and documents which are marked both in the criminal trial and departmental
enquiry are same. It is evident that the evidence is also same. The Sessions Court has held that it is a
false case and there is no evidence to prove demand or acceptance of bribe by the petitioner. It is
also pertinent to note that the petitioner was acquitted by the learned Sessions Judge holding that,
there is not an iota of evidence against the petitioner to prove the demand and acceptance. But the
tribunal wrongly held that it is not a honorable acquittal and upheld the punishment which is not
based on legal finding and without application of mind.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 14
Jameer Pasha vs State Of Karnataka on 28 June, 2022
Therefore, penalty imposed by respondent No.1 based on the report dated 06.08.2015 warrants
interference at the hands of this Court, as the same suffers from perversity and illegality.
19. In view of the discussions made above, we hold that the order of tribunal is needs interference by
this Court.
Accordingly, we pass the following:
ORDER
(i) The writ petition is allowed.
(ii) The order of the tribunal dated 30.03.2017 passed in Application No.9730/2016
(Annexure-A) is set aside. The application filed by petitioner is allowed.
(iii) Consequently, the Government order dated 26.09.2016 (Annexure-A18) is also
set aside.
(iii) The respondent is directed to reinstate the petitioner forthwith.
(iv) The petitioner is entitled for all consequential benefits, in view of allowing the petition.
(v) The said benefits shall be paid to petitioner by respondent within a period of three months from
the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
(vi) No order as to costs.
Sd/-
JUDGE Sd/-
JUDGE HJ
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/47541449/ 15
