Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam
Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 29.09.2023
Pronounced on: 06.10.2023
AA No.3/2022
Jammu Development Authority through its
Vice-Chairperson, Vikas Bhawan, Rail Head Complex,
Jammu.
...Appellant(s)
Through:- Mr. Adarsh Sharma, Advocate
Versus
Saral Sugam Sewa Society, D-5, 348, Sangam Vihar,
New Delhi, 62 through its State Secretary, J&K, 47-A, 2nd Extension,
Gandhi Nagar, Jammu.
... Respondent
Through:- Ms. Shivani Jalali, Advocate
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Sanjeev Kumar-J
1. This appeal under Section 37 of the J&K Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1997 ["the Act"] arises
from the judgment dated 03.11.2021 passed by a Single Bench of this Court in an application filed
under Section 34 of the Act titled Jammu Development Authority v. Saral Sugam Sewa Society,
whereby the application of the appellant-authority for setting aside an award of the sole arbitrator
has been dismissed.
2. Before we advert to the grounds of challenge urged by the learned counsel appearing for the
appellant-authority, we deem it appropriate to state few material facts germane to the disposal of
this appeal.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 1
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
3. The appellant entered into an agreement/Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) with the
respondent-society on 15.12.2008 to undertake the work of operation, management and
maintenance of 28 public toilets on pay and use basis for a period of five years. The contract was to
commence w.e.f. 22.12.2008 and was to remain valid till 21.12.2013. It is important to note that
prior to the appellant-authority entering into MOU with the respondent-society, the
appellant-authority had an arrangement on similar lines with M/s Sulabh International Social
Service Organization [M/s Sulabh International"] in terms of MOU executed on 14.02.2006 for
maintenance and operation of public toilets on 22 sites. The aforesaid arrangement was later on
terminated by the appellant vide order No.SE/JDA/2471-75 dated 16.12.2008.
4. Feeling aggrieved, M/s Sulabh International filed two writ petitions before the learned Single
Bench; one challenging the MOU entered by the appellant with the respondent-society; and the
other challenging the order of the appellant dated 16.12.2008 terminating the arrangement with it.
M/s Sulabh International succeeded in obtaining interim relief in both the writ petitions. As per the
claim of the respondent-society, which is not refuted by the appellant, possession of all twenty eight
sites was handed over to the respondent on 22.12.2008. The respondent further claimed that after
passing of the interim directions by the Court, M/s Sulabh International assisted by the officers of
the appellant- authority took back the possession of twenty two sites 24.12.2008 and the
respondent-society was left only with six sites. On the contrary, case of the appellant is that the
respondent-society, which was handed over six sites, could not operate and maintain the public
toilets even on these sites.
5. Having regard to the respondent-society(cid:128)s failure to maintain even six sites, the
appellant-authority vide its communication No.JDA/Litg./2010/ 440 dated 12.05.2010 called upon
the respondent to discuss the matter and for taking decision to make an alternative arrangement for
maintenance of public toilets at litigation free six sites. On failure of the respondent-society to
attend the office of the appellant-authority, the respondent- society was put on notice to show cause
as to why the contract allotted in its favour be not cancelled. Having found no response from the
respondent-society, appellant-authority, claimably acting in larger public interest and public
convenience, cancelled the arrangement/MOU made with the respondent-society and revived the
arrangement already made with M/s Sulabh International with additional conditions by
withdrawing the order of termination of M/s Sulabh International passed on 15.12.2008. However,
the respondent-society, feeling aggrieved of such action of the appellant-authority, challenged its
termination as also the revival of MOU with M/s Sulabh International by filing OWP No.1154/2010.
The writ petition was opposed by the appellant by filing its objections.
6. Be that as it may, while the writ petition was pending consideration of the learned Single Judge,
the appellant-authority and the respondent-society arrived at an agreement that the claims of the
respondent-society arising out of the MOU dated 15.12.2008 may be adjudicated upon by Sh. Sunil
Sethi, Senior Advocate as sole arbitrator. Learned Single Judge took note of the agreement arrived
at between the parties and accordingly, disposed of OWP No.1154/2010 referring the
respondent-society and the appellant-authority to arbitration. Pursuant to the notice issued by the
arbitrator, both the parties caused their appearance before the learned Arbitrator. The
respondent-society filed its claims before the learned Arbitrator with the following reliefs:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 2
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
a) To revoke/revive the contract dated 15.12.2008 entered into between the
appellant-authority and the respondent-
society for operation and maintenance of as many as 28 toilet blocks situated across the entire
Jammu city.
b) To allow the respondent-society to work on the sites, which were allotted to them vide MOU
dated 15.12.2008.
c) Any other relief, order or direction which the Arbitrator deems fit and appropriate in the nature
and circumstances of the instant case.
7. The disputes which were highlighted by the respondent-society in its claims were enlisted from
(A) to (E) of para 9 under the heading „List of Disputes'. The appellant-authority filed its
objections/written statement but did not raise any counter claim. The evidence was led by the
respondent-society in the shape of an affidavit executed by one Sh. Gauri Shanker, Secretary of the
respondent-society. The appellant-authority also produced evidence in rebuttal and placed on
record affidavit of one T.R.Sargotra, Superintending Engineer.
8. It seems that during the course of hearing learned counsel appearing for the respondent-society
produced certain documents, which were taken on record by the learned arbitrator. To substantiate
the documents, the respondent-society produced another affidavit by way of evidence executed by
Sh. Gauri Shanker, Secretary of the respondent-society. In this second affidavit sworn in by Gouri
Shanker on behalf of the respondent- society fresh claims to the tune of Rs.47,64,925/- on various
heads, which included a claim of compensation for the damage suffered by the respondent-society,
were also put forth. Appellant-authority objected to the filing of second affidavit and filed its reply
affidavit. The Vice-Chairperson, JDA in her affidavit also refuted the fresh clams put forth by the
respondent- society.
9. Learned Arbitrator considered the entire matter and came to the conclusion that the
respondent-society had not been fairly treated and the contract entered into with it by the
appellant-authority was wrongfully terminated. The arbitrator did not allow the respondent-society
to continue with the operations for balance period of the contract for the reason that M/s Sulabh
International was not party to the arbitration and was executing the contract qua all the 28 toilet
blocks pursuant to the revival of their contract and cancellation of the MOU with the respondent-
society. The arbitrator, however, agreed with the respondent- society that on account of this action
of the appellant-authority, respondent-society had suffered loss. The claims put forth by the
respondent-society by way of evidence affidavit were accepted with modification and the
respondent-society was held entitled to a sum of Rs.34,23,473/- along with interest @ 9% to be
reckoned w.e.f. 02.05.2012 till realization of the amount. Accordingly, the Arbitrator passed its
award on 02.01.2013.
10. The Jammu Development Authority did not accept the award of the Arbitrator and filed a
petition under Section 34 of the Act before the learned Single Bench. The award of the arbitrator
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 3
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
was assailed by the appellant-authority on following grounds:-
i) That the award passed by the learned Arbitrator is in conflict with the public policy
of the State.
ii) The Arbitrator awarded compensation to the respondent-
society in respect of claims, which were neither pleaded nor projected either in the writ petition or in
the claims filed before the Arbitrator.
iii) The award is bad in the eye of law for the simple reason that the second affidavit filed by the
respondent-society was taken on record by the Arbitrator after the evidence stood closed and the
matter was being finally heard by the Arbitrator.
iv) That the Arbitrator did not spell out reasons in support of its conclusion that there was breach of
contract committed by the appellant-authority in cancelling the MOU entered by it with the
respondent-Society.
v) That no award for compensation in favour of the respondent-society could have been passed
without first quashing the order of cancellation of MOU dated 15.12.2008 entered into between the
appellant-authority and the respondent-society and also without terminating the arrangement made
with M/s Sulabh International by reviving its earlier contract.
11. It was urged that the respondent-society could not have been granted such relief without M/s
Sulabh International being party in the arbitration and without providing an opportunity of being
heard. The arbitrator has noticed this aspect and expressed his inability to put the
respondent-society back in the execution of the work without first declaring the arrangement made
by the appellant-authority with M/s Sulabh International bad in the eye of law.
12. The petition was opposed by the respondent-society. The learned Single Judge considered the
entire matter and did not find any merit in the petition filed by the appellant-authority. Learned
Single Judge after discussing the entire matter in light of the rival contentions addressed before it,
came to the conclusion that the appellant-authority had failed to show any perversity or error of fact
or law apparent on the face of the record. Vide order and judgment impugned in this appeal, the
petition filed by the appellant-authority under Section 34 of the Act was dismissed.
13. The appellant-authority is aggrieved and has called in question the impugned judgment as also
the award of the sole Arbitrator Sh. Sunil Sethi, Senior Advocate on the ground, which it had
pleaded and urged before the learned Single Judge.
14. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
15. First, the facts which are not in dispute before us.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 4
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
16. Indisputably, an agreement/MOU was entered into by the appellant-authority with the
respondent-society on 15.12.2008 to undertake the work of operation, management and
maintenance of 28 public toilets for a period of five years commencing from 22.12.2008. At the time
of execution of MOU dated 15.12.2008 with respondent-society the appellant-authority had an
arrangement with M/s Sulabh International in terms of MOU executed between them on
14.02.2006. This was, however, in respect of 22 sites. This arrangement was later on terminated by
the appellant-authority vide its order dated 15.12.2008. Feeling aggrieved, M/s Sulabh International
challenged the MOU dated 15.12.2008 entered between by the appellant-authority with
respondent-society as also the order of termination of its arrangement dated 15.12.2008 by filing
two writ petitions bearing OWP Nos.1018/2008 and 1039/2008. In OWP No.1018/2008, the order
of termination of contract with M/s Sulabh International passed by the appellant-authority dated
15.12.2008 was stayed. In OWP No.1039/2008, the appellant- authority was directed not to
withdraw the works allotted to M/s Sulabh International for all sites without resorting to due course
of law and the rules governing the subject. These directions were passed on 23.12.2008 and
24.12.2008 respectively.
17. Because of the interim directions passed in twin petitions filed by M/s Sulabh International, 22
sites out of 28 sites allotted to the respondent-society vide MOU dated 15.12.2008 could not be
operationalized by the respondent-society. The respondent- society, it seems, took over the
operation of 28 sites on 22.12.2008 but in view of the interim directions passed in the writ petitions
filed by M/s Sulabh International, M/s Sulabh International took over the operation and
maintenance of 22 sites which were subject matter of MOU dated 14.02.2006 entered into between
the appellant-authority and the said society.
18. The petitions filed by M/s Sulabh International remained pending for almost two years. M/s
Sulabh International continued to operate and maintain 22 sites whereas six litigation free sites only
were handed over to the respondent-society for operation and maintenance. It has amply come on
record that the respondent-society had been showing its inability to pay the agreed annual sum of
Rs.51000/- per site on the ground that these sites were less frequented by public and, therefore, not
generating enough revenue. The appellant-authority called upon the respondent-society to come
forward and discuss the matter. However, this was not responded by the respondent-society. The
appellant-authority even put the respondent-society on show cause notice as to why the
arrangement made with it for carrying out operation and maintenance of the six sites be not
terminated.
19. Indisputably, no reply was given by the respondent-society to the show cause notice. This paved
the way for the appellant- authority to cancel the contract. It is true that the contract/MOU dated
15.12.2008 was terminated by the appellant-authority only after M/s Sulabh International agreed to
withdraw both the writ petitions on account of some assurance extended by the appellant-authority.
It is pertinent to note that both the writ petitions filed by M/s Sulabh International came to be
dismissed as withdrawn vide order dated 27.08.2010. .It has also come on record that after
withdrawal of the writ petitions and the vacation of the interim directions, respondent-society
approached the appellant-authority for allotment of all the sites which were subject matter of MOU
dated 15.12.2008.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 5
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
20. It is further seen that the appellant-authority with a view to come out of the litigation launched
against it by M/s Sulabh International agreed with the later to revive the MOU entered between the
parties in the year 2006 with fresh conditions. It is in these circumstances and probably having
regard to the conduct of the respondent-society, which had shown its inability to pay the annual
amount of Rs.51,000/- in respect of six litigation free sites allotted to it, vide its
communication/order dated 09.09.2010 terminated the MOU dated 15.12.2008 entered with the
respondent-society. This made the respondent-society to file OWP No.1154/2010.
21. Indisputably, the entire thrust of OWP No.1154/2010, which was filed, inter alia, against M/s
Sulabh International also, was to seek quashment of the order of termination bearing No.560-
61/General dated 09.09.2010 as well as order of the appellant- authority bearing
No.558-59/JDA/General dated 09.09.2010, whereby the MOU entered between the
appellant-authority and M/s Sulabh International on 14.02.2006 had been revived after
withdrawing earlier order of termination dated 15.12.2008. In essence, the respondent-society
claimed restoration of status quo ante after the dismissal of two writ petitions of M/s Sulabh
International as withdrawn.
22. The writ petition, as stated above, was objected to by the appellant-authority. Interestingly, the
appellant-authority and the respondent-society without involving M/s Sulabh International, third
necessary party to the dispute, agreed before the Writ Court for disposal of the writ petition
referring the disputes raised by the respondent-society to the arbitration of sole arbitrator, namely,
Sh. Sunil Sethi, senior advocate.
23. The appellant-authority and respondent-society appeared before the arbitrator. The
respondent-society reiterated its claim, as was projected by it, in the writ petition. From a reading of
the entire claim petition, one would not find even a whisper with regard to any claim for damages
suffered by it except Clause (E) of para 9 under the heading "List of Disputes", which for facility of
reference is reproduced hereunder:-
"E) Is the petitioner organization is not entitled to any benefit in the form of damages
from the JDA who has left the petitioner organization a non voluntary Organization
high and dry and without any source of livelihood from the past three and a half
years."
24. Apart from the aforesaid paragraph, one would not find even a single word in respect of any
damage suffered by the respondent- society. There is no quantification of the damages nor any basis
laid down for such damages in the claim petition. And rightly so, as the respondent-society was
aware that they could not execute the contract due to stay orders granted by the High Court.
25. Reading the disputes raised by the respondent-society in paragraph No.9 and the prayer made
before the Arbitrator together, it would be beyond any cavil of doubt that the respondent-society
only claimed revival of its contract and handing back the possession of 28 toilet blocks allotted to it
vide MOU dated 15.12.2008 and nothing more. It is to this extent, the respondent-society led its
evidence by placing on record an affidavit sworn-in by one Gauri Shanker, the Secretary of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 6
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
respondent-society. The affidavit filed by the respondent-society, by way of evidence, does not spell
out any claim in respect of damages suffered by it on account of any breach of contract. Neither any
specific claims are raised nor basis for such claims indicated anywhere in the affidavit.
26. The sole grievance raised by the respondent-society before the Writ Court as also before the
learned Arbitrator was that after withdrawal of the writ petitions filed by M/s Sulabh International
and vacation of the interim directions passed therein, the respondent-society was entitled to the
revival of its contract and allotment of 28 sites which were subject matter of the MOU dated
15.12.2008.
27. The appellant-authority filed its objections in rebuttal as also the affidavit of Mr. S.R.Sargotra,
Superintending Engineer by way of evidence. As noted above, the appellant-authority did not raise
any counter claim. It is, thus, not in dispute that both the parties submitted only one affidavit each
by way of evidence to support their claim and stand respectively.
28. To appreciate the argument of learned counsel for the appellant-
authority that the second affidavit filed by the respondent-society was taken on record by the
arbitrator after the evidence stood closed and the matter was being finally heard, it would be
appropriate to take note of the certain orders passed by the learned arbitrator. The orders, which are
relevant for our purposes, are reproduced hereunder:-
Order dated 26th August, 2012 read as follows:-
"Dated:-26-08-2012 Sh. Avinash Gupta Legal Asst from JDA Sh. Gauri Shanker from
SOS Evidence affidavits have been filed by both the parties. Both the parties say that
they don(cid:128)t desire to file any further documents/pleadings. The matter as such is kept
for final arguments on the next date of hearing. The case to come up now 02.09.2012
at 10:00 am."
Order dated 2nd September, 2012 "Date:-02-09-2012 Mrs. Shivani Jalali Pandita Advocate for SSS
Society. None for JDA.
The date was fixed today for final arguments. Mrs. Shivani Jalali Pandita has partly argued the
matter and produced ten letters depicting the handing over of toilet blocks to her client. The same
are taken on record. The matter will be heard further on 9th of September, 2012 at 1.30 pm. JDA is
proceeded ex parte today because of its absence and there being no request for adjournment.
Matter to be taken up on 9th of September, 2012 at 1.30 pm." On 9th September 2012, following
order was passed by the arbitrator:-
"9-9-2012 Representatives of both parties present. Case fixed for further proceedings
for 17/09/2012 at 6 pm. Ex-parte against JDA is set aside on oral request."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 7
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
th Order dated 17 September, 2012:-
"17.9.2012 Mrs. Shivani Jalali Pandita Sh. Avinash Gupta Matter fixed for 24-9-2012
at 5 pm for evidence of claimant."
Order passed on 24th September, 2012 reads thus:-
"Date:- 24-09-2012 Sh. Pankaj Sharma Legal Asst for JDA Sh. Gauri Shanker from
SSS Society.
Both the parties are present. The matter has been kept for further evidence on the
next date of hearing which is fixed for 30.09.2012, as requested by both sides. Matter
to be taken up on 30th of September, 2012 at 11.00 am."
On 30.09.2012, following order was passed:-
"30-9-2012 Mrs. Shivani Jalali Pandita for SSS Society Nemo for JDA Matter is kept
for filing of additional evidence affidavit by SSS Society on 1-10-2012 at 7 pm."
Proceedings done on 1st October, 2012 read as follows:-
"Date:-01.10.2012 Mr. Pankaj Sharma Advocate for JDA Mrs. Shivani Jalali Pandita
Advocate for SSS Society. Additional evidence affidavit has been filed by SSS Society
today and statement is made b Mrs. Shivani Jalali Pandita (Advocate) for the society
that she does not want to file any further evidence.
JDA seeks one more opportunity to file evidence affidavit and same has been granted.
Let the matter to be taken up on 08.10.2012 at 7 pm."
On 8th October, 2012, following order came to be passed:-
"Date:-08-10-2012 Sh. Gauri Shanker from SSS Society Telephonic request has been
made by Sh. Adarsh Sharma Advocate for JDA that he may be given some time to file
reply affidavit to additional evidence affidavit filed by the claimant. Same is granted.
Matter now to be taken on 11.10.2012 at 7.00pm by giving last opportunity to file
reply affidavit to JDA."
On 11.10.2012, the order passed by the arbitrator is as follows:-
"11-10-2012 Sh. Pankaj Sharma Adv. for JDA Another opportunity for filing rreply
affidavit is sought by JDA. Same is granted and the matter is fixed for 16-10-2012 at 7
p.m. for last and final opportunity to JDA to file reply affidavit.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 8
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
Order announced."
Order dated 16th October, 2012 reads thus:-
"Date:- 16.10.2012 Mr. Vikas Pankaj Sharma Advocate for JDA Mr. Gauri Shanker for
SSS Society.
Reply evidence affidavit has been filed by JDA today and the copy has been provided
to the other party. The matter now be taken up on 21.10.2012 at 8.30 am for final
arguments. Let the matter to be taken up on 21.10.2012 at 8.30 am."
29. As is evident from the proceeding-sheets maintained by the learned Arbitrator, the matter was
fixed for final hearing on 02.09.2012. The arguments on behalf of the respondent-society were
addressed by Ms. Shivani Jalali on 02.09.2012. Since arguments could not be concluded, the matter
was posted for further arguments on 9th September, 2012. It is pertinent to mention here that
during the course of arguments, learned counsel appearing for the respondent-society placed before
the arbitrator in as many as 10 different documents without providing copy thereof in advance to the
other side. The documents were taken on record by the learned Arbitrator vide its order dated
02.09.2012. It seems that the respondent-society of its own and without seeking permission or
orders from the Arbitrator filed additional affidavit on 01.10.2012. This affidavit was also sworn-in
by Gauri Shanker, Secretary of the respondent-society and was second affidavit sworn-in by way of
evidence. It is through this evidence affidavit by the respondent- society, some claims for damages
for the first time came to be raised.
30. It needs to be marked that respondent-society neither amended the claim petition nor filed any
supplementary claims with or without permission of the learned Arbitrator. This move of the
respondent-society was seriously objected to by the appellant- authority. In the reply affidavit filed
by then Vice Chairperson, Jammu Development Authority, the Arbitrator was urged to reject the
second affidavit in evidence filed on behalf of the respondent-society. It was pleaded that by way of
second affidavit in evidence sworn-in by same person a new case cannot be set up. It was specifically
pleaded in reply affidavit by the Vice Chairperson, JDA that the respondent-society had neither in
the writ petition nor in the claim petition filed before the arbitrator claimed any damages and the
same cannot be permitted to be introduced by way of evidence. The claims of respondent-society for
damages projected in the second evidence affidavit were also refuted on merits. It was specifically
pleaded on behalf of the appellant-authority that the toilet blocks 22 in number were never operated
and maintained by the respondent- society and, therefore, no loss whatsoever was suffered by the
respondent-society. It was, thus, submitted that all the 28 toilet blocks could not be handed over to
the respondent-society pursuant to the MOU dated 15.12.2008 because of the stay granted by the
High Court in the two writ petitions filed by M/s Sulabh International. It was further submitted in
the reply affidavit that the respondent-society, which had been allotted six litigation free toilet
blocks could not operate and maintain even the said blocks, constraining the appellant-authority to
cancel the contract with it.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 9
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
31. The arbitrator, as is apparent from his award, did not carefully read the reply affidavit and
without there being any iota of evidence concluded that the appellant-authority had not disputed the
claim of the respondent-society on merits. The learned arbitrator did not even thought it fit to
consider the objection taken by the appellant-authority to the submission of second affidavit in
evidence of the same person i.e. Secretary of the respondent-society and introduction of new case
during the course of evidence/hearing.
32. Learned arbitrator also did not advert to the objection of the appellant-authority what when the
matter was being heard finally where was the necessity to allow the respondent-society to lead
further evidence and that too without there being any request from the respondent-society and
formal order from the arbitrator. Learned arbitrator, we are aware, may not be bound by strict rules
of pleading and evidence but at the same time cannot throw the basic norms of procedure to wind.
33. The manner in which the learned arbitrator has acted has not only deprived the appellant
-authority of its right to contest the claims of the respondent-society but has caused serious
miscarriage of justice. The entire proceedings conducted by the learned arbitrator suffer from
perversity. The claim for damages are not only required to be pleaded and indicated under different
heads but a sufficient foundation is also required to be laid in the pleadings to substantiate such
claims.
34. From a reading of the writ petition from where the reference to the arbitrator has arisen and also
the claim petition filed before the arbitrator, it is abundantly clear that the respondent- society never
intended to raise any claim for damages against appellant but only wanted revival of its contract and
its continuation for the remainder contract period. The respondent-society was aware that it could
not operate atleast 22 toilet blocks due to the interim directions passed by the High Court in two
writ petitions filed by M/s Sulabh International. It, therefore, rested its claim only for restoration of
its contract on the ground that after dismissal of the writ petitions and vacation of the interim
directions, the respondent-society was entitled to claim continuance of the contract entered into
with it by the appellant-authority vide MOU dated 15.12.2008.
35. It seems that while arguing the matter, the respondent-society was told that revival of its
contract is not possible without first cancelling the contract entered into by the appellant-authority
with M/s Sulabh International and such action was not possible unless M/s Sulabh International
was also a party to the arbitration. Confronted with the aforesaid position, hurriedly and without
giving proper thought to the issue, another affidavit by way of evidence was filed by the Secretary of
the respondent- society, who had earlier also filed an evidence affidavit in support of the
respondent-society(cid:128)s claim.
36. It is by virtue of second affidavit, which was unauthorizedly and without permission of the
arbitrator was filed during course of the arguments, fresh claims for damages were raised. The
Jammu Development Authority specifically refuted the claims and sought rejection of the second
affidavit in evidence but for the reasons best known to the arbitrator, serious objection raised by the
appellant authority was taken as admission of the fresh claims projected by respondent-society by
way of second affidavit. This is how the learned arbitrator messed up the entire proceedings and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 10
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
passed the award, which has not only travelled beyond reference but also suffers from grave
perversity, both substantive and procedural.
37. Learned arbitrator could not have gone beyond the terms of reference and awarded the sums not
claimed in the claim petition or supplemented by filing additional claims. There was absolutely no
opportunity granted to the appellant-authority to object to the claims and their quantification and,
therefore, in the process, learned arbitrator also acted in violation of the principles of natural justice
and decided the claims of the respondent- society without providing adequate opportunity to contest
the same to the appellant-authority.
38. Viewed from any angle, the award passed by the arbitrator challenged before the learned Single
Judge was bad in the eye of law and liable to be set aside. Learned Single Judge did not appreciate
these aspects and landed in serious error in upholding the award, which was not only against the
public policy of the State but was beyond the terms of reference and absolutely perverse.
39. It is trite that an arbitral award can be annulled, if the arbitral tribunal awards differently than
the submission of the parties (ultra or extra petita). When an arbitral tribunal passes an award in
disregard of some fundamental legal principles and thereby renders such award incompatible with
the essential and widely recognized values on which Indian Judicial System edificed, such arbitral
award will violate public policy of State. No doubt, a challenged award will only be set aside if it
violates public policy not merely in its reasoning but also in its result.
40. The meaning and import of "Public Policy of the State" is elaborately discussed and explained in
a recent judgment of the Apex Court in Batliboi Environmental Engineers Limited v. Hindustan
Petroleum Corporation Limited and another, Civil Appeal No.1968 of 2012 decided on 21.09.2023.
Paragraph Nos. 38 to 43 are quite relevant and are set out below:-
"38. The expression „public policy(cid:128) under Section 34 of the A&C Act is capable of
both wide and narrow interpretation. Taking a broader interpretation, this Court in
ONGC Limited. v. Saw Pipes Limited., 26 held that the legislative intent was not to
uphold an award if it is in contravention of provisions of an enactment, since it would
be contrary to the basic concept of justice. The concept of „public policy(cid:128) connotes a
matter which concerns public good and public interest. An award which is patently in
violation of statutory provisions cannot be held to be in public interest. Thus,
expanding on the scope and expanse of the jurisdiction of the court under Section 34
of the A&C Act, it was held that an award can be set aside if it is contrary to:
(a) fundamental policy of Indian law; or
(b) the interest of India; or
(c) justice or morality, or
(d) in addition, if it is patently illegal.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 11
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
Nevertheless, the decision holds that mere error of fact or law in reaching the conclusion on the
disputed question will not give jurisdiction to the court to interfere. However, this will depend on
three aspects: (a) whether the reference was made in general terms for deciding the contractual
dispute, in which case the award can be set aside if the award is based upon erroneous legal
position; (b) this proposition will also hold good in case of a reasoned award, which on the face of it
is erroneous on the legal proposition of law and/or its application; and (c) where a specific question
of law is submitted to an arbitrator, erroneous decision on the point of law does not make the award
bad, unless the court is satisfied that arbitrator had proceeded illegally. In the said case, the court
set aside the award on the ground that the award had not taken into consideration the terms of the
contract before arriving at the conclusion as to whether the party claiming the damages is entitled to
the same. Reference was made to the provisions of Sections 73 and 74 of the Contract Act, which
relate to liquidated damages, general damages and penalty stipulations. This view had held the field
for a long time and was applied in subsequent judgments of this Court in Hindustan Zinc Ltd. v.
Friends Coal Carbonisation, (2006) 4 SCC 445, Centrotrade Minerals and Metals Inc. v. Hindustan
Copper Limited, (2006) 11 SCC 245, Delhi Development Authority v. R.S. Sharma and Co., (2008)
13 SCC 80, J.G. Engineers (P) Ltd. v. Union of India and Another, (2011) 5 SCC 758, and Union of
India v. L.S.N. Murthy, (2012) 1 SCC 718.
39. In 2006, this Court in McDermott International Inc. despite following the ratio of Saw Pipes
Limited, made succinct observations regarding the restrictive role of courts in the postaward
interference. In addition to the three grounds introduced in Renusagar Power Co. Limited v.
General Electric Co., 1994 Supp (1) SCC 644, as noticed above, an additional ground of „patent
illegality(cid:128) was introduced Saw Pipes Limited, for exercise of the court(cid:128)s jurisdiction in setting aside
an arbitral award. This Court, in McDermott International Inc, held that patent illegality, must be
such which goes to the root of the matter. The public policy violation should be so unfair and
unreasonable as to shock the conscience of the court. Arbitrator where s/he acts contrary to or
beyond the express law of contract or grants relief, such awards fall within the purview of Section 34
of the A&C Act. Further, what would constitute public policy is a matter dependent upon the nature
of transaction and the statute. Pleadings of the party and material brought before the court would be
relevant to enable the court to judge what is in public good or public interest, or what would
otherwise be injurious to public good and interest at a relevant point. So, this must be distinguished
from public policy of a particular government.
40. A similar view was expressed in Rashtriya Ispat Nigam Ltd. v. Dewan Chand Ram Saran, (2012)
5 SCC 306 with the clarification that where a term of the contract is capable of two interpretations
and the view taken by the arbitrator is a plausible one, it cannot be said that the arbitrator travelled
outside the jurisdiction or the view taken the arbitrator is against the terms of the contract. The
court cannot interfere with the award and substitute its view with the award and interpretation
accepted by the arbitrator, the reason being the court does not sit in appeal over the findings and
decision of the arbitrator, while deciding an application under Section 34 of the A&C Act. The
arbitrator is legitimately entitled to take a view after considering the material before him/her and
interpret the agreement. The judgment should be accepted as final and binding.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 12
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
41. Subsequently, in ONGC Ltd. v. Western Geco International Ltd., (2014) 9 SCC 263 a three Judge
Bench of this Court observed that the Court, in Saw Pipes Ltd., did not examine what would
constitute „fundamental policy of Indian law(cid:128). The expression „fundamental policy of Indian law(cid:128)
in the opinion of this Court includes all fundamental principles providing as basis for administration
of justice and enforcement of law in this country. There were three distinct and fundamental juristic
principles which form a part and parcel of „fundamental policy of Indian law(cid:128). The first and the
foremost principle is that in every determination by a court or an authority that affects rights of a
citizen or leads to civil consequences, the court or authority must adopt a judicial approach. Fidelity
to judicial approach entails that the court or authority should not act in an arbitrary, capricious or
whimsical manner. The court or authority should act in a bona fide manner and deal with the
subject in a fair, reasonable and objective manner. Decision should not be actuated by extraneous
considerations. Secondly, the principles of natural justice should be followed. This would include the
requirement that the arbitral tribunal must apply its mind to the attending facts and circumstances
while taking the view one way or the other. Nonapplication of mind is a defect that is fatal to any
adjudication. Application of mind is best done by recording reasons in support of the decision. As
noticed above, Section 31(3)(a) of the A&C states that the arbitral award shall state the reasons on
which it is based, unless the parties have agreed that no reasons are to be given. Sub-clauses (i) and
(iii) to Section 34(2) also refer to different facets of natural justice. In a given case sub- clause to
Section 34(2) and sub-clause (ii) to clause (b) to Section 34(2) may equally apply. Lastly, is the need
to ensure that the decision is not perverse or irrational that no reasonable person would have
arrived at the same or be sustained in a court of law. Perversity or irrationality of a decision is tested
on the touchstone of Wednesbury principle of reasonableness. At the same time, it was cautioned
that this Court was not attempting an exhaustive enumeration of what would constitute
„fundamental policy of Indian law(cid:128), as a straightjacket definition is not possible. If on facts proved
before them, the arbitrators fail to draw an inference which ought to have been drawn or if they have
drawn an inference which on the face of it, is untenable resulting in injustice, the adjudication made
by an arbitral tribunal that enjoys considerable latitude and play at the joints in making awards,
may be challenged and set aside.
42. The decision of this Court in Associate Builders elaborately examined the question of public
policy in the context of Section 34 of the A&C Act, specifically under the head „fundamental policy of
Indian law(cid:128). It was firstly held that the principle of judicial approach demands a decision to be fair,
reasonable and objective. On the obverse side, anything arbitrary and whimsical would not satisfy
the said requirement.
43. Referring to the third principle in Western Geco, it was explained that the decision would be
irrational and perverse if (a) it is based on no evidence; (b) if the arbitral tribunal takes into account
something irrelevant to the decision which it arrives at; or (c) ignores vital evidence in arriving at its
decision. The standards prescribed in Excise and Taxation Officer-cum-Assessing Authority v. Gopi
Nath & Sons, (1992 Supp (2) SCC 312 and Kuldeep Singh v.
Commissioner of Police, (1999) 2 SCC 10 should be applied and relied upon, as good working tests
of perversity. In Gopi Nath & Sons it has been held that apart from the cases where a finding of fact
is arrived at by ignoring or relevant materials or taking into consideration irrelevant material, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 13
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
finding is perverse and infirm in law when it outrageously defies logic as to suffer from vice of
irrationality. Kuldeep Singh clarifies that a finding is perverse when it is based on no evidence or
evidence which is thoroughly unreliable and no reasonable person would act upon it. If there is
some evidence which can be acted and can be relied upon, however compendious it may be, the
conclusion should not be treated as perverse. This Court in Associate Builders emphasised that the
public policy test to an arbitral award does not give jurisdiction to the court to act as a court of
appeal and consequently errors of fact cannot be corrected. Arbitral tribunal is the ultimate master
of quality and quantity of evidence. An award based on little evidence or no evidence, which does
not measure up in quality to a trained legal mind would not be held to be invalid on this score. Every
arbitrator need not necessarily be a person trained in law as a Judge. At times, decisions are taken
acting on equity and such decisions can be just and fair should not be overturned under Section 34
of the A&C Act on the ground that the arbitrator(cid:128)s approach was arbitrary or capricious. Referring
to the third ground of public policy, justice or morality, it is observed that these are two different
concepts. An award is against justice when it shocks the conscience of the court, as in an example
where the claimant has restricted his claim but the arbitral tribunal has awarded a higher amount
without any reasonable ground of justification. Morality would necessarily cover agreements that
are illegal and also those which cannot be enforced given the prevailing mores of the day. Here again
interference would be only if something shocks the court(cid:128)s conscience. Further, „patent illegality(cid:128)
refers to three sub-heads: (a) contravention of substantive law of India, which must be restricted
and limited such that the illegality must go to the root of the matter and should not be of a trivial
nature. Reference in this regard was made to clause (a) to Section 28(1) of the A&C Act, which states
that the dispute submitted to arbitration under Part I shall be in accordance with the substantive
law for the time being in force. The second sub-head would be when the arbitrator gives no reasons
in the award in contravention with Section 31(3) of the A&C Act. The third sub-head deals with
contravention of Section 28(3) of the A&C Act which states that the arbitral tribunal shall decide all
cases in accordance with the terms of the contract and shall take into account the usage of the trade
applicable to the transaction. This last sub-head should be understood with a caveat that the
arbitrator has the right to construe and interpret the terms of the contract in a reasonable manner.
Such interpretation should not be a ground to set aside the award, as the construction of the terms
of the contract is finally for the arbitrator to decide. The award can be only set aside under this
sub-head if the arbitrator construes the award in a way that no fair-minded or reasonable person
would do.
41. We do not wish to discuss the legal position more, as the judgment aforementioned takes care of
all aspect of challenge to arbitral award by resort to Section 34 of the Act. Suffice for us to say and
hold that the arbitral award passed by the sole arbitrator in the instant case was liable to be set aside
on the grounds enumerated in Section 34 of the Act, in particular, grounds mentioned under
Subsections 2(a) (iv) and 2(b(ii) thereof. Not only the arbitrator has passed award not falling within
the terms of the submission to arbitration and in respect of matters beyond the scope of the
submission to arbitration but has also rendered his award which is in conflict with public policy of
State. The Single Bench, with great respect, has failed to appreciate all these aspects of the case.
42. For the reasons given above, we allow this appeal and set aside the judgment impugned dated
03.11.2021. As a result, arbitral award dated 02.01.2013 passed by the learned arbitrator is also set
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 14
Jammu Development Authority Through ... vs Saral Sugam Sewa Society on 6 October, 2023
aside. Parties are left to bear their own costs.
(Puneet Gupta) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
JAMMU
06.10.2023
Vinod,PS
Whether the order is speaking : Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83021264/ 15
