Javaid Ahmad Bhat vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir on 3 April, 2025
Javaid Ahmad Bhat vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir
on 3 April, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
(THROUGH VIRTUAL MODE)
Reserved on: 25.03.2025
Pronounced on: 03.04.2025
CrlA(D) No. 1/2025
Javaid Ahmad Bhat, aged 41 years
S/O Abdul Majeed Bhat
R/O Kohnkhan, Dalgate Srinagar
Through his father
Abdul Majeed Bhat
.....Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Azhar-ul-Amin, Advocate.
Vs
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir,
Through SHO Police Station Khanyar.
..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Mohsin S. Qadri, Sr. AAG with
Ms. Maha Majeed, Assisting Counsel.
HON(cid:128)BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
CORAM:
HON(cid:128)BLE MR. JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
(PER: CHOWDHARY-J)
01. The instant appeal has been filed by the appellant-Javaid Ahmad Bhat through his father Abdul
Majeed Bhat, under Section 21 of the National Investigation Agency Act, 2008 read with Section 483
of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita (BNSS), 2023, for setting-aside the order of rejection of
bail dated 19.12.2024 passed by the Court of learned Additional Sessions Judge, Special Judge
(Designated under NIA Act), Srinagar („NIA Court(cid:128) for short) in FIR No. 19 of 2022 under Sections
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130003893/ 1
Javaid Ahmad Bhat vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir on 3 April, 2025
13,18,19,39 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 (for short, „UAP Act(cid:128)) registered at
Police Station, Khanyar in case titled "Javid Ahmad Bhat Vs. Union Territory of J&K" with a further
prayer that the appellant be released on bail.
02. The appellant has challenged the impugned order on the grounds that there is no material to
give rise to the belief that accusations against the appellant are prima facie true and the evidence
against the appellant is only circumstantial; that the appellant has been sought to be implicated in
the case based on his own self-incriminating statement recorded in police custody before the
Executive Magistrate regarding „knowledge(cid:128) and the foundational circumstance of „knowledge(cid:128) is
not substantiated by any other evidence, be it ocular, documentary or electronic; that no reasonable
foundation is available for the court to believe that accusations against the appellant are prima facie
true; that rigour of section 43-D (5) of the UAP Act is not at all attracted in the case; that the order
of rejection of bail suffers from the patent illegality, so much so, that the cardinal principle of
criminal law is that benefit of doubt always goes to the accused but the trial court, while rejecting
bail, has not given this benefit to the appellant; that the trial court has not appreciated the fact that
the accused No. 4-Kaleem Zaffar, who provided Aadhar Cards and faked the identity of foreign
terrorists, is already granted bail by the Court. Lastly, it has been prayed that the order of rejection
of bail of the appellant be set aside and the appellant be released on bail.
03. Learned counsel for the appellant, in line with the memo of appeal, argued that the prolonged
incarceration of the appellant , who is languishing in jail for the last two years, amounts to the
pre-trial conviction and deprivation of his liberty as in the facts and circumstances of the case, no
reasonable foundation is available for the trial court to believe that accusations against the appellant
are prima facie true as such, the rejection of bail of the appellant is antithetical to Article 21 of the
Constitution of India; that the rigour of section 43-D (5) of the UAP Act is not at all attracted in the
case; that the trial court has applied strict burden in framing opinion that the appellant is prima
facie guilty; that the order of rejection of bail suffers from the patent illegality so much so that the
cardinal principle of criminal law is that benefit of doubt always goes to the accused and the trial
court, while rejecting the bail of the appellant, has not given this benefit to the appellant; that the
only reason foisted by the trial court for rejection of bail of the appellant is the ground of severity of
allegations and the risk posed by the appellant(cid:128)s release.
04. He has further argued that the prosecution has cited 36 witnesses, out of which only 10
witnesses have been examined and none of the said 10 witnesses have deposed anything averse
against the appellant; that the appellant has been behind the bars for the last two years, as such he is
entitled to be released on bail. Lastly, he has argued that the order of rejection of bail of the
appellant be set aside and the appellant be released on bail.
05. Learned counsel for the respondent, ex adverso, vehemently argued that the appellant-accused
had been charged for having conspired and abetted the commission of terrorist acts, who has
harboured two foreign terrorists initially for a period of twelve days in his hotel and then in his
house and in this period, two foreign terrorists were abetted to stay concealing their identity and one
of the foreign terrorists was also provided with a fake aadhar card by one of the employees of the
appellant-accused and those two foreign terrorists were later neutralized in an encounter; that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130003893/ 2
Javaid Ahmad Bhat vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir on 3 April, 2025
during the period of their stay in the properties of the appellant-accused which they used as
hideouts, the said two foreign terrorists had committed an act of terror wherein they had killed two
CRPF personnel in the heart of city at Maisuma and that the appellant-accused had actively
participated in the conspiracy and harbouring the terrorists to carry on terrorist acts to further the
designs of a terrorist organization, as such, the appellant-accused is liable to be awarded with life
imprisonment and the appellant accused had failed to show any reason that no „prima facie(cid:128) case is
made out against him so as to escape the rigour of sub-section 5 of Section 43-D of the UAP Act for
grant of bail especially when he has been chargesheeted for the commission of the offences he was
charged by the prosecution agency.
06. Learned counsel for the respondent further argued that in case the appellant-accused is
admitted to bail at this stage, when most of the prosecution witnesses are yet to be examined, there
is a strong apprehension that given to his clout, he may try to win-over the witnesses by exerting
influence and there is also likelihood that he may abscond and may not face the trial in view of the
severity of punishment in case of conviction. He has finally argued that the trial court has decided
the bail application moved by the appellant-accused touching all the aspects raised by him perfectly
in consonance with law and the impugned order refusing grant of bail to the appellant-accused does
not warrant any interference by this court, invoking appellate jurisdiction and prayed that the
appeal be rejected.
07. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
08. The appellant-Javaid Ahmad Bhat, had filed an application, before the NIA Court, on the ground
that in view of the investigation already having been completed, he was no more required for
investigation and not admitting to bail shall amount to pre-trial punishment to the appellant, which
is against the principle of concept of liberty in terms of Article 21 of the Constitution; that the
accused persons are presumed to be innocent till the guilt is proved beyond reasonable doubt and
cannot be deprived of their personal liberty when there is nothing on record, which can connect
them to the commission of any sort of crime; that the purpose of bail is not to exonerate the accused
of their charges but is merely shifting of custody of sureties, who undertake their presence; that bail
is the rule and jail is exception; that the offences alleged against the appellant do not carry
punishment of death or life imprisonment, as such, there was no justification to keep the appellant
in custody.
09. The prosecution had filed objections to the application filed by the appellant before the court
below asserting that out of 36 prosecution witnesses, 10 prosecution witnesses have been examined
and the report submitted by the Investigating Agency is suggestive of the fact that the appellant is
involved in the commission of offences punishable under sections. 307 IPC, 7/27 Arms Act, 16, 18,
19, 20, 39 UAP Act; that the offences punishable under these sections of law carry imprisonment for
life and the rigour of Section 43(D) of UAP Act also bars the jurisdiction of trial court to grant bail if
the accused is „prime facie(cid:128) found involved in commission of such offences; that the appellant was
involved in serious offences, which impinges upon the peace and security of the State and society in
general and the prosecution has reasonable apprehension that in case the bail application is allowed,
the appellant may jump over the bail and turn absconder; that on drawing a balance sheet of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130003893/ 3
Javaid Ahmad Bhat vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir on 3 April, 2025
aggravating and mitigating factors of the case i.e., involvement of the appellant in the commission of
aforesaid crime, one will come to an irresistible conclusion that case in question is full of
aggravating factors, as such, motion for grant of bail in favour of the appellant deserves to be
rejected as it is incumbent upon the court to strike a balance between the individual and public
interest and wherever they may get pitted against one another, former must give way to the later.
10. The facts gathered from the trial court record are that on 10.04.2022 at about 1100 hrs, Khanyar
police received information through reliable sources about the presence of two foreign terrorists in
the Bishember Nagar, Khanyar area, as a result whereof the local police along with CRPF and
security forces launched cordon/search operation and the terrorists, who were hiding in the house
of one Javid Ahmed Bhat S/O Abdul Majeed R/O Konkhan-the appellant herein, on seeing the
search party, opened indiscriminate firing upon the security forces resulting to which, some police
and CRPF personnel got injured; that the firing was retaliated by security forces turning into an
encounter and the holed up terrorists were gunned down and consequent to this a case was
registered vide FIR No. 19/2022 under Sections 307 IPC, 7/27 Arms Act and 13, 16, 18, 19, 20, 39
UAP Act at Police Station, Khanyar; that during investigation, statements of the witnesses recorded,
recoveries and seizures made, disclosures recorded and other technical data analysis collected which
established that the two foreign terrorists, who had illegally infiltrated in J&K on the directions of
PAK based handler Mubashir Hamza, were later transported into Srinagar city to carry out terrorist
activities; that Mubashir Hamza who was in fact Mubashir Ahmad Dar @ Hamza S/O Ghulam Nabi
Dar R/O Syedabad Tral, is believed to have exfiltrated to Pakistan in the year 2018 and associated
with LeT terrorist outfit there and he motivated two accused, namely, Bilal Ahmad Dagga and Ashiq
Bashir Najar to transport and accommodate the two foreign terrorists in Srinagar city; that both the
foreign terrorists were transported from Parimpora in the month of December, 2021 to Soiteng area
of Srinagar city wherefrom they contacted Hamza and then went to the shop of Ashiq Bashir Najar,
who was made to speak to Hamza through their mobile phone and on the directions of PAK based
handler Hamza, the said Ashiq Bashir Najar accommodated the two foreign terrorists in a nearly
abandoned house for about 12 days, providing them food and other daily needs during this period;
that thereafter these two foreign terrorists were again received by Bilal Ahmad Dagga from the
above area of Srinagar and got them accommodated in Khayam area of Srinagar through his
acquaintance Sabreena in a hotel run by one Javid Ahmad Bhat-appellant herein where they stayed
for around 12 days, however, later the appellant shifted them to his home located at Bishambar
Nagar on the instructions of Bilal Ahmad Dagga as they felt it safer; that the appellant initially did
not have knowledge of the two foreigners as terrorists, however, in due course of time, he learnt
about it and was motivated by Bilal to work in league with him; that as per the chargesheet, these
two foreign terrorists with the assistance of two local accused carried out a terrorist attack on CRPF
personnel deployed in Maisuma area on 04.04.2022 in which two CRPF personnel got martyred.
11. It is the prosecution case that the appellant Javaid Ahmed Bhat had accommodated the foreign
terrorists initially in his hotel and then in his house and also arranged sim card for them, besides
accommodated them in Padshahibagh and used to meet them in Bishambar Nagar area occasionally
to discuss and plan their movement and other terrorist activities. The police concluded the
investigation establishing that all the accused persons including the appellant conspired with each
other to wage war against the Govt. of India by receiving, transporting, concealing, harboring and by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130003893/ 4
Javaid Ahmad Bhat vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir on 3 April, 2025
extending all physical and communicational logistics to the freshly infiltrated Pakistani terrorists of
proscribed terror organization "Lashker-e-Toiba" with the aim and motive to spread terror by way of
carrying out terror attacks on the security forces and on the persons working in the security grid in
J&K in particular and based on the investigation, the chargesheet was concluded against the
appellant for the commission of offences punishable under sections 13, 18, 19 & 39 of UAP Act as he
was alleged to have voluntarily provided accommodation to the two alleged slain militants in his
hotel (Section 19 of UAP Act) and asked one of his employees (Saqib) to provide a SIM card to one of
the two alleged slain militants for use (Section 18 of UAP Act).
12. The court below, vide impugned order, has discussed all important aspects on the case and
rejected the bail application moved by the appellant herein.
13. The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant that the learned NIA court has not
appreciated the submission made with regard to the fact that the appellant not to have committed
any offence punishable under the Chapters of IV and VI of UAP Act as no such offences are made
out on the basis of the evidence collected by the prosecution, seems to be untenable in law in view of
the fact that the trial court has framed charges for the trial of the appellant for the commission of the
aforementioned offences and to a pointed question to the learned senior counsel appearing for the
appellant that whether the order framing charge has been assailed or not, the answer was replied in
negative and that the appellant has been facing trial of his case wherein out of 36 witnesses, 10
prosecution witnesses are stated to have been examined.
14. The appellant-accused has been charged for the commission of offences punishable under
Sections 13, 18, 19 and 39 of the UAP Act. Section 13 (Punishment for unlawful activities) provides
for a punishment for unlawful activities and is punishable with imprisonment for a term which may
extend to seven years and shall also be liable to fine. Section 18 (Punishment for conspiracy)
provides that whoever conspires or attempts to commit or advocates, abets, advises or incites,
directs or knowingly facilitates the commission of, a terrorist act or any act preparatory to the
commission of a terrorist act, shall be punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be
less than five years but which may extend to imprisonment for life and shall also be liable to fine.
Section 19 (Punishment for harbouring) provides that whoever voluntarily harbours or conceals, or
attempts to harbour or conceal any person knowing that such person is a terrorist shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may
extend to imprisonment for life, and shall also be liable to fine. It is to be noted that both these
offences under sections 18 and 19 of UAP Act fall under Chapter IV of the UAP Act.
15. Section 39 (Offence relating to support given to a terrorist organization) of the UAP Act provides
that whoever commits the offence relating to support given to a terrorist organization shall be
punishable with imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years or with fine or with both. It is not
out of place to mention that the offence punishable under section 39 of the UAP Act is a part of
Chapter VI of the UAP Act.
16. Sub-section 5 of section 43(D) of the UAP Act creates a rigour to the grant of bail to an accused,
who is alleged to have committed offence punishable under Chapter IV and VI of the UAP Act. It will
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130003893/ 5
Javaid Ahmad Bhat vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir on 3 April, 2025
be profitable to extract the relevant part of the said Section as under:
"43(D) (5)-Notwithstanding anything contained in the Code, no person accused of an
offence punishable under Chapters IV and VI of this Act shall, if in custody, be
released on bail or on his own bond unless the Public Prosecutor has been given an
opportunity of being heard on the application for such release:
Provided that such accused person shall not be released on bail or on his own bond if
the Court, on a perusal of the case diary or the report made under section 173 of the
Code is of the opinion that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
accusation against such person is prima facie true."
17. Having regard to the aforesaid provision contained in sub-
section 5 of Section 43(D) of UAP Act, the contention raised by the learned counsel for the
appellant-accused that the rigour of section is not attracted pales into insignificance as the appellant
accused is stated to have been charged for the commission of offences punishable under Sections 18
and 19 falling under Chapter IV and Section 39 falling under Chapter VI of the UAP Act.
18. The trial court while considering the application for grant of bail and so this appellate court
while hearing the appeal against the rejection of bail cannot go into the intricate questions of
whether the offences are made out or not as the evidence cannot be appreciated so minutely at the
stage of consideration of bail, which is expected to be considered at the trial stage.
19. It appears that the learned judge presiding over the NIA Court has discussed all the points raised
by the appellant before the trial court and the point wise determination has been given with
elaborate discussion on each and every point raised.
20. This court, after hearing both the sides, perusal of chargesheet and other incriminating material,
while exercising appellate jurisdiction, does not find any illegality or perversity in the impugned
order, which is, thus, upheld, as a result the appeal fails and is, accordingly dismissed.
(M A CHOWDHARY) (TASHI RABSTAN)
JUDGE CHIEF JUSTICE
JAMMU
03.04.2025
Naresh/Secy
Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
.....
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130003893/ 6
