Javed Shaikh @ Babu vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 24 April, 2019
Javed Shaikh @ Babu vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 24
April, 2019
M.Cr.C. No.15156/2019 1
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
M.Cr.C. No.15156/2019
(Javed Shaikh @ Babu & Ors. vs. The State of Madhya Pradesh)
Indore, Dated:24/04/2019
Shri Deepak Rawal, learned counsel for the applicant.
Shri Gaurav Kumar Verma, learned Public Prosecutor for the
respondent/State.
ORDER
This petition under Section 482 of Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (for short 'The Code'), has been
preferred against the the order dated 06/06/2018 passed by Special Judge (NDPS Act), Javad,
District Neemuch, in S.S.T. No.66/2017, whereby the trial Court has framed charges under Section
8/15(C) or 8 /15(C), 29 and 8/15(C) of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
02. The facts of the case, briefly stated, are that on 31/08/2013, police received a source information
that a truck bearing Registration No. RJ 07 GA 1488 which was driven by one Shoukhat Khan and
the helper's namely Barkat Ali is carrying poppy straw. On the basis of this information, the Sub-
Inspector after complying with the necessary formalities, carried out check post tracking at the
railway crossing on Nayagaon-Nimbaheda road. The said truck was intercepted, Police briefed the
driver-Shoukhat Khan and helper Barkat Ali about the secret information and conducted search of
the driver, helper and the truck. During search, total quantity of 35 quintals, 10 kgs of poppy straw
was recovered from the vehicle. After completing necessary formalities Police arrested Shoukhat
Khan and Barkat Ali and recorded their statement under Section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act, in
which they informed the Police that the alleged contra band was loaded by the present applicants in
the aforesaid vehicle.
03. It is submitted by learned counsel for the applicants that neither the contraband article has been
recovered from the possession of the applicants, nor they are the registered owner of the vehicle in
which the alleged contraband was being transported. It is further submitted that the applicants were
not present on the spot. The complicity of the applicants is alleged only on the basis of the disclosure
statement under Section 27 of the Evidence Act, said to have been made by co-accused persons
Shoukhat Khan and Barkat Ali in which they deposed that alleged contraband was loaded in the
truck by the present applicants. However, the said statement is not legally admissible evidence
within the meaning of Section 25 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (for short 'The Act'). Except this
there is no independent or direct evidence available on record against the applicants, in order to
show their involvement in the alleged offence. Hence he prayed that impugned order of framing
charges be set aside and the applicant be discharged from the aforesaid charges
04. Per contra, the learned Public Prosecutor supported the impugned order and prayed for
rejection of this petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168966979/ 1
Javed Shaikh @ Babu vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 24 April, 2019
05. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
06. From the perusal of the material available on record, it appears that the applicants are not
named in the F.I.R and no contraband has been recovered from their possession. Neither they are
the owner of the vehicle nor they were present in the vehicle at the time of the alleged incident.
Police has not arrested the applicants from the spot. They are implicated in the present matter only
on the basis of disclosure statement of co-accused persons Shoukhat Khan and Barkat Ali, in which
they deposed that alleged contraband was loaded by the present applicants in the aforesaid vehicle.
The memorandum of co-accused is nothing except a confessional statement given before the police
officials, which is not admissible under Section 25 of the Evidence Act.
7. Section 27 of 'The Act', in terms, provides that only that information which distinctly relates to the
discovery of fact is admissible in evidence. In the landmark decision of Privy Council in the case of
Pulukuri Kottaya vs. Emperor, AIR 1947 P.C. 67, it has been held that unless there is discovery of
fact, statement made u/S. 27 of 'The Act' has no evidential value. It has further been held that in a
case, it can seldom happen that information leading to discovery of a fact can be made, the
foundation of the prosecution case because it is one link in the chain of proof and the other links
must be forged in the manner allowed by law.
08. In the case of Hari Charan Kurmi and Jogia Hajam Vs. State of Bihar, (1964) 6 SCR 623 it was
observed by the Apex court :-
"As we have already indicated. this question has been considered on several
occasions by judicial decisions and it has been consistently held that a confession
cannot be treated as evidence which is substantive evidence against a co-accused
person. in dealing with a criminal case where the prosecution relies upon the
confession of one accused person against another accused person, the proper
approach to adopt is to consider the other evidence against such an accused person,
and if the said evidence appears to be satisfactory and the court is inclined to hold
that the said evidence may sustain the charge framed against the said accused person,
the court turns to the confession with a view to assure itself that the conclusion which
it is inclined to draw from the other evidence is right. As was observed by Sir
Lawrence Jenkins in Emperor v. Lalit Mohan Chuckerbuttv, (1911) I.L.R. 38 Cal. 559
at p. 588. a confession can only be used to "lend assurance to other evidence against a
co-accused". In In re. Peryaswami Noopan, (2) Reilly J. observed that the provision
of s. 30 goes not further than this : "where there is evidence against the co-accused
sufficient, if,. believed, to support his conviction, then the kind of confession
described in s.
30 may be thrown into the scale as an additional reason for believing that evidence." In Bhuboni
Sahu v. King, (1913) I.L.R. 54 Mad. 75 at p. 77. the Privy Council has expressed the same view. Sir.
John Beaumont who spoke for the Board observed that a confession of a co- accused is obviously
evidence of a very weak type. It does not indeed come within the definition of "evidence" contained
in s. 3 of the Evidence Act. It is not required to be given on oath, nor in the presence of the accused,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168966979/ 2
Javed Shaikh @ Babu vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 24 April, 2019
and it cannot be tested by cross-
examination. It is a much weaker type of evidence than the evidence of an approver, which is not
subject to any of those infirmities. Section 30, however, provides that the Court may take the
confession into consideration and thereby, no doubt, makes it evidence on which the court may act;
but the section does not say that the confession is to amount to proof. Clearly there must be other
evidence. The confession is only one element in the consideration of all the facts proved in the case,
it can be put into the scale and weighed with the other evidence." It would be noticed that as a result
of the provisions contained in s. 30, the confession has no doubt to be regarded as amounting to
evidence in a general way, because whatever is considered by the court is evidence; circumstances
which are considered by the court as well as probabilities do amount to evidence in that generic
sense. Thus, though confession may be regarded as evidence in that generic sense because of the
provisions of s. 30, the fact remains that it is not evidence as defined by s. 3 of the Act. The result,
therefore, is that in dealing with a case against an accused person, the court cannot start with the
confession of a co-accused person; it must begin with other evidence adduced by the prosecution
and after it has formed its opinion with regard to the quality and effect of the said evidence, then it is
permissible to turn to the confession in order to receive assurance to the conclusion of guilt which
the judicial mind is about to reach on the said other evidence. That, briefly stated, is the effect of the
provisions contained in s. 30. The same view has been expressed by this Court in Kashmira Singh v.
State of Madhya Pradesh 1952 S.C.R. 526 where the decision of the Privy Council in Bhuboni
Sahu's(2) case has been cited with approval."
09. Considering the fact that in the present case the only material to implicate the present applicants
is the disclosure made by co-accused persons namely Shoukhat Khan and Barkat Ali, under Section
27 of the Evidence Act, which is not a legal evidence, therefore this petition filed under section 482
of 'the Code' is allowed. The order of framing charges dated 06/06/2018 passed by Special Judge
(NDPS Act), Javad, District Neemuch, in S.S.T. No.66/2017 is hereby set aside and applicants are
discharged from the charges under Section 8/15(C) or 8 /15(C), 29 and 8/15(C) of Narcotic Drugs
and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985.
Certified copy as per Rules.
(S. K. Awasthi) Judge skt Santosh Kumar Tiwari 2019.04.25 18:46:27 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168966979/ 3
