Jayshankar Yadav @ Tanman @ Amit Yadav vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Jayshankar Yadav @ Tanman @ Amit Yadav vs State Of U.P. on
2 January, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:489
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 15473 of 2024
Applicant :- Jayshankar Yadav @ Tanman @ Amit Yadav
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Shailendra Kumar Yadav
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Deepak Singh Yadav, Advocate holding brief of Sri Shailendra Kumar Yadav, learned
counsel for the applicant as well as Sri Sunil Kumar, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the
record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No.182 of 2022, under Sections 498-A, 304-B I.P.C. and
Section 3/4 Dowry Prohibition Act, Police Station Sakaldiha, District Chandauli, during the
pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75172516/ 1
Jayshankar Yadav @ Tanman @ Amit Yadav vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
4. The marriage of the applicant was solemnized with the sister of the informant about five years
before her death. The applicant and other family members are stated to have subjected her to cruelty
for demand of dowry, leading her to death on 15.10.2022.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT:
5. The applicant is absolutely innocent and has been falsely implicated in the present case.
6. The cause of death was found to be asphyxia as a result of ante-mortem hanging.
7. The victim was feeling depressed, as such, had committed suicide.
8. The only examination-in-chief of PW-1 has been conducted and he has not turned up for
cross-examination. Even bailable warrants have been issued against him as per the status report
filed by learned A.G.A.
9. The fundamental rights enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution of India stand violated as
there is no likelihood of early conclusion of trial in near future.
10. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
11. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since 19.10.2022
and is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the
liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF STATE/INFORMANT:
12. The bail application has been opposed but the submissions raised by the learned counsel for the
applicant could not be disputed.
CONCLUSION:
13. ?The Supreme Court while granting bail to former Tamil Nadu Minister in V. Senthil Balaji v.
Enforcement Directorate, 2024 SCC OnLine SC 2626 held that higher thresholds for granting bail in
stringent penal statutes like the PMLA, UAPA, and NDPS Act cannot be a tool to keep an accused
incarcerated without trial. It emphasized the incompatibility of stringent bail provisions with
prolonged delays in trial.
14. While granting bail to ex-West Bengal Minister in Partha Chatterjee v. Enforcement Directorate,
2024 SCC OnLine SC 3729, the Supreme Court reiterated the principle that "a suspect cannot be
held in custody indefinitely and that undertrial incarceration should not amount to punitive
detention."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75172516/ 2
Jayshankar Yadav @ Tanman @ Amit Yadav vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
"The Court would, nevertheless, ensure that affluent or influential accused do not
obstruct the ongoing investigation, tamper with evidence, or influence witnesses,
namely, actions that undermine the fundamental doctrine of a fair trial," observed
the bench.
15. The Supreme Court in the case of Union of India vs. K.A. Najeeb, AIR 2021 SC 712, has observed
as under:-
"We are conscious of the fact that the charges levelled against the respondent are
grave and a serious threat to societal harmony. Had it been a case at the threshold,
we would have outrightly turned down the respondent's prayer. However, keeping in
mind the length of the period spent by him in custody and the unlikelihood of the
trial being completed anytime soon, the High Court appears to have been left with no
other option except to grant bail."
16. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
17. ?A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot
be taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
18. ?Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia vs. Directorate
of Enforcement, 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
19. ?Learned A.G.A. could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would warrant
denial of bail to the applicant.
20. ?It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at
the trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned A.G.A.
21. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75172516/ 3
Jayshankar Yadav @ Tanman @ Amit Yadav vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
22. Let the applicant-Jayshankar Yadav @ Tanman @ Amit Yadav involved in aforementioned case
crime number be released on bail on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C/351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
23. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
24. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 Ravi/-
(Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75172516/ 4
