Jitendra Yadav vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
Jitendra Yadav vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:29173
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 43076 of 2024
Applicant :- Jitendra Yadav
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Atmaram Nadiwal,Dinesh Kumar Yadav
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Chandan Kumar Jaiswal,G.A.,Tarun Kumar
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised. The ossification test report (X-ray report) of the victim has been received in
compliance of order dated 27.1.2025. As per the report, her age has come out to be 19 years. The
report be returned to the office of the concerned C.M.O. after retaining the photocopy thereof.
2. Heard Sri Dinesh Kumar Yadav, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Chandan Kumar
Jaiswal, learned counsel for the informant as well as Sri J.K. Chaurasia, learned State Law Officer
and perused the material placed on record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 600 of 2024, U/S 137(2), 65(1), 351(3), 61(2), 352 B.N.S.
and 4(2) POCSO Act, 2012 and 3(2)5, 3(2)5a, 3(1)da, dha S.C./S.T. Act, Police Station Campierganj,
District Gorakhpur, during the pendency of trial.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57022730/ 1
Jitendra Yadav vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
4. As per prosecution story, the applicant is stated to have enticed away the minor daughter of the
informant in the night of 8/9.9.2024.
5. Learned counsel for the applicant has argued that the applicant is absolutely innocent and has
been falsely implicated in the present case with a view to cause unnecessary harassment and to
victimize him. It is stated that he has nothing to do with the said offence. It is stated that FIR is
delayed by about eight days and there is no explanation of the said delay caused.
6. Learned counsel has further stated that the victim is the consenting party, which is but evident
from the fact that she had gone with the applicant to the bridge and thereupon to the railway
station, although she has stated that the applicant had used force against her. The victim by her
looks, seems to be major, although as per High School Certificate, she is aged about 15 years. A
leverage of two years may be granted to the applicant on the upper side.
7. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity of
the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
8. The applicant has a criminal history of one case, which stands explained. The applicant is
languishing in jail since 18.9.2024. In case, the applicant is released on bail, he will not misuse the
liberty of bail.
9. Learned State Law Officer and learned counsel for the informant have vehemently opposed the
bail application on the ground that the victim is minor, as her date of birth, as per High School
certificate, is 8.8.2009, as such, her age comes out to be 15 years, 1 month and 9 days.
10. In the case of Prabhakar Tewari Vs. State of U.P. and another, (2020) 11 SCC 648, the Supreme
Court has observed that pendency of several criminal cases against an accused by itself cannot be a
basis for refusal of bail.
11. In light of the judgement of the Supreme Court passed in Niranjan Singh and another vs.
Prabhakar Rajaram Kharote and others AIR 1980 SC 785 this Court has avoided detailed
examination of the evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the case as no party
should have the impression that his case has been prejudiced. A prima facie satisfaction of case is
needed but it is not the same as an exhaustive exploration of the merits in the order itself.
12. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
13. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57022730/ 2
Jitendra Yadav vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
14. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasized that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that ?bail is a rule and jail is an exception?.
15. Learned State Law Officer could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would
warrant denial of bail to the applicant.
16. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned State Law Officer.
17. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, taking into consideration the age of the victim as per ossification
test report, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the Court is of the view that the
applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is allowed.
18. Let the applicant- Jitendra Yadav involved in aforementioned case crime number be released on
bail on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
court concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C./351 B.N.S.S. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of
the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the
Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in
accordance with law.
19. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
20. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Shalini (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57022730/ 3
