Joswin Lobo vs State Of Karnataka on 2 February, 2022
Joswin Lobo vs State Of Karnataka on 2 February, 2022
Author: H.P. Sandesh
Bench: H.P. Sandesh
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
ND
R
DATED THIS THE 2 DAY OF FEBRUARY, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE H.P. SANDESH
CRIMINAL PETITION NO.6916/2021
BETWEEN:
JOSWIN LOBO
S/O JOHN LOBO,
AGED ABOUT 26 YEARS,
NO.21, 8TH CROS,
NEAR DASARAHALLI, BBMP OFFICE,
PRASARA BHARATHI LAYOUT,
KEMPAPURA MAIN ROAD,
BENGALURU-560024,
KARNATAKA. ... PETITIONER
(BY SRI HASHMATH PASHA, SENIOR COUNSEL FOR
SRI NASIR ALI, ADVOCATE)
AND:
STATE OF KARNATAKA
BY BYADARAHALLI POLICE STATION,
BENGALURU CITY-560091,
REPRESENTED BY SPP
HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
BENGALURU-560 001. ... RESPONDENT
(BY SRI KRISHNA KUMAR K.K., HCGP)
THIS CRIMINAL PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION 439
OF CR.P.C PRAYING TO ENLARGE THE PETITIONER ON BAIL IN
CR.NO.224/2021 OF BYADARAHALLI POLICE STATION,
BENGALURU, FOR THE OFFENCES PUNISHABLE UNDER
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67520026/ 1
Joswin Lobo vs State Of Karnataka on 2 February, 2022
SECTIONS 8(c), 20(ii)(b), 21(c), 22(c), 23(c), 27(A) OF NDPS
ACT.
THIS CRIMINAL PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND
RESERVED FOR ORDERS ON 20.10.2022, THROUGH VIDEO
CONFERENCE THIS DAY, THE COURT PRONOUNCED THE
FOLLOWING:
ORDER
This petition is filed under Section 439 of Cr.P.C seeking regular bail in favour of the petitioner in
Cr.No.224/2021 for the offences punishable under Sections 8(c), 20(ii)(b), 21(c), 22(c), 23(c), 27(A)
of Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (for short 'NDPS Act').
2. The factual matrix of the case is that on receipt of credible information at 1.00 p.m, that the five
persons who were indulged in trafficking the narcotic drugs i.e., Ecstasy pills, Ashes and LSD Strips
to the college students, ITBT employees in order to destroy the social heal of the society, hence, on
22.06.2021 at about 2.45 p.m., the complainant - R.Virupakshaswamy along with staff and panchas
went and apprehended the accused persons in the room and after apprehending them, secured the
Assistant Commissioner of Police at 3.45 p.m. and subjected them for personal search and drawn
the panchanama from 3.00 p.m. to 7.00 p.m. Each MDM ecatasy pill cost around Rs.4,000/- to
Rs.5,000/-, one LSD strip will cost around Rs.4,000/- to Rs.5,000/- and ganja for 100 grms will
cost around Rs.5,000/-.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently contend that the search and seizure is not done
before the Gazetted Officer and though it claims that the same was done in the presence of the
Gazetted officer, the said Gazatted Officer is also the part of the raid, hence, he cannot be termed as
Gazatted Officer. The counsel would contend that the Officer is not an authorized person and also
not an in-charge of the police station who conducted the raid. The Assistant Commissioner of Police
himself searched the accused persons and hence, the search and the seizure is not in accordance
with the procedure established under the NDPS Act. The learned counsel for the petitioner would
submit that the complainant police have falsely implicated this petitioner and it is clear abuse of
process of law. The alleged drugs are known as MDM ecstasy pills and 250 grams of Hashish said to
have been recovered from the possession of the petitioner but the same has not been recovered from
the possession of this petitioner. The FIR clearly discloses that drugs were seized in the room hence,
the bifurcation of the drugs in the name of this petitioner is erroneous. The complainant police
would not have been classified that 54 Ecstasy pill and 250 grams of Hashish were recovered at the
instance of this petitioner since, the alleged recovery is from a famous PG situated at 1st Floor,
bearing No.11, near East West College, Bharathnagar, Nanjaiah Layout, Vishwaneedam Post. The
accused never resided in that address and also not at all in the said address. This petitioner has been
arrested on 19.06.2021 and the police did not show his arrest at all and the drugs which were
recovered is from other persons and this petitioner implicated by registering the case on 22.06.2021,
but on 22.06.2021, there is absolutely no raid of whatsoever nature and in fact, the CCTV camera
footage and other electronic equipments clearly demonstrate that the police have never conducted
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67520026/ 2
Joswin Lobo vs State Of Karnataka on 2 February, 2022
the raid on the particular date. The counsel vehemently contend that the phone location of the
petitioner from 19.06.2021 to 22.06.2021 is clear that he was illegally detained and falsely framed
the case against him and investigation does not discloses that drugs were seized from the custody of
this petitioner. It is contended that there is no any fairness on the part of the police in the alleged
seizure and this petitioner was arrested under mysterious circumstances. The counsel also contend
that Investigating Officer has totally failed to comply with the procedure established under Section
50 of NDPS Act and also Sections 42 of the NDPS Act and it shows clear violation of Section 52(3) of
NDPS Act as the Officer who arrested is not an Officer in-charge of police station and hence, prayed
to allow the petition.
4. The learned counsel for the petitioner in support of his argument relied upon the unreported
decision of this Court in Crl.P.No.9045/2021 wherein this Court in paragraph 7 held that alleged
recovery was not at the presence of the Gazetted Officer and FIR discloses only received information
and not subjected for raid and thereafter seizure was done and granted bail and the said decision is
applicable to the facts of the present case also. The counsel also relied upon the judgment of the
Apex Court reported in 2021 SCC ONLINE SC 324 in the case of BOOTA SINGH AND OTHERS vs
STATE OF HARYANA wherein it is held that non-compliance of requirement of Sections 42 and 50
is impermissible and set aside the order of conviction and acquitted the accused/appellant. The
counsel relying upon the judgment reported in (2016) 11 SCC 687 in the case of STATE OF
RAJASTHAN vs JAGRAJ SINGH @ HANSA would contend that compliance of Section 42 is
mandatory and search conducted is in breach of Section 42(1) and (2) which causes serious
prejudice to the accused and acquitted the accused. The counsel also relied upon the unreported
decision of this Court in Crl.P.No.1298/2020 in the case of NANSO JOACHIN UDEDIKE vs STATE
OF KARNATAKA and in this case, this Court while considering the bail petition has taken note of
the judgment of PAULSAMY regarding technicality is concerned. The counsel also relied upon the
judgment of the Apex Court reported in (2021) 10 SCC 100 in the case of UNION OF INDIA vs MD.
NAWAZ KHAN.
Though the Apex Court set aside the bail granted in favour of accused, in paragraph 31 made an
observation that due to non- compliance of the procedural requirement under Section 42 of the
NDPS Act, the respondent should be granted bail. On receipt of credible information, the officer
have to write down the information and send it to a superior officer within 72 hours.
5. Per contra, the learned High Court Government Pleader appearing for the respondent-State
would submit that heinous offence is committed by this petitioner along with other accused persons
and MDMA was seized to the extent of 56.50 grams and apart from that 250 grams of Hashish was
recovered at the instance of this petitioner and total five accused persons including this petitioner
were arrested and when this petitioner subjected for search, recovery was made at the instance of
him and hence, there is a prima facie case against his petitioner.
6. The counsel for the State also relies upon the judgment of the Apex Court in NAWAZ KHAN's
case in which the petitioner's counsel also relied and brought to notice of this Court that
non-compliance of Section 42 will not be a ground to enlarge the petitioner on bail and it is a matter
of trial and the same has to be considered during the course of trial and the Apex Court would have
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67520026/ 3
Joswin Lobo vs State Of Karnataka on 2 February, 2022
acquitted the petitioner only after trial and acquittal is not a ground at the stage of exercising the
discretion under Section 439 of Cr.P.C. The counsel also brought to notice of this Court the
unreported judgment in Crl.P.No.1298/2020 referred supra, in paragraph 15 of he said decision,
this Court held that the Court has to take note of the wisdom of the legislature in bringing the
special enactment and the very object of bringing this enactment is to combat the menace in the
society and categorically held that the principles laid down in the Apex Court in the judgment of
Paulsamy is clear that while exercising the discretion, that too during the bail stage, it would be too
early to take into account and judge the matter regarding non-compliance with the formalities and
hence, at this juncture, again this Court cannot evaluate the evidence with regard to the
admissibility and non-compliance and the Court has to take note that it is an offence against the
society at large.
7. Having heard the respective counsel for the parties and also the grounds urged in the petition, the
points that arise for consideration are:
(1) Whether it is a fit case to exercise powers under Section 439 of Cr.P.C in favour of
the petitioner?
(2) What order?
Point No.1:
8. Having heard the respective counsel and also on perusal of the material available on record, a
specific allegation is made in the complaint that on credible information, the raid was conducted
and at the instance of this petitioner, 56.50 grams of MDMA, 250 grams of Hashish and mobile were
seized. The very contention of the learned counsel for the petitioner before the Court is that the
officer who conducted the raid is not an in-charge of the said police station and hence, there is a
violation of Section 52(3) of the NDPS Act. Apart from that the other allegation is that the Gazetted
Officer is none other than the Assistant Commissioner of Police who is also a part of the raid and the
complaint is also not registered by the officer of the police station and the Assistant Commissioner
of Police himself searched the accused. On perusal of the complaint, it discloses that the Police
Inspector of CCB has received the credible information that accused persons have indulged in
trafficking the narcotic drug and based on that credible information, the raid was conducted along
with staff and panchas and mahazar was drawn from 3.00 p.m to 7.00 p.m, securing the Gazetted
Officer i.e., Assistant Commissioner of Police and subjected this petitioner for search and nowhere it
is found that the Assistant Commissioner of Police is also a part of the raid. It is clear that after
apprehending the accused persons, Assistant Commissioner of Police came and asked the accused
persons whether the other Gezetted Officer to be called or he himself can search them. The accused
persons given consent to search them by the Assistant Commissioner of Police only and thereafter,
the search was conducted with the consent of the accused persons. On perusal of mahazar, it clearly
discloses that panchanama was drawn between 3.00 p.m. to 7.00 p.m. and in terms of the
panchanama 56.5 grams of MDMA pills were recovered from this petitioner and apart from that 250
grams of Hashish also recovered and the same is also weighed through the electronic scale and the
same was also recovered from his pant pocket. When the personal search is made in the presence of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67520026/ 4
Joswin Lobo vs State Of Karnataka on 2 February, 2022
Assistant Commissioner of Police who is also a Gazetted Officer and the very contention that he
belongs to the same department cannot be a ground to disbelieve the case of the prosecution and the
learned counsel of the petitioner also not disputing the fact that the said Assistant Commissioner of
Police is also a Gazetted Officer and this Court already held that conducting of the search by the
officer of the said department is not a bar and no law prescribes that he should be subjected to the
personal search in the presence of the Gazetted Officer not belongs to the particular department. In
Crl.P.No.1298/2020 referred supra, the petitioner's counsel himself relied upon in paragraph 13 of
the said decision in which it is observed that the provision says that he should be subjected for
personal search in the presence of the Gazetted Officer and in the case on hand also in the presence
of the Gazetted Officer only, the personal search was made and hence, there is a compliance of
Section 50 of NDPS Act.
9. The other contention that the officer who registered the case is not an officer in-charge of the
police station, is a matter of fact and the same to be decided during the course of the trial. The Apex
Court in the judgment reported in (2000) 9 SCC 549 in the case of SUPERINTENDENT,
NARCOTICS CONTROLS BUREAU, CHENNAI vs R.PAULSAMY held that provisions of Section 37
of the NDPS Act; it is held that it would be too early to take into account and judge the matter
regarding non-complaince with the formalities during the bail stage. Since recording of findings
under Section 37 of the NDPS Act was a sine-qua non for granting bail under the Act. The Apex
Court also referring Sections 37 and 52, 57 of the NDPS Act set aside the bail granted in the said case
and made an observation that non-compliance of Sections of NDPS Act is not a ground to enlarge
him on bail and the same has to be tested during the course of trial. The Apex Court also in the
judgment of UNION OF INDA vs BAL MUKUND AND OTHERS reported in (2009) 12 SCC 161
discussed with regard to Section 37 of the NDPS Act and also referred the earlier judgment of
Paulsamy and come to the conclusion that the material would indicate that there is a material
against the petitioner and hence, does not find any reasons to enlarge him on bail. The Apex Court
in the recent judgment relied upon by both the parties in the case of Nawaz Khan discussed with
regard to the scope of the conscious possession of contraband and also summarized the principles
how to be ascertained and also categorically held that mere absence of possession of the contraband
on the person of the accused does not ipso facto mean that the accused was not in conscious
possession of the contraband rather the knowledge of possession of contraband has to be gleaned
from the facts and circumstances of a case. The term "possession" could mean physical possession
with animus; custody over the prohibited substances with animus; exercise of dominion and control
as a result of concealment; or personal knowledge as to the existence of the contraband and the
intention based on such knowledge. The entry applies in the case of transportation of the
contraband in the vehicle, but in the case on hand, it has to be noted that MDMA pills i.e., 150
number of packets weighing 56.5 grams which is commercial quantity and apart from that 250
grams of Hashish was seized in the presence of the Assistant Commissioner of Police from the
petitioner in the room which is the manufactured drugs. Mere completion of investigation and filing
of charge-sheet is not a ground to enlarge the petitioner on bail when he has been apprehended
along with a manufactured drugs of commercial quantity and apart from that the Special Enactment
is brought into force when the IPC is not sufficient to combat the offences which are against the
society at large and only in order to prevent the menace in the society, the Special Enactment is
brought into force. Under Section 37 of the NDPS Act, the Court cannot enlarge the petitioner on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67520026/ 5
Joswin Lobo vs State Of Karnataka on 2 February, 2022
bail unless there is a reasonable ground that the petitioner is not guilty and he is not likely to involve
in similar offences in future. The Court also has to look into the fact that the drugs which are seized
are manufactured drugs which are in conscious possession of this petitioner which was recovered
from the pocket of this petitioner and the same is also a commercial quantity and it is also settled
law that while granting bail, the Court has to look into the interest of the society at large and if such
acts are considered in a lenient way, it affects the society at large. The very information received
from the arresting officer is clear that this petitioner along with others were indulging in trafficking
the manufactured drugs to the college students, ITBT employees and to the general public and when
such allegation is made and the recovery is made at the instance of this petitioner that too a
commercial quantity, i.e., 56.5 grams of Ecstasy pills as well as 250 grams of Hashish, I am of the
opinion that it is not a fit case to exercise the discretion in favour of the petitioner to enlarge him on
bail and non-compliance of the mandatory provisions also to be considered at the time of trial and
the same is a matter of fact whether same is complied with or not. Hence, at this juncture, this Court
cannot evaluate the evidence on record while exercising the discretion under Section 439 of Cr.P.C.
Hence, I do not find any merit in the petition to enlarge the petitioner on bail that too on the ground
of non-compliance of mandatory provisions and the Court not to look into the technicalities at the
time of considering the bail petition to enlarge the petitioner on bail. The decisions of the Apex
Court quoted by the petitioner will not comes to the aid of the petitioner and those judgments are
delivered at the stage of appeal on merits and not at the time of considering the bail application and
the judgments referred by this Court and the Apex Court are clear that the bail cannot be granted on
the ground of technicality and non-compliance of formalities cannot be considered during the bail
stage. Accordingly, Point No.1 is answered as Negative.
Point No.2
10. In view of the discussions made above, I pass the following:
ORDER The bail petition is rejected.
Sd/-
JUDGE SN
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67520026/ 6
