K A Uma Devi vs State Of Karnataka on 7 June, 2018
K A Uma Devi vs State Of Karnataka on 7 June, 2018
Author: K.N.Phaneendra
Bench: K. N. Phaneendra
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA, BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 7TH DAY OF JUNE, 2018
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE K. N. PHANEENDRA
CRL.P. NO.2120/2018
BETWEEN
K A UMA DEVI
W/O DR.V.NARAYANSWAMY
AGED ABOUT 43 YEARS,
R/AT NO.50/1, 18TH CROSS
MALLESHWARAM
BANGALORE-560 055 ... PETITIONER
(BY SRI. ASHOK HARNAHALLI, SR. COUNSEL FOR
SRI. SRINIVAS RAO S.S., ADVOCATE)
AND
1. STATE OF KARNATAKA
BY MALLESHWARAM POLICE STATION
BANGALORE-560 003, REP. BY ITS SPP.,
HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
BENGALURU - 560 001
2. DR GOPINATH R
DIRECTOR NIRBAYA SUPERSPECIALITY
HOSPITAL, 18TH CROSS, MALLESHWARAM
BANGALORE-560 055
3. DR BALAJI RAO A
DIRECTOR NIRBAYA SUPERSPECIALITY
HOSPITAL, 18TH CROSS, MALLESHWARAM
BANGALORE-560 055
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI. S. RACHAIAH, HCGP FOR R-1;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188168208/ 1
K A Uma Devi vs State Of Karnataka on 7 June, 2018
PETITION DISMISSED AGAINST
R2 & R3 V.O.DT. 7.6.2018)
2
THIS CRL.P FILED U/S.482 CR.P.C PRAYING TO
QUASH THE FIR IN CRIME NO.124/2016 OF THE FIRST
RESPONDENT POLICE, AGAINST THE PETITIONER
HEREIN, FOR THE OFFENCES P/U/Ss. 143, 147, 341,
323, 504, 506 R/W 149 OF IPC.
THIS CRL.P COMING ON FOR ADMISSION ALONG
WITH IA NO.1/2018 FOR STAY THIS DAY, THE COURT
MADE THE FOLLOWING:
ORDER
Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned HCGP for the Respondent-State.
Perused the impugned order dated 17.01.2018 passed by LVI Addl. CMM, Bengaluru, in C.C. No.
22441/2016, which reads as under:-
"The DCP, Crime-II, Bengaluru, filed a requisition seeking permission to investigate
the matter under Section 173(8) of Cr.PC. and prays for order. Perused the papers.
The accused is directed to appear after further final report. Await report. Call on
19.1.2018"
2. The said order is called in question by the petitioner herein, who claims that, during further
investigation by the respondent-Police, they have arrested the petitioner and contemplating to file
further final report against this petitioner. The learned counsel has brought to the notice of this
court that the order passed by the learned Magistrate is bereft of any reasons and further there is no
opportunity given even to the Investigating Officer to ascertain as to what exactly the reason to go
for further investigation in this particular case. Learned counsel also attacks the order on the ground
that under Section 173(8) of Cr.PC., the Magistrate has no power even to order for further
investigation. In this regard, the learned counsel has relied upon a decision of Hon'ble Apex Court
reported in (2017) 4 SCC 177 [Amruthbhai Shambhubhai Patel Vs. Sumanbhai Kantibhai Pate and
Ors.], wherein it has been observed at Para-49 to 51 thus:
49. On an overall survey of the pronouncements of this Court on the scope and
purport of Section 173(8) of the Code and the consistent trend of explication thereof,
we are thus disposed to hold that though the investigating agency concerned has been
invested with the power to undertake further investigation desirably after informing
the Court thereof, before which it had submitted its report and obtaining its approval,
no such power is available therefor to the learned Magistrate after cognizance has
been taken on the basis of the earlier report, process has been issued and accused has
entered appearance in response thereto. At that stage, neither the learned Magistrate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188168208/ 2
K A Uma Devi vs State Of Karnataka on 7 June, 2018
suo motu nor on an application filed by the complainant/informant direct further
investigation. Such a course would be open only on the request of the investigating
agency and that too, in circumstances warranting further investigation on the
detection of material evidence only to secure fair investigation and trial, the life
purpose of the adjudication in hand.
50. The un-amended and the amended sub-Section (8) of Section 173 of the Code if
read in juxtaposition, would overwhelmingly attest that by the latter, the
investigating agency/officer alone has been authorized to conduct further
investigation without limiting the stage of the proceedings relatable thereto. This
power qua the investigating agency/officer is thus legislatively intended to be
available at any stage of the proceedings.
The recommendation of the Law Commission in its 41st Report which manifesting heralded the
amendment, significantly had limited its proposal to the empowerment of the investigating agency
alone.
51. In contradistinction, Sections 156, 190, 200, 202 and 204 of the Cr.P.C clearly outline the powers
of the Magistrate and the courses open for him to chart in the matter of directing investigation,
taking of cognizance, framing of charge, etc. Though the Magistrate has the power to direct
investigation under Section 156(3) at the pre-cognizance stage even after a charge- sheet or a closure
report is submitted, once cognizance is taken and the accused person appears pursuant thereto, he
would be bereft of any competence to direct further investigation either suo motu or acting on the
request or prayer of the complainant/informant. The direction for investigation by the Magistrate
under Section 202, while dealing with a complaint, though is at a post-cognizance stage, it is in the
nature of an inquiry to derive satisfaction as to whether the proceedings initiated ought to be
furthered or not. Such a direction for investigation is not in the nature of further investigation, as
contemplated under Section 173(8) of the Code. If the power of the Magistrate, in such a scheme
envisaged by the Cr.P.C to order further investigation even after the cognizance is taken, accused
persons appear and charge is framed, is acknowledged or approved, the same would be discordant
with the state of law, as enunciated by this Court and also the relevant layout of the Cr.P.C.
adumbrated hereinabove. Additionally had it been the intention of the legislature to invest such a
power, in our estimate, Section 173(8) of the Cr.P.C would have been worded accordingly to
accommodate and ordain the same having regard to the backdrop of the incorporation thereof. In a
way, in view of the three options open to the Magistrate, after a report is submitted by the police on
completion of the investigation, as has been amongst authoritatively enumerated in Bhagwant Singh
(supra), the Magistrate, in both the contingencies, namely; when he takes cognizance of the offence
or discharges the accused, would be committed to a course, whereafter though the investigating
agency may for good reasons inform him and seek his permission to conduct further investigation,
he suo motu cannot embark upon such a step or take that initiative on the request or prayer made by
the complainant/informant. Not only such power to the Magistrate to direct further investigation
suo motu or on the request or prayer of the complainant/informant after cognizance is taken and
the accused person appears, pursuant to the process, issued or is discharged is incompatible with
the statutory design and dispensation, it would even otherwise render the provisions of Sections 311
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188168208/ 3
K A Uma Devi vs State Of Karnataka on 7 June, 2018
and 319 Cr.P.C., whereunder any witness can be summoned by a Court and a person can be issued
notice to stand trial at any stage, in a way redundant. Axiomatically, thus the impugned decision
annulling the direction of the learned Magistrate for further investigation is unexceptional and does
not merit any interference. Even otherwise on facts, having regard to the progression of the
developments in the trial, and more particularly, the delay on the part of the informant in making
the request for further investigation, it was otherwise not entertainable, as has been rightly held by
the High Court."
3. On meaningful understanding of the above said observation of the Hon'ble Apex Court, the
Investigating agency can request for further investigation and that too in the circumstances
warranting further investigation on the detection of material evidence only to secure fair
investigation and trial, the life purpose of the adjudication in hand. Therefeore, it goes without
saying that the Magistrate has got power to order for further investigation only on the request of the
Investigating Agency, not on the requisition of the complainant or any other person. However, the
sad decision makes it abundantly clear that, as the course is open to the Magistrate only grant
permission for further investigation only on the request of the Investigating Agency, that too in the
circumstances warranting further investigation on the detection of material evidence to secure fair
investigation and trial. Therefore, what is incumbent upon the Investigating Agency is to establish
the circumstances warranting further investigation and the detection of material evidence before the
Magistrate and after going through such circumstances and the materials on record, the Magistrate
has to apply his judicious mind and if necessary permit the Investigating agency for further
investigation.
4. As could be seen from the order passed by the learned Magistrate in this particular case, it is
bereft of any reason. Even the order extracted above does not show any permission is actually
granted for further investigation. However, this Court has to presume that such permission has been
granted, because the Magistrate has directed the accused to appear after further investigation and
submitting of further final report. However, the order does not disclose that, any request has been
made by the Investigating Officer explaining the reason for further investigation and explaining the
circumstances warranting for further investigation, and what are all the materials detected or
materials available to secure fair investigation and trial. The application filed by one Mr.Jinendra
Khanagavi, Dy. Commissioner of Police, Crime-II, Bengaluru, also does not disclose as to under
what circumstances, he would like to investigate the matter further. It is simply stated that the
charge sheet has already been filed in this case and the Police Inspector, Malleswaram Police Station
has handed over the papers to the concerned officer and he would like to investigate further. Except
that, the said letter is not inconsonance with the direction of the Hon'ble Apex Court as noted above,
in the said decision. As I have already noted that the Magistrate even though has powers to permit
the Investigating Agency for further investigation, however, that order should be judicious and only
after application of judicious mind and that sort of judiciousness, is absent in this case.
5. In the above circumstances, the petition is allowed. The order dated 18.01.208 passed by the LVI
Addl. CMM, Bengaluru, in C.C. No. 22441/2016 permitting the Investigating agency to further
investigate the matter is hereby quashed. However, the Investigating Agency is at liberty to make
necessary fresh application to the Magistrate explaining the circumstances warranting further
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188168208/ 4
K A Uma Devi vs State Of Karnataka on 7 June, 2018
investigation and furnishing materials for further investigation. After such an application being
filed, the learned Magistrate has to apply his judicious mind in the light of the decision of the
Hon'ble Apex Court cited supra, particularly in the light of Paras 49 to 51 and pass appropriate
orders in accordance with law.
In view of disposal of this case, the application-IA No.1/2018 filed for stay, does not survive for
consideration. Accordingly, the said application stands disposed of.
Sd/-
JUDGE KGR*
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188168208/ 5
