K.Ilayarani vs The District Collector on 9 July, 2020
K.Ilayarani vs The District Collector on 9 July, 2020
Author: R.Suresh Kumar
Bench: R.Suresh Kumar
W.P.(MD)No.6606 of 2020
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 09.07.2020
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE R.SURESH KUMAR
W.P.(MD)No.6606 of 2020
(Through Video Conferencing)
K.Ilayarani ... Petitioner
Vs.
The District Collector,
Madurai District,
Madurai. ... Respondent
PRAYER : Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India to issue a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus to call for the records of
the respondent, ie., the District Collector, Madurai, passed in his e.f.vz;
58778/2012/[p1 ehs;:17.03.2020 and provide compassionate ground
appointment to the petitioner considering the qualifications required, within
a specified time frame that may be fixed by this Court.
For Petitioner :Mr.S.Visvalingam
For Respondents :Mrs.J.Padmavathy Devi
Special Government Pleader
1/15
http://www.judis.nic.in
(cid:12) W.P.(MD)No.6606 of 2020
ORDER
Challenging the order passed by the respondent District Collector dated 17.03.2020 and for a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128981061/ 1
K.Ilayarani vs The District Collector on 9 July, 2020
consequential direction to the respondent to provide appointment to the petitioner on
compassionate ground, the present writ petition has been filed.
2. One V.Kallanai, who was working as Village Assistant at Katchirayanpatti Village, Melur Taluk,
Madurai District, suddenly expired, while he was in service on 28.10.2011. His appointment as
Village Assistant in revenue department was in regular service and was in regular time scale of pay.
The said deceased Government servant left behind her widow and three children. Subsequently, one
of the child of the deceased Government servant, ie., one of the son, namely, Sakthiponnusamy got a
Government job in the year 2013. However, the fact remains that, the said son Sakthiponnusamy of
the deceased Government servant, though got Government job after the demise of his father, that
appointment was given on merits and not on the basis of compassionate ground. Also to be noted
http://www.judis.nic.in that, the said Sakthiponnusamy has started living separately leading his
own life and he has never turned back or has never come and help the family of the deceased
Government servant, ie., the widow as well as other two children of the deceased Government
servant. There is no dispute on this factual aspects, as the impugned order also reflects the same.
3. In that circumstances, in order to bail out the family of the deceased Government servant, which
means the family consisting of the widow and two other children from the indigent circumstances,
one of the daughter, ie., the petitioner Ilayarani, seeking for appointment on compassionate ground,
for which, application has been filed in the year 2012 itself. The said application dated 27.08.2012,
having been considered, was rejected by the District Collector, ie., the respondent herein by the
impugned order dated 17.03.2020.
4. Assailing the said impugned order, Mr.S.Visvalingam, learned counsel for the petitioner, would
submit that, the respondent, while rejecting the request of the petitioner for giving job on
compassionate ground, has http://www.judis.nic.in quoted the Government order in G.O.Ms.No.155
Labour and Employment Department dated 16.07.1993 and G.O.Ms.No.18 Labour and Employment
Department dated 23.01.2020. The learned counsel would further submit that, the import or
relevant portion of the said G.Os., do not any way restrain or prohibit the respondent from
considering the candidature of the petitioner, as one of the legal heir of the deceased Government
servant for the purpose of compassionate appointment, merely because one of the legal heir, ie.,
Sakthiponnusamy, son of the deceased Government servant, has already got a job.
5. In this context, the learned counsel would submit that, Paragraph No.3 of G.O.Ms.No.155 and also
Clause 4 of G.O.Ms.No.18, in fact, enabling the respondent to consider the other legal heir for
compassionate appointment, if already a legal heir, who is in Government job, prior to the death of
the Government servant, provided he/she has not been lending any helping hand to the family of the
deceased Government servant. Therefore, the learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that,
the reasons cited in the impugned order quoting the aforesaid two Government orders are not
http://www.judis.nic.in good reasons and in fact, the G.Os. support the case of the petitioner.
Therefore, the impugned order has to be interfered with and suitable direction can be given, he
contended.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128981061/ 2
K.Ilayarani vs The District Collector on 9 July, 2020
6. On the other hand, the learned Special Government Pleader for the respondent would submit
that, both under the G.O.Ms.Nos.155 and 18, it has been categorically stated that, in respect of
request for compassionate appointment, if the Government servant died during service and the
family is in indigent and penurious circumstances, if one of the legal heir of the deceased
Government servant is already in a Government job and getting a permanent salary and if he/she is
not lending helping hand to the family of the deceased Government servant, then the employer can
consider the request of the other legal heir of the deceased Government servant for the purpose of
compassionate appointment. This is what the import of the relevant clause of the G.O.
7. However, the learned Special Government Pleader would submit that, insofar as the present case
is concerned, the Government servant died http://www.judis.nic.in in 2011, one of the legal heir
Sakthiponnusamy has got job in 2013 and even though it may be a fact that, the said
Sakthiponnusamy is not supporting the family of the deceased Government servant including the
petitioner herein, this situation cannot be fit in under the relevant clause referred to above either
under G.O.Ms.No.155 or under G.O.Ms.No.18. Therefore, the learned Special Government Pleader
would submit that, the case of the petitioner has been rightly rejected by the respondent by quoting
the relevant clauses of the respective G.Os., referred to above and therefore, the said impugned
order need not be interfered with.
8. I have considered the said submissions made by both sides and have perused the materials placed
before this Court.
9. Insofar as the factual matrix discussed above is concerned, there is no much dispute as the
Government servant died in 2011, who is the father of the petitioner, left behind in a penurious
circumstances his widow as well as three children. Out of the three children, one son
Sakthiponnusamy has got a Government job thereafter in the year 2013, however, he started
http://www.judis.nic.in leading his own life, which means that, he has not given any helping hand to
the family of the deceased Government servant ie., the mother as well as the sisters of the said
Sakthiponnusamy. Therefore, it become clear that, the family consisting of the widow and other two
children of the deceased Government servant have been left behind in a penurious and indigent
circumstances, where, no one is there to look after their welfare and to bail out the family from such
circumstances. Whether these circumstances can be fit in within the aforesaid two clauses to
consider the candidature of the petitioner on compassionate ground is a question before this Court
in this writ petition. In order to delve in those issues, the relevant portion of the G.O.Ms.No.155 as
well as G.O.Ms.No.18, which have been heavily relied upon by both sides, are quoted hereunder:
“3.In regard to the second condition mentioned in para 1 above, it is considered that
if a member of the family is already in employment and supports the family then the
restriction may be applied. When a dependant of the family is employed, the factors
to be ascertained are, whether he is regularly employed, and is actually supporting
the family. If that person was employed even http://www.judis.nic.in before the
death of the Government servant and was living separately without extending any
help to the family, then the case of other eligible dependants will be considered.” “(iv)
If any, person in the deceased Government Servant's family was employed even
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128981061/ 3
K.Ilayarani vs The District Collector on 9 July, 2020
before the death of the Government servant but was living separately without
extending any help to the family, then the case of other eligible dependant will be
considered.”
10. The relevant portion as quoted above in both the G.Os., have been heavily relied upon by the
respondent herein, while passing the impugned order rejecting the request of the petitioner.
Therefore, the relevant portion of the impugned order is also extracted hereunder:
“5),e;epiyapy;> Nkw;fhZk; murhiz (epiy) vz;.155> njhopyhsh; kw;Wk;
Ntiytha;g;Gj;Jiw ehs;:16.07.1993If; ftdkhf ghprPyid nra;jjpy;> muR Copah; ,wg;gjw;F
Kd;Ng> mtuJ thhpRjhuh;fspy; xUth; muR gzpepakdk; ngw;W> FLk;gj;jpw;F ve;j
cjtpAk; nra;ahky; jdpahf tho;e;J te;jhy;> mjdhy; ,we;j muR Copah; FLk;gk; twpa
epiyapy; ,Ue;jhy;> jFjpahd gpw thhpRjhuh;fSf;F fUiz mbg;gilapy; gzp toq;Ftjw;F
ghprPypf;fg;gLk; vdj; njhptpf;fg;gLfpwJ.
http://www.judis.nic.in
6)fUizapd; mbg;gilapy; gzp epakdk;
toq;f> jw;NghJ tug;ngw;w murhiz (epiy) vz;:18> njhopyhsh; kw;Wk; Ntiytha;g;G
(f;A+)j;Jiw ehs; 23.01.2020-y; fPo;f;fz;lthW Fwpg;gplg;gl;Ls;sJ.
LEGAL HEIRS/NEAR RELATIVES OF THE DECEASED GOVERNMENT SERVANT/PERSON
WHO ARE ELIGIBLE FOR COMPASSIONATE GROUND APPOINTMENT gj;jp (IV)-y;
(iv) If any person in the deceased Government servant's family was employed even before the death
of the Government servant but was living separately without extending any help to the family, then
the case of other eligible dependant will be consiedered.
7) ,we;j muR Copahpd; kfd; jpU.rf;jp nghd;Dr;rhkp vd;gth; mtuJ je;ij jpU.fy;yhiz ,we;jjw;F
(28.10.2011) gpd;dh;> 2013-k; Mz;L Kjy; muR Copauhf gzpahw;wp tUfpwhh;.
vdNt> Kjd;ikr; nrayh; kw;Wk; tUtha; epUthf Mizah; mth;fspd; njspTiuapd;gbAk;> murhiz (epiy)
vz;:155> njhopyhsh; kw;Wk;
Ntiytha;g;Gj;Jiw ehs;: 16.07.1993d;gbAk; kw;Wk;
murhiz (epiy) vz;:18> njhopyhsh; kw;Wk;
Ntiytha;g;G(f;A)j;Jiw ehs;:23.01.2020-d;gbAk;>
jpUkjp.,isauhzp vd;gtUf;F fUiz mbg;gilapy;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128981061/ 4
K.Ilayarani vs The District Collector on 9 July, 2020
gzp epakdk; toq;Ftjw;F toptif ,y;iy.
vdNt> kJiu khtl;lk;> NkY}h; tl;lk;>
http://www.judis.nic.in
fr;rpuhad;gl;b fpuhkj;jpy; fpuhk cjtpahsuhfg;
gzpapy; ,Uf;Fk;NghJ 28.10.2011 md;W kuzkile;j jpU.fy;yhiz vd;gthpd; kidtp jpUkjp.re;jpuh vd;gth;
jdJ kfs; jpUkjp. ,isauhzp vd;gtUf;F 27.08.2012 md;W fUiz mbg;gilapy; gzp toq;ff;Nfhhpa kDitj;
js;Sgb nra;J ,jd;
%yk; cj;jutplg;gLfpwJ.
(xk;) b.[p.tpda;.
khtl;l Ml;rpj;jiyth;
kJiu.
//c.e.c.g// khtl;l Ml;rpaUf;fhf.”
11. The paragraph 3 of G.O.Ms.No.155 and Clause 4 of G.O.Ms.No. 18 were sought to be given an
interpretation by the respondent to state that, since the said clauses enabling the employer to
consider the other legal heir for the purpose of compassionate appointment, if the family of the
deceased Government servant is not looked after by other legal heir, who is already in service and
getting a permanent salary even prior to the death of the Government servant. Therefore, the
respondent has come to the conclusion that, here in the case in hand, it is not the case, where, one of
the legal heir of the deceased Government servant, who not got a job prior to the death of
http://www.judis.nic.in the Government servant, but only after the death of the Government
servant. Therefore, even though the said legal heir, who, after getting a Government job
permanently, is not able to look after the family of the deceased Government servant, the other legal
heir cannot be considered for the compassionate appointment, as such kind of situation is not
supported either under paragraph No.3 of the G.O.Ms.No.155 or under Clause 4 of the
G.O.Ms.No.18. This interpretation, in the considered opinion of this Court, as has been given by the
respondent through the impugned order, is thoroughly detrimental to the intention of the
Government, where the Government issued these two G.Os., as illustratively given a situation,
where, even if already a legal heir of the deceased Government servant is in a permanent job or a
Government job well prior to the death of the Government servant, the other legal heir of the
deceased Government servant can be considered for compassionate appointment, provided the
other legal heir, who is already in Government job or permanent job, is not looking after the family
of the deceased Government servant. The said position or situation is noway inferior than the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128981061/ 5
K.Ilayarani vs The District Collector on 9 July, 2020
present situation faced by the writ petitioner and her rest of the family, where, the widow and two
children http://www.judis.nic.in of the deceased Government servant, have been left in lurch
without any support and they have been in continuous indigent circumstances or penurious
situation, where no one is there in their family to look after or bail out their family.
12. In such circumstances, one legal heir of the deceased Government servant, though got a job in
2013 ie., two years after the death of the Government servant, admittedly, he is not looking after the
family of the deceased Government servant. This position has been accepted by the respondent.
Therefore, the import of Paragraph No.3 of G.O.Ms.No.155 and Clause 4 of G.O.Ms.No.18 shall be
put in with purposive interpretation, where, the Government thought if fit to extend the benefit of
compassionate appointment to the other legal heir of a deceased Government servant, even though
already a legal heir of the deceased Government servant is in a permanent job, provided, that legal
heir, who was already in a permanent job, is not looking after the family or living separately without
taking care of the other family members of the deceased Government servant.
http://www.judis.nic.in
13. Exactly the situation now prevail in the family of the petitioner can very well be fit in either
under Paragraph No.3 of G.O.Ms.No.155 or under clause 4 of G.O.Ms.No.18. Therefore, a negative
interpretation sought to be given by the respondent through the impugned order for those clauses of
the respective G.Os., by thus, denying the request of the petitioner for consideration of the request
of compassionate appointment, cannot be accepted, as such interpretation would destroy the very
purpose for which, the G.Os., especially the relevant clauses were issued by the Government.
14. Therefore, this Court is of the considered view, that the reasons cited by the respondent in the
impugned order is unsustainable. Therefore, the impugned order is liable to be interfered with and
necessary order to that effect as sought for can be given.
15. In the result, the impugned order is quashed. The writ petition is allowed and there shall be a
direction to the respondent to reconsider the application of the petitioner for grant of job suitable to
the educational and other qualification of the petitioner.
http://www.judis.nic.in
16. Since no other reason has been given except the relevant clause of the G.Os., referred to above,
the order granting appointment on compassionate ground can be appreciable. Therefore, the
needful, as indicated above, shall be undertaken by the respondent within three months from the
date of receipt of a copy of this order.
17. The writ petition is allowed to the extent indicated above. No costs.
09.07.2020
Index : Yes / No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128981061/ 6
K.Ilayarani vs The District Collector on 9 July, 2020
Internet : Yes
RR
To
The District Collector,
Madurai District,
Madurai.
Note: In view of the present lock down owing to COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the order may
be utilized for official purposes, but, ensuring that the copy of the order that is presented is the
correct copy, shall be the responsibility of the advocate/litigant concerned. http://www.judis.nic.in
R.SURESH KUMAR, J.
RR 09.07.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/128981061/ 7
