K.P. Narasimhan vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 September, 2022
K.P. Narasimhan vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 September,
2022
Author: H.B.Prabhakara Sastry
Bench: H.B.Prabhakara Sastry
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 16TH DAY OF SEPTEMBER 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE Dr. JUSTICE H.B.PRABHAKARA SASTRY
CRIMINAL REVISION PETITION No.843 OF 2013
BETWEEN:
1. K.P. Narasimhan
S/o Late K.R. Padmanabha
80 years, No.19, Raja Annamalai
Road, Purusawalkam
Chennai 600084
2. Farooq Dadabhai
S/o L.N. Dadabhai
66 years, No.13, 1st Road
Subbarao Avenue
Chennai 600006
.. Petitioners
(Vide order dated 02.06.2022 petition of petitioner No.1 is abated;
Sri S.G. Bhagavan, Advocate for petitioner No.2)
AND:
The State of Karnataka
By the Inspector of Police
Corps of Detectives
Bangalore 560 001
.. Respondent
(By Sri K. Nageshwarappa, HCGP)
Crl.R.P.No.843/2013
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109844626/ 1
K.P. Narasimhan vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 September, 2022
This Criminal Revision Petition is filed under Section 397
read with Section 401 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973,
praying to allow the petition, set aside the order dated 19th
August, 2013, passed by the Court of the XVII Additional Chief
Metropolitan Magistrate (Special Court for CBI Cases, Bangalore,
in C.C.No.8257/2001 framing charge against the petitioners and to
discharge them from the case to meet the ends of justice.
This Criminal Revision Petition (Bengaluru Bench matter)
having been heard through video conferencing hearing and
reserved on 07.09.2022, at the Kalaburagi Bench, coming on
for pronouncement of Orders, this day, the Court made the
following:
ORDER
The respondent-Police have filed a charge sheet against the present petitioners and four other
persons alleging that they have committed the offences punishable under Sections 406 and 420 read
with Section 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (hereinafter for brevity, referred to as the 'IPC').
It is alleged in the charge sheet that the accused persons are the Directors of a company by name
M/s. Synergy Financial Exchange Limited with its registered office at Chennai (hereinafter for
brevity referred to as the 'Company'). The Company is said to have been incorporated under the
Companies Act, 1956.
It is further alleged that, about in the year 1992, the Company opened its branch office at Bengaluru
and collected deposits from several persons, promising them to return the amounts in deposit with
good accruals thereupon. However, the amounts were not returned. Cheques were signed and issued
by the authorised signatories of the Company. Thus, after conducting an investigation in their
station Crime No.252/1999, the respondent - police filed charge sheet against the six accused for the
offences mentioned above.
2. The Court of the XVII Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate (Special Court for CBI Cases),
Bengaluru (hereinafter for brevity referred to as the 'Special Court') where the charge sheet was filed
in C.C.No.8257/2001, proceeded to frame the charges against the accused, including the petitioners,
for the offences punishable under Sections 406 and 420 read with Section 34 of the IPC for fourteen
heads purported to have been committed between the dates 16.10.1996 and 14.09.1997. Challenging
the said framing of charges against them, accused Nos.1 and 5 before the Special Court have
preferred the present revision petition.
3. The respondent is being represented by the learned High Court Government Pleader.
4. Records from the Special Court pertaining to the matter were called for and the same are placed
before this Court.
5. Heard the arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned High Court
Government Pleader for the respondent. Perused the materials placed before this Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109844626/ 2
K.P. Narasimhan vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 September, 2022
6. After hearing both side, the only point that arise for my consideration in this revision petition is:
Whether the Special Court was at error in framing the charge against the present
petitioners (accused Nos.1 and 5) before it, when the Company - M/s. Synergy
Financial Exchange Limited not being arraigned as an accused in the charge sheet?
7. The learned counsel for the petitioner, in his very brief argument, submitted that the offence is
alleged to have been committed by the Company, however, the said Company has not been
arraigned as an accused either in the FIR or in the charge sheet. The accused against whom the
charge sheet is filed are only the Directors, as such, without arraigning the Company as one of the
accused, no vicarious liability can be fastened and the act of framing of charges, without there being
Company as an accused, would not sustain. He also submitted that nowhere in the charge sheet
there is an averment of inducement by the Directors who are accused herein.
In support of his argument, the learned counsel relied upon few judgments of the Hon'ble Apex
Court, which would be discussed hereafterwards at the relevant place.
8. The learned High Court Government Pleader appearing for the respondent, in his brief argument,
submitted that the State can still either implead the Company in the case or can still file an
additional charge sheet. Therefore, the framing of the charge cannot be set aside. However, he fairly
conceded that the Company was not made a party, though arraigning the Company also as one of
the accused was mandatory.
9. A perusal of the Special Court's records which were summoned and placed before this Court
would go to show that the complainant and also the charge sheet witnesses who are said to have
lodged the complaint and given their statements before the Investigating Officer respectively, have
alleged the act of criminal breach of trust and cheating mainly against the Company showing the
accused as the Directors of the Company at the relevant point of time. Some of them have
mentioned the names of the accused also. However, the fact remains that neither in the FIR nor in
the charge sheet, the Company has been arraigned as an accused.
10. Learned counsel for the petitioners, in his memorandum of petition has relied upon the
judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court in S.K. Alagh vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and others, reported in
(2008) 5 SCC 662. With respect to the offences punishable under Sections 405 and 406 of IPC
against the Directors of a Company, the Hon'ble Apex Court observed that vicarious liability cannot
be fastened on Managing Director, Director or other officers of a Company which is accused of
commission of offence punishable under Sections 406. Sections 34, 146 to 149 of IPC does not cast
vicarious liability on a party not directly charged for commission of an offence, unless specifically
provided therefor. In para-19 of its judgment, the Hon'ble Apex Court observed as below:
"19. As admittedly, drafts were drawn in the name of the Company, even if the
appellant was its Managing Director, he cannot be said to have committed an offence
under Section 406 of the Penal Code. If and when a statute contemplates creation of
such a legal fiction, it provides specifically therefor. In the absence of any provision
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109844626/ 3
K.P. Narasimhan vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 September, 2022
laid down under the statute, a Director of a Company or an employee cannot be held
to be vicariously liable for any offence committed by the Company itself."
In the second judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for the petitioner, i.e., Maksud Saiyed vs.
State of Gujarat and others reported in (2008) 5 SCC 668 regarding vicarious liability of Directors
for the charges levelled against the Company, in para-13 of its judgment the Hon'ble Apex Court was
pleased to observe as below:
"13. ... The Bank is a body corporate. Vicarious liability of the Managing Director and
Director would arise provided any provision exists in that behalf in the statute.
Statutes indisputably must contain provision fixing such vicarious liabilities. Even for
the said purpose, it is obligatory on the part of the complainant to make requisite
allegations which would attract the provisions constituting vicarious liability."
In another judgment relied upon by the petitioners in their memorandum of petition which is R.
Kalyani vs. Janak C. Mehta and others reported in (2009) 1 SCC 516, in para-41 of its judgment the
Hon'ble Apex Court was pleased to observe as below:
"41. If a person, thus, has to be proceeded with as being vicariously liable for the acts
of the company, the company must be made an accused. In any event, it would be a
fair thing to do so, as legal fiction is raised both against the company as well as the
person responsible for the acts of the company."
Learned counsel for the petitioner in his argument relied upon a judgment of the Hon'ble Apex
Court in the case of Aneeta Hada vs. Godfather Travels and Tours Private Limited and connected
matters reported in (2012) 5 SCC
661. In the said case, with respect to Section 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, regarding
criminal liability for dishonour of cheque drawn by company, the Hon'ble Apex Court at paras-24
and 59 of its judgment was pleased to observe as below:
"24. Section 141 uses the term "person" and refers it to a company. There is no trace
of doubt that the company is a juristic person. The concept of corporate criminal
liability is attracted to a corporation and company and it is so luminescent from the
language employed under Section 141 of the Act. It is apposite to note that the
present enactment is one where the company itself and certain categories of officers
in certain circumstances are deemed to be guilty of the offence."
59. In view of our aforesaid analysis, we arrive at the irresistible conclusion that for maintaining the
prosecution under Section 141 of the Act, arraigning of a company as an accused is imperative. The
other categories of offenders can only be brought in the drag-net on the touchstone of vicarious
liability as the same has been stipulated in the provision itself. ..."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109844626/ 4
K.P. Narasimhan vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 September, 2022
11. In Sharad Kumar Sanghi vs. Sangita Rane reported in (2015) 12 SCC 781, the Hon'ble Apex Court
in a petition seeking quashing of criminal proceeding against the petitioner for the offence
punishable under Section 420 IPC was pleased to observe that though the allegations were made
against the Company, the Company was not made a party, therefore, the allegations were restricted
to the Managing Director. The allegations were vague and in fact the same were principally levelled
against the Company. It further observed that there was no specific allegation against the Managing
Director. When a Company had not been arrayed as a party, no proceeding could have been initiated
against it even where vicarious liability was fastened under certain statutes. When a complainant
intends to rope in a Managing Director or any officer of a Company, it would be essential to make
requisite allegation to constitute the vicarious liability. Thus, it was observed that where company
had not been arrayed as a party to the complaint, the criminal proceedings initiated against
Managing Director were not maintainable.
12. The above judgments clearly go to show that when the allegations are against the Company of
alleged cheating or criminal breach of trust, in such a circumstance, the registered Company under
the Companies Act, 1956 being a juristic person is required to be arraigned as an accused.
Independent of the Company arraigning only the Managing Director or Directors of that Company
against whom no individual allegations or specific allegations are made, then the said criminal
proceedings initiated only against the Managing Director or Directors is not maintainable.
In the instant case also, as observed above, a perusal of the materials placed before this Court would
go to show that the complaint and the statements of the witnesses recorded by the Investigating
Officer during the course of the investigation only go to show that the alleged depositors have
accused the Company. According to them it is based on the representation of the Company they
have kept deposit with the Company. Though the Directors may be in the Board of the Company,
however, without arraigning the Company, the vicarious liability cannot be fastened on the
Directors in the instant case. As such, the order of the Special Court framing charges against the
present petitioners under the impugned order deserves to be set aside. However, since according to
the learned HCGP the alleged defect is curable, it is for the prosecution to take such remedial course
if available to them and in accordance with law, if they feel so. However, considering the fact that
the alleged transactions are said to have taken place during the year 1996 and 1997, the matter
requires to be expedited by the Special Court. Accordingly, I proceed to pass the following:
ORDER The petition is allowed in part. The order dated 19.08.2013 passed by the
XVII Additional Chief Metropolitan Magistrate (Special Court for CBI Cases),
Bengaluru in C.C.No.8257/2001, framing the charges against the present petitioner
for the offences punishable under Sections 406 and 420 read with Section 34 of the
Indian Penal Code, 1860 stands set aside.
The liberty is reserved to the respondent to cure the alleged defect in their charge sheet, in
accordance with law, provided they feel doing so.
Since the alleged transactions resulting the criminal case in the Special Court are said to have taken
place during the years 1996 and 1997, as such, nearly 25 to 26 years old, the Special Court is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109844626/ 5
K.P. Narasimhan vs The State Of Karnataka on 16 September, 2022
requested to expedite and dispose of the main case at the earliest.
Registry to transmit a copy of this order to the concerned trial Court along with its records
immediately.
Sd/-
JUDGE swk
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109844626/ 6
