Kabiram vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Kabiram vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Author: Siddharth
Bench: Siddharth
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44935
Court No. - 47
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 20813 of 2024
Applicant :- Kabiram
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Rajeev Kumar Saxena
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Siddharth,J.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant and learned A.G.A. for the State.
There are allegations made against the applicant and three co-accused of causing stab injuries to the
injured.
Learned counsel for the applicant submits that applicant has been falsely implicated in this case. No
specific role has been assigned to him. He is in jail since 06.07.2023.
Learned AGA has opposed the prayer for bail but could not dispute the above submissions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8224293/ 1
Kabiram vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Keeping in view the nature of the offence, evidence, complicity of the accused; submissions of the
learned counsel for the parties noted above; finding force in the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the applicant; keeping view the uncertainty regarding conclusion of trial; one sided
investigation by police, ignoring the case of accused side; applicant being under trial having
fundamental right to speedy trial; larger mandate of the Article 21 of the Constitution of India and
recent judgment dated 11.07.2022 of the Apex Court in the case of Satendra Kumar Antil vs. C.B.I.,
passed in S.L.P (Crl.) No. 5191 of 2021 and considering 5-6 times overcrowding in jails over and
above their capacity by the under trials and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the
case, the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
Let the applicant, Kabiram, involved in Case Crime No.369 of 2023, under Sections 307, 504 I.P.C,
Police Station Ajeetmal, District- Auraiya be released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond and
two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following
conditions. Further, before issuing the release order, the sureties be verified.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with the evidence or threaten the witnesses.
(ii) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any adjournment on
the dates fixed for evidence when the witnesses are present in Court. In case of default of this
condition, it shall be open for the Trial Court to treat it as abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders in
accordance with law.
(iii) The applicant shall remain present before the Trial Court on each date fixed, either personally
or as directed by the Court. In case of his absence, without sufficient cause, the Trial Court may
proceed against him under Section 229-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(iv) In case the applicant misuse the liberty of bail during trial and in order to secure his presence,
proclamation under Section 82 Cr.P.C. is issued and the applicants fail to appear before the Court on
the date fixed in such proclamation then the Trial Court shall initiate proceedings against him in
accordance with law under Section 174-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(v) The applicant shall remain present in person before the Trial Court on the dates fixed for (i)
opening of the case, (ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause,
then it shall be open for the Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed
against him in accordance with law.
In case of breach of any of the above conditions, the complainant is free to move an application for
cancellation of bail before this court.
Identity and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned before
the bonds are accepted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8224293/ 2
Kabiram vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 SS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8224293/ 3
