Kailash Assudani vs Commissioner Of Income Tax on 3 August, 2017
Kailash Assudani vs Commissioner Of Income Tax on 3 August,
2017
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH JABALPUR
WRIT PETITION NO. 10280 of 2017
Kailash Assudani.
Vs.
Commissioner or Income Tax, Aayakr Bhawan & others
For Petitioner : Mr. Pratyush Tripathi, Advocate
For Respondent : Mr. Sanjay Lal, Advocate.
Order posted for: 03.08.2017.
(SUJOY PAUL)
JUDGE
-:- 2 -:-
W.P. No. 10280 of 2017
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH, PRINCIPAL SEAT AT JABALPUR Case No. W.P.
No.10280/2017 Parties Name Kailash Assudani.
Vs.
Commissioner or Income Tax, Aayakr
Bhawan & others
Date of Judgment 03/08/17
Bench Constituted Single Bench
Judgment delivered by Justice Sujoy Paul
Whether approved for reporting YES
Name of counsels for parties Petitioner: Mr. Pratyush Tripathi, Advocate
Respondent: Mr. Sanjay Lal, Advocate
Law laid down No interference is warranted by writ
court against a provisional attachment
order passsed under S.24 of the act.The
provisional order is subject to judicial
review under s.26 of the act.The amended
provisions of the act are complete code in
itself.
The principles of natural justice are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80056653/ 1
Kailash Assudani vs Commissioner Of Income Tax on 3 August, 2017
reduced in writing in the shape of
amended provision. -
Significant paragraph numbers Paras 6 and 7 -
(Order)
03.08.2017
This petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is directed against the order dated
29.06.2017 (Annexure-P/1), whereby the Initiating Officer/Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax
(Benami Prohibition), Bhopal prohibited and restrained the M/s. Kailesh Associates from
transferring or changing the instant property in any manner till passing of necessary order by
adjudicating authority under the Prohibition of Benami Property Transaction Act, 1988 (hereinafter
called as "the PBPT Act").
2. Mr. Pratyush Tripathi, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the Initiating Officer under
the PBPT Act issued show cause notice to the petitioner under Section 24(1) of the said Act. In reply
to this notice dated 31.03.2017 (Annexure-P/5), the petitioner filed his reply on 07.04.2016
-:- 3 -:-
(Annexure-P/6). The petitioner also received summons issued under Section 19 (1) of
the said Act (Page No.17). The petitioner appeared before the authority and desired
certain documents. The petitioner also filed an affidavit before the Initiating Officer.
The Initiating Officer passed the impugned order dated 29.06.2017 and prohibited
and restrained M/s. Kailesh Associates (proprietor Mr. Kailesh Assudani) from
transferring or changing the above mentioned property till passing of necessary order
by the adjudicating authority under Section 26 (3) of the PBPT Act. Criticizing this
order, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the principles of natural justice
were not followed by the Initiating Officer. He placed reliance on 1993 (1) SCC 78,
[C.B. Gautam vs. Union of India & others].
3. Per-contra, Mr. Sanjay Lal, learned counsel for the respondents submits that the
PBPT Act is recently amended by Gazette Notification (Extraordinary) dated
11.08.2016. The Initiating Officer has taken action strictly in accordance with the
enabling provision i.e. Section 19 & 24 of the Act. The order impugned issued by him
is subject to passing of necessary order by the adjudicating authority. Mr. Lal,
apprised this Court that under Section 24(5) of the Act, the Initiating Officer has
already referred the matter to the adjudicating authority. In turn, the adjudicating
authority has fixed the hearing of the reference on 23.08.2017. In near future, the
petitioner will receive the notice for the said hearing by the adjudicating authority.
Petitioner can raise all possible grounds before the said authority. The order of
adjudicating authority is also appealable before the appellate tribunal and before this
Court as per the provisions of the said act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80056653/ 2
Kailash Assudani vs Commissioner Of Income Tax on 3 August, 2017
4. No other point has been pressed by the learned counsel for the parties.
5. I have heard the learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record.
6. The show cause notice shows that it is passed on the basis of certain information
received by the Initiating Officer. The Initiating Officer has not placed reliance on any
documentary evidence. The petitioner demanded
-:- 4 -:-
certain documents. Since, no document is relied upon in the show cause notice, the
documents were not supplied to the petitioner. The order dated 29.06.2017 is a
provisional attachment order under Section 24(4) of the PBPT Act, 1988. The order
itself shows that it is issued with the prior approval of approving authority, but will
remain subject to passing of necessary order by the adjudicating authority. Section
24(3) of the PBPT Act makes it clear that the order of attachment would be a
provisional order. As per Sub-section (5) of Section 24 of the Act, the Initiating
Officer after passing the provisional attachment of property is obliged to draw up the
statement of the case and refer it to the adjudicating authority. On receipt of
reference under Sub-section (5) of Section 24, the adjudicating authority shall issue
notice to the stake holders as provided under Sub-section (1) of Section 26 of the Act.
Section 26 (3) makes it clear that the adjudicating authority will examine the entire
issue and relevant material. Sub-section (3) of Section 26 reads as under:
"(3) The Adjudicating Authority shall, after--
(a) considering the reply, if any, to the notice issued under sub-section (1);
(b) making or causing to be made such inquiries and calling for such reports or
evidence as it deems fit; and
(c) taking into account all relevant materials, provide an opportunity of being heard
to the person specified as a benamidar therein, the Initiating Officer, and any other
person who claims to be the owner of the property, and, thereafter, pass an order--
(i) holding the property not to be a benami property and revoking the attachment
order; or
(ii) holding the property to be a benami property and confirming the attachment
order, in all other cases. "
A plain reading of Sub-section (3) makes it clear that the adjudicating authority is obliged to
examine the stand of alleged Benamindar in reply to the show cause notice. He is further obliged to
make further inquiry or take into account further report or evidence which he deems fit for deciding
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80056653/ 3
Kailash Assudani vs Commissioner Of Income Tax on 3 August, 2017
the question. He can take into account all relevant documents. After providing due opportunity of
hearing to alleged Benamindar, he may pass the order to declare the property as Benami Property
and confirm the attachment order or
-:- 5 -:-
he may hold that the property cannot be treated as Benami Property . In that case, he
may revoke the attachment order. Pertinently, as per Sub-section (6) of Section 26,
the adjudicating authority may at any stage of proceeding, either on the application of
any party or suo-moto strike out the name of any property improperly joined or add
the name of any person whose presence before the adjudicating authority may be
necessary to enable him to adjudicate upon and settle all the questions involved in
the reference.
In my view, the principles of natural justice are codified in terms of Sub- section (6)
of Section 26 of the Act.The impugned order is subject to judicial review before the
adjudicating authority. The order passed by the adjudicating authority can be
assailed before the appellate tribunal constituted under Section 31 of the Act. The
order of appellate tribunal can also be called in question by preferring appeal to the
High Court within a period of 60 days. A microscopic reading of provisions make it
clear that principles of natural justice are reduced in writing in the shape of
amendment in the said act. The amended provisions contains a complete code in
itself.
7. In this back drop, it is to be seen whether at this stage any interference is
warranted by this Court. In C.B. Gautam (Supra) the order of compulsory purchase
under Section 269-UD(1) of Income Tax Act was served on the petitioner without
issuing any show cause notice and without giving any opportunity to him. The Apex
Court in the aforesaid factual back drop interfered in the matter. In the said case
,neither show cause notice was given nor reasons were assigned in the impugned
compulsory purchase order. In the present case show cause notice has been issued,
opportunity has been given to the petitioner. The order impugned is
provisional/tentative in nature. It is subject to judicial review by adjudicating
authority. If order of adjudicating authority goes against the petitioner, the further
forums of judicial review of said order is available to the petitioner before the
appellate tribunal and then before this Court. Hence,against the tentative/provisional
order, no interference is warranted by this court at this stage. As per the scheme of
the Act, the petitioner can raise all possible grounds before the adjudicating
authority. The adjudicating authority is best suited and statutorily obliged to
-:- 6 -:-
consider all relevant aspects. Thus, at this stage no case is made out for interference.
Moreso, when adjudicating authority has already fixed the hearing on 23.08.2017.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80056653/ 4
Kailash Assudani vs Commissioner Of Income Tax on 3 August, 2017
Resultantly, the petition is dismissed.
8. No cost.
(Sujoy Paul) s@if Judge
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80056653/ 5
