Kalinga Warriors vs The Orissa Minerals Development ..... ... on 5 February, 2024
Kalinga Warriors vs The Orissa Minerals Development ..... ... on
5 February, 2024
Author: B.R.Sarangi
Bench: B.R.Sarangi
ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
AFR W.P.(C) NO. 28472 of 2023
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and
227 of the Constitution of India.
---------------
Kalinga Warriors ..... Petitioner
-Versus-
The Orissa Minerals Development ..... Opp. Parties Co. Ltd., Keonjhar and others.
For petitioner : M/s P.C. Rath and S.S. Rath, Advocates For opp. parties : Mr. P.K. Parhi, DSGI
along with Mr. S.S. Kashyap, Central Government Counsel, [O.Ps. No. 1 & 2] Mr. Subham Sharma,
Advocate [O.P.No.3] P R E S E N T:
THE HONOURABLE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE DR. B.R.SARANGI AND THE
HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MURAHARI SRI RAMAN Date of Hearing and
Judgment : 05.02.2024 DR. B.R. SARANGI, ACJ. The petitioner, by means of this
writ petition, seeks to quash the order dated // 2 // 10.08.2023 passed by opposite
party no.3 under Annexure-1 in blacklisting and debarring the petitioner from
participating in the future tenders to be floated by the Orissa Minerals Development
Company Limited for a period of one year.
2. The facts leading to filing of this writ petition, in a nutshell, are that the Orissa Mineral
Development Company (OMDC) Limited invited public tender, vide tender call notice dated
17.03.2023 under Annexure-2, from the experienced agencies for "Maintenance of Security Services
at Thakurani Colony and Office premises of OMDC, Barbil in the district of Keonjhar"
with various terms and conditions. As per the tender conditions, the security
personnel deployment will be made by the successful agency and further duties and
responsibility of the security personnel engaged by the agency are independent, as
stipulated in the tender documents. Pursuant to the above tender call notice, the
petitioner participated in the process of tender by submitting all required documents.
The bid of the petitioner was accepted by opposite party no.2.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126417854/ 1
Kalinga Warriors vs The Orissa Minerals Development ..... ... on 5 February, 2024
// 3 // Thereafter, the Letter of Acceptance (LoA) was issued, vide letter
no.OMD/Pers/2023/533 dated 29.04.2023, in favour of the petitioner. But due to
violation of terms of the tender, the petitioner declined to accept the LoA vide letter
dated 29.04.2023 under Annexure-4.
Thereafter, vide letter dated 03.05.2023 under Annexure-5, the petitioner intimated
opposite party no.2 regarding discussion in the meeting with regard to violation of
terms of the tender. After receiving the letter dated 03.05.2023 from the petitioner,
opposite party no.2, without considering the discussion in the meeting, cancelled the
LoA vide order dated 19.05.2023 under Annexure-6. Thereafter, opposite party no.3,
without issuing notice of show cause and granting opportunity of hearing to the
petitioner, passed the order of blacklisting dated 10.08.2023 under Annexure-1 and
debarred the petitioner from participating in future tenders to be floated by Orissa
Minerals Development Company Limited for a period of one year. Hence, this writ
petition.
// 4 //
3. Mr. P.C. Nayak, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner contended that the order under
Annexure-1 is non-speaking one and has been passed by the authority without providing
opportunity of hearing to the petitioner. In the said order, it has only been indicated that the
petitioner has been blacklisted from participating in future tender of OMDC for a minimum period
of one year from the date of issue of the letter in accordance with sub-clause (d) of clause 11 of
Chapter-II of the NIT, which has been placed on record at page-28. It is further contended that
while blacklisting the contractor, OMDC ought to have followed the procedure and given
opportunity of hearing to the petitioner. But without doing so the order under Annexure-1 has been
passed which also non-speaking one.
4. Mr. Subham Sharma, learned counsel appearing for opposite party no.3 contended that opposite
party-OMDC issued the tender notice under Annexure-2 in company's website on 17.03.2023 and
also published the same in daily English Newspaper // 5 // "The Times of India" and Odia Daily
"The Samaj" for maintenance of security services at different premises of OMDC. The petitioner was
declared as L-1 bidder in all the five tenders for a contract period of one-year with effect from
01.05.2023. The present writ petition relates to Tender Notice No. OMD/Mines/Pers./Sec/2022-
123/497 dated 17.03.2023 at Takhurani Colony & Office Premises of OMDC, Barbil. The petitioner
since was declared as L-1 bidder, OMDC issued Letter of Acceptance (LoA) on 29.04.2023
intimating the petitioner agency that deployment of security personnel will be for a contract period
of one-year w.e.f. 01.05.2023 and that the terms and conditions as stipulated in NIT shall remain
the same throughout the contract period. Pursuant to the issuance of LoA intimating to deploy
security personnel w.e.f., 01.05.2023 in the concerned premises, the petitioner, vide its letter dated
29.04.2023 under Annexure-4, on the very same day declined to accept the LoA citing reasons that
the petitioner's manager went for site visit and after discussion with some officials and other
security related persons it was observed by him that // 6 // existing security guards will continue on
the pay roll of the petitioner company and the existing security guards are protesting against
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126417854/ 2
Kalinga Warriors vs The Orissa Minerals Development ..... ... on 5 February, 2024
recruitment of outsiders and are dictating their own terms and further some security personnel have
intimated that they have not been paid their wages since last four months and basing upon this
presumptive context, the LoA issued by OMDC was declined. Therefore, opposite party no.3 passed
the order impugned invoking sub-clause (d) of clause 11 of Chapter-II of the NIT.
5. This Court heard Mr. P.C. Nayak, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner; and Mr. Subham
Sharma, learned counsel appearing for opposite party no.3 in hybrid mode. Pleadings having been
exchanged between the parties, with the consent of learned counsel for the parties the writ petition
is being disposed of finally at the stage of admission.
6. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and after going through the records, this Court finds
that the order under Annexure-1 has been passed without assigning any reason. Reasons being a //
7 // necessary concomitant to passing an order, the authority can thus discharge its duty in a
meaningful manner either by furnishing the same expressly or by necessary reference to those given
by the original authority.
7. In Union of India v. Mohan Lal Capoor, AIR 1974 SC 87, it has been held that reasons are the
links between the materials on which certain conclusions are based and the actual conclusions. They
disclose how the mind is applied to the subject-matter for a decision whether it is purely
administrative or quasi-judicial and reveal a rational nexus between the facts considered and
conclusions reached. The reasons assure an inbuilt support to the conclusion and decision reached.
Recording of reasons is also an assurance that the authority concerned applied its mind to the facts
on record. It is vital for the purpose of showing a person that he is receiving justice.
8. Similar view has also been taken in Uma Charan v. State of Madhya Pradesh, AIR 1981 SC 1915,
Patitapaban Pala v. Orissa Forest // 8 // Development Corporation Ltd. & another, 2017 (I) OLR 5
and in Banambar Parida v. Orissa Forest Development Corporation Limited, 2017 (I) OLR 625.
9. But the order impugned does not reflect such reason and, therefore, by way of filing counter
affidavit, reasons cannot be supplemented or supplanted to the order impugned in the writ petition.
As such, the subsequent explanation given in the counter affidavit filed by opposite parties no.1 and
2 cannot be taken into consideration in view of the judgment of this Court in M/s Shree Ganesh
Construction v. State of Orissa, 2016 (II) OLR 237, which has been passed by following the
judgment of the apex Court in Mohinder Singh Gill v The Chief Election Commissioner, New Delhi,
AIR 1978 SC 851. In paragraphs-7 and 8 of the judgment in Shree Ganesh Construction mentioned
supra, this Court observed as under:-
"7. In the counter affidavit filed, the reasons have been assigned, which are not
available in the impugned order of cancellation filed before this Court in Annexure-4
dated 5.2.2016. More so, while cancelling the tender, the principles of natural justice
have not been complied with. It is well settled principle of law laid down by the Apex
Court in Mohinder // 9 // Singh Gill and another v. The Chief Election
Commissioner, New Delhi and others, AIR 1978 SC 851 that :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126417854/ 3
Kalinga Warriors vs The Orissa Minerals Development ..... ... on 5 February, 2024
"When a statutory functionary makes an order based on certain grounds, its validity
must be judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh
reasons in the shape of affidavit or otherwise. Otherwise an order bad in the
beginning may by the time it comes to Court on account of a challenge, get validated
by additional grounds later brought out."
8. In Commissioner of Police, Bombay v. Gordhandas Bhanji, AIR 1952 SC 16, the Apex Court held
as follows :
"Public orders publicly made, in exercise of a statutory authority cannot be construed
in the light of explanations subsequently given by the officer making the order of
what he meant, or of what was in his mind, or what he intended to do. Public orders
made by public authorities are meant to have public effect and are intended to affect
the acting and conduct of those to whom they are addressed and must be construed
objectively with reference to the language used in the order itself. Orders are not like
old wine becoming better as they grow older."
10. In Oryx Fisheries Pvt Ltd v. Union of India (2010) 13 SCC 427 where reliance has been placed on
Kranti Associates Pvt Ltd v. Masood Ahmed Khan, // 10 // (2010) 9 SCC 496, in paragraph-41 it was
observed as follows:-
"41. In M/s Kranti Associates (supra), this Court after considering various judgments
formulated certain principles in para 51 of the judgment which are set out below a. In
India the judicial trend has always been to record reasons, even in administrative
decisions, if such decisions affect anyone prejudicially.
b. A quasi-judicial authority must record reasons in support of its conclusions.
c. Insistence on recording of reasons is meant to serve the wider principle of justice
that justice must not only be done it must also appear to be done as well.
d. Recording of reasons also operates as a valid restraint on any possible arbitrary
exercise of judicial and quasi- judicial or even administrative power.
e. Reasons reassure that discretion has been exercised by the decision maker on
relevant grounds and by disregarding extraneous considerations.
f. Reasons have virtually become as indispensable a component of a decision making
process as observing principles of natural justice by judicial, quasi-judicial and even
by administrative bodies.
g. Reasons facilitate the process of judicial review by superior Courts. // 11 // h. The
ongoing judicial trend in all countries committed to rule of law and constitutional
governance is in favour of reasoned decisions based on relevant facts. This is virtually
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126417854/ 4
Kalinga Warriors vs The Orissa Minerals Development ..... ... on 5 February, 2024
the life blood of judicial decision making justifying the principle that reason is the
soul of justice.
i. Judicial or even quasi-judicial opinions these days can be as different as the judges
and authorities who deliver them. All these decisions serve one common purpose
which is to demonstrate by reason that the relevant factors have been objectively
considered. This is important for sustaining the litigants' faith in the justice delivery
system.
j. Insistence on reason is a requirement for both judicial accountability and
transparency.
k. If a Judge or a quasi-judicial authority is not candid enough about his/her decision
making process then it is impossible to know whether the person deciding is faithful
to the doctrine of precedent or to principles of incrementalism.
l. Reasons in support of decisions must be cogent, clear and succinct. A pretence of
reasons or `rubber-stamp reasons' is not to be equated with a valid decision making
process.
m. It cannot be doubted that transparency is the sine qua non of restraint on abuse of
judicial powers. Transparency in decision making not only makes the judges and
decision makers less prone to errors but also makes them subject to broader scrutiny.
(See David Shapiro in Defence // 12 // of Judicial Candor (1987) 100 Harward Law
Review 731-737).
n. Since the requirement to record reasons emanates from the broad doctrine of
fairness in decision making, the said requirement is now virtually a component of
human rights and was considered part of Strasbourg Jurisprudence. See (1994) 19
EHRR 553, at 562 para 29 and Anya vs. University of Oxford, 2001 EWCA Civ 405,
wherein the Court referred to Article 6 of European Convention of Human Rights
which requires, "adequate and intelligent reasons must be given for judicial
decisions". o. In all common law jurisdictions judgments play a vital role in setting up
precedents for the future. Therefore, for development of law, requirement of giving
reasons for the decision is of the essence and is virtually a part of "Due Process".
11. Nothing has been placed on record to substantiate the same. Therefore, mechanically the order
dated 10.08.2023 has been passed blacklisting the petitioner without affording opportunity of
hearing.
12. In Gorkha Security Services v. Government of NCT of Delhi, AIR 2014 SC 3371, it has been held
that blacklisting causes civil death. Such a grave consequence, therefore, attracts exercise of power
of judicial review.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126417854/ 5
Kalinga Warriors vs The Orissa Minerals Development ..... ... on 5 February, 2024
// 13 //
13. In Nova Steel (India) Ltd v. M.C.D. And Ors, AIR 1995 SC 1057 the apex Court held that the
question of blacklisting of the contracts have been considered by the Courts time and again and it
has categorically been held that such order cannot be passed without giving opportunity of hearing
to the party.
14. In Urusian Equipment & Chemicals Ltd. v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1975 SC 266, the apex
Court held that a fair hearing to the party being blacklisted thus becomes an essential pre-condition
for a proper exercise of the power and a valid order of blacklisting made pursuant thereto. The order
itself being reasonable, fair and proportionate to the gravity of offence is similarly examinable by a
writ Court. The apex Court also declared that blacklisting has the effect of preventing a person from
entering into lawful relationship with the Government for purposes of gains and the authority
passing any such order is required to give a fair hearing before passing an order of blacklisting in
certain entity.
// 14 //
15. In Mr. B.S.N. Joshi & Sons Ltd v. Nair Coal Services Ltd. & Ors, (2006) 11 SCC 548 : AIR 2007
SC 437 and a long line of decisions have followed the ratio of that decision and applied principle of
audi alteram partem to the process that may eventually culminate in the blacklisting of a contractor.
16. In TELSA Transformers Limited v. Odisha Power Transmission Corporation Limited, 2016 (II)
ILR CUT-37, this Court also taking into consideration the ratio of Gorkha Security Services v.
Government (NCT of Delhi), AIR 2014 SC 3371 held that merely because clause in notice inviting
tender empowers the department to impose such penalty that does not mean that such penalty can
be imposed without putting defaulting contractor to notice to this effect.
17. In Isolators and Isolators v. Madhya Pradesh Madhya Kshetra Vidyut Vitran Co. Ltd., (2023) 4
SCR 445, it has been laid down that finality attaching to the action of cancellation cannot be read as
a due notice for imposition of penalty even if the respondents chose to employ the expression
'cancelled // 15 // with imposition of penalty' in the orders. If at all penalty was considered to be
leviable, the same could not have been carried out without affording adequate opportunity of
response to the appellant. It is, thus, held in the said case that the action of the respondents in
imposing penalty without even putting the appellant to notice as regards proposed action could not
be approved.
18. In Kulja Industries Limited v. Chief General Manager, Western Telecom Project Bharat Sanchar
Nigam Limited and others, (2014) 14 SCC 731, the apex Court held, if State or its instrumentality
takes decision on blacklisting then such decision is subject to judicial review on grounds of
principles of natural justice, doctrine of proportionality, arbitrariness and discrimination under
Article 14 of the Constitution of India.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126417854/ 6
Kalinga Warriors vs The Orissa Minerals Development ..... ... on 5 February, 2024
19. In UMC Technologies Private Limited v Food Corporation of India (2020) 13 SCR 1175, the apex
Court has also taken note of the decision of the apex Court in Erusian Equipment & Gorkha Security
// 16 // (supra) and has come to a conclusion that a prior show cause notice granting a reasonable
opportunity of being heard is an essential element of all administrative decision-making and
particularly so in decisions pertaining to blacklisting which entail grave consequences for the entity
being blacklisted. Therefore, furnishing of a valid show cause notice is critical and a failure to do so
would be fatal to any order of blacklisting pursuant thereto.
20. In view of the fact and law, as discussed above, this Court is of the considered opinion that the
order dated 10.08.2023 under Annexure-1, having been passed by opposite party no.3 without
affording opportunity of hearing to the petitioner and the same being non-speaking and
non-reasoned one, is liable to be quashed and is hereby quashed. The matter is remitted to the
authority concerned to take a decision afresh in accordance with law by affording opportunity of
hearing to the petitioner.
// 17 //
21. In the result, the writ petition is allowed. However, under the facts and circumstances of the
case, there shall be no order as to costs.
(DR. B.R. SARANGI)
ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE
M.S. RAMAN, J. I agree.
(M.S. RAMAN)
JUDGE
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 5th February, 2024, Arun
Designation: ADR-cum-Addl. Principal Secretary
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/126417854/ 7
