Kalloo vs Statejail Appeal on 1 May, 2025
Kalloo vs Statejail Appeal on 1 May, 2025
Author: Sangeeta Chandra
Bench: Sangeeta Chandra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad
(Lucknow)
*********
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:25166-DB
Judgment Reserved on 04.03.2025
Judgment Delivered on 01.05.2025
Court No.-9
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 450 of 2003
Appellant :- Kalloo
Respondent :- State jail Appeal
Counsel for Appellant :- In Person Jail,Anuradha Singh,Ruby Singh,Shishir Chandra,Shishir Pradhan,Shishir Pradhan
Counsel for Respondent :- Govt.Advocate
AND
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 643 of 2003
Appellant :- Kalloo
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90287350/ 1
Kalloo vs Statejail Appeal on 1 May, 2025
Respondent :- The State Of U.P.
Counsel for Appellant :- S.C.Sinha,Ruby Singh
Counsel for Respondent :- Govt.Advocate
Hon'ble Mrs. Sangeeta Chandra, J.
Hon'ble Ajai Kumar Srivastava-I, J.
(Per : Mrs. Sangeeta Chandra, J.)
1. Heard Sri Shishir Pradhan along with Sri Rajendra Prasad Mishra, learned Amicus Curiae for the
appellant, Ms. Meera Tripathi, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the entire record.
2. Under challenge in these criminal appeals is the impugned judgment and order dated 20.02.2003
passed by the learned Additional District and Sessions Judge (FTC-V), Lucknow in Sessions Trial
No.169 of 1998 arising out of Case Crime No.294 of 1997, under Sections 302/34 and 201 of the
Indian Penal Code, 18601, Police Station Thakurganj, District Lucknow, whereby the appellant,
Kalloo has been convicted and sentenced to undergo life imprisonment for the offence under Section
302 read with Section 34 I.P.C. with a fine of Rs.5,000/- and in default of payment of fine, he has
further been directed to undergo six months' additional simple imprisonment. He has also been
convicted and sentenced to undergo two years' imprisonment for the offence under Section 201/34
I.P.C. with a fine of Rs.500/- and in default of payment of fine, he has further been directed to
undergo one month's additional simple imprisonment. All the sentences were directed to run
concurrently.
3. Since the aforesaid two appeals have been preferred to assail the impugned judgment and order
dated 20.02.2003 passed by the learned Additional District and Sessions Judge (FTC-V), Lucknow
in Sessions Trial No.169 of 1998, which emanated from same Case Crime No.294 of 1997, Sections
302/34 and 201 of the I.P.C., Police Station Thakurganj, District Lucknow by the appellant, Kalloo
only, therefore, they have been heard together and are being decided by a common judgment.
4. It is pertinent to mention that co-convict Uma Shanker had also filed a separate Criminal Appeal
i.e. Criminal Appeal No.553 of 2003, however, he died on 11.11.2014 during pendency of aforesaid
Criminal Appeal No.553 of 2003 which was dismissed as abated by a Co-ordinate Bench of this
Court vide order dated 11.09.2019.
5. The case of the prosecution, in nutshell, is that on 26.09.1997, at around 3:00 P.M., the
appellant/ accused Kalloo and co-convict Uma Shanker called the complainant, Ram Bharosey from
his house to accompany them on a fishing trip to the house of the deceased, Pappu Yadav in village
Saitha near the bank of the Gomti River. The four persons consumed liquor until around 10:00 P.M.
The appellant/ accused Kalloo and co-convict Uma Shanker made Pappu Yadav consume excessive
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90287350/ 2
Kalloo vs Statejail Appeal on 1 May, 2025
liquor. When the deceased, Pappu Yadav turned into an inebriated condition because of consuming
liquor, the accused persons dragged him to Hayat Nagar near the field of Baqar Nawab on the bank
of the Gomti River with the intention to kill him. When the complainant objected, the accused
persons threatened him and warned that they would kill him as well if he did not remain silent.
Thereafter, at about 11:00 P.M., the appellant/ accused Kalloo and co-convict Uma Shanker
strangulated Pappu Yadav to death and drowned his body in the Gomti River. Later on, they also
chased the complainant to kill him but somehow he succeeded in escaping from the place of
occurrence.
6. On the basis of aforesaid written report, Ext. Ka-5 submitted by the first informant, Ram
Bharosey, the First Information Report, Ext. Ka-2 came to be lodged against the accused/ appellant
under Sections 364, 302, 201 I.P.C.
7. The inquest proceedings started on 27.09.1997 at 8:30 A.M. and got concluded on 27.09.1997 at
01:00 P.M. (13:00 hour). The inquest report has been duly proved by B.S. Tomar, Sub Inspector,
P.W.10 as Ext. Ka-6.
8. The postmortem of the deceased has been conducted by Dr. Sunil Kumar Gupta, P.W.-8 and the
report has been proved by him as Ext. Ka-3.
9. According to the postmortem report, Ex. Ka- 3, cause of death of the deceased is reported to be
asphyxia as a result of ante mortem strangulation and following ante-mortem injuries were reported
on the body of the deceased :
"1. Abraded contusion 4 cm x 4 cm on abdomen 7 cm below the left nipple.
2. Lacerated contused wound 2 cm x 1 cm below the left eye.
3. Continuous transverse ligature mark 32 cm x 2 cm, 5 cm below the right and left
ear each. Base of groove being soft and raddish, 5 cm below the chin."
10. The Investigating Officer recorded the statements of the witnesses under Section 161 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 19732. He visited the place of occurrence and prepared site plan thereof as
Ext. Ka-4.
11. Upon conclusion of investigation, the Investigating Officer submitted a charge sheet, Ext. Ka-5
under Sections 302/34 and 201 I.P.C. against the accused/ appellant, Kalloo. The case was
committed to the court of Sessions by the then Chief Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow on 21.01.1998.
12. Charges for the offence under Sections 302/34 and 201 I.P.C. were framed against the accused/
appellant, Kalloo, who denied the charges and claimed to be tried.
13. In order to bring home guilt of the accused/ appellant, the prosecution has examined Ram
Bharosey, complainant as P.W.-1, Deen Dayal as P.W.-2, Constable Munni Lal as P.W.-3, Siya Ram
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90287350/ 3
Kalloo vs Statejail Appeal on 1 May, 2025
as P.W.-4, Ranjeet as P.W.-5, Chhatrapal as P.W.-6, Kunwar Pal as P.W.-7, Dr. Sunil Kumar Gupta
as P.W.-8, S.I. Abaad Ali as P.W.-9 and B.S. Tomar as P.W.-10.
14. The accused/ appellant, in his statement recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C., has stated the
prosecution story to be false. He has also stated to have been falsely implicated in this case. He also
claimed to be innocent.
15. No evidence in defence was adduced by the accused/ appellant before the learned trial court.
16. The learned trial court, after appreciating the evidence available on record, rendered the
impugned judgment and order dated 20.02.2003 whereby the accused/ appellant came to be
convicted as aforesaid.
17. Aggrieved by the aforesaid impugned judgment and order dated 20.02.2003, the accused/
appellant has preferred the instant appeals.
Submissions advanced by learned counsel for the parties :-
18. Learned Amicus for the accused/ appellant has submitted that the appellant has been falsely
implicated in the present case. The prosecution has failed to adduce any reliable witness to clinch
the charges under Sections 302/34 and 201 I.P.C.
19. His further submission is that learned trial court has failed to appreciate material contradictions
appearing in the testimonies of the witnesses of fact which rendered their testimonies unreliable.
Despite this fact, learned trial court has proceeded to place reliance on their testimonies for
convicting the present appellant, therefore, the impugned judgment and order is wholly
unsustainable.
20. His next submission is that there is delay in lodging the F.I.R. as the alleged incident took place
on 26.09.1997, at about 10-11 P.M., whereas the F.I.R. of the incident was lodged on 27.09.1997 at
8:30 A.M. The explanation so offered by the informant P.W.1-Ram Bharosey in lodging the F.I.R.
has not been properly dealt with by the trial Court.
21. His further submission is that even if for the sake of argument the prosecution story is taken to
be true on its face value, the chronology of events is so dramatic that rendered the entire prosecution
story wholly improbable.
22. Per contra, learned A.G.A. for the State has submitted that the accused/ appellant rightly came
to be convicted vide impugned judgment and order dated 20.02.2003, which is well discussed and
reasoned. The accused/ appellant was named in the First Information Report. The prosecution has
proved its case beyond reasonable doubt on the basis of cogent and reliable testimonies of
prosecution witnesses.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90287350/ 4
Kalloo vs Statejail Appeal on 1 May, 2025
23. Her further submission is that minor contradictions do not demolish the entire case of the
prosecution; rather presence of minor contradictions show that the prosecution witnesses are not
tutored and a natural witness. She, thus, submits that the impugned judgment is a reasoned one
which is based on proper analysis of prosecution evidence in its correct perspective wherein there is
no illegality or irregularity, therefore, no interference by this Court is warranted. She, accordingly,
prays for dismissal of the instant appeals.
Prosecution evidence at a glance :-
24. We would first like to examine testimony of P.W.1- Ram Bharosey, who is first informant of the
case. What transpires from the testimony of P.W.1- Ram Bharosey is that, on the date of incident,
this witness was called by the accused/ appellant Kalloo for fishing. This witness and accused/
appellant Kalloo went to Shankar Ji's temple which is situated at a distance of 1 km where they met
with another co-convict Uma Shanker, who had a bicycle. According to this witness, he alongwith
accused/ appellant Kalloo and co-convict Uma Shanker went to Pappu's hut which is about 3 km
away from village Saitha on the bicycle of co-convict Uma Shanker. After consuming the liquor in
the Pappu's hut they remained there for sometime and thereafter accused/ appellant Kalloo told this
witness and co-convict Uma Shanker to go to Allu Nagar to have some more liquor. For doing so,
they crossed the river in Kalloo's boat and bought five pouches of liquor from Allu Nagar. They
drank three pouches of liquor at some distance from the shop and thereafter came to Ghaila Ghat
and again cross the river by boat. After crossing the river, accused/ appellant Kalloo and Pappu
started abusing each other while they were walking. According to P.W.1- Ram Bharosey, the
accused/ appellant Kalloo asked this witness to give him a beedi to smoke. After smoking beedi
accused/ appellant Kalloo and co-convict Uma Shanker started assaulting Pappu, the deceased with
fist. This witness tried to intervene, however, he was warned to keep silent. According to this
witness, the deceased Pappu was strangulated by accused/ appellant Kalloo and co-convict Uma
Shanker to death in the field. Accused/ appellant Kalloo and co-convict Uma Shanker then threw
corpse of deceased Pappu in the river. This witness was also chased by the accused/ appellant and
co-convict Uma Shanker to a distance of about 3 km in order to kill him so that this witness may not
inform the police about this incident. P.W.1- Ram Bharosey in order to save him hid himself in a
pigeon pea field and remained there for whole night. He went home at 4 A.M. and inform about this
incident to his brother Ram Ratan. Though this witness has proved written report as Ext. Ka- 5,
however, it is noteworthy that according to this witness, written report was scribed by someone near
his house, however, he did not know name of the scribe. He is also stated that content of written
report was not read out to him though he has admitted to have marked his thumb impression on the
written report. When in the trial court, the written report paper No. A-5/2 was showed to this
witness, he stated that the paper on which he had put signature was a small piece of paper and was
not such a large paper.
25. In his cross-examination, though P.W.1- Ram Bharosey has stated that on the date of the
incident the accused/ appellant killed the deceased. However, we have been able to notice that
admittedly, this witness had also consumed liquor and was in an inebriated condition. He has also
stated that the father of the deceased had threatened him to give such a statement as made in the
examination-in-chief, otherwise he would be killed by the father of the deceased, Shatruhan. It is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90287350/ 5
Kalloo vs Statejail Appeal on 1 May, 2025
also noteworthy that this witness, though has identified his thumb impression on the written report.
However he has unequivocally stated that the written report, after being written by the scribe, was
not read over to him. He has further stated that the paper on which he had placed his thumb
impression, after the report was written, was smaller in size than the one shown to him in the trial
court as Paper No. A-5/2. He has also stated that he had not seen any of the accused killing the
deceased.
26. P.W.2- Deen Dayal, was the then Pradhan of the concerned village. In his examination-in-chief,
he deposed that the deceased Pappu lived in a hut. He stated that two bottles and a bundle of beedi
No. 201 were recovered in his presence. He identified his signature on Paper No. 6/1 and thus
proved the recovery memo as Ext. Ka-1.
27. P.W.3- Munni Lal, Constable, in his examination-in-chief has deposed that he was posted as
Constable Mohrir in Police Station Thakurganj. According to this witness, on 27.09.1997, the first
informant, Ram Bharosey brought a written report with thumb impression of the scribe, i.e. Manoj
Kumar Shukla. On the basis of it, Case Crime No. Nil/97, Sections 364, 302, 201 I.P.C. against
Kalloo S/o Natha and Uma Shanker S/o Gaya Prasad Chik No.247/97 was written at 8:30 P.M. and
registered in the concerned police station Kakori by H.C. Gulab Chand Sharma as Rapat No.19 at
8:30 P.M. The above documents were given to Contable Devendra Kumar and he was sent to Police
Station Kakori. This witness has, thus, proved chik report as Ext. Ka-2.
28. P.W.4- Siyaram, is a witness produced by the prosecution, has been declared hostile as he did
not support the prosecution's case. This witness stated on oath that his statement was never
recorded by the Investigating Officer. He expressed complete unawareness of Pappu's hut on the
river bank and also stated that he did not know the accused and deceased Pappu.
29. P.W.5- Ranjeet, in his examination-in-chief, has deposed that the incident occurred about five
years ago. This witness, along with P.W.4- Siya Ram, and Amit, were grazing the buffaloes in the
field. He saw the accused/ appellant Kalloo and the deceased Pappu passing through the field, who
went into the hut of Pappu. However, this witness was unable to state as to whether the deceased
and the accused/ appellant ate or drank anything there in the hut. He further stated that he did not
see these persons coming out of the hut.
30. P.W.6- Chhatrapal, appears to be a witness who had not seen the incident of killing of deceased
Pappu Yadav by accused/ appellant because it is apparent from his testimony that on the next date
of the incident P.W.1- Ram Bharosey and a police inspector told him that accused/ appellant Kalloo
and co-convict Uma Shanker had killed Pappu, the deceased, who was real nephew of this witness.
It, thus, clearly transpires that his testimony regarding alleged killing of deceased by accused/
appellant can at best be placed in the category of hear say evidence.
31. P.W.7- Kunwar Pal, in his examination-in-chief, has deposed that the incident happened about
five years ago. The deceased, Pappu was his nephew. He was murdered. Pappu's hut was on the
bank of the river. He used to grow gourd, pumpkin etc. Kalloo, Rama Kant and Ram Bharosey used
to visit Pappu's hut. Pappu used to make rotis and the appellant used to eat. On the day of incident,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90287350/ 6
Kalloo vs Statejail Appeal on 1 May, 2025
Pappu, Kalloo, Ram Bharosey and Rama Kant went in the hut. All fours were friends. His son Ranjit
had told that on the day of incident, all four were in the hut. From a bare perusal of testimony of this
witness, it appears that he has not seen the alleged killing of deceased by the appellant rather he was
informed about this incident by P.W.1- Ram Bharosey and some police personnel.
32. P.W.8- Dr. Sunil Kumar Gupta, Medical Officer, Bhau Rao Devras Joint Hospital, Lucknow, in
his examination-in-chief, deposed that on 28.09.1997, he was posted for autopsy in K.G.M.C.
Mortuary. On that day, at 1 P.M., the autopsy of the deceased Pappu Yadav was done, who was
identified by Constable No.1675 CP Devenra Dixit and Constable No.670 CP Daya Shankar Police
Station Thakurganj. Eight police documents came with them. He further deposed that all the
internal organs of the deceased were congested. The deceased had died about two days ago and his
tongue was blue and protruded. In his opinion, death was due to suffocation caused by antemortem
strangulation. This witness has, thus, proved postmortem report as Ext. Ka-3. According to this
witness, the deceased could have died on 26.09.1997 at about 10-11 P.M.
33. P.W.9- S.I. Abaad Ali is the Investigating Officer of this case. The investigation of this case was
handed over to this witness on 27.09.1997. This witness, during the course of investigation, recorded
statement of prosecution witnesses. He has also recorded statement of witnesses under Section 161
Cr.P.C. He had prepared site place in his own handwriting which he has proved as Ext. Ka-4.
34. P.W.10- Sri B.S. Tomar, Sub Inspector, Laharpur Police Station, District Sitapur, has proved
chargesheet as Ext. Ka-5. He has also proved Panchayatnama paper No.A 7/1, photo lash A 7/3,
Chalan lash A 7/4, sample seal A 7/5 and A 12/1 the letter sent to C.M.O. and post-mortem report
are signed by Ashok Kumar Shukla. All are proved as Ext. Ka-6, Ka-7, Ka-8, Ka-9 and Ka-10
respectively.
Discussion :-
35. Having heard learned Amicus for the appellant, learned A.G.A. for the State and upon perusal of
record when we scrutinize the testimonies of prosecution witnesses of facts, we find that the finding
of guilt has been recorded by learned trial court against the accused/ appellant Kalloo mainly on the
basis of testimonies of P.W.1- Ram Bharosey, P.W.2- Deen Dayal and P.W.5- Ranjeet. It appears
from the testimony of P.W.1- Ram Bharosey, who is the first informant and eye witness of the
alleged incident, that at about 12-1 P.M., when the accused/ appellant Kalloo called him for fishing,
he went with accused/ appellant Kalloo to Shankar Ji's Temple which is 1 km. away and where they
met the accused/ co-convict Uma Shanker. Thereafter all of them went to the hut of the Pappu,
which is situated at about 3 km away from village Saitha where they ate rotis with vegetables and
drank liquor. Thereafter, they again drank at Allu Nagar. After crossing the river, accused/ appellant
Kalloo and Pappu started abusing each other. They were abusing each other while walking. Sitting in
a field, accused/ appellant Kalloo asked this witness to give him a beedi to smoke. After smoking
beedi, accused/ appellant Kalloo and co-convict Uma Shanker started hitting Pappu with fists.
Thereafter, accused/ appellant Kalloo and co-convict Uma Shanker strangulated Pappu to death in
the same field. Accused/ appellant Kalloo and co-convict, Uma Shanker also tried to kill this witness
but he somehow escaped and saved his life. However, the said witness has turned hostile and in his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90287350/ 7
Kalloo vs Statejail Appeal on 1 May, 2025
cross-examination, he has stated that he did not lodge the written report, Ext. Ka-5. He further
deposed that the paper, on which the written report was written, was not the same, on which, he had
placed thumb impression. This witness has clearly stated that he had not seen the accused/
appellant killing the deceased on the date of incident. In such circumstances, the testimony of this
witness appears to be of no assistance to the prosecution for proving the guilt of appellant/ accused.
36. However, insofar as the testimony of P.W.2, Deen Dayal is concerned, he was the Pradhan of the
concerned village on the date of the incident, who is a witness to the recovery of two bottles and a
bundle of beedi No. 201, which was proved as Ext. Ka-1. He is not the eyewitness of the alleged
incident of killing of deceased Pappu.
37. P.W.4- Siyaram, who is a milkman, has stated that he is not aware about this incident. This
witness has also been declared hostile. In our considered opinion, no part of his testimony appears
to be of any assistance to the prosecution or the defence.
38. P.W.5- Ranjeet, though stated that he saw the accused/appellant Kalloo and the deceased Pappu
going together towards Pappu's hut, however, he did not see them returning from the hut.
Therefore, his testimony, in isolation, does not appear to be of any assistance to the prosecution as
this witness has not supported the prosecution case in its entirety and he is not an eyewitness of
alleged killing of Pappu Yadav by the present appellant.
39. Even the testimony of prosecution witnesses i.e. P.W.3- Constable Munnil Lal, P.W.6-
Chhatrapal, P.W.7- Kunwar Pal, P.W.8- Dr. Sunil Kumar Gupta, P.W.9- SI Abaad Ali, P.W.10- B.S.
Tomar once we scrutinize their testimonies do not go to prove beyond reasonable doubt that
accused/ appellant killed the deceased Pappu Yadav.
40. We are conscious of the fact that in the present case, a young man has died but the fact remains
that it is the duty of prosecution to prove its case against the accused-appellant beyond reasonable
doubt. Suspicion, howsoever, grave cannot take place of a proof. In this regard, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Upendra Pradhan vs. State of Orissa3 in para-14 has held as under:-
"14. Taking the first question for consideration, we are of the view that in case there
are two views which can be culled out from the perusal of evidence and application of
law, the view which favours the accused should be taken. It has been recognised as a
human right by this Court. In Narendra Singh v. State of M.P., [(2004) 10 SCC 699 :
2004 SCC (Cri) 1893], this Court has recognised presumption of innocence as a
human right and has gone on to say that: (SCC pp. 708 & 709, paras 30-31 & 33) "30.
It is now well settled that benefit of doubt belonged to the accused. It is further trite
that suspicion, however grave may be, cannot take place of a proof. It is equally well
settled that there is a long distance between ''may be' and ''must be'.
xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx xxxx"
(emphasis supplied)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90287350/ 8
Kalloo vs Statejail Appeal on 1 May, 2025
41. Thus a close survey of the testimony of the aforesaid prosecution witnesses reveals that P.W.1-
Ram Bharosey, though projected as an eyewitness, has himself denied having seen the
incident-in-question. He even stated that while getting the First Information Report lodged he had
placed his thumb impression on a paper which was smaller in size, whereas, Paper No. A2/5, which
has been proved as Ext. Ka-1, is comparatively a larger piece of paper. Siya Ram, P.W.4 has been
declared hostile. Admittedly, P.W.1- Ram Bharosey, had consumed liquor and was thus in an
inebriated condition. Therefore, keeping in view the statements of the witnesses of fact in their
entirety, it can safely be concluded that the prosecution has bitterly failed to establish its case to the
effect that on 26.09.1997, the appellant/ accused killed the deceased Pappu Yadav in presence of
P.W.1- Ram Bharosey, therefore, we have no hesitation in holding that learned trial court, while
convicting the accused/ appellant on the basis of aforesaid witnesses of facts, fell in error in holding
accused/ appellant guilty. The impugned judgment dated 20.02.2003, thus, being unsustainable,
deserves to be set aside.
Conclusion :-
42. In the result, Criminal Appeal No.450 of 2003 is allowed. As a sequel, the Criminal Appeal
No.643 of 2003 also stands disposed of. Consequently, the impugned judgment and order dated
20.02.2003 passed by the learned Additional District & Sessions Judge (FTC-V), Lucknow in
Sessions Trial No.169 of 1998 convicting and sentencing the accused/ appellant Kalloo, to undergo
imprisonment for life under Section 302 read with Section 34 I.P.C. is hereby set-aside. Appellant
Kalloo is acquitted on that count.
43. We are informed that appellant- Kalloo is in jail. Therefore, he shall be released from jail
forthwith unless he is wanted in any other case.
44. The appellant is directed to file a personal bond and two sureties in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned in compliance of Section 437-A Cr.P.C. within six weeks from
today.
45. Before we part with the case, we express our appreciation for the distinguished assistance
rendered by Sri Shishir Pradhan, learned Amicus for the appellant. He shall be entitled to
Rs.15,000/- (Rupees Fifteen Thousand) from the High Court as fee for his services.
46. Let a copy of this judgment be also placed on the records of connected Criminal Appeal No.643
of 2003.
47. Let the trial court record along with a copy of this judgment be transmitted forthwith to the
learned trial Court concerned for information and necessary compliance through fax/ E-mail
forthwith.
(Ajai Kumar Srivastava-I, J.) (Sangeeta Chandra, J.)
Order Date :- 01.05.2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90287350/ 9
Kalloo vs Statejail Appeal on 1 May, 2025
Mahesh/Shubhankar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90287350/ 10
