Kalyani Maternity Hospital Pvt. Ltd vs Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation ... on 22 April, 2021
Kalyani Maternity Hospital Pvt. Ltd vs Bhubaneswar Municipal
Corporation ... on 22 April, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2021 ORI 202
Author: B.P. Routray
Bench: B.P. Routray
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.6590 of 2012
Kalyani Maternity Hospital Pvt. Ltd., .... Petitioner
Bhubaneswar
Mr. G.M. Rath, Advocate
-versus-
Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation .... Opposite Party
(BMC)
Mrs. M. Padhi, Advocate
CORAM:
THE CHIEF JUSTICE
JUSTICE B.P. ROUTRAY
ORDER
Order No. 22.04.2021
20. 1. This matter is taken up by video conferencing mode.
2. The present writ petition has been filed seeking to challenge the demand notice dated 9th
February, 2012 issued by the Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation (BMC), whereby the Petitioner
has been asked to pay the sum of Rs.4,49,440/- as "holding tax, latrine tax and lighting tax".
3. Earlier the Confederation of Citizens' Association, Bhubaneswar had filed W.P.(C) No.11764 of
2011 challenging BMC's notification dated 15th December, 2010 enhancing 'holding tax' on the basis
of the erstwhile Orissa Municipal Act, 1950 (OM Act) with the aid of Sections 693 and 694 of the
Orissa Municipal Corporation Act, 2003 (OMC Act).
4. The grievance of the Petitioner in that case was that the Commissioner intended to impose a new
rate at a much higher rate than the mandate under the OM Act as well as the OMC Act. Further it
was contended that a notification had been issued without following procedure under Chapter-13 of
the OMC Act or the pari materia provision in the OM Act. The said writ petition was disposed of on
12th August, 2011 by this Court with the following order:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89787059/ 1
Kalyani Maternity Hospital Pvt. Ltd vs Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation ... on 22 April, 2021
"Learned Govt. Advocate is directed to take notice on behalf of Opposite Party No.1.
An extra copy of the writ petitioner be served on him by tomorrow. Notice issued to
opposite party no.2 by Registered post with A.D. requisites for which shall be filled by
Tuesday (16.8.2011).
Pending consideration of the misc. case, the revision of rent is stayed under the Old
Act as per Annexure-2, but the holding tax must be paid as was being paid earlier. It
is open for the municipal Corporation to revise the tax in accordance with the
provisions of Sections 694(3) read with Sections 205, 208, 209 and 210 and other
relevant provisions of Chapter-XIII.
Urgent certified copy of this order be granted as per rule."
5. Based on the same notification dated 15th December 2010, the impugned demand dated 9th
February, 2012 was raised on the Petitioner by BMC leading to the filing of the present petition in
which the prayer is for a direction to issue to the BMC to receive the holding tax as earlier paid by
the Petitioner.
6. On 20th April, 2015 while directing to issue notice to the Opposite Party, the following interim
order was passed:
"As an interim measure, we direct that the holding tax as was being paid earlier shall
be paid but the revision thereof shall remain in abeyance until further orders."
7. Mr. G.M. Rath, learned counsel appearing for the Petitioner submits that neither Section 693 nor
Section 694 of the OMC Act can be invoked to raise the rate of 'holding tax' that was leviable under
the OM Act after its repeal. He points out that under the OMC Act the concept of 'holding tax' does
not exist. Therefore, the demand is entirely without the authority of law. In support of this
submission, he referred to the decision of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in New
Delhi Municipal Council v. State of Punjab and Others, (1997) 7 SCC 339.
8. Mrs. Padhi, learned counsel appearing for the Opposite Party (BMC), first submitted that against
the impugned demand notice, the Petitioner has an alternative remedy under the OMC Act and
therefore, this Court should not interfere. Secondly, she submitted that the procedure envisaged
under the OM Act for enhancing the rate of 'holding tax' has in fact been followed and therefore, in
the light of the transitional provision contained in Section 694(3) of the OMC Act, the BMC was
entitled to raise the 'holding tax' and recover it from the Petitioner. She referred to the affidavits
filed by the BMC in the present case on 6th August, 2019 and 5th December, 2019.
9. The above submission of learned counsel for the parties have been considered.
10. The Court finds no merit in the preliminary submission of the BMC that the Petitioner has an
alternative remedy against the demand notice. Here the very authority of the BMC to raise such a
demand in terms of the OMC Act is being challenged. This has to be dealt with only by this Court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89787059/ 2
Kalyani Maternity Hospital Pvt. Ltd vs Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation ... on 22 April, 2021
and not a statutory authority which is tasked with enforcing the demand.
11. On the central issue that arises for consideration, Mr. Rath has rightly contended that no tax can
be levied and collected by BMC without the authority of law. In other words, without there being a
law passed by the State legislature specifically authorizing the Municipal Corporation to levy and
collect taxes, it cannot do so. This has been succinctly explained by the Constitution Bench of the
Supreme Court in New Delhi Municipal Council (supra) thus:
"97. ...Article 265 of the Constitution emphatically mandates that "no tax shall be
levied or collected except by authority of law". Under the framework of the
Constitution there are two principal bodies which have been vested with plenary
powers to make laws, these being the Union Legislature, which is described by Article
79 as "Parliament for the Union" and the State Legislatures, which are described by
Article 168 in the singular as "Legislature of a State". While certain other bodies have
been vested with legislative power, including the power of levying taxes, by the
Constitution for specific purposes, as in the case of District Committees and Regional
Councils constituted under the aegis of the Sixth Schedule to the Constitution, the
plenary power to legislate, especially in matters relating to revenue, still vests with
the Union and the State Legislatures. Even if the submission that Municipalities now
possess, under Part IXA of the Constitution, a higher juridical status is correct, the
extension of that logic to the proposition that they have plenary powers to levy taxes
is not, as is clear from a perusal of the relevant part of Article 243X of the
Constitution which reads as under:
"243X. Power to impose taxes by, and Funds of, the Municipalities.- The Legislature
of a State may, by law,-
(a) authorise a Municipality to levy, collect and appropriate such taxes, duties, tolls
and fees in accordance with such procedure and subject to such limits;
(b) -(d) as may be specified in law."
98. Article 243ZB provides that this provision will be applicable to Union Territories and the
reference to the legislature of a State would apply, in relation to a Union Territory having a
Legislative Assembly, to that Legislative Assembly.
99. It is, therefore, clear that even under the new scheme, Municipalities do not have an
independent power to levy taxes. Although they can now be granted more substantial powers than
ever before, they continue to be dependent upon their parent Legislatures for the bestowal of such
privileges. In the case of Municipalities within States, they have to be specifically delegated the
power to tax by the concerned State Legislature. In Union Territories which do not have Legislative
Assemblies of their own, such a power would have to be delegated by Parliament. Of the rest, those
which have Legislative Assemblies of their own would have to specifically empower Municipalities
within them with the power to levy taxes."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89787059/ 3
Kalyani Maternity Hospital Pvt. Ltd vs Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation ... on 22 April, 2021
12. Conscious of the above limitation, BMC has sought to argue in the present case that it can raise
the rate of holding tax with the aid of under Sections 693 and 694 of the OMC Act. Section 693(2)
saves the previous operation of the OM Act in respect of any right, privilege and obligation or
liability accrued or incurred thereunder or any penalty, forfeiture or punishment incurred or in
respect of any offence or any investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect of such right,
privilege, obligation, liability, penalty, forfeiture or punishment as aforesaid, and any such
investigation, legal proceeding or remedy in respect thereof. This provision, therefore, does not
specifically empower the BMC to levy or collect tax. Even Section 693 (2) of the OMC Act exclusively
preserves all rules, bye-law, notifications, orders, directions and powers, made, issued or conferred
under the OM Act and in force before the commencement of the OMC Act cannot be invoked to
enhance the rate of holding tax. In fact under the OMC Act, there is no concept of 'holding tax' at all.
13. Section 694 of the OMC Act which is a transitional provision against seeks to continue liability
against the BMC prior to commencement of the OMC Act. Section 694 (2) and (3), which are
relevant in the present context, read as under:
"694. Transitional provisions. -
(1) xx xx (2) All arrear of taxes or other payment by way of composition of a tax, or
dues for expenses or compensation or otherwise and all sums of money otherwise due
to the Municipal Corporations at the commencement of this Act may be recovered as
if they had accrued to the respective Corporations under the provisions of this Act.
(3) All taxes, fees and duties, which immediately before the commencement of this
Act, were being imposed by the Municipal Corporations shall be deemed to have been
imposed by the respective Corporations under the provisions of this act and shall
continue to be in force accordingly until such taxes, fees and duties are revised,
cancelled or superseded by anything done of any action, taken under this Act."
14. A careful perusal of the above provision reveals that the legislative intent, engrafted in the OMC
Act, was only to preserve the right of BMC to collect tax which were leviable "immediately before
commencement of the OMC Act" and which were being imposed. It by no means permits BMC to
raise the rate of a tax that was leviable for a period prior to the coming into force of the BMC act. In
other words, any fresh levy of tax after the enactment of the OMC Act had to be only under the
substantive provisions of the BMC Act and not its transitional provisions.
15. The very nature of a transitional provision is temporary. As explained by Francis Bennion in his
classical treatise on Statutory Interpretation, Third Edition, (page 233-234):
"transitional provisions in an Act or other instrument are provisions which spell out
precisely when and how the operative parts of the instruments are to take effect. They
serve a very useful purpose, since merely to say that an enactment comes into force
on a specified date is often insufficient to produce a clear meaning. Lord Bridge said
that the purpose of a transitional provision is 'to facilitate the change from one
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89787059/ 4
Kalyani Maternity Hospital Pvt. Ltd vs Bhubaneswar Municipal Corporation ... on 22 April, 2021
statutory regime to another', citing Thornton's statement that 'The function of a
transitional provision is to make special provision for the application of legislation to
the circumstances which exist at the time when that legislation comes into force'.
16. He further explains that "one feature of a transitional provision is that 'its operation is expected
to be temporary, in that it becomes spent when all the past circumstances with which it is designed
to deal have been dealt with'.
17. Thus the transitional provision viz., Section 694 (3) of the OMC Act cannot be invoked by BMC
to justify either the raising of the rate of 'holding tax' or to continue to levy and collect it for a period
subsequent to the repeal of the OM Act. The question of BMC resorting to the procedure under the
Om Act, after its repreal, is to no avail since under the OMC Act, there is no concept of holding tax at
all. So the question of legitimizing such demand by following the procedure under the Om Act, after
its repeal by the OMC act, does not arise.
18. Consequently, the Court finds merit in the contention of Mr. Rath, learned counsel for the
Petitioner that the impugned demand notice in so far as the BMC seeks to collect the holding tax
from the Petitioner for a period after the commencement of the OMC Act, and at a rate higher than
that prevalent when the OM Act was in force, is unsustainable in law. The impugned demand notice
to that extent is hereby quashed.
19. Mrs. Padhi, learned counsel for the Opposite Party submits that although by the interim order
dated 28th April, 2015 the Petitioner was directed to continue to pay the holding tax prior as it was
doing prior to the repeal of the OM Act, it in fact did not do so.
20. It is directed that, if not already paid, the Petitioner shall pay for the period prior to
commencement of the OMC Act, the holding tax at the same rate at which it was paying when the
OM act was repealed, without fail within a period of four weeks from today.
21. The writ petition is disposed of in the above terms.
22. As the restrictions due to resurgence of COVID-19 situation are continuing, learned counsel for
the parties may utilize a printout of the order available in the High Court's website, at par with
certified copy, subject to attestation by the concerned advocate, in the manner prescribed vide
Court's Notice No.4587, dated 25th March, 2020 as modified by Court's Notice No.4798, dated 15th
April, 2021.
(Dr. S. Muralidhar) Chief Justice (B.P. Routray) Judge S.K. Jena/P.A.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89787059/ 5
