Kamlesh Rani vs Satish Kumar on 18 November, 2023
Kamlesh Rani vs Satish Kumar on 18 November, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU, KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on : 25.07.2023
Pronounced on: 18.11.2023
CSA No. 13/2011(O&M)
Kamlesh Rani .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Aditya Gupta, Advocate
vs
Satish Kumar ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. P. N. Bhat, Adv.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. The appellant, who has been in possession of a shop situated at Purani Mandi, Jammu (for short
the „suit shop(cid:129)), as a tenant for the last more than 52 years has preferred this second appeal against
the judgment and decree dated 13.04.2011 passed by the Court of learned 1st Additional District
Judge, Jammu (for short „the appellate court(cid:129)), whereby the judgment and decree dated 12.03.2005
passed by the Court of learned 1st Additional Munsiff, Jammu (hereinafter to be referred as „the
trial court(cid:129)), for eviction of the appellant from the suit shop, has been upheld.
2. This second appeal was admitted on 06.09.2011 on the following substantial questions of law:
1) Whether the impugned judgments are perverse?
2) Whether ejectment can be ordered on the ground not pleaded by the plaintiff?
3) Whether the trial court and the appellate court have wrongly weighed/determined
the advantages/disadvantages of the parties?
4) Whether the impugned judgments are not in accordance with the mandate of
section 11(1) (h) of the J&K Houses and Shops Rent Control Act?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58219947/ 1
Kamlesh Rani vs Satish Kumar on 18 November, 2023
3. In order to answer the above mentioned substantial questions of law, it is imperative to have a
brief resume of the facts of the case projected by the parties before the learned trial court.
4. The respondent had filed a suit for eviction of the appellant from the suit shop thereby pleading
that initially the suit shop was owned by another owner, from whom, the appellant had obtained the
suit shop on rent. The respondent purchased the building along with suit shop from the ex-owner
and stepped into the shoes of the ex-owner as landlord and when the said fact was brought to the
notice of the appellant, she attorned the tenancy in favour of the respondent and executed a rent
deed dated 14.04.1995 in favour of the respondent. The respondent sought eviction of the appellant
from the suit shop on the ground that he was unemployed and wanted to establish his own business
in his own shop so as to sustain his family. It was the also the case of the respondent that the
appellant was having joint family with her sons and husband residing in their own residential house
and the appellant was running her own business in the residential house, where she had affixed the
Sign Board. It was also claimed by the respondent that the appellant was in joint possession of the
building situated at the main road Purani Mandi, Jammu and in the said building, the appellant
through her family members was in possession of two shops known as "Standard Companion" and
"Gift Collection". Two more shops were rented out, one shop was known as "Sham Di Hatti" and
another shop was rented to "Panwalla (Betel Seller)". It was also pleaded by the respondent that
over the shopping complex, first floor was given on rent to M/S Vijaya Bank and over the roof of the
Vijaya Bank, a big hall was lying vacant and in possession of the appellant and her family members.
In a nutshell, the suit was filed by the respondent/plaintiff for eviction of the appellant from the suit
shop for his personal use and occupation, as he claimed to be unemployed and wanted to establish
his business in the suit shop. The appellant/defendant filed her written statement thereby admitting
the execution of the rent deed in favour of the appellant but under the threat of eviction. It was
stated by the appellant that the respondent was running the business of wholesale readymade
garments in a lane near the suit shop and the suit shop was no more required by him. It was further
pleaded that for running a wholesale business, the respondent did not require any shop for display
of his goods in the market as the wholesale business could be conducted from any shop whether the
same was situated in a lane or in a market. It was also averred by the appellant/defendant that she
had not been able to get any shop in the vicinity of the suit shop which she had been running for the
last 28 years and the respondent was not having any reasonable and bona fide requirement of the
suit shop. It was also pleaded that sons of the appellant were putting up separately with their
respective families and that the appellant was not running any business in her residential house. She
also denied being in possession of any building or any shop as claimed by the respondent. It was
also stated by the appellant that there existed a big hall measuring 13ft x 26ft on the first floor of the
suit shop which was lying vacant and the respondent could easily run his business of readymade
garments in the said hall.
5. The learned trial court framed nine issues for its consideration. The respondent besides
examining himself, also examined Shashi Paul, Sham Lal and Khajoor Singh as witnesses in support
of his claim, whereas the appellant besides examining herself, examined Brijpal Singh, Shailendra
Singh, Janardhan Singh, Sardari Lal and Krishan Dev Singh Jamwal as witnesses in rebuttal to the
evidence led by the respondent.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58219947/ 2
Kamlesh Rani vs Satish Kumar on 18 November, 2023
6. The learned trial court decreed the suit in favour of the respondent vide judgment and decree
dated 12.03.2005. The judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial Court was assailed by the
appellant through the medium of appeal and the learned Appellate Court after observing that some
of the issues casted in the suit were not happily worded, framed the following issues for its
consideration.
a) Whether the suit shop is bona fide and reasonably required by the
respondent/plaintiff for his personal use and occupation?
b) Whether the requirement of the plaintiff/respondent is greater than that of the
appellant and what are the comparative advantages and disadvantages of the parties?
c) Whether the requirement of the respondent/plaintiff can be satisfied by partial
eviction of the defendant from the suit shop?
d) Relief
7. The learned Appellant Court vide its judgment and decree dated 13.04.2011 dismissed the appeal
preferred by the appellant, thereby upholding the judgment and decree passed by the learned Trial
Court.
8. Learned counsel for the appellant restricted his arguments mainly to the issue that the
respondent had pleaded in the plaint that he was unemployed but in his statement recorded before
the learned Trial Court, it was admitted by him that he was running a wholesale business in a shop
located in a street and in view of this evidence, the suit could not have been decreed by the learned
Trial Court as the evidence of the respondent was contrary to his pleadings and the "element of
necessity" was missing in the claim of the respondent.
9. Per contra, learned counsel for the respondent vehemently argued that the respondent in his
chief-examination only had stated that he was running a wholesale business in a shop located in a
street which was not suitable for wholesale business and he required the suit shop to establish his
business. He further argued that mere pleading by the respondent that he was unemployed would
not result in non-suiting the respondent particularly, when he had proved his own genuine
requirement of the suit shop by way of cogent evidence before the learned Trial Court and that the
appellant had been in possession of the suit shop for the last half century.
10. Now, this Court would examine the substantial questions of law as mentioned above.
Question Nos. 1&2:
Questions of law framed at serial Nos. 1 and 2 are correlated, as such, are collated for
the determination of this Court. The questions of law bearing No. 1&2 are reproduced
as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58219947/ 3
Kamlesh Rani vs Satish Kumar on 18 November, 2023
1) Whether the impugned judgments are perverse?
2) Whether ejectment can be ordered on the ground not pleaded by the plaintiff?
11. In order to adjudicate this issue, it would be proper to take note of the relevant case laws in
respect of ambit and scope of „Perversity(cid:129). In Vidhyadhar v. Manikrao, (1999) 3 SCC 573, the
Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court of India has held as under:
"23. The findings of fact concurrently recorded by the trial court as also by the lower
appellate court could not have been legally upset by the High Court in a second
appeal under Section 100 CPC unless it was shown that the findings were perverse,
being based on no evidence or that on the evidence on record, no reasonable person
could have come to that conclusion."
12. Further in S.R. Tewari v. Union of India, (2013) 6 SCC 602 the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court of India
has held as under:
"30. The findings of fact recorded by a court can be held to be perverse if the findings
have been arrived at by ignoring or excluding relevant material or by taking into
consideration irrelevant/inadmissible material. The finding may also be said to be
perverse if it is "against the weight of evidence", or if the finding so outrageously
defies logic as to suffer from the vice of irrationality. If a decision is arrived at on the
basis of no evidence or thoroughly unreliable evidence and no reasonable person
would act upon it, the order would be perverse. But if there is some evidence on
record which is acceptable and which could be relied upon, the conclusions would not
be treated as perverse and the findings would not be interfered with."
13. In "Boodireddy Chandraiah and Ors. Vs. Arigela Laxmi and Ors".
(17.09.2007- SC): MANU/SC/3839/2007, though the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court of India has
discussed the scope of second appeal in terms of section 100 CPC but in fact has laid down contours
of perversity. The relevant part is extracted as under:
"The general rule is that High Court will not interfere with concurrent findings of the
Courts below. But it is not an absolute rule. Some of the well recognized exceptions
are where (i) the courts below have ignored material evidence or acted on no
evidence; (ii) the courts have drawn wrong inferences from proved facts by applying
the law erroneously; or (iii) the courts have wrongly cast the burden of proof. When
we refer to 'decision based on no evidence', it not only refers to cases where there is a
total dearth of evidence, but also refers to any case, where the evidence, taken as a
whole, is not reasonably capable of supporting the finding."
14. Thus, the judgment can be termed as perverse only when the finding recorded by the court is,
based on no evidence or ignoring the vital evidence or where the court has drawn wrong inferences
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58219947/ 4
Kamlesh Rani vs Satish Kumar on 18 November, 2023
from the proved facts or where the evidence taken as a whole does not support the finding. But when
there is some evidence on record to substantiate the finding, then the finding cannot be termed as
perverse.
15. It was contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that the respondent had pleaded in his
plaint that he was unemployed and to establish his business, the suit shop was required by the
respondent, whereas the respondent in his statement before the learned Trial Court himself
admitted that he was running a wholesale business of readymade garments shop in a street, as such,
the cause projected by the respondent for the eviction of the appellant from the suit shop was false,
sham and non-existent. Now it is to be seen as to whether the findings returned by both the courts
below that the suit shop was required for personal use and occupation by the respondent to
establish his business in the suit shop are perverse or not.
16. The learned trial court as also the appellate court have held that the suit shop is required by the
respondent for his personal use and occupation. A perusal of the statement of the respondent-Satish
Kumar would reveal that he in his examination-in-chief only has categorically stated that he was
engaged in a small wholesale readymade garment business in a rented shop at Mohalla Paharia and
stock of the said shop was kept by him in the first floor of the suit shop. It was also stated by him
that the appellant was running a boutique under the name and style of "Maa Beti" in her house. He
has further stated that wholesale business could not be run in the lanes and for that purpose the
main market was required. Respondent(cid:129)s witnesses Shashipaul, Sham Lal and Khajoor Singh have
also stated that the respondent was running a wholesale business in a rented shop located in a
street. The appellant(cid:129)s witnesses, Brijpaul Singh, Shailender Singh and Sardari Lal have deposed to
same extent that the respondent was running a wholesale business of readymade garments in a
shop.
17. From the evidence led by the parties, it is proved that the respondent was running a business of
wholesale garments in a shop located in a street. The learned appellate court has observed that
merely because the respondent had pleaded that he was unemployed and wanted to start business in
his suit shop and did not state that he was already engaged in a small wholesale business of
readymade garments, cannot be a ground to non-suit the respondent and deprive him of his legal
right to enjoy his property, the possession of which was being enjoyed by the appellant for the last
40 years. The issue raised by the appellant is in respect of contradiction between pleadings and
evidence, which would fall within the realm of appreciation of evidence and it is trite law that the
appreciation of evidence is not permissible while adjudicating a Civil Second Appeal. It is only when
the finding on a fact is returned on the basis of no evidence or the finding returned on the basis of
the evidence on record could not have been arrived at, then only the finding can be termed as
perverse. The respondent wants to establish the wholesale business in the suit shop, whereas he is
already running the business in a rented shop that too in a street and by no stretch of imagination,
the necessity of the respondent can be termed as non-existent. Every person would endeavour to run
his business in his own shop rather in a rented shop and it would be travesty of justice if the suit of
the landlord is dismissed just because he is running a business in a rented shop. It is not the case
projected by the appellant that there was no evidence in respect of the personal requirement of the
respondent qua the suit shop but the appellant simply wants to get an advantage of the pleadings
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58219947/ 5
Kamlesh Rani vs Satish Kumar on 18 November, 2023
made by the respondent in the plaint that he was unemployed, which in the opinion of this Court, as
rightly observed by the learned appellate court, cannot be made a ground to dismiss the suit filed by
the respondent. The respondent in his examination-in-chief never stated that he was unemployed
and it is not that the respondent concealed the factum of running his business in his chief-
examination and admitted in cross-examination for the first time, which could have been termed as
an attempt to project the false necessity to seek eviction of the appellant and would have amounted
to concealment of fact. Therefore, this Court does not find any perversity in the judgments passed by
both the courts in respect of their findings that the respondent required the suit shop for his
personal use and occupation. More so, the ground projected by the respondent for seeking eviction
of the appellant is his personal necessity, which he successfully proved before the trial court.
Therefore, it cannot be said that the suit has been decreed on the ground other than "the personal
necessity".
Question No. 3:
Whether the trial court and the appellate court have wrongly weighed/ determined
the advantages/ disadvantages of the parties?
18. It is contended by the appellant that once the respondent could not prove that the suit shop was
required by him, so there was no occasion for the learned Trial Court to hold that the comparative
requirement of the respondent was more than that of the appellant. Though the learned trial court
had not framed a specific issue in respect of the comparative advantages/disadvantages of the
parties in case of eviction or refusal thereof but the learned Appellate Court has determined the
issues as mentioned above in para-6.
19. A perusal of the statement of the appellant reveals that she had stated that she was putting up
separately with her son in the same house where her husband was residing. She further admitted
that she was not divorced by her husband and she was in good terms with her husband and no
quarrel had taken place with him. She also admitted that she had neither left her husband nor her
husband had left her. Though she stated that the building where the Vijaya Bank was functioning
belonged to her husband and she had no concern with the said property but she admitted that the
upper hall of the Vijaya Bank was lying vacant those days. The appellant(cid:129)s witness Brij Paul Singh
had stated that four shops in the building of Vijaya Bank were owned by appellant(cid:129)s husband and
above the roof of these shops, there was a Vijaya Bak building which was lying vacant. He admitted
that the appellant was running a boutique in her house and later on corrected himself by stating that
board of the boutique had been installed but was not doing any business. Similarly, appellant(cid:129)s
witness Shaildera Singh (son of appellant) stated that the Board under the name and style of "Maa
Beti Boutique" had been fixed in the house, but his mother was not running any boutique in the
house and even the board did not belong to them. He also admitted that a big hall at the first floor of
the Vijaya Bank building was lying vacant. The appellant(cid:129)s witness Janardan Singh also stated that
in a building there was a Vijaya Bank and the said building was lying vacant and being put to use for
small functions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58219947/ 6
Kamlesh Rani vs Satish Kumar on 18 November, 2023
20. The appellant has further stated that the respondent can keep readymade clothes at the roof of
the suit shop. The learned appellate court has examined the judgment of the learned trial court and
after laying down the points for its determination, has considered the issue of comparative
advantages/disadvantages and has arrived at a conclusion that due to long period of 40 years for
which the appellant has enjoyed the possession of the suit shop, the balance tilts in favour of the
landlord and inconvenience, loss and trouble resulting from the denial of decree for eviction shall
outweigh the inconvenience caused to the appellant/defendant. In this context, it would be proper
to take note of the observations of the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court in Mohd. Mohd. Ayub v. Mukesh Chand,
(2012) 2 SCC 155. The relevant portion of the judgment is extracted as under:
"It is well settled the landlord's requirement need not be a dire necessity. The court
cannot direct the landlord to do a particular business or imagine that he could
profitably do a particular business rather than the business he proposes to start. It
was wrong on the part of the District Court to hold that the appellants' case that their
sons want to start the general merchant business is a pretence because they are
dealing in eggs and it is not uncommon for a Muslim family to do the business of
non-vegetarian food. It is for the landlord to decide which business he wants to do.
The court cannot advise him. Similarly, length of tenancy of the respondent in the
circumstances of the case ought not to have weighed with the courts below.
X x x x X
18. In the ultimate analysis, we are of the view that the perverse findings of the courts
below on the aspect of comparative hardship must be set aside. The High Court has
rightly found the need of the appellants to be bona fide. It has however, fallen into an
error in directing the respondent to hand over only one room to the appellants. In
our opinion, the hardship the appellants would suffer by not occupying their own
premises would be far greater than the hardship the respondent would suffer by
having to move out to another place. We are mindful of the fact that whenever the
tenant is asked to move out of the premises some hardship is inherent. We have
noted that the respondent is in occupation of the premises for a long time. But in our
opinion, in the facts of this case that circumstance cannot be the sole determinative
factor. That hardship can be mitigated by granting him longer period to move out of
the premises in his occupation so that in the meantime he can make an alternative
arrangement."
21. From the facts brought on record, it is clear that the appellant has been in possession of the suit
shop for the last more than 52 years and the respondent has spent 24 years in litigation only to seek
eviction of the appellant so as to establish his business in the suit shop. In view of the evidence
brought on record, it cannot be said that the comparative advantages/disadvantages of the parties
have been wrongly determined.
Question No. 4:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58219947/ 7
Kamlesh Rani vs Satish Kumar on 18 November, 2023
Whether the impugned judgments are not in accordance with the mandate of section
11(1) (h) of the J&K Houses and Shops Rent Control Act.
22. The Section 11(1)(h) of the J&K Houses and Shops Rent Control Act is reproduced as under:
"(h) where house or shop is reasonably required by a landlord either for the purpose
of building or rebuilding or for his own occupation or of any person for whose benefit
house or shop is held.
Explanation:- The court in determining the reasonableness of requirement for occupation shall have
to record the comparative advantages or disadvantages of the landlord or person for whose benefit
the house or shop is held and of the tenant.
Provided that where the Court thinks that the reasonable requirement of such occupation may be
substantially satisfied by evicting the tenant from a part only of the house or shop and allowing the
tenant to continue occupation of the rest, and the tenant agrees to such occupation, the Court shall
pass a decree accordingly and fix a proportionately fair rent for the portion in occupation of the
tenant, which portion shall henceforth constitute the house or shop within clause (3) or clause (5) of
section 2 and the rent fixed shall be deemed to be the fair rent fixed under section 8."
23. In order to seek eviction under section 11(1)(h) of the J&K Houses and Shops Rent Control Act,
the following issues are required to be adjudicated:
"Firstly, whether the suit shop or house is reasonably required by the landlord for the
purpose of building/rebuilding or for his own occupation or for any other person.
Secondly, whether the necessity of the landlord is greater than that of the tenant and
what are the comparative advantages/disadvantages of the landlord and, Lastly,
whether the necessity of the plaintiff can be met by partial eviction."
24. There are concurrent findings of facts by the both the Courts below. Both the judgments are in
accordance with the mandate of section 11(1)(h) of the J&K Houses and Shops Rent Control Act,
more particularly when the appellant has herself admitted that the suit shop cannot be partitioned.
25. For all what has been said and discussed above, this Court does not find any reason to disturb
the judgments and decrees of the learned Trial Court and the learned Appellate Court. Accordingly,
the appeal is dismissed and the appellant is granted three months time from today to vacate the suit
shop. Registry is directed to prepare the decree sheet accordingly.
(RAJNESH OSWAL) JUDGE Jammu 18.11.2023 Rakesh Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/58219947/ 8
