Kanta Andotra vs The Central Bureau Of Investigation ... on 19 April, 2023
Kanta Andotra vs The Central Bureau Of Investigation ... on 19
April, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
Sr. No. 150
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRM(M) No. 305/2023
CrlM No. 561/2023
Reserved on : 17.04.2023
Pronounced on : 19.04.2023
Kanta Andotra, aged 60 years w/o Ch. Lal .... Petitioner(s)
Singh resident of H. No. 01 Ward No. 02
Kathua, (UT of Jammu & Kashmir).
Through :- Mr. R.K. Kotwal, Advocate
V/s
1. The Central Bureau of Investigation through ....Respondent(s)
its Incharge (ACB) Jammu,
2. Ravinder Singh S/O Gian Chand resident of Village Gatti Tehsil Bani District Kathua (UT of
Jammu & Kashmir).
Through :- Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG for R-1.
Coram: HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE ORDE R 19.04..2023
1. Through the medium of this petition u/s 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure 1973 (hereinafter
referred as 'the Code'), petitioner has assailed the legality, propriety and correctness of impugned
order dated 27-03-2023 rendered by the Court of Ld. Special Judge Anti-Corruption (CBI Cases)
Jammu in case File No. 291/CBI titled "CBI Vs Kanta Andotra & Ors.", whereby, direction has been
issued for re-investigation of the case. It is averred, that after respondent No.1 received source
information in regard to encroachment of Public/Govt./Forest land in District Kathua by someone
in connivance with revenue and forest officials, on the basis of preliminary enquiry No. PE
042020A0002 conducted on 22-06-2020 and on the basis of complaint made by Sub-Inspector
CBI/ACB Vikas Ranot registered FIR No. RC0042020A0005 for alleged commission of offences
punishable u/ss 120-B r/w Section 5(1) (d) r/w 5(2) of J&K Prevention of Corruption Act 2006;
consequently, a final chargesheet for commission of aforesaid offences in case titled CBI Vs. Kanta
Andotra & Ors. was filed by respondent No.1 in the trial court of Ld. Special Judge Anti-Corruption
(CBI Cases) Jammu wherein respondent No.2 has also arraigned as accused. It is moreso averred,
that petitioner being chair person of R.B. Educational Trus Kathua in conspiracy with respondent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187043312/ 1
Kanta Andotra vs The Central Bureau Of Investigation ... on 19 April, 2023
no.2 has acquired and is holding land for the aforesaid trust more than ceiling limit of 100 standard
kanals (12 ½ standard Acre) in violation of Section 14 of Agrarian Reforms Act 1976; the Trial Court
after hearing on the question of charge and discharge at length, instead of deciding the issue, passed
direction for re-investigation of the case vide impugned order dated 27-03-2023 without there being
any power expressly or impliedly conferred upon it under the Criminal Procedure Code, thereby, has
impinged upon the jurisdiction of respondent No.1; the trial court while trying an accused has to
adopt the procedure for the trial of warrant cases by Magistrate, therefore, impugned order is an
order passed by a Magistrate having no jurisdiction to order the re- investigation of the case.
2. Mr. R.K. Kotwal Ld. Counsel for the petitioner while seeking the quashment/setting aside of the
impugned order, has vehemently canvassed arguments, that the trial court of Ld. Special Judge
Anti-Corruption (CBI Cases) Jammu has the powers of a Magistrate only to direct further
investigation in terms of Section 173 (8) Cr.pc, however, no power exists in the said Magistrate to
order re-investigation of the case in hand. It is argued, that the settled position of law is no longer
res-integra, that the re-investigation can neither be conducted by the investigating agency nor can
be ordered by the Magistrate, and the power only lies with the higher Courts viz; the High Courts
and Supreme Court in exercise of their extraordinary or inherent jurisdiction as envisaged under
Section 482 Cr.pc or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. To support his arguments, Ld.
Counsel has relied upon the judgment of Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court reported in 2013 CRI.L.J 754
[Vinay Tyagi v. Irshad Ali alias Deepak & Ors.].
3. In the case law (Supra) of Vinay Tyagi v. Irshad Ali alias Deepak & Ors. relied by Ld. Counsel for
petitioner, Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court of India while discussing the scope and ambit of the powers of a
Magistrate and that of High Court in regard to „initial investigation(cid:129), „further investigation(cid:129) and
„fresh or de novo or re-investigation(cid:129) in paragraphs 13,14,15,16,18& 33 of the judgment observed as
under:-
13. Having noticed the provisions and relevant part of the scheme of the Code, now
we must examine the powers of the Court to direct investigation. Investigation can be
ordered in varied forms and at different stages. Right at the initial stage of receiving
the FIR or a complaint, the Court can direct investigation in accordance with the
provisions of Section 156(1) in exercise of its powers under Section 156(3) of the
Code.
Investigation can be of the following kinds: (i) Initial Investigation. (ii) Further Investigation. (iii)
Fresh or de novo or re-investigation.
14. The initial investigation is the one which the empowered police officer shall conduct in
furtherance to registration of an FIR. Such investigation itself can lead to filing of a final report
under Section 173(2) of the Code and shall take within its ambit the investigation which the
empowered officer shall conduct in furtherance of an order for investigation passed by the court of
competent jurisdiction in terms of Section 156(3) of the Code.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187043312/ 2
Kanta Andotra vs The Central Bureau Of Investigation ... on 19 April, 2023
15. 'Further investigation' is where the Investigating Officer obtains further oral or documentary
evidence after the final report has been filed before the Court in terms of Section 173(8). This power
is vested with the Executive. It is the continuation of a previous investigation and, therefore, is
understood and described as a „further investigation(cid:129). Scope of such investigation is restricted to
the discovery of further oral and documentary evidence. Its purpose is to bring the true facts before
the Court even if they are discovered at a subsequent stage to the primary investigation. It is
commonly described as „supplementary report(cid:129). „Supplementary report(cid:129) would be the correct
expression as the subsequent investigation is meant and intended to supplement the primary
investigation conducted by the empowered police officer. Another significant feature of further
investigation is that it does not have the effect of wiping out directly or impliedly the initial
investigation conducted by the investigating agency. This is a kind of continuation of the previous
investigation. The basis is discovery of fresh evidence and in continuation of the same offence and
chain of events relating to the same occurrence incidental thereto. In other words, it has to be
understood in complete contradistinction to a „reinvestigation(cid:129), „fresh(cid:129) or „de novo(cid:129) investigation.
16. However, in the case of a 'fresh investigation', 'reinvestigation' or 'de novo investigation' there
has to be a definite order of the court. The order of the Court unambiguously should state as to
whether the previous investigation, for reasons to be recorded, is incapable of being acted upon.
Neither the Investigating agency nor the Magistrate has any power to order or conduct 'fresh
investigation'. This is primarily for the reason that it would be opposed to the scheme of the Code. It
is essential that even an order of „fresh(cid:129)/(cid:129)de novo(cid:129) investigation passed by the higher judiciary
should always be coupled with a specific direction as to the fate of the investigation already
conducted. The cases where such direction can be issued are few and far between. This is based
upon a fundamental principle of our criminal jurisprudence which is that it is the right of a suspect
or an accused to have a just and fair investigation and trial. This principle flows from the
constitutional mandate contained in Articles 21 and 22 of the Constitution of India. Where the
investigation ex facie is unfair, tainted, mala fide and smacks of foul play, the courts would set aside
such an investigation and direct fresh or de novo investigation and, if necessary, even by another
independent investigating agency. As already noticed, this is a power of wide plenitude and,
therefore, has to be exercised sparingly. The principle of rarest of rare cases would squarely apply to
such cases. Unless the unfairness of the investigation is such that it pricks the judicial conscience of
the Court, the Court should be reluctant to interfere in such matters to the extent of quashing an
investigation and directing a „fresh investigation(cid:129). In the case of Sidhartha Vashisht v. State (NCT
of Delhi) [(2010) 6 SCC 1], the Court stated that it is not only the responsibility of the investigating
agency, but also that of the courts to ensure that investigation is fair and does not in any way
hamper the freedom of an individual except in accordance with law. An equally enforceable canon of
the criminal law is that high responsibility lies upon the investigating agency not to conduct an
investigation in a tainted or unfair manner. The investigation should not prima facie be indicative of
a biased mind and every effort should be made to bring the guilty to law as nobody stands above law
de hors his position and influence in the society. The maxim contra veritatem lex nunquam aliquid
permittit applies to exercise of powers by the courts while granting approval or declining to accept
the report. In the case of Gudalure M.J. Cherian & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. [(1992) 1 SCC 397],
this Court stated the principle that in cases where charge-sheets have been filed after completion of
investigation and request is made belatedly to reopen the investigation, such investigation being
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187043312/ 3
Kanta Andotra vs The Central Bureau Of Investigation ... on 19 April, 2023
entrusted to a specialized agency would normally be declined by the court of competent jurisdiction
but nevertheless in a given situation to do justice between the parties and to instil confidence in
public mind, it may become necessary to pass such orders. Further, in the case of R.S. Sodhi,
Advocate v. State of U.P. [1994 SCC Supp. (1) 142], where allegations were made against a police
officer, the Court ordered the investigation to be transferred to CBI with an intent to maintain
credibility of investigation, public confidence and in the interest of justice. Ordinarily, the courts
would not exercise such jurisdiction but the expression „ordinarily(cid:129) means normally and it is used
where there can be an exception. It means in the large majority of cases but not invariably.
„Ordinarily(cid:129) excludes extra- ordinary or special circumstances. In other words, if special
circumstances exist, the court may exercise its jurisdiction to direct „fresh investigation(cid:129) and even
transfer cases to courts of higher jurisdiction which may pass such directions.
18. Next question that comes up for consideration of this Court is whether the empowered
Magistrate has the jurisdiction to direct „further investigation(cid:129) or „fresh investigation(cid:129). As far as
the latter is concerned, the law declared by this Court consistently is that the learned Magistrate has
no jurisdiction to direct 'fresh' or 'de novo' investigation. However, once the report is filed, the
Magistrate has jurisdiction to accept the report or reject the same right at the threshold. Even after
accepting the report, it has the jurisdiction to discharge the accused or frame the charge and put him
to trial. But there are no provisions in the Code which empower the Magistrate to disturb the status
of an accused pending investigation or when report is, filed to wipe out the report and its effects in
law. Reference in this regard can be made to K. Chandrasekhar v. State of Kerala [(1998) 5 SCC
223]; Ramachandran v. R. Udhayakumar [(2008) 5 SCC 413], Nirmal Singh Kahlon v State of
Punjab & Ors. [(2009) 1 SCC 441]; Mithabhai Pashabhai Patel & Ors. v. State of Gujarat [(2009) 6
SCC 332]; and Babubhai v. State of Gujarat [(2010) 12 SCC 254].
33. At this stage, we may also state another well-settled canon of criminal jurisprudence that the
superior courts have the jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code or even Article 226 of the
Constitution of India to direct 'further investigation', 'fresh' or 'de novo' and even 'reinvestigation'.
„Fresh(cid:129), „de novo(cid:129), and „reinvestigation(cid:129) are synonymous expressions and their result in law
would be the same. The superior courts are even vested with the power of transferring investigation
from one agency to another, provided the ends of justice so demand such action. Of course, it is also
a settled principle that this power has to be exercised by the superior courts very sparingly and with
great circumspection.
4. From the ratio of the judgment (Supra) the principle law deduced there from is, that Superior
Courts have the jurisdiction u/s 482 or even under Article 226 of the Constitution to direct
re-investigation of the case, while as, the Magistrate has no jurisdiction/power to order the
re-investigation. It is apt to mention here, that in para 56 of impugned order dated 27-03-2023 the
trial court in the case in hand has observed that total land of R.B. Education Trust Kathua was found
to be 328 kanals 19 marlas in excess of ceiling area as per section 14 of Agrarian Reforms Act 1976.
In paras 103 & 104 of the impugned order the trial court has further stated that the matter requires
further probe and until the final order is passed by the revenue committee declaring accused liable
for violation of Section 14 of Agrarian Reforms Act, the criteria for limited purpose of sifting the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187043312/ 4
Kanta Andotra vs The Central Bureau Of Investigation ... on 19 April, 2023
evidence to proceed against accused which can be considered and looked into on completion of
further investigation/enquiry and this aspect of the case is shown to have been either overlooked or
completely ignored by the investigating agency warranting re- investigation on all aspects. Para 106
of the impugned order further depicts that 4 months time has been granted for re-investigation of
the case in hand under the supervision of SP CBI concerned. In light of the dictum of Hon(cid:129)ble
Supreme Court rendered in Vinay Tyagi(cid:129)s case (Supra), the Ld. Special Judge Anti-Corruption (CBI
Cases) Jammu being Court of Magistrate also has no power/jurisdiction to order re-investigation in
the case in hand which lies in the exclusive domain and jurisdiction of High Court and Supreme
Court.
5. Ms. Monika Kohli Ld. Sr. AAG on her appearance on 12-04-2023 had waived notice on behalf of
respondent No.1 and sought time for filing the objections. Today she has not filed the objections and
again has sought time. Time is granted. Issue fresh notice to respondent No.2. Alongwith the main
petition, petitioner has filed an interim application supported by an affidavit for staying the
operation of impugned order dated 27-03-2023 passed by the trial court. In view of the averments of
the main petition and the settled legal position aforesaid, till the filing of objections by respondent
no.1 and consideration of the petition in hand, impugned order dated 27-03-2023 passed by the trial
court is stayed. List on 03-05-2023.
JAMMU (MOHAN LAL)
19-04-2023 JUDGE
Vijay
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187043312/ 5
