Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
Author: R.N.Manjula
Bench: P.N.Prakash, R.N.Manjula
Crl.A.No.815 of 2019
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
Reserved on 20.10.2021
Pronounced on 25.11.2021
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.N.PRAKASH
AND
THE HONOURABLE MS.JUSTICE R.N.MANJULA
Criminal Appeal No.815 of 2019
Kanu Mandal .. Appellant/A-2
Vs.
The State, Represented by
The Inspector of Police,
Villianur Police Station,
Puducherry.
Crime No.233/2011. .. Respondent/Complainant
PRAYER: This Criminal Appeal filed under Section 374 (2) Cr.P.C.,
against the conviction and sentence imposed upon the appellant by the
learned III Additional Sessions Judge, Puducherry passed in S.C.No.34 of
2015 by a judgement dated 07.09.2017.
For Appellant : Mr.S.Doraisamy
For Respondent : Mr.V.Balamurugane
Additional Public Prosecutor
(Pondicherry)
1/30
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) Crl.A.No.815 of 2019
JUDGMENT
R.N.MANJULA, J.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170889052/ 1
Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
This Criminal Appeal has been preferred by the Appellant/A-2 to set aside the conviction and
sentence made in S.C.No. 34/2015 on the file of the learned III Additional Sessions Judge,
Puducherry dated 07.09.2017, as tabulated hereunder:
Provision under Sl.No Sentence which convicted Life Imprisonment and to pay a fine
of Section 302 IPC 1 Rs.1,000/- in default to undergo one year r/w 34 IPC rigorous
imprisonment.
2. The facts of the case in brief are as follows:
The house of the deceased is situated opposite to Abirami Leather Industry,
K.S.Nagar, Thondamanatham, near Pathukannu Junction Villiamur, Puducherry. On
12.07.2011 at about 01.30 hours, the second accused along with one Sadu Sardar and
Pradip Gosh (case against the other two accused has been already split up in
PRC.No.22/2015), in furtherance https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of common
intention of murdering the deceased murdered him by strangulation. Hence they
committed the offence under Section 302 r/w 34 IPC. On receiving the complaint
(Ex.P1) from PW.1/Vijayadass at about 9.00 hours on 12.07.2011,
PW.15/Arumugham, Sub Inspector of Police, Villianur Police Station has registered
an FIR (Ex.P25) in Cr.No.233/2011 under Section 302 r/w 34 IPC.
2.1. P.W.16- Dr.S.Baskaran took up the investigation. He went to the place of occurrence at 10.30 am
and inspected the place of occurrence and he prepared an Observation Mahazar (Ex.P.26) and
Rough Sketch (Ex.P.4) in the presence of the witnesses. He collected the bloodstained mortar
(M.O.2), plain mortar (M.O.3) and shirt (M.O.1) from the place of occurrence covered under
Mahazar Ex.P.29. The body of the deceased was kept in the Government Hospital Mortuary. He
enquired PW.1 and other witnesses and thereafter, he arrested the accused at their residence and
sent them for medical examination. When he enquired A1 to A3 they gave confession statements and
the same was recorded in the presence of VAO and one Sudhakar. Since the accused spoke in Hindi,
their statements were https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis recorded after getting them translated into
Tamil by the translators.
2.2. On the basis of their confession, the shirt and pant of A-2 (M.O.5 and M.O.6) and the shirt and
pant of A-3 (M.O.8) were recovered under Seizure Mahazar (Ex.P.33). After sending the accused for
remand, P.W.16 went to hospital and conducted the Inquest on the body of the deceased in the
presence of panchayatars and prepared the Inquest Report (Ex.P.34). Thereafter, he sent the body of
the deceased for postmortem. He caused the viscera to be sent to the forensic lab for chemical
examination. He enquired the witnesses and the doctor who conducted the postmortem and
collected the postmortem certificate (Ex.P.12). He enquired the photographer Selvaganapathy and
other witnesses. After completing the investigation, he filed the charge sheet against the accused for
the offence under Sec.302 r/w 34 IPC.
2.3. After taking cognizance of the case, the learned Judicial Magistrate-III, Puducherry, duly
complied with the formalities under Sec.207 & 209 Cr.P.C and committed the case to the Sessions
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170889052/ 2
Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
Court, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Puducherry.
2.4. The case against the accused (A1 and A3) got spilt up and pending in PRC.No.22/2015. And
NBWs are pending against them for a long time without execution.
2.5. During the course of the trial on the side of the prosecution, 16 witnesses were examined as
PW.1 to 16 and 34 documents were marked as Exs.P.1 to P.34 and 12 material objects have been
produced as M.Os.1 to
12. The incriminating circumstances appearing in the evidence of the prosecution witnesses were
put to the accused while questioning under Sec. 313 Cr.P.C. and he denied the same as false. On the
side of the defence, no witness was examined and no document was marked.
2.6. The trial Court upon hearing both side arguments and on perusal of the oral and documentary
evidence, convicted and sentenced the accused as stated supra. Challenging the same A-2 has
preferred this Criminal Appeal.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
3. The evidence of the prosecution in brief:
PW.1-Vijayadass is residing at No.402, Mariamman Koil Street,
Periyapapusamudram. The deceased was residing in the opposite room. On
11.07.2011 at 8.00 p.m, when he was getting ready to go for his work, PW.2 (the
brother of the deceased ) called PW.1 to come and check the deceased who was lying
unconscious and from whose ear and neck blood was oozing out. When PW.1
informed this to the house owner, he told that three persons came to the house of the
deceased on the previous night and among them one person had some defects in his
eyes.
3.1. Then the matter was informed to the contractor Ramesh. He went along with one
Gunasekaran to the house of the accused situated at Manjolai and confronted the
accused about their involvement in the offence and then informed it to the Inspector
of Police. Since the brother of the accused did not know Tamil, his statement in Hindi
was translated into Tamil by PW.1 and prepared it as a compliant. PW.1 gave the said
complaint to police and the FIR was registered on the same.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 3.2. PW.2-Biswanth Mukerjee deposed in his evidence that he was
working in Good Knight Company; the deceased is his younger brother and he was also working in
Good Knight Company and was staying one of the rooms opposite to a factory; however at the time
of occurrence the deceased was working at NTS paper mill; the accused 1 to 3 were working under
the deceased; on the early night of the occurrence PW2 had night shift and he was preparing to go to
his Company; during that time the deceased came to his room along with A1 to A3 in order to have
drinks with them; PW.2 left along with his colleague Sudir Rai to night shift by leaving the deceased
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170889052/ 3
Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
and A1 to 3; when he returned from work on the early morning, he saw the deceased dead at his own
room; the house owner informed that during the previous night he heard the noise of a tussle
between three persons and the deceased; PW2 went to see the contractor Gunasekaran, under
whom the deceased and the accused were working and asked him come to the place of occurrence;
after coming there Gunasekaran told PW.2 that he saw the three accused were sleeping in the
construction site and later brought them; he gave an oral statement which was translated and
reduced into writing by https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis PW1; he told the police that the shirt of
the deceased was used to strangulate his neck.
3.3. PW.3 went to the place of occurrence along with PW.2 and saw the body of the deceased. PW.3
brought the accused who were working under him . He also informed that there was a fight between
the accused and the deceased with regard to purchase of a cell phone; the deceased was having a cell
phone which was hidden by A1 and that had resulted in a fight; as the accused were angry with the
deceased they had committed the murder.
3.4. PW.4 Ramesh is working as a Supervisor at Pandiyan’s company and the deceased was known
to him. He knew the deceased. On 12.07.2011 at about 6.30 am to 7.00 am PW.1 informed him that
Somnath died at K.S.Nagar; he went to the place of occurrence and saw the body of the deceased. He
appeared to have been strangulated with a shirt. PW.1, PW.3 and PW.4 went to the construction site
and saw all the accused were about to leave by packing their bags; further the accused were under
the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis influence of alcohol and they were got caught by PW.1, PW.3
and PW.4 and then handed over to the Police. He stood as a witness when the police went to the
place of occurrence and obtained his signature. The signature in the crime details is marked as
Ex.P.2, and his signature in the observation mahazar is marked as Ex.P3 and the rough sketch is
marked as Ex.P4. The shirt used to strangulate the neck of the deceased was seized which is marked
as M.O.1 under the mahazar Ex.P5.
3.5. P.W.5 –Vijayakumar is the supervisor and he deposed that he was asked to come to
Government General Hospital and his requisition is marked as Ex.P.9. He went to the Government
Mortuary along with Ramesh and Padmanaban and stood as a witness for inquest.
3.6. PW.6-Mala Mukerjee is the mother of the deceased who has stated about seeing the body of her
son in the mortuary.
3.7. P.W.7-Vinoon Sagu, is the neighbour of PW.6. He accompanied PW.7 and saw the body of the
deceased in the mortuary. He https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis also saw injuries on cheeks and
strangulation mark on the neck of the deceased and blood oozing out of the ears.
3.8. PW.8-Dr. Diwakar conducted the autopsy. He noticed the following external injuries on the
body of the deceased:
“Diffuse Bruisings:
1. 22cms x 9 cms x over the upper and middle of chest
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170889052/ 4
Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
2. 22 cms x 12 cms x over the pit of the stomach.
Abrasions:
3. 2cms x 2 cms x over the outer aspect of right cheek.
4. 1 ½ cms x 1 ½ cms x over the inner aspect of right cheek.
5. A transverse abrasion of 9 cms x 1 cm x over the middle and front of neck.
6. A contusion of 4 cms x 2 cms, over the right lower and front of neck over the neck
muscles.
7. A contusion of 3 cms x ½ cm, over the left side, middle of neck, over the neck
muscles.” And he has given his final opinion by stating that the death would have
occurred due to strangulation of the neck. The viscera report of the deceased is
obtained as Ex.P.12 and there was no poisonous substance detected in it.
However, it showed the presence of alcohol.
3.9. PW.9-Pathmanaban deposed that on 12.07.2011 at about 7.00 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
a.m, he received a phone call from his owner and was informed that one Somnath Mukkerjee was
dead and his body was sent for postmortem. As he was asked to come there, he went and was
present while the inquest was conducted by the Investigation Officer. He had affixed his signature as
one of the panchayators for inquest.
3.10. PW.10-Jothy, was working as Village Administrative Officer during the year 2011. On a call
received from the Revenue Inspector he went to Villianur Police Station along with the Village
Assistant. He stood as a witness for the confession statement given in Hindi by all the three accused.
And the same was translated into Tamil by one Sudhagar. During the course of the confession, the
accused produced the bloodstained shirt from the place where it was hidden by them. They also
produced the shirt of the deceased. They were recovered by the Police under Mahazaar and they
stood as the witnesses for mahazaar also and affixed their signatures.(Exs.P.17 to 20) They also
identified the material objects recovered from the accused and they are marked as M.Os.4 to 7.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 3.11. PW.11 Selvaganapathy, Photographer, on receiving the
request from the Villianur Circle Inspector on 12.07.2011 in connection with the case went to the
place of occurrence and took photographs as instructed. The photographs have been marked as
M.Os.10 to 18 and the C.D. containing the photos are marked as M.O.19.
3.12. PW.12–S.Sathiyan, is the scientific expert who had conducted chemical examination on the
bloodstained mortar and the plain cement mortar recovered from the place of occurrence and the
shirts of the deceased and the accused, has stated that in those objects human blood was detected.
In his report Ex.P21, it is stated that the shirts of the deceased and the accused contained human
blood and its DNA profiling revealed that it had a male genetic profile and found identical.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170889052/ 5
Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
3.13. PW.13- Sudhagar is the person who stood as translator for translating the confession
statements given by the accused in Hindi and https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis affixed his signature
in Exs.P.22 to 24.
3.14. PW.14-Dev Dip Ganguly is the teacher working in the Pondicherry Arvindar Asramam and who
is conversant in Bengali. He was appointed to assist the accused. He helped to translate the
statement of the witnesses in Bengali in order to enable the accused to understand them. He was
also present during the examination of the witnesses for translating their evidence and conveyed the
same to the accused in Bengali.
3.15. PW.15-Arumugham, was working as Sub Inspector of Police of Villianur Police Station at the
time of occurrence. He received the complaint at about 9.00am, on 12.07.2011. Since the
complainant Biswantha Mukherjee did not know Tamil, one Vijayadass translated his statement
into Tamil and prepared it as a complaint and gave it to police. A case was registered on the said
complaint in Crime No.233/2011 under Sec.302 r/w 34 IPC. The complaint and the First
Information Report have been marked as Ex.P.1 and Ex.P.25. After getting instructions from the
Investigation https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Officer he arranged for photographer, ambulance
and sniffer dog to be brought to the place of occurrence.
3.16. PW.16-S.Baskaran, Investigating Officer took up the case for investigation. On 12.07.2011 at
about 10.30 am he went to the place of occurrence and prepared the observation mahazar (Ex.P.26)
and crime details form (Ex.P.27) along with rough sketch (Ex.P.28). In his presence the
photographer took photographs of the scene of occurrence. He also recovered the samples of
bloodstained mortar from the scene of occurrence covered under seizure mahazaar (Ex.P.29) and
the material objects have been marked as M.O.2 and M.O.3. He also recovered a shirt-M.O.1 from
the place of occurrence; he examined the witnesses and arrested the accused on the same day at
about 4.00 p.m at their houses. Thereafter, he sent them for medical examination and recorded the
confession statements given by the accused in the presence of Village Administrative Officer and the
village assistant at the police station. Since the accused had given confession in Hindi, he got it
translated with the help of Hindi knowing person PW.13. On https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the
confession given by the accused he recovered the materials used to strangulate the deceased.
Thereafter he also recovered the shirt and pants (M.Os. 4 to 8) of the accused under seizure
mahazaar Ex.P.33. He conducted inquest on the body of the deceased in the presence of the
panchayators and the inquest report was marked as Ex.P.34. After conducting the inquest and after
the completion of the post mortem, he handed over the body of the deceased to the relatives and
sent the viscera to forensic lab. After obtaining the postmortem report and after concluding his
investigation he filed charge sheet against the accused. After the conclusion of the trial and on
considering the evidence, the learned trial Judge found the accused guilty and convicted and
sentenced as supra. Aggrieved over that, the appellant /A2 has filed this criminal appeal.
4. Heard the submissions of Mr S.Doraisamy, learned Counsel for the Appellant and
Mr.V.Balamurugane, learned Additional Public Prosecutor, Pondicherry, appearing for the
respondent.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170889052/ 6
Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
5. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the trial https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Court has failed to consider the fact that except the confession statement, there is no other evidence
available to connect the accused with the crime; since the accused is from West Bengal, he knew
only Bengali and the person who is said to have recorded the confession statement did not know
Bengali; the trial Court failed to note that by establishing the last seen theory alone, it can not come
to the conclusion that the appellant/accused is guilty; since the appellant was working under the
deceased, it is quite natural to see him along with him; the trial Court failed to note that the house
owner who is a vital witness was not examined and his non examination shatters the chain of
circumstances; the Investigating Officer did not even enquire about the motive for the occurrence
and hence the conviction of the appellant/A2 on the basis of incomplete prosecution evidence is not
sustainable.
6. The learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the respondent submitted that the evidence of the
witnesses are cogent and clear and the circumstances available in the case interlink with each other
and form a complete chain of circumstances which prove the involvement of the appellant/A2 along
with the other accused in the occurrence and the learned https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis trial
Judge has properly appreciated the evidence and arrived at a correct conclusion by convicting the
accused.
7. The point for consideration is Whether the conviction and sentence of the appellant/ac− cused-2
for the offence under Section 302 IPC r/w 34 IPC by the learned Sessions Judge basing on the
materials avail− able on record is fair and proper?
8. Point:- As there is no eyewitness, the prosecution relies on the circumstantial evidence. In the
cases of this nature, it has to be established that the circumstances form a complete chain. The facts
established should connect with each other and it should lead to the one and only conclusion that
the accused is guilty.
9. In this context it is relevant to refer to the judgement of the Hon’ble Supreme Court of India in
Sharad vs. State of Maharashtra (AIR https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 1984 SC 1622). In the said
judgement, the Hon’ble Supreme Court has laid down the following five golden principles on
circumstantial evidence:
“The following conditions must be fulfilled before a case against an accused can be
said to be fully established:
1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be fully
established. It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances
concerned ‘must or should’ and not ‘may be’ established. There is not only a
grammatical but a legal distinction between ‘may be proved’ and “must be or should
be proved” as was held by Apex Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade v. State of
Maharashtra where the following observations were made: [SCC para 19, p.807:SCC
(Cri) p.1047] Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused must be and not
merely may be guilty before a court can convict and the mental distance between
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170889052/ 7
Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
‘may be’ and ‘must be’ is long and divides vague conjectures from sure conclusions.
2) the facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of
the accused, that is to say, they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis
except that the accused is guilty.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency.
4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved, and
5) there must be a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the
conclusion consistent with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all human
probability the act must have been done by the accused.”
10. The above principles have been reiterated in Padala Veera Reddy vs. State of Andhra Pradesh
[(1989) Supp (2) SCC 706] as under:
“(1) the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to be drawn, must
be cogently and firmly established;
(2) those circumstances should be of a definite tendency unerringly pointing towards
guilt of the accused;
(3) the circumstances, taken cumulatively, should form a chain so complete that
there is no escape from the conclusion that within all human probability the crime
was committed by the accused and none else; and https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(4) the circumstantial evidence in order to sustain conviction must be complete and
incapable of explanation of any other hy-pothesis than that of the guilt of the accused
and such evidence should not only be consistent with the guilt of the accused but
should be inconsistent with his innocence.”
11. The case in hand was registered on the basis of the complaint given by PW.1 Vijayadass. PW1 got
the information about the occurrence from PW2-Biswanth Mugarjee and went to the place of
occurrence and saw the body of the deceased. PW.1-Vijayadass is also residing at a room opposite to
the room of PW.2. On 11.07.2011 at about 8.00 pm when PW1 was preparing to go to his night shift,
he saw the accused and the deceased at the opposite room, where PW.2-Biswanth Mukerjee was
staying.
12. PW.2 has stated in his evidence that his deceased brother was staying in one of the three rooms
opposite to a factory. At that time his brother was working in NTS Paper Mill. He knew that the
accused persons (Sadu Sardar (A1), Kanu Mondal (A2) and Pradip Gosh (A3)) were
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis working under the deceased; on the fateful night, the deceased
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170889052/ 8
Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
invited all the three accused to the room of PW.2 for consuming alcohol. After meeting his brother
along with the accused at his house, PW.2 went to his night shift work. When he returned from work
on the next day morning, he saw the deceased lying on the floor of his room. The house owner of the
premises informed PW.2 that he heard some people were quarrelling with the deceased on the
previous night and thereafter PW.2 went to meet PW.3 under whom the accused were working.
PW.3 also informed by PW.1 about the death of the deceased and the accused were staying in a
house under construction and they were about to leave the place by setting their bags ready. The
said fact was spoken by PW.1 who also went to the house of the accused along with PW.3.
13. The evidence of PW.1 and 2 reveals two important circumstances. Firstly, they had seen the
deceased lastly with the accused. When PWs.1 and 3 went and saw the accused at their place, after
knowing the occurrence, they found them getting ready to leave the place. Secondly,
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the conduct of the accused has got relevancy to the information
given to PW.2 that during the previous night there was a tussle between the accused and three
persons. Before leaving to his shift, PW.2 noticed the deceased and the accused were having alcohol
at his room. When PW.2 returned from duty he found the accused dead.
14. PW.4‘s evidence also corroborates with the evidence of PW.3. PW.3 has stated that he joined
PW.1 and PW.2 when they went to see the accused and they found them about to leave. He has
further stated that the accused appeared to have consumed alcohol. The said evidence corroborates
with the evidence of PW.2, who has stated that before he left for his night shift, his deceased brother
brought the accused to his room for taking alcohol. The viscera report of the deceased also showed
that it contained alcohol. In the final opinion given by the doctor after getting the viscera report, it is
specifically mentioned as follow:
“Died of asphyxia, as a result of ligature strangulation over the neck. (viscera
alchol:0.18g%)” https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
15. Dr.Diwakar who had conducted the postmortem and who was examined as PW.8, has also stated
the said fact in his evidence. It is also noticed by the doctor that there were injuries on the body of
the deceased. Apart from the injuries caused due to strangulation, these injuries which were present
on the body of the deceased would pre-suppose a scuffle. The shirt of the deceased which was used
for the occurrence was seized from the accused on their confessions.
16. The said shirt and the clothes of the accused which were produced by them to the investigation
officer and later sent for scientific examination found to be containing the stains of human blood.
And its DNA profile has shown the following:
(i) A male genetic profile could be generated only from the DNA recovered from the
Exhibit- 1,3,5 and 6 and they were found to be identical.
(ii)DNA recovered from Exhibit-4 was found to be highly degraded and was found
refractory to PCR amplification.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170889052/ 9
Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
Conclusion: Based on the above observation it is concluded that:
The source of the blood stain on cement floor pieces (Exhibit 1) full sleeved shirt
(Exhibit-3), https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis half sleeved shirt (Exhibit-5) and full
sleeved shirt (Exhibit-6) are from same human male source.”
17. The above observation and the conclusion of the scientific expert (PW12) would show that the
blood of the deceased was present in the clothes of the accused, which were recovered from them.
The blood stains found on the shirts of the accused and the blood stains found on the material
objects were also found to be identical. Very same blood was also found on the bloodstained cement
mortar recovered from the place of occurrence. The above correlation would show that the blood
leaked from the body of the deceased spread on the shirt of the deceased, the shirt of the accused
and the floor of the room. Though it is possible for the witnesses to lie, the circumstance can not lie
and more particularly the above scientific evidence could directly connect the accused to the scene of
the occurrence.
18. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that the house owner who had given
information to PW.2 about the quarrel that had taken place at the room of the deceased during the
previous night is a vital witness and his non-examination is fatal to the case of the prosecution. No
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis doubt the house owner is one of the vital witnesses and the
information given by him is also very important to the case of the prosecution. But the accused was
last seen with the accused and the same was proved beyond reasonable doubt. The above said last
seen theory coupled with the scientific evidence which shows that the blood of the accused found on
the shirts of the accused could themselves form a chain without any breakage.
19. It is seen from the judgement of the trial Court that the learned trial Judge has relied on the
following proved circumstances:
1.Identification of the dead body
2.Presence of the accused at the scene of crime
3.Last seen of the deceased with the company of the accused persons
4.Conduct of the accused
5.Recovery of material objects as per section 27 of the Indian Evidence Act.
6.Scientific expert opinion.
20. The above proved facts and circumstances would show that even without the evidence of the
house owner, there are enough links which would unfailingly connect the accused to the occurrence.
The unusual urge https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis shown by the accused to leave the place in a
hurried manner will also prove their intention of escaping from the clutches of law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170889052/ 10
Kanu Mandal vs The State on 25 November, 2021
21. The learned counsel for the appellant /A2 submitted that the motive for the offence was not
proved by the prosecution and the investigating officer had omitted to enquire the witness on this
aspect. The quarrel among the accused and the deceased during the previous night would show that
the accused had some bitterness toward the deceased and they had used this opportunity to do away
with him. The other injuries which were present on the body of the deceased would confirm the fact
that there was a tussle and during that course the accused had strangulated the deceased with his
shirt and killed him.
22. These facts would show that the accused had a clear premeditation to kill the deceased by
making use of his shirt as a weapon to strangulate him. The quarrel between the accused and the
deceased would itself speak about the ill-Will they had between themselves. As the accused
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and the deceased were drunk they would have become less
inhibited to bring out the bitterness which they had with each other and that culminated into a
quarrel and the murder followed by strangulation.
23. The circumstance that has already been established before this Court coupled with the injuries
on the body of the deceased and the presence of the alcohol in his viscera and the opinion of the
doctor as to the cause of the death would show the revengeful thought harboured by the accused
against the deceased. Since the evidence of the prosecution witnesses coupled with the
circumstances established by the prosecution along with the conduct of the accused, the scientific
evidence and medical evidence prove that the deceased was murdered by the accused in the manner
stated by the prosecution, the learned trial judge has accepted the same and held the accused guilty.
Hence we do not find any reason for interference. Thus, the point for consideration is answered
against the appellant.
In the result, this Criminal Appeal stands dismissed and the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
judgement and conviction of the learned III Additional Sessions Judge, Puducherry dated
07.09.2017 passed in Special Case No.34 of 2015, as against the appellant/A-2 is confirmed.
[P.N.P.J.,] [R.N.M.J,] 25.11.2021 Index : Yes Internet: Yes Speaking / Non Speaking jrs
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Copy to
1. III Additional Sessions Judge, Puducherry
2. The Inspector of Police, Villianur Police Station, Puducherry
3.The Public Prosecutor, High Court, Madras.
4.The Superintendent of Police, Central Prison, Cuddalore.
5. The Record Keeper, Criminal Section, High Court, Madras.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis P.N.PRAKASH, J and R.N.MANJULA, J jrs Judgement made in
25.11.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170889052/ 11
