Kapil Jaiswal And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
Kapil Jaiswal And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3
March, 2025
Author: Manju Rani Chauhan
Bench: Manju Rani Chauhan
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:29121
Court No. - 52
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 528 BNSS No. - 6746 of 2025
Applicant :- Kapil Jaiswal And 2 Others
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Ram Jatan Yadav
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Mrs. Manju Rani Chauhan,J.
1. Heard Mr. Ram Jatan Yadav, learned counsel for the applicants and Mr. Amit Singh Chauhan,
learned A.G.A.-I for the State as well as perused the entire record.
2. The present application has been filed challenging the entire proceeding as well as order dated
30.11.2024 vide which the discharge application of the applicants has been rejected.
3. Brief facts of the case are that an FIR has been lodged on 11.05.2024 at 13:34 hours, under
Sections 376, 504, 506 I.P.C. against Kapil Jaiswal applicant no.1 along with her parents with the
allegation that opposite party no.2 whose parents had expired way back in the year 2020 itself, was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127162862/ 1
Kapil Jaiswal And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
staying along with her maternal-grandmother in a rented house. Kapil Jaiswal applicant no.1 was
also staying in the same colony and he became friendly with opposite party no.2 and with a promise
to marry, he established physical relationship with opposite party no.2 which continued, on several
occasions at different places over a period of about two years. When the opposite party no.2
requested the applicant no.1 to fulfill his promise and perform marriage with her, he gave some
excuses, therefore, opposite party no.2 stated that she will proceed in accordance with law. After
coming to know about the aforesaid situation, the parents of applicant no.1 were ready to solemnize
marriage of applicant no.1 with opposite party no.2. Accordingly, on 27.10.2023 with intent to cheat
and gave an impression that applicant no.1 would marry the opposite party no.2, engagement was
performed. After the aforesaid engagement ceremony, applicant no.1 continued to have a physical
relationship with opposite party no.2, however, he never married. Therefore, an application was
given by opposite party no.2 for lodging the present FIR.
4. After investigation, charge sheet has been submitted under Sections 376, 504, 506 I.P.C. &
Section 3/4 D.P. Act, against the applicants, on the basis of statements of victim recorded u/s 161
and 164 Cr.P.C. and other charge sheet witnesses. Discharge application was moved by the
applicants on 29.10.2024, which has been rejected by order dated 30.11.2024, hence, the present
application.
5. Learned counsel for the applicants submits that neither from the version of the FIR nor in any
statements of charge sheet witnesses prima facie case is made out in the offences in which charge
sheet has been submitted against the applicants. The order dated 30.11.2024 has been passed in a
mechanical manner without application of judicial mind. He further submits that there is no
allegation against the applicant nos.2 and 3 regarding mental and physical torture of opposite party
no.2 raising any dowry demand, therefore, offence u/s 3/4 D.P. Act is not made out against
applicant nos.2 and 3 as well as the applicant no.1, who was in a consensual relationship with
opposite party no.2. He further contends that charge sheet has been submitted placing reliance
upon the Chats of Instagram and WhatsApp Messages, which have not been sent for examination,
therefore, it is not the authentic evidence on the basis of which it could be said that offence under
the relevant sections, in which charge sheet has been submitted, is made out against the applicants.
He further contends that the present case has been lodged in order to exert pressure upon the
applicants as applicant no.1 is ready and willing to perform marriage to the opposite party no.2. He
further submits that without considering the aforesaid fact that applicant no.1 and opposite party
no.2 were friendly for the past two years and opposite party no.2 willingly engaged in a physical
relationship with applicant no.1, it cannot be said that applicant no.1 has intention to cheat for not
marrying the opposite party no.2. Therefore, the impugned order dated 30.11.2024 may be set aside
and proceedings may be quashed.
6. Learned A.G.A. on the other hand submits that from the version of FIR as well as statements of
victim recorded under Sections 161 and 164 Cr.P.C., offence under the relevant sections is made out
as there are clear allegations that applicant no.1 from the very inception has intention not to marry
the opposite party no.2 and has established physical relationship with her. As regards the allegations
of dowry demand, from the statements recorded under Sections 161 and 164 Cr.P.C. it is clear that
Rs.50,000/- was given to the applicants, which was taken as loan by opposite party no.2. He further
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127162862/ 2
Kapil Jaiswal And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
submits that statements of charge sheet witnesses have also not been annexed, from which it can be
seen that from the arguments as placed by learned counsel for the applicants prima facie case under
the relevant sections is made out or not. In support of his submission, he has relied upon judgement
of Supreme Court passed in Kaptan Singh Vs. State of U.P., (2021) 9 SCC 35.
7. Learned A.G.A. further submits that after considering the grounds as taken in the discharge
application, the order impugned has been passed after application of judicial mind. There is no
illegality or infirmity in the impugned order passed the learned Court below and the other
submissions made by learned counsel for the applicant related to disputed questions of fact, which
cannot be seen here.
8. I have considered the submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have gone
through the records of the present application.
9. All the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the applicants relate to disputed questions of
fact. The court has also been called upon to adjudge the testimonial worth of prosecution evidence
and evaluate the same on the basis of various intricacies of factual details which have been touched
upon by the learned counsel. The veracity and credibility of material furnished on behalf of the
prosecution has been questioned and false implication has been pleaded.
10. Before proceeding to adjudge the validity of the impugned order it may be useful to cast a
fleeting glance to some of the representative cases decided by the Hon'ble Supreme Court which
have expatiated upon the legal approach to be adopted at the time of framing of the charge or at the
time of deciding whether the accused ought to be discharged. It shall be advantageous to refer to the
observations made by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of State of Bihar vs. Ramesh Singh 1977
(4) SCC 39 which are as follows :-
"4. Under S. 226 of the Code while opening the case for the prosecution the
prosecutor has got to describe the charge against the accused and State by what
evidence he proposes to prove the guilt of the accused. Thereafter, comes at the initial
stage, the duty of the Court to consider the record of the case and the documents
submitted therewith and to hear the submissions of the accused and the prosecution
in that behalf. The Judge has to pass thereafter an order either u/s. 227 or u/s. 228 of
the Code. If "the Judge considers that there is not sufficient ground for proceeding
against the accused, he shall discharge the accused and record his reasons for so
doing", so enjoined by s. 227. If, on the other hand, "the Judge is of opinion that there
is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence which
?................................?
(b) in exclusively triable by the court, he shall frame in writing a charge against the
accused," as provided in S. 228.
Reading the two provisions together in juxtaposition, as they have got to be, it would be clear that at
the beginning and the initial stage of the trial the truth, veracity and effect of the evidence which the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127162862/ 3
Kapil Jaiswal And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
prosecutor proposes to adduce are not to be meticulously judged. Nor is any weight to be attached to
the probable defence of the accused. It is not obligatory for the Judge at that stage of the trial to
consider in any detail and weigh in a sensitive balance whether the facts, if proved, would be
incompatible with the innocence of the accused or not. The standard of test and judgment which is
to be finally applied before recording a finding regarding the guilt or otherwise of the accused is not
exactly to be applied at this stage of deciding the matter under s. 227 and 228 of the Code. At that
stage the court is not to see whether there is sufficient ground for conviction of the accused or
whether the trial is sure to end in his conviction. Strong suspicion against the accused, if the matter
remains in the region of suspicion, cannot take the place of proof of his guilt at the conclusion of the
trial. But at the initial stage if there is a strong suspicion which leads the court to think that there is
ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence then it is not open to the court to
say that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. The presumption of the
guilt of the accused which is to be drawn at the initial stage is not in the sense of the law governing
the trial of criminal cases in France where the accused is presumed to be guilty unless the contrary is
proved. But it is only for the purpose of deciding prima facie whether the court should proceed with
the trial or not. If the evidence which the Prosecutor proposes to adduce to prove the guilt of the
accused even if fully accepted before it is challenged in cross-examination or rebutted by the
defence, if any, cannot show that the accused committed the offence, there will be no sufficient
ground for proceeding with the trial. An exhaustive list of the circumstances to indicate as to what
will lead to one conclusion or the other is neither possible nor advisable. We may just illustrate the
difference of the law by one more example. If the scales of pan as to the guilt or innocence of the
accused are something like even at the conclusion of the trial, then, on the theory of benefit of doubt
the case is to end in his acquittal. But if, on the other hand, it is so at the initial stage of making an
order under S. 227 or S. 228, then in such a situation ordinarily and generally the order which will
have to be made will be one under S. 228 and not under S. 227."
11. Aforesaid case was again referred to in another Apex Court's decision Superintendent and
Remembrance of Legal Affairs, West Bengal Versus Anil Kumar Bhunja AIR 1980 (SC) 52 and the
Apex Court proceeded to observe as follows:-
"18. It may be remembered that the case was at the stage of framing charges; the
prosecution evidence had not yet commenced. The Magistrate had, therefore, to
consider the above question on a general consideration of the materials placed before
him by the investigating police officer. At this stage, as was pointed out by this Court
in State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh, AIR 1977 SC 2018, the truth, veracity and effect of
the evidence which the prosecutor proposes to adduce are not to be meticulously
judged. The standard of test, proof and judgment which is to be applied finally before
finding the accused guilty or otherwise, is not exactly to be applied at the stage of
Section 227 or 228 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. At this stage, even a very
strong suspicion founded upon materials before the Magistrate, which leads him to
form a presumptive opinion as to the existence of the factual ingredients constituting
the offence alleged; may justify the framing of charge against the accused in respect
of the commission of that offence."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127162862/ 4
Kapil Jaiswal And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
12. In yet another case of Palwinder Singh Vs. Balvinder Singh reported in AIR 2009 SC 887, the
Apex Court had the occasion to reflect upon the scope of adjudication and its ambit at the time of
framing of the charge and also about the scope to consider the material produced by the accused at
that stage. Following extract may be profitably quoted to clarify the situation:-
"12. Having heard learned counsel for the parties, we are of the opinion that the High
Court committed a serious error in passing the impugned judgment insofar as it
entered into the realm of appreciation of evidence at the stage of the framing of the
charges itself. The jurisdiction of the learned Sessions Judge while exercising power
under Section 227 of the Code of Criminal Procedure is limited. Charges can be
framed also on the basis of strong suspicion. Marshalling and appreciation of
evidence is not in the domain of the Court at that point of time. This aspect of the
matter has been considered by this Court in state of Orissa v. Debendra Nath Padhi,
(2005) 1 SCC 568 wherein it was held as under :
"23. As a result of the aforesaid discussion, in our view, clearly the law is that at the
time of framing charge or taking cognizance the accused has no right to produce any
material. Satish Mehra's Case holding that the trial Court has powers to consider
even materials which the accused may produce at the stage of Section 227 of the Code
has not been correctly decided."
13. The following observations made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Sanghi Brothers
(Indore) Pvt. Ltd. v. Sanjay Choudhary reported in AIR (2009) SC 9 also reiterated the same
position of law :-
"10. After analyzing the terminology used in the three pairs of sections it was held
that despite the differences there is no scope for doubt that at the stage at which the
Court is required to consider the question of framing of charge, the test of a prima
facie case to be applied.
11. The present case is not one where the High Court ought to have interfered with
the order of framing the charge. As rightly submitted by learned counsel for the
appellant, even if there is a strong suspicion about the commission of offence and the
involvement of the accused, it is sufficient for the Court to frame a charge. At that
stage, there is no necessity of formulating the opinion about the prospect of
conviction. That being so, the impugned order of the High Court cannot be sustained
and is set aside. The appeal is allowed."
14. In fact, while exercising the inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr.P.C. or while wielding the
powers under Section 226 of the Constitution of India the quashing of the complaint or charge sheet
can be done only if it does not disclose any offence or if there is any legal bar which prohibits the
proceedings on its basis. The Apex Court decisions in R.P. Kapur Vs. State of Punjab AIR 1960 SC
866 and State of Haryana Vs. Bhajan Lal 1992 SCC(Cr.) 426 make the position of law in this regard
clear recognizing certain categories by way of illustration which may justify the quashing of a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127162862/ 5
Kapil Jaiswal And 2 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 3 March, 2025
complaint or charge sheet.
15. The submissions made by the learned counsel for the applicants counsel call for adjudication on
pure questions of fact which may be adequately adjudicated upon only by the trial court and while
doing so even the submissions made on points of law can also be more appropriately gone into by
the trial court in this case. This Court does not deem it proper, and therefore cannot be persuaded to
have a pre-trial before the actual trial begins. A threadbare discussion of various facts and
circumstances, as they emerge from the allegations made against the accused, is being purposely
avoided by the Court for the reason, lest the same might cause any prejudice to either side during
trial. But it shall suffice to observe that the perusal of the F.I.R. and the material collected by the
Investigating Officer on the basis of which the charge sheet has been submitted makes out a prima
facie case against the accused at this stage and this Court does not find any justifiable ground to set
aside the impugned order refusing the discharge of the accused. This court has not been able to
persuade itself to hold that no case against the accused has been made out or to hold that the charge
is groundless.
16. The prayer for quashing or setting aside the impugned order dated 30.11.2024 is refused as I do
not see any illegality, impropriety and incorrectness in the impugned order or the proceedings
under challenge. There is absolutely no abuse of court's process perceptible in the same. The present
matter also does not fall in any of the categories recognized by the Supreme Court which might
justify interference by this Court in order to upset or quash them.
17. With the above observations, this application is rejected.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Rahul.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127162862/ 6
