Karam Singh vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
Karam Singh vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
LPSW No. 229/2017
Reserved on 23.05.2023.
Pronounced on 05 .06.2023.
Karam Singh ..... petitioner (s)
Through :- Mr Ajay Sharma Advocate.
Mr. Atul Verma Advocate.
V/s
Union of India and others .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. Vishal Sharma DSGI.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
Sanjeev Kumar, J.
1 The appellant, an enrolled constable in Central Reserve Police Force ['CRPF'], was, in the year
2001, posted in Headquarter 138 Bn. CRPF located at Durgapur, West Bengal. On 04.01.2002, the
appellant along with three other constables was deputed for collection of goods from Government
Stores, Group Centre CRPF Ban Talab, Jammu. The Group was headed by Sh. S.K.Sahana, Head
Constable in CRPF. The appellant along with other CRPF personnel reported at Group Centre Ban
Talab, Jammu on 07.01.2002. The appellant left his associates at the Group Centre on 09.01.2002
and absented from duty without any leave or permission up to 26.01.2002, when he on his own,
reported at Headquarter 138 Bn., Durgapur, West Bengal before the Competent Authority. For this
act, the appellant was found to have committed offences under Section 9(f) and Section 10(p) of the
Central Reserve Police Force Act, 1949 ['the Act']. The appellant was tried for the commission of the
aforesaid offences by respondent No.4 i.e the Commandant of the Batallion in the exercise of his
powers as Chief Judicial Magistrate. Respondent No.4, in the exercise of his powers of CJM,
conducted trial of the appellant and vide his order dated 29.01.2002 recorded a finding that the
appellant had, on 09.01.2002, left his associates at the Group Centre Ban Talab, Jammu, without
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155129913/ 1
Karam Singh vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
any reasonable cause and without any leave or lawful permission. The appellant was, thus, found to
have deserted from the Group Centre Ban Talab, Jammu, though, he, on his own, had later reported
for his duty on 26.01.2002 at the Battalion Headquarter in Durgapur, West Bengal. The appellant
was, thus, found guilty of offences under Sections 9(f) and 10 (p) of the Act and was sentenced to
three months' simple imprisonment. On 29.01.2002 itself, the Commandant-respondent No.4
herein, in the exercise of his powers conferred under Section 12(1) of the Act, issued order No.
P.VIII.II/2002-138-Estt-II dated 29.01.2002 whereby the appellant was dismissed from service
considering him not fit to be retained in the service. 2 Feeling aggrieved by the order of dismissal
passed by respondent No.4, the appellant filed a representation before the Hon'ble Minister for
Home Affairs, Government of India. The said representation was forwarded by the Ministry to the
Deputy Inspector General, CRPF Durgapur i.e respondent No.3. The representation was treated as
an appeal in terms of Rule 28 of the Central Reserve Police Force Rules, 1955 ['the Rules']. The
Appellate Authority i.e respondent No.3, though, did not accept the explanation tendered by the
appellant in respect of his having deserted the party from the Group Centre, Ban Talab, Jammu, yet,
ordered reinstatement of the appellant giving him the benefit of Administrative lacuna which, as per
the appellate Authority, was committed by respondent No.4. The appeal was allowed by respondent
No.3 primarily on the ground that, before imposing the penalty of dismissal from service, the
Disciplinary Authority had not given him an opportunity of personal hearing and that, the order of
dismissal was mechanical and non-speaking. The appellate Authority also observed that, in the
absence of any reasons forthcoming from the impugned order before it, it was not possible to find
out as to how the Disciplinary Authority reached a conclusion that he was not fit to be retained in
the service and deserved dismissal from service. The appellant was ordered to be reinstated with a
direction to the Disciplinary Authority to take action against the appellant as a result of his
conviction in the prescribed manner afresh after providing an opportunity of personal hearing. 3
Acting in compliance with the order of the Appellate Authority, respondent No.4 reinstated the
appellant in service vide his order dated 27.06.2003 and passed a fresh order bearing
No.P.VIII-11/02-138-EC-II dated 26.09.2003 after providing a personal hearing to the appellant
and dismissed the appellant from service again.
4 The appellant impugned the order dated 26.09.2003 in SWP No. 764/2004. The impugned order
was assailed by the appellant, inter alia, on the ground that his dismissal from service, in terms of
the order impugned in the writ petition, was clearly in violation of Rule 27 of the Rules, in that, the
punishment of dismissal from service was inflicted upon him without holding departmental enquiry
as envisaged under clause (c) Rule 27 of the Rules. The appellant, however, gave up his challenge to
order dated 29.01.2002 passed by respondent No.4 acting as CJM whereby the appellant had been
held guilty of the charges under sections 9 (f) and 10(p) of the Act and sentenced to simple
imprisonment of three months. The Writ Court, thus, dismissed the writ petition of the appellant as
not pressed insofar as challenge to the order dated 29.01.2002 was concerned. Having done so, the
Writ Court considered the rival contentions put forth by learned counsel for both the sides and,
having gone through the relevant record, came to the conclusion that Rule 27 of the Rules was not
attracted in the case, in that, the dismissal of the appellant from service under Section 12 of the Act
did not require any formal enquiry to be conducted regarding misconduct of the appellant. The Writ
Court, however, opined that Section 12 of the Act gives a discretion to the Disciplinary Authority and
exercise of such discretion would depend upon the facts and circumstances of the case proved
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155129913/ 2
Karam Singh vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
against an individual. In a nutshell, the Writ Court did not agree with any of the contentions raised
by learned counsel on behalf of the appellant and dismissed the writ petition being devoid of any
merit vide its order and judgment dated 03.07.2012. It is this order and judgment of the Writ Court
which is called in question before us. 5 Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record
of the case.
6 Mr. Ajay Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, at the outset, sought to impugn the
judgment of conviction and sentence dated 29.01.2002 passed by respondent No.4 acting as CJM on
the ground that the entire trial conducted by respondent No.4 was de hors the Code of Criminal
Procedure and, therefore, vitiated in law. He would submit that, if the order of conviction and
sentence passed by respondent No.4 is held bad, the order of dismissal, which is passed on the basis
of imprisonment of the appellant for three months pursuant to order of conviction dated 29.01.2002
will automatically go. He would argue that, if the basis is knocked, then the entire edifice built on it,
is bound to crumble and fall. He even relied upon the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of State of Punjab vs Davinder Pal Singh Bhuller and others, (2011) 14 SCC 770 wherein the
Supreme Court has explained the maxim "sublato fundamento cadit opus"
and held that, if initial action is not in consonance with law, all subsequent and
consequential proceedings would fall through for the reason that illegality strikes at
the root of the order and in such a fact situation, the legal maxim "sublato
fundamento cadit opus" which means that foundation being removed,
structure/work falls would come into play. We could have spared some time to
consider the proposition of law propounded by Mr. Ajay Sharma, learned counsel for
the appellant supported with the judgment of the Supreme Court rendered in the case
of Davinder Pal Singh Bhuller (supra), but, we are afraid, we cannot do so, for the
simple reason that the appellant has already given up before the Writ Court his
challenge to the impugned order of conviction and sentence passed by respondent
No.4 dated 29.01.2002. The Writ Court has dismissed the writ petition of the
appellant to the extent of aforesaid relief. Once the appellant accepts that there is
nothing wrong with the initial action i.e the conviction recorded and the sentence
imposed on the appellant by respondent No.4, the consequential action cannot fall
through, unless it is otherwise vitiated independently of the foundational act. The
maxim "sublato fundamento cadit opus" as explained by the Hon'ble Supreme Court
shall not be attracted.
7 Having held thus, we shall now proceed to consider the next submission of Mr.
Sharma, learned counsel for the appellant that, dismissal of a person from CRPF, in
terms of Section 12 (1) of the Act cannot be ordered, unless a departmental enquiry,
in terms of Rule 27 of the Rules, is conducted. 8 To appreciate the argument put forth
by Mr. Sharma, it is necessary to make reference to Section 9 and 10 of the Act.
Section 9 enumerates more heinous offences which amongst others, include
'desertion from Force'. Similarly, Section 10 catalogues less heinous offences and
offence specified in clauses (e) to (l) of Section 9 of the Act, if committed while not on
active duty, is a less heinous offence. Section 11 deals with minor punishments that a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155129913/ 3
Karam Singh vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
Commandant or any other authority or officer as may be prescribed, may, inflict, in
addition to the punishments of suspension or dismissal. Reduction in rank; fine of
any amount exceeding one month's pay and allowances; confinement to quarters etc.,
are amongst the minor punishments that can be awarded to a delinquent member of
the Force. 9 It would be appropriate if we reproduce Section 11(1) of the Act herein
below. It reads thus:
"11. Minor punishments:-
(1) The Commandant or any other authority or officer as may be prescribed, may,
subject to any rules made under this Act, award in lieu of, or in addition to,
suspension or dismissal any one or more of the following punishments to any
member of the Force whom he considers to be guilty of disobedience, neglect of duty,
or remissness in the discharge of any duty or of other misconduct in his capacity as a
member of the Force, that is to say,--
(a) reduction in rank;
(b) fine of any amount not exceeding one month's pay and allowances;
(c) confinement to quarters, lines or camp for a term not exceeding one month;
(d) confinement in the quarter-guard for not more than twenty-
eight days, with or without punishment drill or extra guard, fatigue or other duty; and
(e) removal from any office of distinction or special emolument in the Force.
10 From a reading of Section 11 (1) of the Act, it is evident that the Commandant or any other
prescribed Authority is empowered to award, in lieu of or in addition to, suspension or dismissal any
one or more of the punishments enumerated from clauses (a) to (l) to any member of the Force.
Though, the heading of Section 11 is misleading as, apart from the minor punishments that a
Commandant or the prescribed Authority can impose on the errant or delinquent member of the
Force, the Commandant or any other prescribed Authority can also impose the punishment of
dismissal. 11 Viewed thus, the dismissal of a member of the Force is a punishment other than the
minor punishment which is also within the power and competence of the Disciplinary Authority.
Section 12 of the Act stands on a different pedestal . It also provides for dismissal of a person from
the Force who has been sentenced under the Act to imprisonment of any term. As rightly analysed
by the Writ Court, the dismissal under Section 11 of the Act is by way of punishment, whereas the
dismissal envisaged under section 12 of the Act is a disciplinary action which the Competent
Authority may take against a person who has been sentenced under the Act to imprisonment of any
term. To understand it better, it is necessary to set out Section 12 also herein below.
12. Place of imprisonment and liability to dismissal on imprisonment:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155129913/ 4
Karam Singh vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
(1) Every person sentenced under this Act to imprisonment may be dismissed from
the Force, and shall further be liable to forfeiture of pay, allowance and any other
moneys due to him as well as of any medals and decorations received by him.
(2) Every such person shall, if he is so dismissed, be imprisoned in the prescribed
prison, but if he is not also dismissed from the Force, he may, if the Court or the
Commandant so directs, be confined in the quarter-guard or such other place as the
Court or the Commandant may consider suitable.
12 Having brought out the distinction between the dismissal under Section 11 and dismissal under
section 12 of the Act, we now turn to Rule 27 of the Rules. Rule 27 is a part of Chapter VI of the
Rules and reads thus:
"27. Procedure for the Award of punishments:-
(a) The punishments shown as Items 1 to 11 in column 2 of the table below may be
inflicted or non-gazetted officers and men of the various ranks shown in each of the
headings of columns 3 to 6, by the authorities named below such headings under the
conditions mentioned in column 7.
S.No. Punishment Subedar Sub- Others Consts remarks (inspector) Inspect except & or Const &
enrolled enrolled follower follower s s 1 Dismissal or DIGP DIGP Comdt. Comdt. To be inflicted
after removal formal departmental from Force enquiry 2 Reduction to DIGP DIGP Comdt. Comdt.
To be inflicted after a lower time formal departmental scale of pay, enquiry grade, post or service 3
Reduction to DIGP DIGP Comdt. Comdt. To be inflicted after a lower formal departmental stage in
the enquiry time scale of pay for a specified period 4 Compulsory DIGP DIGP Comdt. Comdt. To be
inflicted after retirement formal departmental enquiry 5 Fine of any DIGP DIGP Comdt. Comdt. To
be inflicted after amount not formal departmental exceeding enquiry one month's pay and
allowances 6 Confinement - - - Comdt. To be inflicted after in the formal departmental Quarter
enquiry Guard exceeding seven days but not more than twenty eight days with or without
punishment drill or extra guard fatigue or other duty.
7 Stoppage of DIGP DIGP Comdt. Comdt.
increment
8 Removal DIGP DIGP Comdt. Comdt. May be inflicted
from any without a formal
office of departmental enquiry
distinction
or special
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155129913/ 5
Karam Singh vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
emolument
in the Force
9 Comdt. Comdt. Assitt. Asstt.
Censure
Comdt. Comdt
or Coy or Coy
Comdr. Comdr.
Confinement
10 to quarter - - - Comdt.
Guard for
not more
than seven
days with or
without
punishment
or extra
guard
fatigue or
other duty
Confinement
11 to quarters - - - Comdt.
lines, camp,
punishment
drill, fatigue
duties etc.
for a term
not
exceeding
one month
Explanation:
(a) Dismissal of a member of the Force precludes him from being re-employed in Government
service, while removal of any such member form the Force shall not be disqualification for any
future employment (other than an employment in the Central Reserve Police Force) under the
Government.
,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155129913/ 6
Karam Singh vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
(b) When non-gazetted Officers or men of the various ranks are to be punished for any offence, a
departmental enquiry, if necessary under clause (a), shall be held by the Commandant or other
superior officer under the orders of the Commandant, provided that when the charge is against an
officer of the rank of Subedar (Inspector) or Sub-Inspector the enquiry shall be held by an authority
to be designated for the purpose by the Deputy Inspector-General. Where the officer conducting the
enquiry in the case of a Subedar (Inspector) or a Sub-Inspector considers that a punishment [under
items (1) to (5) and (7)] of the Table is called for, he shall complete the departmental proceedings
and forward the departmental proceedings and forward the same to the Deputy Inspector General
for orders.
(c) The procedure for conducting a departmental enquiry shall be as follows:-
(1) The substance of the accusation shall be reduced to the form of a written charge
which should be as precise as possible. The charge shall be read out to the accused
and a copy of it given to him at least 48 hrs. before the commencement of the
enquiry. (2) At the commencement of the enquiry the accused shall be asked to enter
a plea of "Guilty" or "Not Guilty" after which evidence necessary to establish the
charge shall be let in. The evidence shall be material to the charge and may either be
oral or documentary, if oral:
(i) it shall be direct;
(ii) it shall be recorded by the Officer conducting, the enquiry himself in the presence
of the accused;
(iii) the accused shall be allowed to cross examine the witnesses.
(3) When documents are relied upon in support of the charge, they shall be put in
evidence as exhibits and the accused shall, before he is called upon to make his
defence be allowed to inspect such exhibits.
(4) The accused shall then be examined and his statement recorded by the officer
conducting the enquiry. If the accused has pleaded guilty and does not challenge the
evidence on record, the proceedings shall be closed for orders. If he pleads "Not
guilty", he shall be required to file a written statement and a list of such witnesses as
he may wish to cite in his defence within such period, which shall in any case be not
less than a fortnight, as the officer conducting enquiry may deem reasonable in the
circumstances of the case. If he declines to file a written statement, he shall again be
examined by the officer conducting the enquiry on the expiry of the period allowed.
(5) If the accused refuses to cite any witnesses or to produce any evidence in his
defence, the proceedings shall be closed for orders. If he produces any evidence the
officer conducting the enquiry shall proceed to record the evidence. If the officer
conducting the enquiry considers that the evidence of any witness or any document
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155129913/ 7
Karam Singh vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
which the accused wants to produce in his defence is not material to the issues
involved in the case he may refuse to call such witness or to allow such document to
be produced in evidence, but in all such cases he must briefly record his reasons for
considering the evidence inadmissible. When all relevant evidence has been brought
on record, the proceedings shall be closed for orders.
(6) If the Commandant has himself held the enquiry, he shall record his findings and
pass orders where he has power to do so.
If the enquiry has been held by any officer other than the Commandant, the officer conducting the
enquiry shall forward his report together with the proceedings to the Commandant who shall record
his findings and pass order where he has power to do so.
(cc) Notwithstanding anything contained in this rule-
(i) Where any penalty is imposed on a member of the Force on the ground of conduct which has led
to his conviction on a criminal charge: or
(ii) Where the authority competent to impose the penalty is satisfied for reasons to be recorded by it
in writing that is not reasonably practicable to hold an enquiry in the manner provided in these
rules: or
(iii) Where the Director General is satisfied that in the interest of security of the State, it is not
expedient to hold any enquiry in the manner provided in these rules, the authority competent to
impose the penalty may consider the circumstances of the case and make such order thereon as it
deems fit.
(ccc) When a member of the Force has been tried and acquitted by a criminal court, he shall not be
punished departmentally under this rule on the same charge or on a similar charge upon the
evidence cited in the criminal case, whether actually led or not except with the prior sanction of the
Inspector General". 13 From reading of Rule 27 of the Rules, it is abundantly clear that the
punishment of dismissal or removal from service of an enrolled constables and enrolled followers
can be inflicted by the Commandant after formal departmental enquiry. As rightly concluded by the
Writ Court, the dismissal referred to in item No.1 of Rule 27 is a dismissal referable to Section 11 of
the Act. It is, thus, beyond any pale of doubt that if the Disciplinary Authority has to dismiss a
member of the Force as a mark of punishment, it can do so only after conducting a formal
departmental enquiry, procedure whereof is elaborately prescribed in Rule 27 (c). Section 12 gives a
discretion to the Disciplinary Authority to dismiss from the Force a person sentenced under the Act
to imprisonment. The sine qua non for exercising such discretion is the sentence of imprisonment
pronounced by the competent Authority on a member of the Force. The Competent Authority is, of
course, required to take an informed decision with regard to retention or otherwise of such
employee having regard to the facts and circumstances leading to misconduct or commission of
offence for which he has been sentenced to imprisonment. Such order would only require a notice of
hearing to be given to the delinquent member of the Force, so that he could persuade the competent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155129913/ 8
Karam Singh vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
Authority not to dismiss him from force simply on the ground that he has been sentenced to
imprisonment. This notice of hearing is not specifically envisaged under Section 12 of the Act, but, is
the requirement of the principles of natural justice, so that the ultimate decision that is taken by the
Disciplinary Authority is, just, fair and equitable. We, therefore, fully concur with the view of the
Writ Court that, for order the dismissal of a member from the Force on the ground of such member
having been sentenced under the Act to imprisonment, no departmental enquiry as envisaged under
Rule 27 of the Rules is called for. Rule 27, as explained above, operates in different situation. We
reiterate the view of the Writ Court that the dismissal, in terms of Section 12 (1) of the Act, is not a
punishment requiring a formal departmental enquiry under Rule 27 (a) and (c) of the Rules.
14 Assuming, though it is not correct, that, even for dismissal from the Force under section 12 of the
Act, formal departmental enquiry, in terms of
(c) of Rule 27, is required, yet, clause (cc) of Rule 27 exempts conduct of departmental enquiry
where any penalty is imposed on a member of the Force on the ground of conduct which has led to
his conviction on a criminal charge. The charge under Section 9 (f) which is a more heinous offence
under the Act and the charge under section 10 (p) which is a less heinous offence is, in any case, a
criminal charge. The appellant has been tried in a judicial trial conducted by the respondent No.4
vested with the powers of CJM. Rule 36 of the Rules clearly provides that, all trials in relation to any
one of the offences specified in Sections 9 or 10 of the Act shall be held in accordance with the
procedure laid down in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1898. In terms of Section 16 of the Act, the
Central Government is empowered to invest the Commandant or an Assistant Commandant with
the powers of a Magistrate of any class for the purpose of enquiring into or trying any offence
committed by a member of the Force and punishable under the Act. 15 Viewed from any angle, more
particularly in the context of Section 16 of the Act read with Rule 36 of the Rules, the trial conducted
against the appellant was a judicial trial held by the CJM as per the provisions of Code of Criminal
Procedure. That being the position, if we treat the dismissal of the appellant from the Force as a
penalty imposed on the ground of conduct which has led to his conviction on a criminal charge, even
then by virtue of provisions of clause (cc) of Rule 27 of the Rules, no departmental enquiry was
required to be conducted in the matter. 16 This brings us to the last contention of Mr. Sharma,
learned counsel for the appellant that the Disciplinary Authority ie respondent No.4, who was
directed by the Appellate Authority to provide a personal hearing to the appellant and pass a
speaking order, has neither performed his duty in accordance with law, in that, the appellant was
not given an adequate opportunity to represent his case, nor the order impugned in the writ petition
is supported by any reasons.
17 We have given thoughtful consideration to the strenuous arguments addressed by Mr. Sharma,
but, we regret our inability to agree with him. As is clearly noticed by the Writ Court, that not only
the appellant was given an opportunity of hearing, but, the Disciplinary Authority has also recorded
reasons as to why the appellant was not fit to be retained in service. The Disciplinary Authority has
not only taken note of misconduct of the appellant who had without any leave or permission from
the competent Authority deserted the party while on active duty, but had also misbehaved with the
Authority even during the hearing that was provided to him before pronouncing the impugned order
of dismissal. The Writ Court has also rightly come to the conclusion that, having regard to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155129913/ 9
Karam Singh vs Union Of India And Others on 5 June, 2023
conduct of the appellant throughout, the penalty of dismissal imposed upon him was not strikingly
disproportionate to the act of indiscipline proved against him. 18 Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for
the appellant has relied upon a couple of judgment to bring home his point that, power given to the
Disciplinary Authority under Section 12 of the Act to dismiss a member of the Force from service is
discretionary and such discretion is required to be exercised on well known parameters. While there
is no quarrel with the proposition propounded by Mr. Sharma, yet, we are of the considered opinion
that, in the given facts and circumstances of the case, the Disciplinary Authority rightly exercised the
discretion. The reasons for taking action of dismissal against the appellant are clearly spelt out in
the impugned order. The judgments cited by Mr. Sharma, learned counsel for the appellant before
us were also cited before the Writ Court and the Writ Court has elaborately dealt with each
judgment. Referring to those judgments, yet again and distinguishing them on facts as is done by
the Writ Court, would only be at the cost of repetition which we would like to avoid being totally
undesirable and an exercise in futility.
19 For the foregoing reasons, we do not find any error of fact and law in the judgment impugned
which is a well reasoned. The appeal is found to be without merit and the same is, accordingly,
dismissed.
(PUNEET GUPTA) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
Jammu
05..06.2023
Sanjeev
Whether order is speaking:Yes
Whether order is reportable:Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/155129913/ 10
