Karan Singh Lodhi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 8 April, 2019
Karan Singh Lodhi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 8 April,
2019
1
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Cr.A. No.2985/2019
(Karan Singh Lodhi Vs The State of M.P. & Another)
Gwalior, Dated : 08.04.2019
Shri Vikas Saxena, learned counsel for the appellant.
Shri Kshitiz Sharma, learned Public Prosecutor for the
respondent/State.
None for respondent No.2/complainant.
Present appeal has been filed under Section 14-A (2) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes
(Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989 (for brevity 'the Atrocities Act') against the order dated
13.03.2019 passed by Special Judge (Atrocities), Shivpuri, whereby the application of the appellant
under Section 438 of Cr.P.C. seeking anticipatory bail has been rejected in connection with Crime
No.29/2019 registered at Police Station Pichhore, District Shivpuri for the offences under Sections
323, 294, 506, 341 34 of IPC and Section 3(1) n] /k] o 3¼2½5d of SC/ST Act.
As per prosecution case, on 17.01.2019, complainant along with his father and wife has lodged
report at Police Station Pichhore, District Shivpuri to the effect that when he was returning back
from Pichhore after taking treatment of his wife on his motorcycle, then at about 7-30 PM when he
reached Sanwar bridge, then Karan Singh Lodhi assaulted him with stick and fists and kicks and
also gave filthy languages against his caste.
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Karan Singh Lodhi Vs The State of M.P. & Another) It is
submitted by counsel for the applicant that the applicant has been falsely implicated in the offence
on account of previous enmity due to property dispute. It is also submitted that the applicant is a
permanent resident of village Bhitargua, District Pichhore and there is no possibility of his fleeing
away from justice, hence prays for grant of anticipatory bail.
In support of his contention, learned counsel for the applicant placed reliance on a decision
rendered by the Apex Court in the case of Gorige Pentaiah Vs. State of A.P. And others (2008 (5)
M.P.H.T. 247 (SC) wherein the Apex Court held as under:-
"In the instance case, the allegation of respondent No.3 in the entire complaint is that
on 27.05.2004, the appellant abused them with the name of their caste. According to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113895306/ 1
Karan Singh Lodhi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 8 April, 2019
the basic ingredients of Section 3(1)(x) of the Act, the complainant ought to have
alleged that the accused-appellant was not a member of the Scheduled Caste or a
Scheduled Tribe and he (respondent No.3) was intentionally insulted or intimidated
by the accused with intent to humiliate in a place within public view. In the entire
complaint, nowhere it is mentioned that the accused-appellant was not a member of
the Scheduled Caste or a Scheduled Tribe and he intentionally insulted or
intimidated with intent to humiliate respondent No.3 in a place within public view.
When the basic ingredients of the offence are missing in the complaint, then
permitting such a complaint to continue and to compel the appellant to face the
rigmarole of the criminal trial would be totally unjustified leading to abuse of process
of law."
Leaned Public Prosecutor for the respondent/State opposed the HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH (Karan Singh Lodhi Vs The State of M.P. & Another) application and prayed for its
rejection by contending that on the basis of allegation and material available on record, no case for
grant of bail is made out.
Heard the counsel for the parties and perused the case diary. However, considering the principles
laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Arnesh Kumar Vs. State of Bihar (2014) 8 SCC 273, it
is directed that in offences involving punishment upto seven years' imprisonment the police may
resort to the extreme step of arrest only when the same is necessary and the applicant does not
cooperate in the investigation. The applicant should first be summoned to cooperate in the
investigation. If the applicant cooperates in the investigation, then the occasion of his arrest should
not arise.
For ready reference and convenience, the guidelines laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of
Arnesh Kumar (Supra) are enumerated below:-
7.1 From a plain reading of the provision u/S.41 Cr.P.C., it is evident that a person
accused of an offence punishable with imprisonment for a term which may be less
than seven years or which may extend to seven years with or without fine, cannot be
arrested by the police officer only on his satisfaction that such person had committed
the offence punishable as aforesaid. A police officer before arrest, in such cases has to
be further satisfied that such arrest is necessary to prevent such person from
committing any further offence; or for proper investigation of the case; or to prevent
the accused from causing the evidence of the offence to disappear; or tampering with
such evidence in any manner; or to prevent such person from making any
inducement, threat or promise to a witness so as to dissuade him from disclosing
such HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Karan Singh Lodhi Vs The State of
M.P. & Another) facts to the court or the police officer; or unless such accused person
is arrested, his presence in the court whenever required cannot be ensured. These are
the conclusions, which one may reach based on facts.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113895306/ 2
Karan Singh Lodhi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 8 April, 2019
7.2 The law mandates the police officer to state the facts and record the reasons in
writing which led him to come to a conclusion covered by any of the provisions
aforesaid, while making such arrest. The law further requires the police officers to
record the reasons in writing for not making the arrest.
7.3 In pith and core, the police officer before arrest must put a question to himself,
why arrest? Is it really required ? What purpose it will serve ? What object it will
achieve ? It is only after these questions are addressed and one or the other
conditions as enumerated above is satisfied, the power of arrest needs to be
exercised. Before arrest first the police officers should have reason to believe on the
basis of information and material that the accused has committed the offence. Apart
from this, the police officer has to be satisfied further that the arrest is necessary for
one or the more purposes envisaged by sub-
clauses (a) to (e) of clause (1) of Section 41 Cr.P.C.
9. Another provision i.e. Section 41-A Cr.P.C. aimed to avoid unnecessary arrest or threat of arrest
looming large on the accused requires to be vitalised. This provision makes it clear that in all cases
where the arrest of a person is not required under Section 41(1) Cr.P.C., the police officer is required
to issue notice directing the accused to appear before him at a specified place and time. Law obliges
such an accused to appear before the police officer and it further mandates that if such an accused
complies with the terms of notice he shall not be arrested, unless for reasons to be recorded, the
police officer is of the opinion that the arrest is necessary. At this stage also, the condition precedent
for arrest as envisaged under Section 41 Cr.P.C. has to be complied and shall be subject to the same
scrutiny by the Magistrate as aforesaid." In view of above and considering the principles laid down
by the Apex Court in the case of Arnesh Kumar (Supra) this Court is inclined to direct thus:-
(1) That, the police may resort to the extreme step of arrest only when the same is
necessary and the HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Karan Singh Lodhi Vs
The State of M.P. & Another) applicant fails to cooperate in the investigation.
(2) That, the applicant should first be summoned to cooperate in the investigation. If
the applicant cooperates in the investigation, then the occasion of his arrest should
not arise.
With the aforesaid directions, the present anticipatory bail application stands disposed of.
C.c.as per rules.
A copy of this order be sent to the Court concerned for compliance.
Certified copy as per rules.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113895306/ 3
Karan Singh Lodhi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 8 April, 2019
(Rajeev Kumar Shrivastava) Judge vv VALSALA VASUDEVAN 2019.04.10 VALSALA VASUDEVAN
2018.10.26 15:14:29 -07'00' 10:44:22
-07'00'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/113895306/ 4
