Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries
Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
Author: M.Nagaprasanna
Bench: M.Nagaprasanna
1
R
Reserved on : 21.08.2025
Pronounced on : 01.09.2025
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 01ST DAY OF SEPTEMBER, 2025
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA
WRIT PETITION No.29449 OF 2024 (GM - CPC)
BETWEEN:
KARNATAKA STATE MEDICAL SUPPLIES
CORPORATION LIMITED
REP. BY ITS AUTHORISED SIGNATORY
MR. SHIVA KUMAR
GENERAL MANAGER ADMIN AND PROCUREMENT
A COMPANY REGISTERED UNDER
THE COMPANIES ACT,2013
HAVING ITS REGISTERED OFFICE AT
NO.1, DR. SIDDAIAH PURANIK
KHB COLONY, MAGADI ROAD
BENGALURU - 560 079.
... PETITIONER
(BY SRI UDAYA HOLLA, SENIOR ADVOCATE FOR
SRI PRASHANTH S. H., ADVOCATE)
AND:
PLASTI SURGE INDUSTRIES PVT. LTD.
REGISTERED UNDER COMPANIES ACT, 1956
A-70, MIDC INDUSTRIAL AREA, PB NO. 95
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 1
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
AMRAVATI, MAHARASTRA - 444 607
REP. BY ITS AUTHORIZED SIGNATORY
MR. DHRUV DAGA
... RESPONDENT
(BY SRI CHRISTOPHER E., ADVOCATE)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226 AND
227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO CALL FOR
RECORDS IN COMM EXECUTION PETITION BEARING NO.517/2023
PENDING ON THE FILE OF THE LXXXVII ADDITIONAL CITY CIVIL
COURT, COMMERICAL COURT COMPLEX,(CCH-88) BANGALORE
(ANNX-S); QUASH THE EXECUTION PETITION BEARING NO.
517/2023 PENDING ON THE FILE OF THE LXXXVII ADDITIONAL
CITY CIVIL COURT, COMMERCIAL COURT COMPLEX, (CCH-88)
BANGALORE (ANNX-T) AND ETC.,
THIS WRIT PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED
FOR ORDERS ON 21.08.2025, COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT
THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:-
CORAM: THE HON'BLE MR JUSTICE M.NAGAPRASANNA
CAV ORDER
The petitioner/Karnataka State Medical Supplies Corporation
Limited is at the doors of this Court calling in question execution
proceeding in Commercial Execution Petition No.517 of 2023
pending before the LXXXVII Additional Civil and Sessions Judge,
Commercial Court, Bengaluru.
3
2. Heard Sri Udaya Holla, learned senior counsel appearing
for the petitioner and Sri E. Christopher, learned counsel appearing
for the respondent.
3. Facts in brief, germane, are as follows: -
3.1. The petitioner floats a tender for supply of drugs,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 2
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
chemicals and miscellaneous items connected to the drugs and
chemicals for the year 2017-18. The respondent emerges as the
successful bidder in respect of the tender and was consequently
issued a work order. The petitioner again floats a re-tender for
supply of disposable delivery kit. The respondent again participates
and emerges as the successful bidder in respect of the said tender
also and work order was issued to the respondent. In terms of
conditions of tender, the respondent executes a performance bank
guarantee for an amount of (cid:128)9,09,394/- in favour of the petitioner
and additional bank guarantee as necessary. After supplies were
completed, invoices were raised for release of an amount of
(cid:128)1,83,40,144/- payable to the respondent by the petitioner.
Alleging certain discrepancies in the list of invoices or payments
4
demanded, as also the alleged fact of several defectives and goods
returned, dispute arose with regard to payment. The respondent
who is an MSME, files a claim before the MSME Council. The Council
initiates conciliation proceedings as is necessary in law and on
failure of such conciliation before MSME, it refers the matter for
arbitration. It was referred to arbitration, owing to failure due to
the absence of the petitioner for conciliation proceedings.
3.2. An Arbitrator was appointed who passes an award
directing the petitioner to pay a sum of (cid:128)1,83,40,144/-. On non-
compliance with the arbitral award, the respondent files execution
petition in Execution No.517 of 2023 claiming an amount of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 3
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
(cid:128)4,02,35,197/-. The Commercial Court attaches movables of the
petitioner. On such attachment about (cid:128)65/- lakhs was paid. A writ
petition comes to be filed by the petitioner challenging the
proceedings in execution insofar as non-consideration of the plea of
the petitioner. The matter was remitted back to the hands of the
concerned Court. On such remand, the petitioner files an
application under Section 47 of the CPC seeking to urge new facts
with regard to forgery and cheating inter alia by the employees of
5
the petitioner/Corporation in connivance with the
respondent/Company. The concerned Court rejects the said
application in terms of its order dated 30-08-2024 holding that the
Court cannot go beyond the decree or beyond the award in the case
at hand and Section 47 of the CPC would not permit pleas to be
raised for the first time in execution.
4. The learned senior counsel Sri Udaya Holla appearing for
the petitioner would submit that the concerned Court ought to have
considered the application favourably in the light of the fact that
fraud would unravel everything. The award was the product of
fraud, as employees of the petitioner/Corporation and the
respondent had connived. Therefore, concealment of relevant
material facts before the Arbitration itself would amount to fraud.
He would seek to place reliance upon plethora of judgments to
buttress his submission, all of which would bear consideration qua
their relevance in the course of the order. He would, on this score,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 4
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
seek obliteration of complete execution proceedings.
6
5. Conversely, the learned counsel Sri E.Christopher
appearing for the respondent would vehemently refute the
submissions in contending that the writ petition itself is not
entertainable, as the relief that has to be sought by challenging the
arbitral award is now indirectly sought by filing the subject petition.
The petitioner has failed to challenge the arbitral award in terms of
the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 ('Act' for short).
Therefore, the petitioner cannot invoke the writ jurisdiction. He
would submit that the petitioner, after suffering an award, cannot
now in the execution petition ask the Court to go beyond the award
and bring out factor that was never urged at any stage before the
Arbitrator. The petitioner has always pleaded before the Executing
Court from time to time that it would make payment of the
decreetal amount and has in fact made payment of (cid:128)1.05/- crores
as on today, by way of deposit before the concerned Court. Having
so done, it would not be open to the petitioner to approach this
Court yet again, challenging the entire execution proceedings. The
petitioner does not challenge the order of the concerned Court
which rejects the application under Section 47 CPC, but challenges
the entire proceedings, which is a remedy that is unavailable to the
7
petitioner for not calling in question the arbitral award in question.
He would submit that fraud has to be proved by appropriate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 5
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
pleadings or it should be demonstrable without such pleading. None
of these factors exist in the case at hand. Therefore, the petition
should be dismissed with exemplary costs.
6. I have heard with anxiousness the submissions of
Sri Udaya Holla, the learned senior counsel for the petitioner, and of
Sri E Chirstopher, learned counsel for the respondent and have
perused the material on record.
SUCCINCT ESSENCE OF THE SUBMISSIONS:
7. The essence of the petitioner's case as articulated is
that, the arbitral award which forms the substratum of the
execution is itself vitiated by fraud, a fraud allegedly
perpetrated in unholy connivance between the officials of
the petitioner and the respondent-Company. The argument
is couched in the oft-repeated maxim that fraud unravels
everything. The essence of respondent's submission is that
the petition is a camouflage, an indirect attempt to do what
8
the petitioner could and should have done directly under
Section 34 of the Act. The petitioner is wanting to contend
grounds of fraud before the Executing Court, which cannot
be done. In the light of the aforesaid succinct essence, it
becomes necessary to notice the facts, beginning from the
award of the arbitrator.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 6
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
FACTS:
8. The afore-narrated facts and link in the chain of events are
all a matter of record. The contract between the petitioner and the
respondent is again a matter of record. MSME Council initiates
conciliation proceedings and the petitioner does not bother to get
represented. The matter is referred to arbitration. The petitioner
participates in the arbitration. The Arbitrator draws up an award
after hearing the parties. The award of the Arbitrator reads as
follows:
"Arbitral Award
a. The claim of balance payment u/s 15 of MSMED
Act of (cid:128)1,83,40,144/- for the goods supplied by
the applicant supplier Plasti Surge Industries
Private Limited against the non-applicant
Director Karnataka State Drug Logistics &
Warehousing Soc. Is hereby allowed.
9
b. Interest on delayed payment u/s 16 of the MSMED
Act, 2006 in respect of balance payment of the
applicant against the non-applicant is hereby allowed.
c. The admission period of 45 days allowed u/s 15 of the
MSMED Act, 2006 shall start from the subsequent day
of the date of acceptance of goods supplied by the
applicant.
d. The claim of interest is to be calculated as per Section
16 of the MSMED Act, 2006 till the date of realization
of the due amount.
e. Both the parties to file compliance report in
respect of present order to this Council within
three months from the date of issue of this
order.
Sd/- sd/-
A.D.Shinde G O Bharti,
Member Secretary Chairman, MSEF Council,
MSEF Council, Amravati. Amravati.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 7
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
Sd/- sd/-
Umesh Malu, Virendra Laddha
Member, MSEF Council, Member, MSEF Council,
Amravati. Amravati."
(Emphasis added)
The arbitral award is dated 8-07-2022. The petitioner does not
challenge the award despite passing of a year. The respondent then
initiates execution proceedings. In the execution proceedings order
of attachment was passed and payment of (cid:128)65/- lakhs was made
during the pendency of execution proceedings. The execution
10
proceedings come to be challenged before this Court in Writ Petition
No.5362 of 2024. A coordinate Bench, by order dated 26-02-2024,
disposes of the petition by the following order:
"6. Though several contentions have been urged
by both sides, having regard to the undisputed fact
that the petitioner had filed statement of objections to
the main execution petition on 06.02.2024, which has
not been considered by the Executing courtbefore
passing the impugned order of attachment, without
expressing any opinion on the merits/demerits of the
rival contentions and to provide sufficient and
reasonable opportunity to both parties, I deem it
appropriate to set aside the impugned order dated
06.02.2024 and direct the Executing court to consider
and pass appropriate order on or before 26.04.2024 by
taking into account / consideration the statement of
objections filed by the petitioner and after hearing
both sides in accordance with law.
7. In the result, I pass the following:-
ORDER
(i) Petition is hereby allowed.
(ii) The impugned order dated 06.02.2024 passed by the Executing court in Com.Ex.No.517/2023
directing attachment of movables of the petitioner is hereby set aside.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 8
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
(iii) The matter is remitted back to the Executing court for reconsideration afresh by taking into
account/ consideration the statement of objections filed by the petitioner and hear both sides and
pass appropriate orders in accordance with law on or before 26.04.2024.
(iv) All rival contentions on all aspects of the matter are kept open and no opinion is expressed on
the same.
(v) At the instance/request of the learned counsel for the respondent-Decree holder, the amount of
Rs.65 Lakhs already deposited by the petitioner- Judgment Debtor before the Executing court is
directed to be released/disbursed in favour of respondent Decree holder without prejudice to the
rights and contentions of the parties and making it subject to the final outcome of the Execution
proceedings."
(Emphasis supplied) The coordinate Bench remits the matter back to the Executing Court for
reconsideration afresh by taking into account the statement of objections filed by the petitioner,
hear both the parties and then pass necessary orders. The Court also recorded that (cid:128)65/- lakhs is
already deposited by the judgment debtor/ petitioner before the Executing Court. It was directed to
be released in favour of the respondent.
9. When the matter goes back to the concerned Court, the petitioner files an application under
Section 47 of the CPC bringing out several new grounds, for the first time before the Executing
Court, by way of statement of objections on the score that liberty was reserved by this Court to file
statement of objections and had further directed the objections to be considered by the Executing
Court. After remand from the hands of coordinate Bench, the concerned Court passes the following
order, on different dates:
"13-03-2024 Both counsels are present.
Advocate for Jdr filed memo along with copy of order passed by the Honorable High
Court of Karnataka in WP No.5362/2024 wherein, the attachment warrant of
movables issued by this Court has been set aside and trial Court is directed to
considered the matter afresh by hearing by both side.
Apart from this trail Court has been directed to disburse the amount of Rs.65 lakhs
that has been deposited by the Jdr, in favour of Dhr.
Further, trail Court has been directed dispose off the matter on or before 26.04.2024.
Office is hereby directed to release the above amount in favour Dhr.
Call on to hear on issuance of attachment warrant of movables by 18.03.2024."
... ... ...
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 9
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
23-04-2024:
ORDERS ON OBJECTIONS FILED BY THE J.DR TO THE MAIN EXECUTION
PETITION The D.hr. herein has filed the present Execution petition to execute the
arbitral award passed by Micro, Small Enterprises Facilitation Council in Reference
N.MH/03 /S/AMV/00204 dated 05-12-2022. On 12-01-2023 D.hr. deposited a sum
of (cid:128)1,03,700/- towards deficit of stamp duty and this Court issued attachment
warrant of movables against the J.Dr. Thereafter, notice was issued on the main
petition and I.A. to the J.Dr. On 24-11-2023, counsel for J.Dr. appeared. On
11-12-2023 J.Dr. deposited (cid:128)50.00 lakhs through D.D. On the same day considering
the oral submissions of both sides, this Court passed an order to keep the warrant of
attachment of movables in abeyance. Again on 14-12-2023 J.Dr. deposited (cid:128)15.00
lakhs. On 22-01-2024, J.Dr. prayed two weeks time to make balance amount. On
06-02-2024 objections was filed to the main petition, but no payment was made by
J.Dr. Hence, this Court issued attachment warrant of movables against the J.Dr.
2. This order was challenged by the J.Dr before the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka
in W.P.No.5362 of 2024. While disposing this writ petition, the Hon'ble High Court
remitted the matter back to the executing court for reconsidering the statement of
objections filed by the J.Dr herein and also directed the trial court to hear both sides
and pass appropriate orders in accordance with law on or before 26-04-2024. It was
also observed that all the rival contentions on all aspects of the matter are kept open
without expressing any opinion on the same. In view of this order, both counsel for
D.Hr. and J.Dr. argued on their respective pleadings.
3. Since objections was filed by J.Dr. to the main petition, this court heard the
counsel for J.Dr., who also filed his additional objections along with certain
documents and list of citations while addressing his arguments, the learned counsel
for J.Dr. drawn the attention of this court to his objections, wherein he has resisted
the execution of the decree for the following grounds:
i) Non delivery of goods.
ii) defective and returned goods
iii) Earnest money deposit/security deposited
iv) GST amount not paid correctly
v) Lab Testing amount
vi) Prices charged higher than the accepted tender prices.
While submitting his oral arguments, the counsel for J.Dr also made some statement that fraud has
been committed by both D.Hr and also the officials of J.Dr and same has to be adjudicated by this
Court. He further argued that this being an executing court as to reassess the grounds urged by him
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 10
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
in his objection and the decree or the award cannot be blindly executed. He further drawn the
attention of this Court to the provisions of Order 21 Rule 58 of CPC and submitted to the Court that
there is no need for J.Dr to file a separate suit to prove the above mentioned grounds and he can
prove the same before the executing court.
4. Per contra, the learned counsel for D.Hr made his submissions that this Court being an executing
Court has limited scope and it cannot go beyond the decree or award and also it cannot sit as an
appellate court or reassess, re- write its own judgment or the judgment rendered by the arbitrator or
the other Courts.
5. Since the point that was argued before the Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka by the J.Dr. was only
that his objections were not considered by this Court before issuing attachment warrant of
movables, the very limited question i.e., now before this court is whether this Court has right in
issuing attachment warrant of movables?
6. No doubt it is true that this Court has not passed any considered order on the objections filed by
the J.Dr before issuing the attachment warrant of movables.
7. The counsel for J.Dr relied on following decisions:
i) Bibhuti Bhusan Dutta v. Samarendra Nath Misra -
MANU/WB/0332/2002
ii) M.Abdul Kareem & Ors. v. State of Karnataka and others - MANU/KA/0256/2023.
iii) Gouriamma v. Yohannan Luckose -
MANU/KE/0276/2010
iv) Copy of the judgment in W.P.No.8352 of 2022 (GM -
CPC) connected with Writ Petition No.12935 of 2022 (GM-CPC).
v) Copy of the judgment in Civil Appeal No.4258 of 2022 dated 28-09-2022.
vi) Copy of the judgment in Ex.F.A.No.18/2010 & CM No.18758 of 2010 dated 05-07-2011.
8. The learned counsel for the D.Hr. also relied on the decision rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court
in (2009) 13 SCC 354 reported in Haryana Vidyut Prasaran Ningam Limited and another.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 11
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
9. I have carefully gone through the objections filed by the J.Dr and the decisions relied by both
D.Hr and the J.Dr. The first judgment relied by the J.Dr is Bibhuthi Bhusan Datta's case rendered
by Hon'ble High Court of Calcutta on the para- 6 of the judgment, the Hon'ble court has raised a
question to itself.
Q. How for the courts goes beyond the decree and in para-6 of the judgment, it was observed 'it is a
settled proposition of law that executing court cannot go beyond the decree or it can enter into
question that the decree sought to be executed was obtained by fraud or was collusive. The second
judgment in M.Abdul Kareem's case, Hon'ble High Court of Karnataka dealt with provisions under
Order 21 Rule 58, 97, 101, 103 of CPC. In 3rd judgment i.e., T.K. Marthandan Unnithan case,
Hon'ble High Court of Kerala dealt with Order 21 Rue 58 of CPC. Now the question that arise before
this court is:
Whether the Order 21 Rule 58 of CPC comes to be rescue of this J.Dr?
Section 2(10) of CPC provides definition for 'J.Dr means any person against whom a
decree has been passed or an order capable of execution has been made. If we peruse
the provision under Order 21 Rule 58 same is relating to adjudication of claims to or
objections to attachment of property. If this provision is read in whole, the same
provides some restrictions regarding execution of the decree i.e., Order 21 Rule 58
provides circumstances where executing court cannot execute the decree. Admittedly,
it is the J.Dr now who is objecting to the decree and not the 3rd party in capacity of
an objector. If we carefully peruse the execution petition and the objections, the
decree obtained by the D.Hr. for claim amount of (cid:128)4,02,35,197/- from the J.Dr and
the award is a arbitral award passed in Micro, Small Enterprises Facilitation Council
in Reference No.MH/03/S/AMV/00204 dated 5-12-2022. If we peruse the
objections filed by the Objector, the same are nothing but the grounds in disguise of
an appeal. In his objections, J.Dr. has raised various grounds disputing the payment
of amount due to the plaintiff due to those grounds. As discussed above, the very
limited question that revolves before this Court is whether this court is being a
executant court can go beyond the decree and again reopen the case, rewrite a fresh
judgment. Sitting over the award passed by the arbitrator.
10. the learned counsel for the D.Hr. while addressing his arguments relied on
Haryana Vidyut Prasaran Nigam's case rendered by Hon'ble Apex Court and in
para-17 and 18 of the judgment, Hon'ble Apex Court has clearly held:
17. As indicated hereinbefore, for the purpose of allowing an objection filed on behalf
of a judgment-debtor under Section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure, it was
incumbent on him to show that the decree was ex facie nullity. For the said purpose,
the court is precluded from making an in-depth scrutiny as regards the entitlement of
the plaintiff with reference to not only his claim made in the plaint but also the
defence set up by the judgment-debtor. As the judgment of the trial court could not
have been reopened, the correctness thereof could not have been put to question.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 12
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
18. It is also well known that an executing court cannot go behind the decree. If on a
fair interpretation of the judgment, order and decree passed by a court having
appropriate jurisdiction in that behalf, the reliefs sought for by the plaintiff appear to
have been granted, there is no reason as to why the executing court shall deprive him
from obtaining the fruits of the decree.
11. If we carefully peruse the objections raised by the J.Dr., decisions relied by both
sides, it is very clear that the remedy left for the J.Dr to prove the above said grounds
or only under Section 47 of the CPC by way of appeal and this court is precluded from
making in depth scrutiny in regard to the grounds urged by JDr. In his objections.
Further, this Court makes it clear, this Court being an executing Court cannot go
beyond the decree. For the above reasons, I hold that the objections filed by the J.Dr.
is not maintainable. In view of this D.Hr. is directed to take steps afresh for issue of
attachment warrant of movables."
Again, the petitioner defaulted in payment. Therefore, for the purpose of further payments, the
concerned Court again re-issues attachment warrant by the following order on 30-03-2024.
"30-08-2024:
Case called.
Jdr prays time to make further payment.
Re-issue attachment warrant of movables for balance amount if PF paid, returnable
by 21.09.2024."
(Emphasis added) The moment the aforesaid order is passed, the petitioner again knocks at the
doors of this Court with the present petition.
10. The issue now would be, whether the petitioner can plead what was not pleaded before the
Arbitrator for the first time in execution proceedings? Therefore, it is necessary to notice the
statutory landscape and its interpretation by the Apex Court and other High Courts.
LEGAL LANDSCAPE:
11. The petitioner seeks to breathe life into its cause by invoking fraud. Undoubtedly fraud, if
established, unravels everything, as it is always said fraud is infinite in variety -
sometimes audacious and sometimes insidious, yet always corrosive to justice. The Apex Court, has
in plethora of cases, echoed that principle in long line of its Authorities, upon which, the learned
senior counsel for the petitioner has placed reliance upon. A few of them which are necessary to be
considered would be noted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 13
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
The submission of the learned senior counsel is fraud unravels everything and it should not be
construed narrowly. Concealment of relevant and material facts, which should have been disclosed
before the Arbitrator, is an act of fraud. He places reliance on the following judgments.
11.1. The Apex Court in the case of VENTURE GLOBAL ENGINEERING v. SATYAM COMPUTER
SERVICES LIMITED1 has observed as follows:
".... .... .....
36. It is well known that fraud cannot be put in a straitjacket and it has a very wide connotation in
legal parlance. In the decision of the House of Lords in Reddaway (Frank) & Co. Ltd. v. George
Banham & Co. Ltd. [1896 AC 199: (1895-99) All ER Rep 133 (HL)], Lord Macnaghten explained the
multifarious aspects of fraud very lucidly, and which we quote:
"But fraud is infinite in variety; sometimes it is audacious and unblushing;
sometimes it pays a sort of homage to virtue, and then it is modest and retiring; it
would be honesty itself if it could only afford it. But fraud is fraud all the same; and it
is the fraud, not the manner of it, which calls for the interposition of the Court."
(AC at p. 221 of the Report).
37. The aforesaid elucidation by the learned Law Lord has also been accepted in the celebrated
treatise on fraud (see Kerr on Fraud and Mistake, 7th Edn., p. 1). Kerr has also referred to Story's
Equity Jurisprudence and defined "fraud" as:
"Fraud, in the contemplation of a civil court of justice, may be said to include
properly all acts, omissions, and concealments which involve a breach of legal or
equitable duty, trust or confidence, justly reposed, and are injurious to another, or by
which an undue or unconscientious advantage is taken of another."
38. In Indian law, namely, the Contract Act, the said common law doctrine of fraud has been
assimilated in Section 17 of the said Act. A very wide definition of "fraud" has been given, which is as
under:
(2010) 8 SCC 660 "17. 'Fraud' defined.--'Fraud' means and includes any of the
following acts committed by a party to a contract, or with his connivance, or by his
agent, with intent to deceive another party thereto or his agent, or to induce him to
enter into the contract--
(1) the suggestion, as a fact, of that which is not true, by one who does not believe it to be true;
(2) the active concealment of a fact by one having knowledge or belief of the fact;
(3) a promise made without any intention of performing it;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 14
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
(4) any other act fitted to deceive;
(5) any such act or omission as the law specially declares to be fraudulent.
Explanation.--Mere silence as to facts likely to affect the willingness of a person to enter into a
contract is not fraud, unless the circumstances of the case are such that, regard being had to them, it
is the duty of the person keeping silence to speak, or unless his silence is, in itself, equivalent to
speech."
39. Therefore, this Court is unable to accept the contention of the learned counsel for the
respondent that the expression "fraud in the making of the award" has to be narrowly construed.
This Court cannot do so primarily because fraud being of "infinite variety" may take many forms,
and secondly, the expression "the making of the award" will have to be read in conjunction with
whether the award "was induced or affected by fraud".
40. On such conjoint reading, this Court is unable to accept the contentions of the learned counsel
for the respondents that facts which surfaced subsequent to the making of the award, but have a
nexus with the facts constituting the award, are not relevant to demonstrate that there has been
fraud in the making of the award. Concealment of relevant and material facts, which should have
been disclosed before the arbitrator, is an act of fraud. If the argument advanced by the learned
counsel for the respondents is accepted, then a party, who has suffered an award against another
party who has concealed facts and obtained an award, cannot rely on facts which have surfaced
subsequently even if those facts have a bearing on the facts constituting the award. Concealed facts
in the very nature of things surface subsequently. Such a construction would defeat the principle of
due process and would be opposed to the concept of public policy incorporated in the Explanation."
It is the submission of the learned senior counsel that Section 47 of the CPC can be pleaded for the
first time even before the Executing Court on grounds of fraud, as well as lack of subject matter
jurisdiction.
11.2. The Apex Court in the case of STATE OF UTTAR PRADESH v. R.K. PANDEY2 has held as
follows:
"24. We have made our observations in the context of Section 47 of the Civil
Procedure Code, 1908, which even at the stage of execution, permits a party to object
to the decree, both on the grounds of fraud, as well as lack of subject matter
jurisdiction. It is apparent that the arbitration proceedings were a mere sham and a
fraud played by Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, by self-
appointing/nominating arbitrators, who have passed ex- parte and invalid awards.
To reiterate, Respondent No. 1, R.K. Pandey, is not a signatory to the purported
arbitration agreement. Moreover, the parties thereto, DNPBID Hospital and the
Governor of Uttar Pradesh, do not endorse any such agreement. From the cumulative
facts and reasons elucidated above, this is a clear case of lack of subject matter
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 15
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
jurisdiction."
2025 SCC OnLine SC 52 11.3. Earlier to the aforesaid judgments, the Apex Court has held that fraud
in decree can be set up in collateral proceedings in the case of JAI NARAIN PARASRAMPURIA v.
PUSHPA DEVI SARAF3 holding:
"Withdrawal of suit--effect of
52. One of the Judges of the High Court in the impugned judgment opined that in
view of the fact that the appellant had withdrawn the suit questioning the said award
and the decree subsequent to passing of the judgment and decree of the trial court,
they became disentitled to raise the said question. In so opining, the High Court
committed a manifest error. The appellant had contended that the said award and the
consequent decree passed by the Delhi High Court was a fraudulent and collusive
one. The appellants having obtained a decree, it was not necessary for them to obtain
another decree. They might not have been able to file another suit, but the same
would not mean that they were not entitled to question the validity or otherwise of
the said award in the suit for specific performance of contract. If a judgment or
decree is vitiated by fraud, the same would be a nullity. In such an event, Section 44
of the Evidence Act would be attracted. As a plea of fraud can be raised even in a
collateral proceeding and the trial court having recorded a specific finding that the
jurisdiction of the Delhi Court was created artificially by including a Delhi property,
in respect whereof there was no dispute, the said decree must be held to have been
obtained by Sarafs by concealment of material facts and by a collusive and fraudulent
exercise.
53. In the arbitration proceedings, Sarafs stated that the agreement dated 12-6-1984
was in fact a sale transaction. In para 8 of the written statement, the stand taken by
them was that the agreement was a sham document entered into by and between the
parties so as to (2006) 7 SCC 756 enable them to secure removal of padlocks by State
Bank of India, Kanpur.
54. In the said written statement itself they, however, disclosed about the execution
of an agreement for sale in favour of Defendant 5. The said agreement was registered
on 29-9-1984 i.e. much after the execution of agreement for sale dated 12-6-1984 as
also after the institution of the suit.
55. It is now well settled that fraud vitiates every solemn act. Any order or decree
obtained by practising fraud is a nullity. [See (1) Ram Chandra Singh v. Savitri Devi
[(2003) 8 SCC 319] followed in (2) Vice Chairman, Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan v.
Girdharilal Yadav [(2004) 6 SCC 325: 2005 SCC (L&S) 785]; (3) State of A.P. v. T.
Suryachandra Rao [(2005) 6 SCC 149]; (4) Ishwar Dutt v. Land Acquisition Collector
[(2005) 7 SCC 190]; (5) Lillykutty v. Scrutiny Committee, SC & ST [(2005) 8 SCC
283]; (6) Chief Engineer, M.SEB. v. Suresh Raghunath Bhokare [(2005) 10 SCC 465:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 16
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
2005 SCC (L&S) 765]; (7) Satya v. Teja Singh [(1975) 1 SCC 120: 1975 SCC (Cri) 50];
(8) Mahboob Sahab v. Syed Ismail [(1995) 3 SCC 693];
and (9) Asharfi Lal v. Koili [(1995) 4 SCC 163].]"
In the afore-quoted three judgments, the Apex Court considers facts obtaining in
each of the cases and holds that fraud would vitiate the decree. It can be set up in
collateral proceedings. What are the collateral proceedings are necessary to be
considered. They cannot be before the Executing Court. In the case of R.K.PANDEY
supra, the Apex Court holds that even before Executing Court for the first time under
Section 47 CPC, a party can object to a decree, both on the grounds of fraud as well as
lack of subject matter jurisdiction. The Apex Court has rendered reasons, as the party
who suffered the order was placed ex parte. He was not even the signatory to the
arbitration agreement and the Governor and the hospital which was a party to the
arbitration proceedings had not even endorsed the agreement. On those facts, it was
a clear case of lack of subject matter of jurisdiction is what the Apex Court holds.
There can no qualm about the principles laid down by the Apex Court in the
afore-quoted judgments. They are distinguishable with the facts obtaining in the case
at hand without much ado.
12. In the case at hand, the agreement between the two envisages arbitration. Since respondent is an
MSME, it goes before the MSME Council. Failure of conciliation under Section 18(4) of the MSME
Act led the Council to refer the matter to arbitration. The petitioner participates in the arbitration,
suffers an award as quoted hereinabove, chooses not to challenge the order under Section 34 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act. The respondent initiates execution. In the execution, the petitioner
deposits (cid:128)65/- lakhs as attachment order was passed. The petitioner approaches this Court in
W.P.No.5362 of 2024 and this Court directs the concerned Court to look into the objections and
take the proceedings further. In the objections, for the first time, new plea with regard to
concealment of facts of fraud are urged without placing any material. The Court rejects those pleas
which were ostensibly invoking Section 47 of the CPC, on the ground that the Court cannot go
beyond the award. I do not find any error apparent in the order passed by the concerned Court. The
challenge by the petitioner is not the order so passed on 30-08-2024, but the entire proceedings of
execution.
13. The petitioner is now wanting to do indirectly what he has lost to be done directly. The
proceedings arise out of arbitration.
The arbitration is under the Arbitration and Conciliation Act which is a complete code by itself and
Section 34 is the only way an award of Arbitrator can be challenged. It becomes apposite to refer to
the judgment in the case of BHAVEN CONSTRUCTION v. EXECUTIVE ENGINEER, SARDAR
SAROVAR NARMADA NIGAM LIMITED4 wherein the Apex Court holds as follows:
"17. Thereafter, Respondent 1 chose to impugn the order passed by the arbitrator
under Section 16(2) of the (2022) 1 SCC 75 Arbitration Act through a petition under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 17
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
Articles 226/227 of the Indian Constitution. In the usual course, the Arbitration Act
provides for a mechanism of challenge under Section 34.
The opening phase of Section 34 reads as "34. Application for setting aside arbitral award.--(1)
Recourse to a Court against an arbitral award may be made only by an application for setting aside
such award in accordance with sub-section (2) and sub-section (3)".
(emphasis supplied) The use of term "only" as occurring under the provision serves two purposes of
making the enactment a complete code and lay down the procedure.
18. In any case, the hierarchy in our legal framework, mandates that a legislative enactment cannot
curtail a constitutional right. In Nivedita Sharma v. COAI [Nivedita Sharma v. COAI, (2011) 14 SCC
337: (2012) 4 SCC (Civ) 947] , this Court referred to several judgments and held :
(SCC p. 343, para 11) "11. We have considered the respective arguments/submissions.
There cannot be any dispute that the power of the High Courts to issue directions,
orders or writs including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, certiorari, mandamus,
quo warranto and prohibition under Article 226 of the Constitution is a basic feature
of the Constitution and cannot be curtailed by parliamentary legislation -- L. Chandra
Kumar v. Union of India [L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India, (1997) 3 SCC 261:1997
SCC (L&S) 577]. However, it is one thing to say that in exercise of the power vested in
it under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High Court can entertain a writ petition
against any order passed by or action taken by the State and/or its
agency/instrumentality or any public authority or order passed by a quasi-judicial
body/authority, and it is an altogether different thing to say that each and every
petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution must be entertained by the High
Court as a matter of course ignoring the fact that the aggrieved person has an
effective alternative remedy. Rather, it is settled law that when a statutory forum is
created by law for redressal of grievances, a writ petition should not be entertained
ignoring the statutory dispensation."
(emphasis supplied) It is therefore, prudent for a Judge to not exercise discretion to allow judicial
interference beyond the procedure established under the enactment. This power needs to be
exercised in exceptional rarity, wherein one party is left remediless under the statute or a clear "bad
faith" shown by one of the parties. This high standard set by this Court is in terms of the legislative
intention to make the arbitration fair and efficient.
19. In this context we may observe Deep Industries Ltd. v. ONGC [Deep Industries Ltd. v. ONGC,
(2020) 15 SCC 706] , wherein interplay of Section 5 of the Arbitration Act and Article 227 of the
Constitution was analysed as under :
(SCC p. 714, paras 16-17) "16. Most significant of all is the non obstante clause
contained in Section 5 which states that notwithstanding anything contained in any
other law, in matters that arise under Part I of the Arbitration Act, no judicial
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 18
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
authority shall intervene except where so provided in this Part. Section 37 grants a
constricted right of first appeal against certain judgments and orders and no others.
Further, the statutory mandate also provides for one bite at the cherry, and interdicts
a second appeal being filed [see Section 37(2) of the Act].
17. This being the case, there is no doubt whatsoever that if petitions were to be filed
under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution against orders passed in appeals under
Section 37, the entire arbitral process would be derailed and would not come to
fruition for many years.
At the same time, we cannot forget that Article 227 is a constitutional provision which remains
untouched by the non obstante clause of Section 5 of the Act. In these circumstances, what is
important to note is that though petitions can be filed under Article 227 against judgments allowing
or dismissing first appeals under Section 37 of the Act, yet the High Court would be extremely
circumspect in interfering with the same, taking into account the statutory policy as adumbrated by
us hereinabove so that interference is restricted to orders that are passed which are patently lacking
in inherent jurisdiction."
(emphasis supplied)
20. In the instant case, Respondent 1 has not been able to show exceptional circumstance or "bad
faith" on the part of the appellant, to invoke the remedy under Article 227 of the Constitution. No
doubt the ambit of Article 227 is broad and pervasive, however, the High Court should not have used
its inherent power to interject the arbitral process at this stage. It is brought to our notice that
subsequent to the impugned order of the sole arbitrator, a final award was rendered by him on
merits, which is challenged by Respondent 1 in a separate Section 34 application, which is pending.
21. Viewed from a different perspective, the arbitral process is strictly conditioned upon time
limitation and modelled on the "principle of unbreakability". This Court in P. Radha Bai v. P. Ashok
Kumar [P. Radha Bai v. P. Ashok Kumar, (2019) 13 SCC 445: (2018) 5 SCC (Civ) 773] ,observed :
(SCC p. 459, paras 36-37) "36.3. Third, Section 34(3) reflects the principle of unbreakability. Dr
Peter Binder in International Commercial Arbitration and Conciliation in UNCITRAL Model Law
Jurisdictions, 2nd Edn., observed:
'An application for setting aside an award can only be made during the three months
following the date on which the party making the application has received the award.
Only if a party has made a request for correction or interpretation of the award under
Article 33 does the time- limit of three months begin after the tribunal has disposed
of the request. This exception from the three month time- limit was subject to
criticism in the working group due to fears that it could be used as a delaying tactics.
However, although "an unbreakable time-limit for applications for setting aside" was
sought as being desirable for the sake of "certainty and expediency" the prevailing
view was that the words ought to be retained "since they presented the reasonable
consequence of Article 33.' According to this "unbreakability" of time-limit and true
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 19
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
to the "certainty and expediency" of the arbitral awards, any grounds for setting aside
the award that emerge after the three month time-limit has expired cannot be raised.
37. Extending Section 17 of the Limitation Act would go contrary to the principle of "unbreakability"
enshrined under Section 34(3) of the Arbitration Act."
(emphasis in original) If the courts are allowed to interfere with the arbitral process beyond the
ambit of the enactment, then the efficiency of the process will be diminished."
(Emphasis supplied) Therefore, the petitioner having lost the opportunity to challenge the award of
the Arbitrator, cannot now by indirect method seek obliteration of execution proceedings, which is
filed to execute the award against the petitioner.
14. What the petitioner now seeks to contend is that award was obtained by fraud. It is not the case
of the petitioner that it was placed ex parte or not afforded adequate opportunity. The plea of fraud
and several factors are for the first time placed before the Executing Court, that too when the
coordinate Bench reserved liberty to file statement of objections. It is trite law that what should have
been done as grounds under Section 34 of the Act cannot be raised in execution proceedings.
Jurisprudence is replete with several High Courts taking the view that what should have been urged
under Section 34, cannot be raised in execution proceedings.
14.1. The High Court of Delhi in the case of ANGLO-
AMERICAN METALLURGICAL COAL PRIVATE LIMITED v.
MMTC LIMITED5 has held as follows:
".... .... ....
53. The legislature by using the phrase "such award shall be enforced in accordance with the
provisions of the Civil Procedure Code" only intends to "enforce" an award in the same manner and
procedure as contemplated in CPC without altering the nature and character of an award. The
provisions of the CPC are only applicable to the extent of "enforcement" of an award such as
attachment, sale, auction, detention, etc. which are reflected in Order 21 CPC. The legislature did
not intend to permit a challenge to an award during enforcement proceedings again on merits as
this would be contrary to the objectives of the 1996 Act which aim to ensure finality and limited
judicial interference. The challenge to an award is only to be made under Section 34 of the 1996 Act.
Once the award passes the scrutiny under Section 34 or the period to challenge an award under
Section 34 lapses, the award becomes final and binding to the parties therein by virtue of Section 35
of the 1996 Act.
54. If the objections under Section 47 CPC are allowed to be entertained during the enforcement
(2025) SCC OnLine Del.3201 proceedings of an award, it would effectively open a second round for
challenging the award which the legislature did not intend to do as the same would undermine the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 20
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
provision of Section 34 i.e. challenge to award on limited grounds available as mentioned therein
and render the finality granted by Section 35, meaningless. Further, if such interpretation is
allowed, the same would defeat the purpose of the 1996 Act which is to streamline arbitration and
reduce the prolonged litigation. In addition, allowing objections would not only delay the finality of
disputes but would also nullify the basic contours of the 1996 Act. Any particular provision of a
statute has to be harmoniously construed so as not to render any other provisions of the statue
otiose/inconsistent with the other provisions.
... ... ...
70. As observed above, I have already held that Section 5 of the 1996 Act aims limited judicial
interference. The legal fiction created by Section 36 of the 1996 Act, allowing an award to be
enforced "as if it were a decree," is limited solely to its "enforcement" and does not equate an award
with a decree in substance. Further, the arbitral proceedings are distinct from civil
suits/proceedings. The use of CPC provisions is confined to enforcement mechanisms under Order
21 and does not allow a re-challenge to the award on merits, which is exclusively governed by
Section 34 of the 1996 Act. In this backdrop, the award cannot be termed as a decree as the same is
not passed by a court. Also, the AT is not a "court" and an award does not satisfy any conditions of
Section 2(2) CPC which defines a "decree". For the said reasons and relying on the observations of
Shaukat Hussain case, it is clear that the award which is sought to be enforced as a decree and is not
a "decree" passed by this Court where the suit is pending. Hence, on this ground, Order 21 Rule 29
CPC is not applicable."
(Emphasis supplied) The High Court of Delhi holds that arbitral proceedings are distinct from civil
proceedings. A challenge to the arbitral award can be made only under Section 34 of the Act. Once
the award passes the scrutiny or the period to challenge the award under Section 34 lapses, then the
award becomes final and binding. Challenging the award in execution is impermissible in law.
14.2. The High Court of Allahabad in the case of LARSEN & TOUBRO LIMITED v. MAHARAJI
EDUCATIONAL TRUST6 has held as follows:
".... .... ....
22. The issue that an award made in arbitral proceedings is not a decree within the meaning of CPC
having been settled by the aforesaid pronouncement by the Hon'ble Apex Court, the provisions of
Section 47 CPC cannot be available to obstruct the execution of the award.
... ... ...
25. Apart from above, the extent of judicial intervention has been circumscribed by Section 5 of the
Act. In other words, judicial interpretation is prohibited except as provided under the Act. Section 5
of the Act reads as under :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 21
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
"Section 5. Extent of judicial intervention. Notwithstanding anything contained in
any other law for the time being in force, in matters governed by this Part, no judicial
authority shall intervene except where so provided in this Part. Section 5 of the Act
falls under Part-I which includes within its ambit Section 2 to Section 43 of the Act.
Thus, Sections 34 and 36 are also included in Part-I of the Act. The judicial
intervention having been limited by the legislature, the Court cannot interfere at any
and every stage on a ground other than those available in the Act (2010) SCC OnLine
All 1866 itself. Thus, once stage of Section 34 is over and the award becomes final
under Section 35, judicial intervention in the execution of the award under Section 36
cannot be held to be permissible on any ground, whatsoever, in view of the limitation
imposed by Section 5 of the Act.
26. Thus, having regard to the provisions of Sections 5, 12, 13, 16, 34, 35 and 36 of the Act, the
irresistible conclusion is only grounds which can be pressed into service for challenge to an award is
within the ambit and scope of Section 34 of the Act. Once the stage of section 34 is over and the
questions that were raised or could have been raised at that stage cannot be allowed to be raised
again and again by pressing into service section 47 of the Civil Procedure Code at the time of
execution of award under Section 36 of the Act."
(Emphasis supplied) The Allahabad High Court holds that an arbitral award is to be enforced like a
decree, but it is not a decree as defined under the CPC.
14.3. The Allahabad High Court, again, in the case of SANJAY AGARWAL v. RAHUL AGARWAL7
has held as follows:
".... .... ....
29. The applicability of Section 47CPC have been considered by this Court in Larsen & Toubro Ltd.
v. Maharaji Educational Trust [Larsen & Toubro Ltd. v. Maharaji Educational Trust, 2010 SCC
OnLine All 1866] where it was held: (SCC OnLine All para 13) 2024 SCC OnLine All 149 "The
aforesaid scheme of the Act go to show that Section 34 of the Act prescribes the ground under which
arbitral award can be challenged. If no application is made under Section 34 within the prescribed
period of limitation or the application is refused the award becomes final under Section 35 of the Act
and enforceable in terms of Section
36. Section 34 of the Act enumerates specific grounds on which an application for setting aside an
award can be made. Intention of legislature is a guiding factor for interpreting the provision of a
Statute and the same is to be gathered from the words used in various provisions and the scheme of
the Statute. Under the 1996 Act, the grounds of challenge having been specified by the legislature by
enacting Section 34 of the Act and finality having been attached under Section 35, the legislature
obviously did not intend to either enlarge the scope of grounds of challenge or to provide another
opportunity of challenge after the stage of Section 34 is over. Thus, the objection to the award on the
grounds enumerated in Section 34 of the Act once adjudicated cannot be allowed to be raised or
reagitated by permitting to raise objection during the execution proceedings under Section 36 by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 22
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
pressing Section 47CPC in service as the same would render the provisions of Sections 34 and 35 of
the Act virtually redundant.
The use of words 'the award shall be enforced under the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 in the same
manner as if it were a decree of the court' in Section 36 of the Act would not mean that the
provisions of the Code of Civil procedure with regard to execution of decree would become
applicable in the execution of the award. Section 36 only creates a fiction that an award would be
enforceable as if it were a decree of the court within the scope of Order 21 CPC. This enforcement of
the award under Order 21 CPC would not attract the application of Section 47CPC simply by use of
the expression 'shall be enforceable as a decree' in Section 36 nor Section 36 can be read
independent of other provisions contained in the Act itself. The provisions of the Act are to be
reconciled with each other. Section 36 cannot be read out of context and independent of the scheme
of the Act. Reference to another statute does not attract application of such other statute to the
referring statute unless expressly provided. A reference in a statute to another statute cannot be
read in a manner to invite inconsistency in the referring statute. Any such reference, if made, has to
be interpreted in the context in which the reference is made so as not to make inconsistent the
provisions of the referring statute itself. If it brings inconsistency, then the same is to be avoided. If
Section 47CPC is to be attracted, then the restrictions provided in Section 34 of the Act and finality
to arbitral award by virtue of Section 35 of the Act would be redundant. Section 36 cannot be
interpreted in the manner inconsistent with the provisions contained in the other part of the Act.
That apart the finality of the decree under the Code is reached after the decision under Section
47CPC, if raised. But the legislature in its wisdom thought it fit to incorporate the scope similar to
Section 47CPC in Section 34 of the Act in order to bring finality before the award becomes
executable. Same procedure cannot be expected to be incorporated in a statute twice. Legislature
can never be interpreted to intend repetition. At the same time, the object of the Act is directed
towards speedy and hazard free finality with a view to avoid long drawn proceeding based on
technicalities. Therefore, having regard to the provisions of Sections 13, 16, 34, 35 and 36 cannot be
interpreted in a manner inconsistent with any of the provisions of the Act to attract the provisions
contained in the Code in its entirety. Therefore, while considering the application filed under
Section 36 of the Act for the execution of an award, the court cannot overlook the scope and ambit
within which the court is to execute the award taking aid of the provisions for execution contained in
the CPC not inconsistent with the provisions contained in the 1996 Act. Therefore, in my view,
Section 47CPC cannot be attracted despite the words 'in the same manner as if it were a decree of
the court' used in Section 36 when the award is sought to be executed thereunder.
The matter can be viewed from another angle. Section 47CPC provides for questions to be
determined by the court executing the decree. The said section reads as under:
'47.Questions to be determined by the court executing decree.--(1) All questions
arising between the parties to the suit in which the decree was passed, or their
representatives, and relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree,
shall be determined by the court executing the decree and not by a separate suit.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 23
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
(2) Omitted by the Code of Civil Procedure (Amendment) Act, 1976, Section 20 (w.e.f.
1-2-1977) (3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the
representative of a party, such question shall, for the purposes of this section, be
determined by the court.
Explanation I.--For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose suit has been dismissed and a
defendant against whom a suit has been dismissed are parties to the suit.
Explanation II.--(a) for the purposes of this section, a purchaser of property at a sale in execution of
a decree shall be deemed to be a party to the suit in which the decree is passed; and
(b) all questions relating to the delivery of possession of such property to such purchaser or his
representative shall be deemed to be questions relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of
the decree within the meaning of this section.' It is, thus, clear that in order to invoke Section
47CPC, there must be a decree. Section 2(2)CPC defines the decree. For a decision or determination
to be a decree, it must necessarily fall within the four-corners of the language used in the definition.
Section 2(2)CPC defines decree to mean 'formal expression of an adjudication which, so far as
regards the court expressing it, conclusively determines the rights of the parties with regard to all or
any of the matters in controversy in the suit and may be either preliminary or final. It shall be
deemed to include the rejection of a plaint and the determination of any question within Section
144, but shall not include-- (a) any adjudication from which an appeal lies as an appeal from an
order, or (b) any order of dismissal for default'. Explanation.--A decree is preliminary when further
proceedings have to be taken before the suit can be completely disposed of. It is final when such
adjudication completely disposes of the suit. It may be partly preliminary and partly final.
The use of words 'adjudication' and 'suit' used by legislature clearly goes to show that it is only a
court which can pass a decree in a suit commenced by plaint adjudicating the dispute between the
parties by means of a judgment pronounced by the court. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Paramjeet
Singh Patheja v. ICDS Ltd. [Paramjeet Singh Patheja v. ICDS Ltd., (2006) 13 SCC 322 : AIR 2007 SC
168] after considering the definition of decree as contained in CPC in para 29 has held that 'it is
obvious that an arbitrator is not a court, an arbitration is not an adjudication and, therefore, an
award is not a decree'. Again in para 31, it has been held that words 'decision', and 'civil court'
unambiguously rule out an award by arbitrators to be a decree. In the said case, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court while considering the question as to whether an insolvency notice under Section 9 of
the Presidency Town Insolvency Act, 1909 can be issued on the basis of an arbitration award, held
that such notice cannot be issued for the reason the arbitration award is neither a decree nor an
order for payment within the meaning of Section 9(2) of the Insolvency Act and it is not rendered in
a suit. Thus, the award not being covered under the definition of a decree, objection with respect to
its validity can only be raised as provided under Section 34 of the Act and not by taking resort to
Section 47CPC.
In Paramjeet Singh Patheja case [Paramjeet Singh Patheja v. ICDS Ltd., (2006) 13 SCC 322 : AIR
2007 SC 168] , the Hon'ble Supreme Court has interpreted the words 'as if' used in Section 36 of the
Act as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 24
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
'The words "as if" demonstrate that award and decree or order are two different
things. Legal fiction is created for limited purpose of enforcement as a decree. The
fiction is not intended to make a decree for all purposes under all statutes, whether
State or Central.' While comparing the provisions of Section 15 of the Arbitration Act,
1899 which also provided for enforcing the award as a decree with Section 36 of the
Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has observed in
paras 56 and 57 as under: (Paramjeet Singh Patheja case [Paramjeet Singh Patheja v.
ICDS Ltd., (2006) 13 SCC 322 : AIR 2007 SC 168] , SCC p. 345, paras 39 and
40) '39. Section 15 of the Arbitration Act, 1899 provides for "enforcing" the award as
if it were a decree. Thus a final award, without actually being followed by the decree
(as was later provided by Section 17 of the Arbitration Act of 1940), could be enforced
i.e. executed in the same manner as a decree. For this limited purpose of
enforcement, the provisions of CPC were made available for realising the money
awarded. However, the award remained an award and did not become a decree either
as defined in the CPC and much less so far purposes of an entirely different statute
such as the Insolvency Act' '40. Section 36 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act of
1996 brings back the same situation as it existed from 1899 to 1940. Only under the
Arbitration Act, 1940, the award was required to be made a rule of court i.e. required
a judgment followed by a decree of court.' The issue that an award made in arbitral
proceedings is not a decree within the meaning of CPC having been settled by the
aforesaid pronouncement by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the provisions of Section
47CPC cannot be available to obstruct the execution of the award.
Much emphasis has been laid by the learned counsel for the applicant on the decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Dharma Prathishthanam v. Madhok Construction (P) Ltd. [Dharma
Prathishthanam v. Madhok Construction (P) Ltd., (2005) 9 SCC 686] wherein it has been held that
in the event of appointment of an arbitrator and reference of disputes to him being void ab initio as
totally incompetent or invalid the award shall be void and liable to be set aside in any appropriate
proceedings when sought to be enforced or acted upon. However, the said case relied upon by the
learned counsel for the applicant is distinguishable and will have no application in the facts of the
present case. In the said case when the award was filed in the court for making rule of the court
under the 1940 Act, objections were filed by the judgment-debtor under Section 30 of the said Act
which were dismissed on the ground that they were filed beyond the prescribed period of limitation.
The intra-court appeal preferred against the said order was also dismissed by the Division Bench
against which appeal by special leave was filed. The dispute being under the 1940 Act, the question
of interpretation of Sections 35 and 36 of the Act and applicability of Section 47CPC to the execution
of an award was not under consideration before the Hon'ble Supreme Court. The Hon'ble Supreme
Court was considering the validity of the objection filed under Section 30 of the 1940 Act and having
found that since the appointment of arbitrator and reference of dispute was void and as such the
award was also void and the fact that application was filed beyond the period of limitation was not of
much significance and delay was liable to be condoned.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 25
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
The same can be inferred from the following observations made in para 32 of the judgment: (SCC p.
701, para 32) '32. In the present case, we find that far from submitting to the jurisdiction of the
arbitrator and conceding to the appointment of and reference to the arbitrator Shri Swami Dayal,
the appellant did raise an objection to the invalidity of the entire proceedings beginning from the
appointment till the giving of the award though the objection was belated. In ordinary course, we
would have after setting aside the impugned judgments of the High Court remanded the matter back
for hearing and decision afresh by the learned Single Judge of the High Court so as to record a
finding if the award is a nullity and if so then set aside the same without regard to the fact that the
objection petition under Section 30 of the Act filed by the appellant was beyond the period of
limitation prescribed by Article 119(b) of the Limitation Act, 1963. However, in the facts and
circumstances of the case, we consider such a course to follow as a futile exercise resulting in
needless waste of public time. On the admitted and undisputed facts, we are satisfied, as already
indicated hereinabove, that the impugned award is a nullity and hence liable to be set aside and that
is what we declare and also do hereby, obviating the need for remand.' In the present case, the
situation is quite different. The applicant invoking Section 34 of the Act filed their objection
challenging the validity of the award which were dismissed as barred by limitation. The judgment
came to be affirmed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court on dismissal of the special leave petition. The
grounds of challenge to the arbitral award which were dismissed as barred by limitation, were much
before the Hon'ble Supreme Court but it did not find it fit to condone the delay and to consider
grounds of challenge on merit, itself or remand back the proceedings for the said purpose. Hon'ble
Supreme Court rather chose to affirm the orders passed by the District Judge and this Court
dismissing the objection as barred by limitation. Thus, the reliance placed by the learned counsel for
the applicant on the aforesaid pronouncement of the Hon'ble Supreme Court is totally misfounded.
Apart from above, the extent of judicial intervention has been circumscribed by Section 5 of the Act.
In other words, judicial interpretation is prohibited except as provided under the Act. Section 5 of
the Act reads as under:
'5.Extent of judicial intervention.--
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, in matters
governed by this part, no judicial authority shall intervene except where so provided in this part.'
Section 5 of the Act falls under Part I which includes within its ambit Section 2 to Section 43 of the
Act. Thus, Sections 34 and 36 are also included in Part I of the Act. The judicial intervention having
been limited by the legislature, the court cannot interfere at any and every stage on a ground other
than those available in the Act itself. Thus, once stage of Section 34 is over and the award becomes
final under Section 35, judicial intervention in the execution of the award under Section 36 cannot
be held to be permissible on any ground, whatsoever, in view of the limitation imposed by Section 5
of the Act.
Thus, having regard to the provisions of Sections 5, 12, 13, 16, 34, 35 and 36 of the Act, the
irresistible conclusion is only grounds which can be pressed into service for challenge to an award is
within the ambit and scope of Section 34 of the Act. Once the stage of Section 34 is over and the
questions that were raised or could have been raised at that stage cannot be allowed to be raised
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 26
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
again and again by pressing into service Section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure at the time of
execution of award under Section 36 of the Act."
(Emphasis supplied) On a blend of the judgments rendered by the High Courts of Delhi and
Allahabad, to which I am in respectful agreement of, what the petitioner has lost to be done directly
is wanting to be done indirectly. The challenge now is to the execution proceedings having lost the
opportunity to challenge the arbitral award. Therefore, the challenge raised now is, on the face of it,
untenable and is sans countenance.
15. Much reliance is placed on Section 47 of the CPC by the learned senior counsel for the petitioner.
Section 47 of the CPC reads as follows:
"47. Questions to be determined by the Court executing decree.--(1) All questions
arising between the parties to the suit in which the decree was passed, or their
representatives, and relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of the decree,
shall be determined by the Court executing the decree and not by a separate suit.
(2) * * * (3) Where a question arises as to whether any person is or is not the
representative of a party, such question shall, for the purposes of this section, be
determined by the Court.
Explanation I.--For the purposes of this section, a plaintiff whose suit has been dismissed and a
defendant against whom a suit has been dismissed, are parties to the suit.
Explanation II.--(a) For the purposes of this section, a purchaser of property at a sale in execution of
a decree shall be deemed to be a party to the suit in which the decree is passed; and
(b) all questions relating to the delivery of possession of such property to such purchaser or his
representative shall be deemed to be questions relating to the execution, discharge or satisfaction of
the decree within the meaning of this section."
(Emphasis supplied) Section 47 no doubt permits plea of fraud to be raised. But, that cannot be
without any substance. At the outset arbitral award is not a decree and the plea that was not there
before the Arbitrator, cannot be for the first time permitted to be raised in the execution, that too
invoking Section 47 of the CPC.
16. It is trite law that fraud must be specifically pleaded and established before the appropriate fora
in the original proceedings.
16.1. The Apex Court in the case of ELECTROSTEEL CASTINGS LIMITED v. UV ASSET
RECONSTRUCTION COMPANY LIMITED8 has clearly held that unless fraud is pleaded with full
particulars, the plea cannot spring from air. The Apex Court has held as follows:
".... .... ....
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 27
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
8. In Bishundeo Narain [Bishundeo Narain v. Seogeni Rai, 1951 SCC 447: 1951 SCR 548] in para 22,
it is observed and held as under: (SCC p. 454) "22. ... Now if there is one rule which is better
established than any other, it is that in cases of fraud, undue influence and coercion, the parties
pleading it must set forth full particulars and the case can only be decided on the particulars as laid.
There can be no departure from them in evidence. General allegations are insufficient even to
amount to an averment of fraud of which any court ought to take notice however strong the
language in which they are couched may be, and the same applies to undue influence and coercion.
See Order 6 Rule 4, Civil Procedure Code."
(2022) 2 SCC 573 8.1. Similar view has been expressed in Ladli Parshad Jaiswal [Ladli Parshad
Jaiswal v. Karnal Distillery Co. Ltd., (1964) 1 SCR 270 : AIR 1963 SC 1279] and after considering the
decision of the Privy Council in Bharat Dharma Syndicate Ltd. v. Harish Chandra [Bharat Dharma
Syndicate Ltd. v. Harish Chandra, 1937 SCC OnLine PC 24 : (1936-37) 64 IA 143], it is held that a
litigant who prefers allegation of fraud or other improper conduct must place on record precise and
specific details of these charges. Even as per Order VI Rule 4 in all cases in which the party pleading
relies on any misrepresentation, fraud, breach of trust, wilful default, or undue influence, particulars
shall be stated in the pleading. Similarly in K.C. Sharma & Co. [Union of India v. K.C. Sharma & Co.,
(2020) 15 SCC 209] it is held that "fraud" has to be pleaded with necessary particulars. In Ram
Singh [Ram Singh v. Gram Panchayat Mehal Kalan, (1986) 4 SCC 364], it is observed and held by
this Court that when the suit is barred by any law, the plaintiff cannot be allowed to circumvent that
provision by means of clever drafting so as to avoid mention of those circumstances by which the
suit is barred by law of limitation.
8.2. In T. Arivandandam v. T.V. Satyapal [T. Arivandandam v. T.V. Satyapal, (1977) 4 SCC 467], it is
observed and held in para 5 as under: (SCC p. 470) "5. We have not the slightest hesitation in
condemning the petitioner for the gross abuse of the process of the court repeatedly and
unrepentantly resorted to. From the statement of the facts found in the judgment of the High Court,
it is perfectly plain that the suit now pending before the First Munsif's Court, Bangalore, is a flagrant
misuse of the mercies of the law in receiving plaints. The learned Munsif must remember that if on a
meaningful -- not formal -- reading of the plaint it is manifestly vexatious, and meritless, in the
sense of not disclosing a clear right to sue, he should exercise his power under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC
taking care to see that the ground mentioned therein is fulfilled. And, if clever drafting has created
the illusion of a cause of action, nip it in the bud at the first hearing by examining the party
searchingly under Order 10 CPC. An activist Judge is the answer to irresponsible law suits."
8.3. A similar view has been expressed by this Court in the recent decision in P. Selathal [Canara
Bank v. P. Selathal, (2020) 13 SCC 143]."
(Emphasis supplied) Therefore, the plea of fraud sought to be set up by the petitioner for the first
time to get away with the making of payment in the execution cannot be accepted, as it is trite law
that Executing Court cannot go beyond the decree.
16.2. It is apposite to refer to the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of HARYANA VIDYUT
PRASARAN NIGAM LIMITED v. GULSHAN LAL9 wherein it is held as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 28
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
".... .... ....
17. As indicated hereinbefore, for the purpose of allowing an objection filed on behalf of a
judgment-debtor under Section 47 of the Code of Civil Procedure, it was incumbent on him to show
that the decree was ex facie nullity. For the said purpose, the court is precluded from making an
in-depth scrutiny as regards the entitlement of the plaintiff with reference to not only his claim
made in the plaint but also the defence set up by the judgment-debtor. As the judgment of the trial
court could not have been reopened, the correctness thereof could not have been put to question.
(2009) 13 SCC 354
18. It is also well known that an executing court cannot go behind the decree. If on a fair
interpretation of the judgment, order and decree passed by a court having appropriate jurisdiction
in that behalf, the reliefs sought for by the plaintiff appear to have been granted, there is no reason
as to why the executing court shall deprive him from obtaining the fruits of the decree.
19. In Deepa Bhargava v. Mahesh Bhargava [(2009) 2 SCC 294: (2008) 16 Scale 305] this Court held
as under:
(SCC p. 298, para 9) "9. ... An executing court, it is well known, cannot go behind the
decree. It has no jurisdiction to modify a decree.
It must execute the decree as it is. A default clause contained in a compromise decree even otherwise
would not be considered to be penal in nature so as to attract the provisions of Section 74 of the
Contract Act."
20. It is also not a case where this Court can exercise its jurisdiction under Article 142 of the
Constitution of India to mould an order. The decree passed by the learned trial court has attained
finality. Whether rightly or wrongly, the judgment of the learned trial Judge has been affirmed by
this Court. It is one thing to say that no right having crystallised in favour of a party to the lis, this
Court can mould the relief appropriately, but it is another thing to say that despite the decree being
found to be an executable one, this Court will refuse to direct execution thereof.
21. We are not oblivious of the fact that the respondents legally would not have been entitled to the
reliefs prayed for by them. However, as a decree has been passed, we do not intend to go behind the
same. The executing court shall, it goes without saying, execute the decree strictly in terms thereof."
(Emphasis supplied) The Apex Court holds that the Executing Court cannot entertain an objection
filed under Section 47 of the CPC against a decree, unless it is shown that the decree suffers from an
ex-facie nullity. In execution of decree, the Court will not go behind the decree or beyond the decree.
The Executing Court would only execute the decree in strict terms thereof. Therefore, the plea that is
now raised without any material which was never raised, cannot be permitted to be raised in the
execution proceedings.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 29
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
17. Equally untenable is the plea that because the petitioner is a Government Corporation, public
money is at stake and special indulgence should follow. The submission is again sans countenance.
The law brooks no such differential treatment. The Apex Court in the case of PAM DEVELOPMENT
PRIVATE LIMITED v. STATE OF WEST BENGAL10observes that when State enters the market
place, it sheds its sovereign mantle and is bound, like any other litigant, by the discipline of law. The
Apex has held as follows:
".... .... ....
26. Arbitration proceedings are essentially alternate dispute redressal system meant for early/quick
resolution of (2019) 8 SCC 112 disputes and in case a money decree -- award as passed by the
arbitrator against the Government is allowed to be automatically stayed, the very purpose of quick
resolution of dispute through arbitration would be defeated as the decree- holder would be fully
deprived of the fruits of the award on mere filing of objection under Section 34 of the Arbitration
Act. The Arbitration Act is a special Act which provides for quick resolution of disputes between the
parties and Section 18 of the Act makes it clear that the parties shall be treated with equality. Once
the Act mandates so, there cannot be any special treatment given to the Government as a party. As
such, under the scheme of the Arbitration Act, no distinction is made nor any differential treatment
is to be given to the Government, while considering an application for grant of stay of a money
decree in proceedings under Section 34 of the Arbitration Act. As we have already mentioned above,
the reference to CPC in Section 36 of the Arbitration Act is only to guide the court as to what
conditions can be imposed, and the same have to be consistent with the provisions of the Arbitration
Act."
(Emphasis supplied) The Apex Court holds that arbitration proceedings are meant for quick
resolution of the dispute. In case of money decree passed by Arbitrator against Government is
allowed to be automatically stayed, the very purpose of quick resolution would be defeated. No
special treatment should be given to the Government as a party.
18. In the light of the preceding analysis, what would unmistakably emerge is, that the Act is a self
contained Code.
Section 34 provides the exclusive remedy for challenging an award.
Section 36 clothes an award with enforceability, as if it were a decree. Jurisprudence, noted
hereinabove, from the Apex Court or other High Courts is mere unanimous that objections which
could and should have been raised under Section 34, cannot be paraphrased into execution
proceedings under the guise of Section 47 of the CPC, indeed, to permit such a course would convert
execution into a proxy appeal, frustrate the principle of finality and reduce arbitration to a futile
ritual.
19. A Government Corporation is dodging the issue of payment right from 2018 to the respondent
who has supplied materials, on one pretext or the other. What is glaring is, against arbitral award
the petitioner had all the opportunity to file a petition under Section 34 of the Act within the time
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 30
Karnataka State Medical Supplies ... vs Plasti Surge Industries Pvt Ltd on 1 September, 2025
limit. The time limit having gone and impossibility of filing a petition under Section 34 of the Act
emerging, other steps are now taken indirectly to achieve what it could not do directly.
20. The Court cannot lend its writ jurisdiction to perpetuate delay and defeat the fruits of an arbitral
award.
The petition, therefore, is devoid of merit, being so, should lead to its dismissal. It does lead, but not
a dismissal simpliciter, but with imposition of exemplary costs to be paid by the petitioner to the
respondent. The act of the petitioner is a drain, on both judicial time, and the decree holder's
legitimate entitlement. Therefore, this Court deems it fit to impose exemplary cost of Rs.1,00,000/-
payable by the petitioner to the respondent within 4 weeks. Furthermore, as the execution
proceedings have already languished for nearly 2 years, the Executing Court is directed to bring
them to finality, within 6 months from the date of receipt of copy of the order.
21. For the reasons afore-stated, the following:
ORDER
(i) The Writ Petition fails and is dismissed with costs of Rs.1,00,000/-.
(ii) The petitioner shall deposit the said cost with the respondent within 4 weeks from
the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
(iii) The Executing Court shall conclude the pending execution within 6 months.
(iv) All deposits already made, till date by the petitioner/Corporation, shall be duly
taken into account in the course of such execution and released in favour of the
respondent.
Consequently, I.A.No.1 of 2024 also stands disposed.
Sd/-
(M.NAGAPRASANNA) JUDGE Bkp CT:SS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38654575/ 31
