Karnataka State Shift Duties And ... vs State Of Karnataka on 7 April, 2022
Karnataka State Shift Duties And ... vs State Of Karnataka on 7
April, 2022
Bench: S.Sujatha, Shivashankar Amarannavar
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 7TH DAY OF APRIL, 2022
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MRS.JUSTICE S.SUJATHA
AND
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SHIVASHANKAR AMARANNAVAR
WRIT APPEAL No. 313/2020 (GM-TEN)
BETWEEN :
Karnataka State Shift
Duties and Maintenance
Electrical Contractors
Welfare Association (R)
Represented by its President
(Reg. No.DRB-1/260/2016-17)
No.88, 3rd Main Road
3rd Cross, MEI Layout
Bagalagunte
Bangalore - 560 073. ... APPELLANT
(By Sri. Srinivas K, Adv.,)
AND :
1. State of Karnataka
Energy Department
Represented by its
Principal Secretary
Vikas Soudha
-2-
Bangalore - 560 001.
2. Karnataka Power Transmission
Corporation Limited
Represented by its
Managing Director
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76795640/ 1
Karnataka State Shift Duties And ... vs State Of Karnataka on 7 April, 2022
Kaveri Bhavan
Kempegowda Road
Bangalore - 560 009.
3. The Director (A & HR)
KPTCL, Kaveri Bhavan
Kempegowda Road
Bangalore - 560 009.
4. The Chief Electrical Inspector
Govt. of Karnataka
KSCC Building
Opp. To Orian Mall
Dr. Rajkumar Road
Bangalore - 560 055. ...RESPONDENTS
(By Sri. Jeevan J. Neeralgi, AGA, for R-1
Smt. Rakshitha D.J., Adv., for R-2 & 3
R-4 served)
---
This Writ Appeal is field under Section 4 of the
Karnataka High Court Act with a prayer to set aside
the impugned order passed by the learned Single
Judge in W.P. No.10639/2019(GM-TEN) dated
04.09.2019 and consequently allow the writ petition
by granting all the reliefs as prayed therein and etc.
-3-
This Writ Appeal coming on for Preliminary
Hearing this day, SHIVASHANKAR AMARANNAVAR,
J. delivered the following;
JUDGMENT
This intra Court Appeal is filed challenging the order dated 04.09.2019 passed in W.P. No.
10639/2019 wherein the writ petition filed by the appellant came to be dismissed. Appellant had
filed the writ petition seeking issue of writ of certiorari quashing the circular dated 23.01.2019
issued by third respondent (Annexure - L) and for a writ of mandamus seeking direction to second
and third respondents to consider only licensed electrical contractors to perform the work of shift
operation and maintenance duties in all the sub-stations of the respondent - KPTCL as per the
provisions of the Indian Electricity Act, and the Rules framed there under.
2. Heard the arguments of Sri. Srinivas K., learned counsel for the appellant and Sri. Jeevan J.
Neeralgi, learned AGA, for first respondent and Smt. Rakshitha D.J., learned counsel for second and
third respondents.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76795640/ 2
Karnataka State Shift Duties And ... vs State Of Karnataka on 7 April, 2022
3. It would be the contention of the learned counsel for second and third respondents that the
tender process is over, work order has been issued and therefore, the writ appeal has rendered
infructuous. On the contrary, learned counsel for the appellant would contend that he has not
challenged the tender process but he has sought for quashing of the circular dated 23.01.2019 issued
by third respondent and therefore, the appeal will not become infructuous if the tender process is
over and work orders are issued. He further contends that the decision of the meeting held on
09.11.2018 is contrary to the provisions of the Central Electricity Authority (Measures relating to
Safety and Electric Supply) Regulations, 2010 (for short `the Regulations'). He contends that the Act
and the Rules make provisions for maintenance and carrying out electricity works only by the
contractors holding license issued by the fourth respondent and therefore, the second and third
respondents have exceeded in their jurisdiction and limit by taking a decision during the meeting
held on 09.11.2019 and issuing circular dated 23.01.2019 (Annexure - L). He contends that there is
no provision in the Act and the Rules to entrust such crucial electrical works to outside private
manpower agencies which lacks any experience, skill and authority as provided in Rule 45 of the
Indian Electricity Rules, 1956. It is his further submission that based on the conditions imposed in
the circular dated 23.01.2019 issued by third respondent - KPTCL anybody and everybody who is
running a manpower agency are eligible to apply for the shift and maintenance work in KPTCL
power stations. Regulation 29 of the Regulations 2010 prescribes that any works related to
electricity shall be carried out and entrusted to contractors holding the license and therefore, the
decision taken during the meeting held on 09.11.2018 and also the circular issued by the second and
third respondents dated 23.01.2019 do not stand the scrutiny of law. It is his further submission that
electrical licensed contractors have been doing the aforesaid 66KV sub-station contract shift and
maintenance works in KPTCL for the last more than 20 years without any remarks and lapses and
any deviation from such established procedures and modalities will amount to discrimination which
is in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. It is his further submission that the
petitioners cannot participate in the tender process as they are not registered company. It is his
further submission that the learned Single Judge has not considered all these aspects and therefore,
the impugned order requires interference.
4. Learned counsel for second and third respondents apart from supporting the reasons assigned by
the learned Single Judge while passing the impugned order has contended that the petitioners can
also participate in the tender process and there is no requirement of any registered company as
submitted. The only requirement is that the manpower agency should be registered under EPF and
ESI schemes. It is his further submission that the manpower agency will look into the shifts and
minor maintenance work in KPTCL substations under the Nodal Officers who have been nominated
as Electrical Safety Officers for employees of the KPTCL. No installation work has been entrusted to
the manpower agencies and therefore, there is no violation of any of the provisions of the Electricity
Act and Regulations.
5. We have carefully considered the rival submissions of the learned counsel for the parties and gone
through the material on record.
6. Regulation 29 of the Regulations reads thus :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76795640/ 3
Karnataka State Shift Duties And ... vs State Of Karnataka on 7 April, 2022
29. Precautions to be adopted by consumers, owners, occupiers, electrical
contractors, electrical workmen and suppliers. - (1) No electrical installation work,
including additions, alterations, repairs and adjustments to existing installations,
except such replacement of lamps, fans, fuses, switches, domestic appliances of
voltage not exceeding 250V and fittings as in no way alters its capacity or character,
shall be carried out upon the premises of or on behalf of any consumer, supplier,
owner or occupier for the purpose of supply to such consumer, supplier, owner or
occupier except by an electrical contractor licensed in this behalf by the State
Government and under the direct supervision of a person holding a certificate of
competency and by a person holding a permit issued or recognized by the State
Government.
Provided that in the case of works executed for or on behalf of the Central Government and in the
case of installations in mines, oil fields, and railways, the Central Government and in other cases the
State Government, may, by notification in the Official Gazette, exempt on such conditions as it may
impose, any such work described therein either generally or in the case of any specified class of
consumers, suppliers, owners or occupiers.
(2) No electrical installation work which has been carried out in contravention of sub-regulation (1)
shall either be energized or connected to the works of any supplier.
- 10 -
7. The aforesaid provision only deals with electrical installation work, only by the electrical
contractors who have license. The work of electrical installation is not assigned to the manpower
agency but it will be assigned only to the contractors. Under the Regulations the Corporation has
nominated Nodal Officers as Electrical Safety Officers for ensuring observance of safety measures
for operation and maintenance of substations as prescribed in the Regulations. The circular
provides for preparation of tender documents for hiring personnel through manpower agencies for
carrying out shift operations and maintenance of substations under the supervision of the Nodal
Officers of the Corporation. There are no electrical installation works to be carried out by manpower
agency. The learned Single Judge referring to Regulation 3.3 and 7 of the Regulations and rightly
held that these regulations do not apply to the fact
- 11 -
situation of the case. The manpower agencies are not carrying out electrical installation work either
in violation of Electricity Act or the Regulations. The qualified Engineers and Diploma holders shall
ensure that safety measures for operation and maintenance are undertaken as prescribed under
Regulation 7 of the Regulations.
8. As the appellant/petitioner is also allowed to participate in the tender process as observed by the
learned Single Judge, which is based on the statement of objections of second and third
respondents, it will not amount to discrimination or violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76795640/ 4
Karnataka State Shift Duties And ... vs State Of Karnataka on 7 April, 2022
Constitution of India. The appellant/petitioner should only have to ensure that they have to be
registered with EPF and ESI scheme. Copy of the work orders furnished by second and third
respondents will reveal that the tender has been processed and work order has been issued to the
- 12 -
electrical contractors also who participated in the tender process. Therefore, the contention of the
learned counsel for the appellant that the appellant/petitioner cannot participate in the tender
process as they are not registered company has no substance. The learned Single Judge has taken
into consideration all contentions of the appellant/petitioner and rightly dismissed the petition. The
order passed by the learned Single Judge is a reasoned order and does not call for any interference
by this Court. Hence, writ appeal is dismissed.
Sd/-
JUDGE Sd/-
JUDGE LRS.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76795640/ 5
