Kewal Kumar And Others vs State Of J&K And Others on 6 February, 2023
Kewal Kumar And Others vs State Of J&K And Others on 6
February, 2023
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
Sr. No.39
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
SWP No.108/2019
[WP(C) No.216/2019]
Kewal Kumar and others .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: M/s Sayeed Nadeem Hamdani & Mohd.
Tabasam Amin Khan, Advocates
Vs
State of J&K and others ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Raman Sharma, AAG
Mr. Suraj Singh, GA
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
ORDER
In this petition, the petitioners have called in question the Government Order No.919-Edu of 2018
dated 16.11.2018, whereby Rehbar-e-Taleem Scheme for engagement/appointment of persons as
Rehbar-e-Taleem in various government schools was formally closed. A Division Bench of this Court
has already decided the issue with regard to the validity of the impugned Government Order in SWP
No.3004/2018 titled Ruksana Jabeen v. State of J&K and others and other clubbed matters vide
judgment dated 04.02.2023.
The Division has upheld the constitutional validity of the impugned Government Order No.919-Edu
of 2018 and has also issued certain directions with regard to the impact of the Government order on
pending and decided litigation(s). Conclusions in this regard are drawn in paragraph No.31 of the
judgment, which, for facility of reference is reproduced hereunder:-
"31. We have heard both the sides at some length on the impact of the Government
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153781253/ 1
Kewal Kumar And Others vs State Of J&K And Others on 6 February, 2023
order on the pending litigation and we cull out our conclusion as under:
(i). That the impugned Government order will not affect the select panels prepared by
the respondents which have been acted upon and formal orders of engagement have
been issued;
(ii) That the impugned Government Order will not override or effect the judgments
passed or to be passed by this Court holding a candidate/candidates entitled to
engagement in the selection process which was/is under challenge before the Court;
(iii) Where the select panels are approved and the aggrieved party has approached
the Court before it could be acted upon, shall also be not affected by the impugned
Government order, in that,but for litigation in the Court, the approved panel/panels
could have been acted upon and formal letters of engagement in favour of the
selected candidates issued prior to the issuance of the impugned Government order;
and,
(iv) Notwithstanding issuance of the impugned Government order, the respondents
shall abide by the judgments passed by any competent Court of law which have
attained finality. However, the writ petitions involving adjudication of disputes in
respect of tentative merit lists or tentative select panels shall be liable to be dismissed
in view of the impugned Government order, in that, it would not be permissible for a
Court of law to direct the respondents to finalize the tentative merit lists or tentative
select panels and issue engagement orders in view of closure of the scheme and a
clear stipulation contained in paragraph 2nd of the impugned Government order."
In view of the above, this petition insofar as it challenges constitutionality of the impugned
Government Order is concerned, fails and same is disposed of by providing that the impugned
Government Order shall be understood and made applicable in the manner explained by the
Division Bench in the supra judgment.
(SANJEEV KUMAR ) JUDGE Jammu 06.02.2023 Vinod.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/153781253/ 2
