Khaidem Mani S/O Late Kh. Yaima Of ... vs The State Of Manipur Through The Chief ... on 22 May, 2024
Khaidem Mani S/O Late Kh. Yaima Of ... vs The State Of Manipur
Through The Chief ... on 22 May, 2024
Author: A. Guneshwar Sharma
Bench: A. Guneshwar Sharma
Digitally signed by
JOHN JOHN TELEN KOM
TELEN KOM Date: 2024.05.22
14:16:07 +05'30'
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C)No.709 of 2023
1. Khaidem Mani S/o Late Kh. Yaima of Moirangkhom Makha
Loklaobung, PO & PS Imphal, District Imphal West, Manipur.
......Petitioner
- Versus -
1. The State of Manipur through the Chief Secretary, Government of
Manipur, Old Secretariat, Babupara, Imphal, Manipur.
2. The Commissioner (Law), Government of Manipur, New Secretariat,
Babupara, Imphal, Manipur.
3. The Principal Accountant General, Manipur, Babupara, Imphal,
Manipur.
.... Respondents
BEFORE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A. GUNESHWAR SHARMA For the Petitioners : Mr. Khaidem
Mani, in-person.
For the Respondents : Mr. Shyam Sharma GA & Mr. S. Samajeet, Sr. PCCG Date of reserved. :
13.05.2024.
Date of order : 22.05.2024
WP(C)No.709 of 2023 Page 1
JUDGEMENT&ORDER
(CAV)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21532344/ 1
Khaidem Mani S/O Late Kh. Yaima Of ... vs The State Of Manipur Through The Chief ... on 22 May, 2024
[1] Heard Mr. Khaidem Mani, the petitioner-in-person, Mr. Shyam
Sharma, learned GA for the State respondents and Mr. S. Samarjeet, learned Sr. PCCG for
respondent No.3 [2] By the present writ petition, the petitioner is seeking for issuance of a writ in
the nature of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ or direction, directing the respondents for
pay of due salaries and other allowances which are yet to paid to the petitioner for performing and
acting as the Chairperson of the Manipur Human Right Commission (MHRC) throughout his full
tenure as a Member.
[3] Brief facts of the case which led to the filing of the instant writ petition are that the petitioner
was initially appointed as a Member of Manipur Human Rights Commission (MHRC) as per a
warrant of appointment dated 25.08.2018 made by Hon'ble Governor of Manipur on the
recommendation of the Committee under the proviso to Sub-Section(1) of Section 22 of the
Protection of Human Rights Act, 1993. On the same day by a separate notification, Hon'ble
Governor of Manipur, in exercise of the power conferred under Sub-Section(1) of Section 25 of the
Protection Human Rights Act, 1993, authorized the petitioner to act as the Chairperson of the
MHRC until a new Chairperson was appointed.
WP(C)No.709 of 2023 Page 2
[4] It is stated that the petitioner served and acted as the Chairperson
of the MHRC for a period of 4(four) years continuously without any break since he assumed the
office on 30.08.2018 till his demitting the office on 31.08.2022. [5] It is stated that during his
4(four) year tenure as Acting Chairperson, several camp sittings of the Commission were held in
various districts of Manipur. Several programmes/events for dissemination of Human Rights and
the remedies available to citizens in cases of violation of human rights were held on numerous
occasions and record of number of cases were filed and disposed of during his tenure. It is reiterated
that during his tenure as the Acting Chairperson, severable notable tasks were taken up by his Single
Bench. For the first time in the Commission's history, two annual reports of the Commission for the
year 2020-21 and 2021-22 were published and same were placed before the Manipur Legislative
Assembly for its approval. Even during the challenging times when the nation was struck by the
deadly pandemic of Covid-19, the Commission continued to function.
[6] It is further stated that the petitioner has been given full entitlement, privileges and other
facilities as the full-fledged Chairperson under the Protection of the Human Rights Act, 1993 and
under the Rules of the MHRC (Salaries and Allowances and other Terms and Conditions of the
Service of the Chairperson and Members) Rules, 2004 as amended from time to time. However, it is
alleged that the petitioner had been denied to draw the salary and allowances of the WP(C)No.709
of 2023 Page 3 Chairperson under the said Rules. Hence, the petitioner approached this Court by
way of filing the present writ petition seeking the prayers as mentioned above. Mr. Kh. Mani, the
petitioner-in-person submits that when the rule is silent, the provisions of FR 9, 30 and 49 will be
attracted and since the petitioner was discharging the function and duty of a full-fledged
Chairperson throughout his tenure as a Member of MHRC, he will be entitled to the salary of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21532344/ 2
Khaidem Mani S/O Late Kh. Yaima Of ... vs The State Of Manipur Through The Chief ... on 22 May, 2024
Chairperson. He draws the attention of this Court to the fact that in the pay slip issued by the office
of the Principal Accountant General, Manipur, his designation is mentioned as Chairperson and
hence he is entitled to the salary of the Chairperson. It is also submitted that a puisne Judge of the
High Court is entitled to the salary of the Chief Justice when he discharges the function of Chief
Justice, even for a brief period. It is prayed that the respondents be directed to grant salary of the
Chairperson of MHRC to the petitioner as he has acted as Chairperson throughout his tenure as a
Member.
[7] Mr. Shyam Sharma, learned GA for the State respondents submitted that the petitioner is not
qualified to be the Chairperson of MHRC as the qualification of the Chairperson is to be Chief
Justice/Retired Chief Justice of High Court and the substantive post of the petitioner was a Member
of the MHRC. It is submitted that the case of the petitioner is totally based on the letter dated
20.06.2022 issued by the Deputy Secretary cum Assistant Registrar of the Manipur Human Right
Commission. However, the said Secretary is not an WP(C)No.709 of 2023 Page 4 appropriate
authority to issue such letter regarding the fixation of pay and allowances of an Acting
Chairperson/member of the MHRC. It is further stated that as per the rules of business of the
Government of Manipur, the concurrence of the Finance department is essential in case of any
proposal/order which affects Finances of state and previous consultation is necessary under Rule
34A of rules of business of the Government of Manipur. Therefore, letter dated 20.06.2022 was
issued by the Deputy Secretary cum Assistant Registrar of the MHRC in violation of Rules of
Business of the Government of Manipur. It is stated that the writ petition is bad for non-joinder of
necessary parties- such as MHRC and Finance Department. MHRC Rules, 2004 does not stipulates
that a Member who is acting as a Chairperson is entitled to pay and allowance of the Chairperson. It
is further clarified that the provisions of FR and SR will not be applicable in case of pay and
allowances of the Chairperson and Members of MHRC.
[8] Learned Government Advocate has further submitted that the claim of the petitioner is barred
by principle of estoppel, as he has already accepted his emoluments and entitlement/allowances of a
Member of MHRC without any protest. It is contended that the petitioner also failed to produce any
legal document for the pending due salaries and allowances and filed his representation dated
20.02.2023 only after his retirement on 31.08.2022.
WP(C)No.709 of 2023 Page 5
[9] Mr. S. Samarjeet, learned Sr.PCCG for the respondent No.3
[Principal Accountant General, Manipur] submits that the petitioner's pay slip as per 3rd
Amendment Rules, 2018 was issued in the scale of pay fixed for a Manipur Judicial Service Grade-I
@Rs.51,550/- and he is not entitled to the pay scale of a Chairman. It is submitted that the nothing
is left to be done from the side of the respondent No.3 and prays that it may be deleted from this
case. [10] This Court has considered the materials on record, the submissions made at bar and the
relevant law in this regard.
[11] It is an admitted fact that the petitioner was appointed as a Member of Manipur Human Right
Commission by the warrant/order dated 25.08.2018/ 28.08.2018 issued by Hon'ble Governor of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21532344/ 3
Khaidem Mani S/O Late Kh. Yaima Of ... vs The State Of Manipur Through The Chief ... on 22 May, 2024
Manipur in exercise of power conferred under Sub-Section (1) of Section 22 of the Protection of
Human Rights Act, 1993. By another order dated 28.08.2018, Hon'ble Governor also authorized the
petitioner to act as the Chairperson of MHRC till appointment of a new Chairman. It is also an
admitted fact that the petitioner discharged the function of the Chairman of MHRC throughout his
tenure as a Member of the Commission till his retirement on 31.08.2022. It is not in dispute that the
petitioner was getting the salary of a Member of MHRC at the scale of pay and allowances
admissible to MJS Grade-I Officer in terms of 3rd Amendment Rules, 2018. Both parties have
admitted that the petitioner was not given any extra allowances or remuneration for discharging the
function of the Chairperson.
WP(C)No.709 of 2023 Page 6
[12] On bare perusal of the provisions of Manipur Human Rights
Commission (Salaries and Allowances and Other Terms and Conditions of Service of Chairperson
and Members) Rules, 2004 and its amendments made from time to time specially 2nd and 3rd
Amendments, it is seen that Chairperson is entitled to the pay scale of Chief Justice of the High
Court and a Member at the minimum salary in the scale fixed for a Manipur Judicial Service (MJS)
Grade-I. The Rule is silent about the salary payable to a Member who discharges function and duty
of the Chairperson. It will be relevant to refer the definition of Chairperson as given in Manipur
Human Rights Commission Service Rules, 2021. Rule 2(e) defines "Chairperson" means the
Chairperson of the Commission and shall include the "Acting Chairperson" of the Commission. This
Rule was published in the State Gazette on 25.03.2021. Even though the Rule of 2021 is with respect
to the service conditions for the employees of the Commission, the definition of the "Chairperson"
will have a bearing in the present case when the relevant rule is silent about the salary of acting
Chairperson. [13] This Court does not find any merit in the preliminary objections of the State
respondents to the maintainability of the writ petition on ground on non- joinder of necessary party.
MHRC itself is espousing the cause of the petitioner as it has already requested the State
Government to correct pay anomaly of the acting Chairperson of MHRC vide its letter dated
20.06.2022 [Annwxure-A-7] and the petitioner is not claiming anything against MHRC. The plea of
doctrine WP(C)No.709 of 2023 Page 7 of estoppel is without any force, as the petitioner never
relinquished his claim of the higher salary. It is held that Finance department is not a necessary
party and any concurrence in terms of the rules of business has to be initiated and processed from
the Law department which is the nodal department of MHRC. [14] When the relevant rule is silent
and in order to do complete justice, it is obligated upon the court to look for the principle and
provisions from other statutory rules of general application. In such situation, the principles
embodied in FR & SR and judicial pronouncements will be relevant.
[15] By any stretch of imagination, the discharge of duty and function of the Chairperson of MHRC
by the petitioner during his tenure as a Member of the Commission wef 30.08.2018 to 31.08.2022,
cannot be said as a stop-gap arrangement. Rather, the petitioner as a Member of MHRC, was made
to discharge the function of the Chairperson, but denied the full salary by hiding behind the
vagueness of the rules.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21532344/ 4
Khaidem Mani S/O Late Kh. Yaima Of ... vs The State Of Manipur Through The Chief ... on 22 May, 2024
[16] It will be relevant to discuss the case law in this regard. Relying on the leading case of Randhir
Singh v. Union of India: (1982) 1 SCC 618 which postulated the doctrine of equality in the matter of
pay and allowances based on the core principles enshrined in Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution
of India, Hon'ble Supreme Court held in the case of Arindam Chattopadhyay v. State of W.B.: (2013)
4 SCC 152, that if a person is made to discharge the function of a higher post for a considerable long
period of time, he/she is entitled to the pay WP(C)No.709 of 2023 Page 8 and allowances of the
higher post, even if not appointed/promoted on regular basis. The relevant portions are reproduced
for ready reference:
13. Reverting to the facts of this case, we find that although the appellants were
recruited as ACDPOs, the State Government transferred and posted them to work as
CDPOs in ICDS Projects. If this would have been a stopgap arrangement for few
months or the appellants had been given additional charge of the posts of CDPO for a
fixed period, they could not have legitimately claimed salary in the scale of the higher
post i.e. CDPO.
However, the fact of the matter is that as on the date of filing of the original application before the
Tribunal, the appellants had continuously worked as CDPOs for almost 4 years and as on the date of
filing of the writ petition, they had worked on the higher post for about 6 years. By now, they have
worked as CDPOs for almost 14 years and discharged the duties of the higher post. It is neither the
pleaded case of the respondents nor has any material been produced before this Court to show that
the appellants have not been discharging the duties of the post of CDPO or the degree of their
responsibility is different from other CDPOs. Rather, they have tacitly admitted that the appellants
are working as full-fledged CDPOs since July 1999. Therefore, there is no legal or other justification
for denying them salary and allowances of the post of CDPO on the pretext that they have not been
promoted in accordance with the Rules. The convening of the Promotion Committee or taking other
steps for filling up the post of CDPO by promotion is not in the control of the appellants. Therefore,
they cannot be penalised for the Government's failure to undertake the exercise of making regular
promotions.
14. In the result, the appeal is allowed. The impugned order 2 as also the one passed by the Tribunal
are set aside and the respondents are directed to pay salary and allowances to the appellants in the
pay scale of the post of CDPO with effect from the date they took charge of those posts. This exercise
must be completed within 8 weeks from today. The arrears shall be paid to the appellants within a
period of 9 months.
15. Since regular promotions to the post of CDPO have not been made for more than one decade, we
direct the respondents to do the needful within a period of six months from today.
[17] From the above referred judgment, it is clear that if a person is made to discharge the function
of a higher post for a considerable long period (as opposed to stop gap arrangement), such person
shall be entitled to the salary WP(C)No.709 of 2023 Page 9 of the higher post. Silence in the rule
shall not be an impediment to the entitle of salary of the higher post. The principles laid down in FR
specially FR 49 will be applicable. The definition of "Chairperson" includes "Acting Chairperson" as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21532344/ 5
Khaidem Mani S/O Late Kh. Yaima Of ... vs The State Of Manipur Through The Chief ... on 22 May, 2024
per Rules of 2021.
[18] Adopting the principles laid down in the case of Arindam Chattopadhyay (supra), this Court has
not hesitation in holding that the petitioner is entitled to the salary of the Chairperson in terms of
the provisions of Manipur Human Rights Commission (Salaries and Allowances and Other Terms
and Conditions of Service of Chairperson and Members) Rules, 2004 and its amendments made
from time to time specially 2nd and 3rd Amendments read with definition of Chairperson as
provided by Rule 2(e) of Manipur Human Rights Commission Service Rules, 2021.
[19] Accordingly, the writ petition is allowed and the petitioner is entitled to the salary of the
Chairperson of Manipur Human Rights Commission for the period he discharged the function and
duty of the Chairperson in terms of the order dated 28.08.2018 issued by the Hon'ble Governor.
State respondents are directed to pay the difference of pay of the Chairperson and Member to the
petitioner and shall send necessary papers to the office of Principal Account General, Manipur
within a period of two months from the date of receipt of a copy of this order. Respondent No.3 shall
issue new salary slip of the petitioner in terms of the above directions and observations within a
period of one month from WP(C)No.709 of 2023 Page 10 the date of receipt of necessary documents
from the State respondents. The process for payment of arrears of pay and allowance shall be
completed within a period of six months from today.
[20] In terms of the above directions and observations, the writ petition is disposed of. Parties are
directed to bear their own costs.
JUDGE
FR/NFR
John Kom
WP(C)No.709 of 2023 Page 11
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21532344/ 6
