Khalid Hussain And Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 20 November, 2023
Khalid Hussain And Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 20 November, 2023
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
...
Bail App No. 223/2023
Reserved on: 08.11.2023
Pronounced on: 20.11.2023
Khalid Hussain and ors. Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Muzaffar Iqbal Khan,Adv.
Mr. Abrar Ahmad, Advocate.
Vs.
UT of J&K .....Respondent(s)
Through: Mr.P. D. Singh, Dy. AG.
Mr. S. S. Ahmad, Advocate with Mr.
Mr. Zulkarnain Chowdhary, Advocate.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
ORDER
1. This application for bail in anticipation of their arrest is filed by eight persons named in FIR No.
250/2023 registered with Police Station Surankote, Poonch on 15-08-2023 for commission of
offences under Section 307, 147, 323 IPC. Out of eight applicants, seven have already been enlarged
on interim anticipatory bail by this Court vide order dated 06-10- 2023.
2. When the case was taken up, the Investigating Officer along with case diaries appeared. Mr.
Muzaffar Iqbal Khan, learned counsel appearing for the applicants submitted that in view of the
evidence collected by the Investigating officer during the investigation, the involvement of applicant
No.1, Khalid Hussain, who has yet not been enlarged on bail, has not been substantiated nor the
offence under Section 307 is made out. He, therefore, prayed for grant of anticipatory bail to all the
applicants including the applicant No.1- Khalid Hussain.
3. Mr. P. D. Singh, learned Dy. A.G, appearing for the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir and
Mr. S.S.Ahmed, learned counsel appearing for the complainant oppose the grant of bail on the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168683886/ 1
Khalid Hussain And Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 20 November, 2023
ground that applicants have not indicated any special or exceptional circumstances for approaching
under Section 438 of Cr.P.C directly to this Court without first exhausting the remedy before the
Court of learned Sessions Judge Poonch.
4. Learned counsel appearing for the parties were heard both on the maintainability and merits of
the application.
5. Section 438 of Criminal Procedure Code 1973 (Cr.P.C) deals with grant of bail to a person
apprehending arrest and reads thus:
" 438. Direction for grant of bail to person apprehending arrest:- (1) Where any
person has reason to believe that he may be arrested on accusation of having
committed a non-bailable offence, he may apply to the High Court or the Court of
Session for a direction under this section that in the event of such arrest he shall be
released on bail; and that Court may, after taking into consideration, inter alia, the
following factors, namely:-
(i) the nature and gravity of the accusation;
(ii) the antecedents of the applicant including the fact as to whether he has previously
undergone imprisonment on conviction by a Court in respect of any cognizable
offence;
(iii) the possibility of the applicant to flee from justice;
and
(iv) where the accusation has been made with the object of injuring or humiliating
the applicant by having him so arrested, either reject the application forthwith or
issue an interim order for the grant of anticipatory bail;"
6. From a bare reading of sub section (1) of Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, it is
manifestly clear that any person who is apprehending his arrest on accusation of his having
committed non-bailable offence, is entitled to apply to the High Court or the Court of sessions for a
direction that in the event of his arrest, he shall be released on bail. A plain reading of this Section
would suggest that it is left to the discretion and convenience of the affected person to apply for
anticipatory bail either to the High Court or the Court of Sessions. The word "or(cid:128) used between
„High Court(cid:128) and „the Court of Sessions(cid:128) is clearly disjunctive and thereby implying that a person
affected may apply either of the two forums. In other words, the jurisdiction for grant of bail in
anticipation of arrest conferred by Section 438 on the High Court and the Court of Sessions is
concurrent. There is nothing in Section 438 which puts any fetter in discretion of the applicant to
necessarily approach the Court of Sessions and if he chooses to approach the High Court skipping
the Court of Sessions, he is obliged to show exceptional or special reasons.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168683886/ 2
Khalid Hussain And Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 20 November, 2023
7. I am aware that there are judgments of couple of High Courts reading into Section 438 the
provision mandating the affected person to first approach the Court of Sessions for grant of
anticipatory bail under Section 438 and in case he wants to invoke the jurisdiction of the High Court
directly, he will have to spell out special/exceptional reasons prompting him to approach directly
the High Court. There is another line of judgments by various High Courts which is against reading
into Section 438 anything which the legislature has not intended.
8. True it is that two later judgments of this Court rendered by two different Single Benches support
the former view. In case of Rouf Ahmad Mir vs. SSP and another, (Bail App No. 64/2022, decided
on 03.06.2022) a Single Bench of this Court has taken the following view:
"From the analysis of the case law on the subject, it is clear that though Section 438
of Cr. P. C confers concurrent jurisdiction on the High Court and the Sessions Court,
an application should ordinarily be filed before the Sessions Court at the first
instance and not directly before the High Court. For filing an application directly
before the High Court, the applicant has to demonstrate and satisfy the High Court
that there exist exceptional, rare and unusual reasons for the applicant to approach
the High Court directly".
9. Similarly another Single Bench of this Court in the case of Ali Mohd vs. UT of Jammu and
Kashmir and others (Bail App No. 13/2022, decided on 18.04.2022) has taken a similar view. The
observations of the Bench made in the penultimate para of the judgment reads thus:
"Ratio of the judgment of "Ankit Bharti's Case" (Supra) make the legal proposition
manifestly clear, that special circumstances viz; (A) Where bail, regular or
anticipatory, of a co-accused has already been rejected by the Court of Sessions; (B)
Where an accused not residing within the jurisdiction of the concerned Sessions
Court faces a threat of arrest; (C) Where circumstances warrant immediate
protection and where relegation to the Sessions Court would not subserve justice &
(D) where time or situational constraints warrant immediate intervention, must exist
and be established in an application for anticipatory bail which must rest on strong
foundation in respect of both the apprehension of arrest as well as in justification for
approaching directly to the High Court skipping the jurisdiction of Sessions Court,
whereby, the High Court would be held justified in entertaining a petition directly
under Section 438 of Code of Criminal Procedure. The "special circumstances"
should be reflected in the affidavit and supported by documentary evidence. I
respectfully agree with opinion rendered by the full Bench of Allahabad High Court in
Ankit Bharti's case (Supra). Applying the ratio of the judgment (Supra) to facts of the
case in hand, it is apt to reiterate here, that instant anticipatory bail application as
well as the affidavit appended thereto, neither demonstrate special circumstances nor
compelling reasons by petitioner/accused to skip the jurisdiction of the court of Pr.
Sessions Judge Samba within whose jurisdiction the offence of rape u/s 376 IPC has
been registered by police station Bari Brahmana against petitioner/accused and to
approach directly before this High Court. In view of the legal position settled
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168683886/ 3
Khalid Hussain And Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 20 November, 2023
aforesaid, without discussing the merits of the anticipatory bail application of
petitioner/accused, I am of the considered view that the anticipatory bail application
in hand is legally incompetent, not maintainable before this court and out rightly
rejected. As discussed above, petitioner/accused is at liberty to approach the court of
Ld. Principal Sessions Judge Samba firstly for availing his right/appropriate remedy
as warranted under law."
10. Interestingly and possibly inadvertently, an earlier judgment of a learned Single Bench of this
Court, throwing light on the issue, has not been brought to the notice of both the learned Judges
who decided Rouf Ahmad and Ali Mohd (supra). Way back in the year 2003, a Single Bench of this
Court had an occasion to consider the same issue, though in a slightly different context, in the case
of Diwan Singh vs. State and another, (2004) SLJ 283. The question that squarely fell for
consideration before the Single Bench was, whether the second application for grant of anticipatory
bail lies before the High Court after the rejection of first application by the learned Special Judge,
Anti Corruption (Sessions Court) in view of the fact that the High Court and the Sessions Court have
concurrent jurisdiction to grant such bail. While debating the question and interpreting the
provisions of Section 498-A of the J&K Code of Criminal Procedure, which are in pari materia with
Section 438 of the 1973 Code, the Single Bench held thus:
"Thus the consensus of the judicial opinion on the subject appears that fresh
application for anticipatory bail filed by a person whose first application on the same
grounds has been rejected by the Session Court, is maintainable under Section 497-A
Criminal Procedure Code before the High Court. My view is also the same. Therefore,
with respect I say that the view expressed in Zubair Ahmad Bhat's case by the learned
Single Judge is per incurrium and cannot be a binding precedent. In my considered
opinion, section 497-A of Criminal Procedure Code confers a concurrent jurisdiction
in the matter of grant of anticipatory bail on the High Court and the Session Court.
The section no doubt, gives a choice to a person to choose between the to High Court
or to the Court of Session for filing an application for anticipatory bail but if he moves
the Session Court first and his application is rejected, he is not debarred from filing
and maintaining a fresh application on the same cause of action and on the same
grounds before the High Court but it would not be vice versa because, the Court of
Session being a Court subordinate to the High Court and bound by the orders passed
by it cannot grant anticipatory bail to such person whose application has been
rejected by the High Court. It is so because of the fact of subordination of the Session
Court to the High Court and not because Section 497-A Criminal Procedure Code
contains any such bar."
11. Though my personal view on the issue is that in the absence of any expressed or implied bar in
Section 438 Cr.P.C, the Court cannot, by entering into interpretative process, read into Section 438
something which the legislature has not provided. I am of the considered opinion that by reading
into Section 438 Cr.P.C something which the legislature has not provided, would be tantamount to
legislation by the Judiciary, which the doctrine of separation of power, a part of basic structure of
the Constitution, clearly prohibits. It is established canon of interpretation of statute that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168683886/ 4
Khalid Hussain And Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 20 November, 2023
language of the stature should be read as it is and the intention of the legislation has primarily to be
gathered from the language used. If the language of a Statute is clear, unequivocal and
unambiguous, there is hardly any need to add or mend and by construction make improvements in
the statute. It is contrary to all rules of interpretation of Statutes to read into a statutory provision,
unless it is absolutely necessary to do so. Reading of Section 438 would make it evident that there
does not exist in the Section a „casus omissus' and therefore to sustain the Section and to give it
meaningful interpretation, it is necessary to supply requisite words. In the absence of such
eventuality, if we do so then we would be legislating and not constructing the statute. The legislation
in its wisdom has given discretion to the person apprehending his arrest to approach either the High
Court or the Court of Sessions, depending upon his convenience, and, therefore, the Courts, by
supplying words to Section 438, which, on the face of it, does not put any fetters on such discretion,
cannot compel the affected person to necessarily approach the Court of Sessions in the first instance
or that affected person will have to spell out special and extraordinary circumstances for justifying
his filing the anticipatory bail application directly before the High Court. I am clearly supportive of
the view of some of the High Courts that Section 438 Cr.P.C must be read as it is and there is hardly
any need to add words to it which the legislation has not intended. I am equally supportive of the
view that no practice of the Court, even if followed over a period of time, can supplant the statutory
provisions.
12. Since there is cleavage of judicial opinion on the issue and the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court is already
seized of the matter in Gauhati High Court Bar Association vs. State of Assam and others, (2023)
Live Law Supreme Court 177, as such it may not be appropriate for me to make reference to the
larger Bench for authoritative pronouncement. The issue, which the Supreme Court has framed in
Gauhati High Court case supra, reads thus:
"The issue raised in this appeal is whether the High Court exercising jurisdiction
under Section 438 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 has discretion not to
entertain such an application on the ground that the applicant must first apply to the
Court of Sessions.
In our view, a decision on the aforesaid issue would have wide ramifications."
13. For the aforesaid reasons and awaiting the determination of the issue by Hon(cid:128)ble the Supreme
Court, the consideration of this application needs to be deferred, however, having gone through the
CD file and having found that the material evidence so far collected by the Investigating Officer does
not suggest prima facie commission of offence under Section 307 IPC, nor is there any material so
far on record to indicate direct involvement of the applicant No.1, I am inclined to grant the interim
anticipatory bail to him too, till the matter is considered finally. The other co-accused, who are
applicant Nos. 2 to 8, have already been enlarged to bail and there is no complaint from the
Investigating Officer that they have not cooperated in the matter.
14. For the foregoing reasons the applicant No.1, Khalid Hussain, is also held entitled to interim
anticipatory bail at this stage and it is provided that the police shall, in the event of his arrest in FIR
No. 250/2023 registered with Police Station Surankote, release him on bail subject to the following
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168683886/ 5
Khalid Hussain And Ors vs Ut Of J&K on 20 November, 2023
conditions:-
(a) That the applicant-Khalid Hussain shall furnish a personal bond to the tune of Rs.
25,000/- with two sureties of the like amount before the Investigating Officer.
(b) That the applicant No.1 shall not leave the territorial jurisdiction of this Court
without prior permission.
(c) That the applicant shall not influence directly or indirectly the prosecution
witnesses or tamper with the prosecution evidence by any mode or method.
(d) That the applicant shall co-operate with the investigating agency in the
investigation of the case as and when required by the Investigating agency, without
any fail.
(e) That the applicant shall deposit his passport, if any, before the Investigating
agency.
15. The CD File be returned to the Investigating Officer through learned government counsel.
16. Let the application come up for consideration on 22-12-2023.
(Sanjeev Kumar) Judge JAMMU:
20.11.2023 Anil Raina, Addl. Registrar/Secy Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168683886/ 6
