Khaseem vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 May, 2022
Khaseem vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 May, 2022
Author: M. Nagaprasanna
Bench: M. Nagaprasanna
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 27TH DAY OF MAY, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA
CRIMINAL PETITION No.47 OF 2022
BETWEEN
KHASEEM,
S/O T. K. KUNHIMMAD,
AGED ABOUT 42 YEARS,
R/AT NEAR MAKKI KAMAN GATE,
BETHU VILLAGE,
NAPOKLU,
KODAGU DISTRICT - 571 213.
... PETITIONER
[BY SRI.PRATHEEP K.C., ADVOCATE)
AND
1. THE STATE OF KARNATAKA,
REPRESENTED BY
NAPOKLU POLICE STATION,
KODAGU DISTRICT.
REPRESENTED BY ITS
STATE PUBLIC PROSEUCTOR,
HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA,
BANGALORE - 01.
2. P. M. POONACHA,
S/O MUTHAPPA,
AGED ABOUT 33 YEARS,
VILLAGE ASSISTANT,
PERURU VILLAGE,
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165377308/ 1
Khaseem vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 May, 2022
MADIKERI,
KODAGU DISTRICT - 571 213.
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI.K.S.ABHIJITH, HCGP FOR R1;
SRI.NAVEEN BIDDAPPA, ADVOCATE FOR R2)
THIS CRIMINAL PETITION IS FILED UNDER SECTION
482 OF CR.P.C. PRAYING TO QUASH THE ENTIRE
PROCEEDINGS AGAINST THE PETITIONER IN
SPL.C.NO.155/2018 (CR.NO.135/2017) OF NAPOKLU
POLICE STATION, KODAGU DISTRICT, FOR THE OFFENCE
P/U/S 279, 323, 504, 506 R/W 34 OF IPC AND SECTION
3(1)(r) AND 3(2)(v-a) OF SC/ST (POA) ACT ON THE FILE OF I
ADDITIONAL DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE, KODAGU,
MADIKERI.
THIS CRIMINAL PETITION COMING ON FOR
ADMISSION THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE
FOLLOWING:
ORDER
The petitioner is before this Court calling in question the proceedings in Spl.C.No.155/2018 which
arose out of Cr.No.135/2017 registered by the Napoklu police station, Kodagu District for the
offences punishable under Sections 279, 323, 504, 506 read with Section 34 of IPC and Section
3(1)(r), and 3(2)(v-a) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act,
1989 on the file of I Additional District and Sessions Judge, Kodagu, Madikeri.
2. Heard Sri. Pratheep K.C., learned counsel appearing for the petitioner, Sri. K.S.Abhijith, learned
HCGP appearing for the 1st respondent-
State and Sri. Naveen Biddappa, learned counsel appearing for the 2nd respondent.
3. The petitioner is accused No.4 in the crime. A crash between the car belonging to the complainant
and that of the 1st accused, the presence of the other accused in the alleged scene of crime leads to
registration of the complaint by the 2nd respondent, alleging the aforesaid offences including
offences punishable under provisions of the Prevention of Atrocities Act, 1989.
4. Accused Nos. 1 to 3 faced trial and were acquitted by an order of the learned Sessions Judge in
Spl.C.No.4/2018, by its order dated 31.07.2019.
The petitioner was not available for trial as he was allegedly absconding and therefore a split charge
sheet was framed against the petitioner. It is the said charge sheet that is now, sought to be tried
against the petitioner notwithstanding the acquittal order against the accused Nos.1 to 3.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165377308/ 2
Khaseem vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 May, 2022
5. The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that the petitioner was not aware of the
ongoing trial, in the light of the confusion with regard to two names of the accused being the same,
one of accused No.1 and accused No.4-the petitioner and therefore, was not aware of the trial.
He would seek parity in treatment and quashment of the proceedings in the light of the acquittal of
accused Nos.1 and 3.
6. The learned HCGP however, refutes the submissions, and would contend that the petitioner
escaped trial and indulgence should not be shown and he should face trial, it is for the Sessions
Judge to pass appropriate orders and the places reliance upon the judgment of the co-ordinate
Bench of this Court in Crl.P.No.6857/2020 rendered on 24.03.2021.
7. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions made by the respective learned counsel
and perused the materials on record.
8. The afore-stated facts are not in dispute.
The case registered is in common against all the accused including that of the petitioner, it has
resulted in acquittal of the accused Nos.1 to 3 in terms of an order of the learned Sessions Judge.
The reason rendered of the learned Sessions Judge reads as follows:
"27. The statements of PWs.5 to 7 said to have been given under Section 161 of
Cr.P.C., as per Ex.P.7 to 9 cannot be relied upon, as they are inadmissible in evidence
and all of them have given a go-bye to the said statements.
28. Thus, on an appreciation of the entire oral and documentary evidence on record,
the prosecution has miserably failed to adduce any cogent and reliable evidence to
connect the accused with the alleged offences and prove the charges framed against
the accused for the offences punishable under Sections 279,323,504,506 read with 34
of IPC and Sections 3(1)(r), 3(1)(s) and 3(2)(v-a) of the Scheduled Castes and
Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, beyond all reasonable doubt.
Hence, the accused persons are liable to be acquitted, on the ground of benefit of
doubt. Hence, I answer Point Nos.1 to 5 in the 'Negative'."
9. The learned Sessions Judge on appreciation of the entire oral and documentary evidence holds
that the prosecution has miserably failed to adduce any cogent or reliable evidence to connect the
accused in the alleged offences and prove them beyond all reasonable doubt. If the offences could
not be proved against accused Nos.1 to 3, independent allegations against accused No.4-the
petitioner herein not being present permitting the trial to be continued against the petitioner would
become an exercise and futility. The reliance placed by the judgment of the co-ordinate Bench by the
leaned HCGP is distinguishable on facts without much ado and has been distinguished by a Co-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165377308/ 3
Khaseem vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 May, 2022
ordinate Bench of this Court in Crl.P.No.110910/2020 rendered on 24.03.2022. This Court in
Cr.P.No.3017/2022 on identical circumstance by its order dated 22.04.2022 has held as follows:
11. If the prosecution has failed in establishing the guilt of the accused, the petitioner
being accused No.1 and the other being accused No.2 and the crime arising out of the
very same set of facts and the very same evidence, the finding would enure to the
benefit of the petitioner as well, as paragraph 19 (supra) makes it abundantly clear
that the prosecution was unable to connect the incident itself to the accused facing
trial. If the prosecution has failed to connect the incident to the accused, it would be
equally applicable to accused No.1, the petitioner, as it was applicable to accused
No.2.
12. Though, the petitioner was absconding throughout the trial and did not face the
rigmarole of the procedure of a criminal trial, one fact cannot be lost sight of is, the
right of liberty of a person which is a fundamental right. When this Court finds that
the other accused who stood on the same footing not being convicted for the reason
that there was no evidence to link the incident to the accused, directing trial to be
conducted against the petitioner on the ground that he was absconding, will result in
miscarriage of justice.
13. If all the accused were available for trial except the petitioner and those accused
had been convicted of the offences, then it would be, "a yes" for conducting a trial
against the petitioner. But, what has happened is the opposite, the accused No.2 has
been acquitted.
Therefore, in my considered view, the trial against accused No.2, in the teeth of the finding of the
learned Sessions Judge in favour of accused No.2 and the order of the learned Sessions Judge
having become final qua accused No.2, further trial against the petitioner cannot be permitted to be
continued.
14. The view of mine, in this regard, is fortified by the judgment rendered by a Co- ordinate Bench of
this Court in Crl.P.4796/2017 wherein the Co-ordinate Bench considering identical set of facts has
held as follows:
"12. Having heard the learned Advocates appearing for parties and on perusal of
records it would disclose that petitioner/accused was never traced and non-bailable
warrant issued against him was never executed. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of
CENTRAL BUREAU OF INVESTIGATION vs AKHILESH SINGH reported in AIR
2005 SCC 268 has held quashing of charge and order discharging co-accused can be
passed, if the proceedings initiated against co-accused is on similar allegations and if
said judgment had reached finality. It is also held that discharge of a co-accused by
the High Court by holding that no purpose would be served in further proceeding
with the case, is just and proper. In another ruling in MOHAMMED ILIAS vs. STATE
OF KARNATAKA reported in (2001) 3 Kant LJ 551 this Court has held as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165377308/ 4
Khaseem vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 May, 2022
"The petitioner is the accused in the case and he is shown to be the absconding.
Therefore, the case against the petitioner was split up and charge-sheet was laid
against other available accused Nos.1 and 3 for committing an offence punishable
under Sections 498A and 307 IPC r/w 34 Indian Penal Code, 1860. After the trial, the
Sessions Judge acquitted the accused Nos.1 to 3. The petitioner was arrested and
proceedings were revived against him in the split charge sheet.... In the instant case
also, the full pledged trial was held against accused Nos.1 to 3, in respect of the same
offence. In the second round of trial against the petitioner, the evidence to be
produced cannot be different from the one that was produced by the prosecution in
the earlier case. Therefore, in that view of the matter, the proceeding is quashed."
13. Yet, in another ruling THE STATE OF KARNATAKA vs. K.C.NARASEGOWDA reported in ILR
2005 Kar. 1822 this Court has held to the following effect:
"As the case before the Sessions Judge is not a pending case, he cannot keep the file
any longer pending nor he can close the case as he has to await appearance of the
accused or the production by the State, for passing orders regarding undergoing
sentence. As such, considering these peculiar facts and circumstances, it is deemed
proper to exercise the inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. instead of
jurisdiction under Section 385 of Cr.P.C. in the interest of justice. As the entire
material evidence of the prosecutions is one and the same, as against all the accused
including the non-appealing accused No.1, who is said to be absconding, there is no
second opinion that he is also entitled for the same benefit of doubt as he is extended
for his co-accused. Accused acquitted by giving benefit of doubt."
14. In this background, when the facts on hand are examined, it would clearly indicate that not only
complainant but also other witnesses including the inmates of ambulance in which they were
travelling on the date of incident, had turned hostile in the proceedings which was continued against
co-accused. Though, P.W.1 - complainant had admitted that he has lodged a compliant as per Ex.P-1
and had also admitted that he has given a statement identifying the accused before the Investigation
Officer, he did not identify the accused persons present before Court. In fact, statements given by
him as per Exs.P-2 to P-4 when confronted, he denied the same and had also denied the suggestion
put by the public prosecutor that he had furnished the statements as per Exs.P-2 to P-4 as false.
P.W.2 to P.W.8 had not identified the accused persons present before the jurisdictional Sessions
Court.
In fact, they have not even identified the statements made by them before the Investigating Officer
and nothing worthwhile has been elicited in their cross-examination to disbelieve their evidence.
Thus, taking into consideration said evidence available on record Sessions Court had arrived at a
conclusion that evidence of the witnesses examined by prosecution would not come to their
assistance. In fact, witnesses to the seizure panchnama - Ex.P-40, who were examined as P.W.16
and P.W.17, have also turned hostile and they have stated that police had called them a year back to
the police station and when they went to the police station, they had not seen any accused persons in
police station. However, they admit police having taken their signatures on the papers and contents
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165377308/ 5
Khaseem vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 May, 2022
of it were not known to them.
15. It is in this background, trial Court on appreciation of entire evidence had acquitted all the
accused persons by holding that prosecution had failed to prove the offence alleging accused persons
beyond reasonable doubt attracting the ingredients of provisions of the offence alleged against them.
In fact, Sessions Court has observed that there was certain communal disturbance in Dakshina
Kannada district and other places at Bantwal Taluk and to please on community of people, the
Investigating Officer might have falsely implicated the accused persons in a false case or to avoid the
blame to be received from the public or other community people and such possibilities cannot be
ruled out. In this background, when prayer of petitioner sought for in the present petition is
examined, it can be noticed that contents of supplementary charge sheet filed against the petitioner
is similar, identical and in fact, it is replica of charge made against accused Nos.1 to 23 and 25 to 33,
who15 were tried in S.C.No.12/2007, 94/2007 and 26/2008 and had been acquitted.
16. In that view of the matter, this Court is of the firm view that judgment rendered by trial Court
insofar as it relates to accused Nos.1 to 23 and 25 to 33 is similar and identical to the charge made
against the present petitioner. This Court does not find any independent or separate material having
been placed by the prosecution against present petitioner to put him on trial once again and
directing the petitioner-accused to undergo the order of trial, which ultimately would and 25 to 33.
When allegation made against accused Nos.1 to 23 and 25 to 33 is compared with the allegation
made against present petitioner, it has to be necessarily held that they are identical, similar and
inseparable in nature and no independent decision can be taken against the present petitioner.
Therefore, no purpose would be served even if the present petitioner is ordered to be tried by the
trial Court.
17. In view of the afore stated facts and the law laid down, as discussed hereinabove, it would emerge
that there would be no harm or injustice that would be caused to prosecution if benefit of acquittal
order is passed in favour of accused - petitioner, since accused Nos.1 to 23 and 25 to 33 against
whom similar allegation had been made is already acquitted. Though, it is contended by Sri.
Rachaiah, learned HCGP appearing for the State that petitioner should not be extended said benefit,
since he is an absconder, by relying upon judgment of Coordinate Bench this Court is not inclined to
accept said contention for single reason that said judgment had been rendered based on the
judgment of Apex Court in the case of DEEPAK RAJAK vs. STATE OF WEST BENGAL reported in
(2007) 15 SCC 305 where under Apex Court after noticing the facts obtained in the said case, had
held that benefit of acquittal, should be extended to the appellant, since co-accused had been
acquitted and held that a departure can be made in cases where accused has not surrendered "after
conviction" in addition to not filing an appeal against the conviction. As such, noticing earlier
position of law laid down it was held by the Apex Court that in case of acquittal of a accused for
same offence on same set of facts and on similar accusations, if considered, it would entile for
acquittal of co-accused also.
18. In that view of the matter, present proceedings initiated against petitioner is liable to be
quashed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165377308/ 6
Khaseem vs The State Of Karnataka on 27 May, 2022
Hence, I proceed to pass the following:
ORDER
(i) Criminal petition is hereby allowed.
(ii) Proceedings in C.C.No.1170/2007 pending on the file of Addl. Civil Judge &
JMFC, Bantwal, in Cr.No.130/2006 registered by Bantwal Rural Police Station, is
hereby quashed insofar petitioner is concerned.
In view of criminal petition having been disposed of on merits, I.A.No.1/2017 for stay does not
survive for consideration and same stands rejected."
The Co-ordinate Bench was considering a case where the co-accused who had escaped trial had not
surrendered or was not arrested by the police.
15. In the case at hand, the petitioner was taken into custody on 24.02.2022 and is in custody for the
last two months. The facts obtaining in the case at hand; the order of the learned Sessions Judge
acquitting accused No.2 on the same set of facts and on the ground that there was no evidence to
link the incident with the accused; the said order of acquittal having become final; the order passed
by the Co-ordinate Bench (supra), a trajectory of all the aforesaid would lead to an unmistakable
conclusion that the petitioner cannot be permitted to undergo trial and I deem it appropriate to
obliterate the proceedings against the petitioner accepting the subject petition filed under Section
482 of the Cr.P.C.
10. In the light of the judgment rendered by this Court and that of the co-ordinate Bench supra, I
deem it appropriate to exercise the jurisdiction of this Court under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. and
obliterate further trial against the petitioner.
11. For the aforesaid reasons, the following:
ORDER The Criminal Petition is allowed.
The proceedings in Spl.C.No.155/2018 pending on the file of the I Additional District
and Sessions Judge, Kodagu, Madikeri (Cr.No.135/2017) stand quashed qua the
petitioner.
Sd/-
JUDGE JS/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/165377308/ 7
