Krishan Lal Alias Lundi vs Union Territory Of J&K on 6 April, 2023
Krishan Lal Alias Lundi vs Union Territory Of J&K on 6 April,
2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on : 17.03.2023
Pronounced on: 06.04.2023
WP(Crl) No. 68/2022
Krishan Lal alias Lundi .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Waheed Choudhary, Advocate.
Vs
Union Territory of J&K ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Sumeet Bhatia, GA.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The petitioner, who has been detained pursuant to the order of detention bearing No. PITNDPS
19/2022 dated 22.09.2022 issued by the respondent No. 2 i.e. Divisional Commissioner, Jammu
under section 3 of the Prevention of the Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1988 has impugned his detention on the ground that the petitioner has not been provided the
documents relied upon by the respondent No. 2 while issuing the detention order.
2. It is also stated that he was not informed about his right to make representation to the Advisory
Board and further, that the petitioner is an illiterate man, who does not know English language and
order of dentition has not been explained to him in Hindi or Dogri, the only languages which the
petitioner understands. It is also pleaded that the respondent No. 2 has not shown his awareness
about the activities of the petitioner and has assigned no reason for detaining the petitioner, as such,
the order suffers from the vice of non-application of mind.
3. The counter-affidavit has been filed by the respondent Nos. 2 and 3.
The respondent No. 2 has stated that the petitioner is a habitual offender, involved in drug peddling
and despite having so many FIRs registered against him, he did not desist from indulging in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109700696/ 1
Krishan Lal Alias Lundi vs Union Territory Of J&K on 6 April, 2023
activities of illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, which poses a serious threat
to the health and welfare of the people of District Udhampur and adjoining areas. It is also stated
that after the careful perusal of the dossier submitted by the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP),
Udhampur, the detention order was passed against the petitioner and the same has been approved
by the Government vide order dated 21.10.2022 . The respondent No. 3 has stated that the detention
order issued by the respondent No. 2 was executed as per law by the Executing Officer,
Sub-Inspector, Daljeet Singh of Police Station, Ramnagar. Upon detention, the signatures of the
petitioner have been obtained and all the documents pertaining to the detention of the petitioner
have been provided to the petitioner under proper receipt. Further, in the execution report, it is
mentioned that conditions/grounds of detention warrant were read over and explained to the
petitioner in Urdu language which he fully understood and in acknowledgment of which, his
signatures have been obtained. He was also made aware of his right to make representation against
the order of detention and the copies of the FIR, seizure memo, FSL reports have been duly supplied
to him. The respondents have placed on record, the execution report, the receipt of grounds of
detention and other record, an undertaking executed by the Sub-Inspector, Daljeet Singh and the
order dated 21.10.2022 issued by the Financial Commissioner (ACS) Home regarding confirmation
of the detention order dated 22.09.2022 and the detention of the petitioner for a period of one year.
4. Mr. Waheed Choudhary, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently argued that Daily Diary
Reports (for short 'the DDRs') relied upon by the respondent No. 2 are merely an excuse to justify
the detention of the petitioner on the stale grounds, therefore, the order of detention is not
sustainable in the eyes of law.
5. Mr. Sumit Bhatia, learned GA argued that the petitioner is a habitual offender and even has been
convicted by the Court and despite release in four cases, he did not reform himself, which
necessitated the respondent No. 3 to prepare the dossier for issuance of the detention order by the
respondent No. 2, which was issued subsequently. He further argued that all the statutory as well as
the constitutional safeguards have been compiled with by the respondents not only at the time of
passing of detention order, but also while executing the detention order.
6. Heard and perused the record.
7. A perusal of the grounds of detention reveals that the petitioner is involved in four FIRs. In FIR
No. 21/2009 under section 8/20 NDPS Act of Police Station, Ramnagar, the allegations against the
petitioner are that during his personal search on 20.02.2009, 22 grams of Charas like substance was
recovered. Charge sheet was produced against the petitioner, but he was acquitted by the Court after
the trial.
8. In second FIR No. 78/2017 under section 8/20 NDPS Act of Police Station, Ramnagar, the
allegations against the petitioner are that on 04.05.2017, during the patrol duty at Dalsar Road, the
petitioner was found moving in suspicious condition and was apprehended by the Police. During his
personal search, one Challi of Charas like substance wrapped in maize wrap (20 grams) was found
and charge sheet was laid against the petitioner. He was enlarged on bail but was convicted and
sentenced for imprisonment till the rising of the court along with fine of Rs. 3,000/-.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109700696/ 2
Krishan Lal Alias Lundi vs Union Territory Of J&K on 6 April, 2023
9. In third FIR No. 81/2019 under section 8/21/22 NDPS Act of Police Station, Ramnagar the
allegations are that during the personal search of the petitioner on 29.07.2019, 10 grams of Heroine
like contraband was recovered from the right pocket of the pant of the petitioner. Charge sheet has
been laid against the petitioner in the said case.
10. In fourth FIR No. 20/2021 under section 8/20 NDPS Act of Police Station, Ramnagar, on
17.02.2021 at 19:00 hours the petitioner who was moving in suspicious condition tried to run away
when he saw the Police party but was apprehended. During his personal search, 540 grams of
Charas like contraband was recovered from the back pocket of his pant. The petitioner was enlarged
on bail by the Court in the said FIR.
11. The petitioner has been detained on the grounds that the petitioner is spoiling the future of the
youth of that area by providing/supplying the contraband substance to them and, as such, is posing
a serious threat to the lives of younger generation of the country and even to the economy of the UT
of Jammu and Kashmir.
12. In all these FIRs, there is no allegation that the petitioner was selling any contraband to the
youth and rather the petitioner has been apprehended only on account of possession of the
contraband. Except the petitioner, none else figures as an accused along with the petitioner. The
respondent No. 2 has also relied upon the DDRs while issuing the order of detention.
13. A perusal of the DDR No. 11 dated 01.09.2022, DDR No. 14 dated 12.09.2022 and DDR No. 21
dated 13.09.2022 reveal that they are vague and in all these DDRs it is only mentioned that the
petitioner is earlier involved in number of cases under NDPS Act and extra vigilance is kept on him.
By doing this, he is playing with the future of youngsters and is involving young boys in his illegal
business of drug smuggling. All these DDRs are vague, as no date, month, year of illegal activities of
the petitioner and also the particulars of the young boys, who are allegedly being involved by the
petitioner, are mentioned.
14. It appears that these DDRs were prepared in quick succession i.e. on 01.09.2022, 12.09.2022
and 13.09.2022 just to detain the petitioner and in all these DDRs extra surveillance was ordered to
be kept on him. But despite the extra surveillance, the respondent No. 3 has not been able to
demonstrate/establish any act in which the petitioner has indulged after he was enlarged on bail in
FIR No. 20/2021. The daily diary reports being vague and bereft of details of the activities of the
petitioner which necessitated the issuance of the detention order, could not have been relied upon
by the detaining authority i.e. respondent no. 2 while issuing the order of detention. The issuance of
the order of detention on vague grounds deprives the detenue of his right to make effective
representation against the order of the detention and if the detention order is passed on vague
grounds then the constitutional right of making representation against the detention order, as
envisaged by article 22(5) of the Constitution of India would become a 'Mirage'. The issuance of the
order of detention on vague grounds would amount to be an arbitrary exercise of power by the
detaining authority. The Hon'ble Apex Court in Jahangirkhan Fazalkhan Pathan v. Police
Commissioner, Ahamabad and Anr. (1989) 3 SCC 590 has held that the order of detention passed on
vague grounds deprives the petitioner of his right to make an effective representation against the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109700696/ 3
Krishan Lal Alias Lundi vs Union Territory Of J&K on 6 April, 2023
order of detention.
15. Being conscious of the fact that if the order of detention is found to be bad on one ground, still
the same can be upheld on the other grounds as well, this Court finds that the order of detention has
been issued on 22.09.2022 after more than one year and seven months of the last alleged illegal
activity of the petitioner, when FIR bearing No. 20/2021 was registered against the petitioner on
17.02.2021. In case, the petitioner was required to be detained, the respondents ought to have
immediately proceeded for issuing the detention order against the petitioner, but they have waited
for one year and seven months for the issuance of the same. The gap of one year and seven months
breaks the proximity between the alleged activity and the purpose of the detention order. As such,
there is delay in passing the detention order, if the other grounds of detention too are taken into
consideration. It is also profitable to take note of the judgment of the Apex Court in case titled,
Saeed Zakir Hussain Malik vs State of Maharashtra, (2012) 8 SCC 233. The relevant paragraph Nos.
27 and 28 read as under:
"27) As regards the second contention, as rightly pointed out by learned counsel for
the appellant, the delay in passing the detention order, namely, after 15 months
vitiates the detention itself. The question whether the prejudicial activities of a
person necessitating to pass an order of detention is proximate to the time when the
order is made or the live-link between the prejudicial activities and the purpose of
detention is snapped depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. Though
there is no hard and fast rule and no exhaustive guidelines can be laid down in that
behalf, however, when there is undue and long delay between the prejudicial
activities and the passing of detention order, it is incumbent on the part of the court
to scrutinize whether the Detaining Authority has satisfactorily examined such a
delay and afforded a reasonable and acceptable explanation as to why such a delay
has occasioned.
28) It is also the duty of the court to investigate whether casual connection has been
broken in the circumstance of each case.
We are satisfied that in the absence of proper explanation for a period of 15 months in issuing the
order of detention, the same has to be set aside. Since, we are in agreement with the contentions
relating to delay in passing the Detention Order and serving the same on detenue, there is no need
to go into the factual details."
16. Thus, this Court is of the considered view that the impugned order of detention bearing No.
PITNDPS 19/2022 dated 22.09.2022 issued by the respondent No. 2 i.e. Divisional Commissioner,
Jammu, is required to be quashed. Ordered accordingly.
17. The petitioner be released forthwith, if he is not required in any other case. Record be returned
to the learned counsel appearing for the respondent.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109700696/ 4
Krishan Lal Alias Lundi vs Union Territory Of J&K on 6 April, 2023
(Rajnesh Oswal) Judge Jammu 06.04.2023 Bunty Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No Whether
the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109700696/ 5
