Krushna Chandra Pattnayak vs Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... ... on 13 March, 2024
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak vs Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi
Swain .... ... on 13 March, 2024
Author: S.K. Panigrahi
Bench: S.K. Panigrahi
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRLREV No.419 of 2021
&
CRLREV No.484 of 2021
(In CRLREV No.419 of 2021)
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak .... Petitioner
-versus-
Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... Opposite Party
Advocates appeared in the case:
For Petitioner : Mr. Devashis Panda, Adv.
-versus-
For Opposite Party : Mr. Sangram Ku. Das, Adv.
(In CRLREV No.484 of 2021)
Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... Petitioner
-versus-
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak .... Opposite Party
Advocates appeared in the case:
For Petitioner : Mr. Sangram Ku. Das, Adv.
-versus-
For Opposite Party : Mr. Devashis Panda, Adv.
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed
Signed by: BHABAGRAHI JHANKAR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80239614/ 1
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak vs Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... ... on 13 March, 2024
Designation: Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary
pg. 1
Reason: Authentication
Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
Date: 02-Apr-2024 19:13:15
CORAM:
DR. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI
DATE OF HEARING:-09.01.2024
DATE OF JUDGMENT:-13.03.2024
Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J.
1. The Petitioners in both the CRLREVs have challenged the legality of the order dated 25.10.2019
passed in Misc. Case No. 229/2015 / Comp. No. 174/2018 by the learned Asst. Sessions Judge
(Womens'), Jagatsinghpur, in proceedings under the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence
Act, 2005 which has been confirmed by judgment dated 06.09.2021 passed in CRLA No. 35/2019 by
the learned Sessions Judge, Jagatsinghpur.
2. The learned A.S.J.(w), Jagatsinghpur passed the order dated 25.10.2019 partly allowing the
prayer of the Opposite Party and passed order of protection under section 18 of the P.W.D.V. Act
and directed the Petitioner to provide monetary relief to the Opposite Party by giving an amount of
Rs.3,000/- per month towards her maintenance from the date of order under section 20 of the
P.W.D.V Act.
3. Through CRLREV No.419 of 2021, the petitioner seeks the quashment of the impugned order with
respect to the allowance of maintenance. Through CRLREV No.484 of 2021, the Opposite Party has
prayed for increasing the amount of maintenance, share in ancestral property and return of
Stridhan property and dowry articles. I. FACTS OF THE CASE:
4. The concise yet comprehensive factual record of the case, pertaining to the matter at hand, is
presented succinctly as follows:
Designation: Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary pg. 2 Reason: Authentication
Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024 19:13:15
(i) The Petitioner is the sole surviving Opposite Party in the court of the Asst.
Sessions Judge (Womens'), Jagatsinghpur (transferee court from the Court of the Id.
S.D.J.M. Jagatsinghpur) in a proceeding initiated against him and his deceased son
and wife under section 12 of the of the Protection of Women from Domestic Violence
Act, 2005. The FIR was filed on 28.12.2015 by the Opposite Party herein and
registered initially as D.V. Crl. Misc.
Case No. 229 of 2015 and after transfer as Misc. Case No. 229/2015 / Comp. No. 174/2018.
(ii) The Opposite Party in the complaint has alleged that she had married to late Ranjan Kumar
Pattnayak, Petitioner's late son as per customary Hindu rituals on 13.04.2009 and at the time of
marriage there was a demand of Rs.5,00,000/- (Rupees Five lakhs only) as dowry along with gold
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80239614/ 2
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak vs Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... ... on 13 March, 2024
and silver ornaments and other household articles which was duly fulfilled. After marriage, the
Opposite Party had resided for some time in the matrimonial home after which her husband
demanded that Opposite Party's parents buy him a plot at Bhubaneswar to which they expressed
their inability to do so.
(iii) The Opposite Party alleged that her husband had mentally and physically tortured her at
Sunabeda where she went to reside and even after she tried to explain her parents' inability to fulfill
their demand, there was no change in her husband's behavior. Further, she alleged that her husband
subjected her to cruelty at Sunabeda and at the behest of others ill-treated her and she was deprived
of the basic necessities like food, clothing and medicines. Thereafter, Designation: Assistant
Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Date:
02-Apr-2024 19:13:15 her husband left for Goa on 17.05.2009 where he was serving. No settlement
could be reached because of his insistence for fulfilling the demand for land at Bhubaneswar.
(iv) Her husband had filed a petition for divorce to declare the marriage as null and void in the
Family Court, Cuttack and she had filed an F.I.R. at Raghunathpur against her husband, parents-
in-law and married sister-in-law. Alleging that the parents-in-law had snatched away her ornaments
she claimed maintenance of Rs.20,000/- per month and a share in the house of the Petitioner at
Gualipur for her residence. It is relevant to state here that the petition filed under Section 12 of the
Act was not accompanied by any report of the Protection Officer nor supported by an affidavit as
required under the statute.
(v) By the time summons were sufficient, the husband of the Opposite Party had died on 06.10.2016.
On receiving notice of the petition from the court below, the Petitioner and his wife filed their show
cause reply/ objection denying all the allegations of their daughter- in-law/ Opposite Party stating
therein that in view of the death of the husband and since during the entire period, the husband and
wife were living together and the Opposite party had never resided with her parents-in-law the
petition was not maintainable. Thereafter, the petition under Section 12 of the Act was amended
deleting the name of the deceased husband and a consolidated petition was filed by Opposite Party
on 17.08.2017 to which another objection was filed by Petitioner and his deceased wife stating that
they were not liable to be proceeded against in the Designation: Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior
Secretary pg. 4 Reason: Authentication Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Date:
02-Apr-2024 19:13:15 proceedings and that the Court below had no reason to entertain the
proceedings.
(vi) In the meanwhile, the records were transferred for disposal to the Court of the Asst. Sessions
Judge (Womens'), Jagatsinghpur for disposal where it stood re-registered as Crl. Misc. Case No.
229/2015/Comp.No. 174/2018 and after recording evidence and hearing the parties the said Court
vide order dated 25.10.2019 held that the Opposite Party was entitled to a Protection Order under
Section 18 of the Act restraining Petitioner and his deceased wife from subjecting her to any
domestic violence and also holding that she was also entitled to be paid interim monetary relief
under Section 20 of the Act and has directed Petitioner to pay the daughter-in-law/Opposite Party a
sum of Rs. 3,000/- per month by the 10th day of every month of the English calendar from the date
of the order.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80239614/ 3
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak vs Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... ... on 13 March, 2024
(vii) The Petitioner had challenged the legality of the aforesaid order in the court of the learned
Sessions Judge, Jagatsinghpur by filling Crl. App. No. 35 of 2019. The Opposite Party had contested
that Appeal and had also filed another appeal challenging the same order by filing Crl. App. No. 36
of 2019 and both the appeals were taken up for hearing analogously and have been dismissed by
common judgment dated on 06.09.2021. Hence, this petition. II. SUBMISSIONS OF THE
PETITIONER:
5. The learned Counsel on behalf of the petitioner has brought forward the following contentions:
Designation: Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary Location: HIGH COURT OF
ORISSA, CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024 19:13:15
(i) It is submitted that both the Trial Court and the Lower Appellate Court below have
acted erroneously in granting interim monetary reliefs to the Opposite Party to be
payable by Petitioner who is himself old, infirm and ailing and he is in receipt of
meager amount of pension and dismissal of Petitioner's appeal has been made
without any application of judicial mind.
(ii) It is submitted that the Id. Lower Appellate Court below has acted illegally in
confirming the order granting interim monetary reliefs to the wife/Opposite Party
and dismissing Petitioner's appeal when the Opposite Party has failed to establish in
her petition that either at the time of moving the court or, immediately before that
she was residing with the Petitioner within the jurisdiction of the court at
Jagatsinghpur and was dependent upon him in order to be entitled to receive
monetary compensation when even accepting her averments in her petition she was
not residing with Petitioner in any shared household and was resident in her father's
house prior to and at the time of her initiating the proceedings.
(iii) It is submitted that the impugned order and judgment of both the courts below
having been passed without application of judicial mind whatsoever with the Trial
Court awarding interim monetary compensation to Opposite Party as she was
resident in her parental house and had been awarded interim maintenance in I.A. No.
2/2014 arising out of C.P. Case No. 81/ 2013 which was a proceeding initiated by the
deceased husband of the Opposite party against her wherein the Petitioner was not
party to the Designation: Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary pg. 6 Reason:
Authentication Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024
19:13:15 proceedings and therefore calls for interference and examination by this
Court.
(iv) It is submitted that the Lower Appellate Court who heard the appeal also erred in
dismissing the appeal and confirming the award of monetary relief by the Court
below under the misconception that monetary relief under the Act amounted to
maintenance when the Apex Court has categorically held that monetary relief
awarded under the Act cannot be equated with maintenance payable under either the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80239614/ 4
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak vs Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... ... on 13 March, 2024
Cr.P.C. or other Acts more so when the wife/Opposite Party had not complied with
the statutory requirements contained in the Rules. Therefore, her petition could not
have been entertained and having admittedly deserted her husband, she had
furnished no proof of being resident with the local jurisdiction of the Trial Court. It
was incumbent upon both the Courts below to consider the question of
maintainability and continuance in the proceedings in the learned Trial Court which
has not been considered at all.
III. SUBMISSIONS OF THE OPPOSITE PARTY:
6. The learned Counsel on behalf of the Opposite Party has brought forward the following
contentions:
(i) It is submitted that the observations of the Trial Court in its judgement is
misconceived with respect to the return of stridhana property and dowry articles and
she has not considered the evidence available in record. The petitioner during his
cross examination admitted that the house hold articles as per dowry list
Designation: Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary Location: HIGH COURT OF
ORISSA, CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024 19:13:15 are in his house but the trial court
without considering the said fact has held that it is the duty of the petitioner to
identify those articles which is not in accordance with law. So the finding of trial
court in this regard is bad in eyes of law and both the impugned order and judgement
of courts below is liable to be set aside.
(ii) It is submitted that the learned trial court without any basis fixed a sum of
Rs.3000/- per month towards maintenance which is not sufficient now-a-days for a
married lady, hence the said amount may be enhanced to Rs.8000/- till she gets the
share of ancestral property of her deceased husband.
(iii) It is submitted that the Petitioner in his evidence has admitted that the Opposite
party after her marriage was staying with her husband, Petitioner and his wife in the
ancestral homestead land situated at village Gualipur having sufficient residential
space but the trial court disallowed the residence order in favour of the petitioner
which is not sustainable in law.
IV. SUBMISSIONS ON LAW:
7. Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the initiation of proceedings under Sections 12
and 23 of the Act contemplates and requires a report being submitted after due inquiry into the
allegations of domestic violence by a Protection Officer which is not available on record of the
instant proceedings initiated by the Opposite Party who has sought various reliefs under the Act
including monetary relief and compensation payable to her. As she has claimed reliefs from the
Petitioner with whom she was not residing in a shared household as Designation: Assistant
Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary pg. 8 Reason: Authentication Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80239614/ 5
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak vs Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... ... on 13 March, 2024
CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024 19:13:15 found from her averments in the petition filed by her the
award of interim monetary compensation to her from the Petitioner clearly amounts to an abuse of
process of court inviting this Court's interference in revision by exercising powers vested in it by
Section 401 Cr. P.C. V. ORDER OF THE ASSISTANT SESSIONS JUDGE (WOMEN'S),
JAGATSINGHPUR
8. The Sessions Judge has held that so far as the P.W.D.V Act is concerned the daughter-in-law has a
right of residence in her shared household even if that house is not owned by her husband. But it is
guided by Supreme Court that a married woman has no right on the self-acquired property of her
in-laws as that property cannot be said as a share property. In the present case the petitioner has
adduced one ROR bearing No.470 of Mauza Gualipur, and it is recorded in the name of Krushna
Chandra Pattanayk, the respondent No.1. On close scrutiny of that document, it is ascertained that
Plot No.368 measuring an area of 040 dec. is of Gharabari kisam and originally it was recorded in
Khata No. 386. The petitioner has also submitted the concerned R.O.R. No. 386 vide exhibit 7 and
on close scrutiny of Exhibit 7 it is ascertained that Khata No. 386 is recorded in the name of
Krushan Chandra Pattanayak.
9. The Sessions Judge observed that the petitioner has not adduced any document regarding the
house situated at Gualipur that it is part of the joint family property. Similarly, a wife or a woman
has the right of maintenance against her husband or son and daughter. She can also assert her rights
against the property of her husband. But she cannot thrust herself against the parents of her
husband nor can claim the right Designation: Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary Location:
HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024 19:13:15 to live in the house of the
parents of her husband against their will and wishes, when she had already left that house during
the life time of her husband. Hence in view of the above analysis and keeping in the guidelines of the
Supreme Court, the petitioner is not entitled to reside in the house situated at Gualipur.
10.The Sessions Judge further held that while considering the amount of maintenance given to any
wife, the standard of living of the petitioner, needs of the petitioner and source of income of both the
parties must be taken into consideration. Besides, there is no set formula which can be led for the
fixing of the maintenance. In the present case, the petitioner is staying in her parents' house and
thus considering her expenditures in regard to food, cloth, residence, medicine etc., the petitioner is
entitled to get monthly relief as per the provision provided in PWDV Act. Moreover, the petitioner
has also adduced the certified copy of the order in I.A. No. 02/2014 arising out of C.P. Case No.
481/2013 vied Ext. 2 and from that document it is revealed that the deceased husband was directed
to pay interim maintenance of Rs.5,500 to the petitioner vide order dated 29.10.2014. So,
considering all the facts and circumstances as well as keeping in mind the above discussions the
petitioner is entitled for relief under Sections 18 and 20 of the PWDV Act. VI. COURT'S
REASONING & ANALYSIS:
11.Learned Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the initiation of proceedings under Sections 12
and 23 of the Act contemplates and requires a report being submitted after due inquiry into
allegations of domestic violence by a Protection Officer which is not available in the Designation:
Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary pg. 10 Reason: Authentication Location: HIGH COURT
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80239614/ 6
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak vs Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... ... on 13 March, 2024
OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024 19:13:15 record of the instant proceedings initiated by
the Opposite Party. This Court does not accede to the submission of the petitioner as the law is well
settled that it was held that the trial court can grant relief under the Act without considering the
report of Protection Officer.
12.Section 12 of DV Act deals with the Application to Magistrate. It prescribes that -
"(1) An aggrieved person or a Protection Officer or any other person on behalf of the
aggrieved person may present an application to the Magistrate seeking one or more
reliefs under this Act.
Provided that before passing any order on such application, the Magistrate shall take into
consideration any domestic incident report received by him from the Protection Officer or the
service provider.
(2) The relief sought for under sub-section (1) may include a relief for issuance of an order for
payment of compensation or damages without prejudice to the right of such person to institute a
suit for compensation or damages for the injuries caused by the acts of domestic violence committed
by the respondent.
Provided that where a decree for any amount as compensation or damages has been passed by any
court in favor of the aggrieved person, the amount, if any, paid or payable in pursuance of the order
made by the Magistrate under this Act shall be set off against the amount payable under such decree
and the decree shall, notwithstanding anything contained in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 or
any other law for the time being in force, be executable for the balance amount, if any, left after such
set off. (3) Every application under sub-section (1) shall be in such form and contain such
particulars as may be prescribed or as nearly as possible thereto.
Designation: Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA,
CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024 19:13:15 (4) The Magistrate shall fix the first date of hearing, which
shall not ordinarily be beyond three days from the date of receipt of the application by the court.
(5) The Magistrate shall Endeavour to dispose of every application made under sub-section (1)
within a period of sixty days from the date of its first hearing."
13.In this regard, the Division Bench of the High Court of Delhi in Shambhu Prasad Singh vs.
Manjari1 speaking through Ravindra Bhat, J. dealt with the conflicting views of the two Single
Judges on the question whether a Magistrate can act straightaway on the complaint made by an
aggrieved person under the D.V. Act. It was held that Section 12(1) of the D.V. Act does not mandate
that an application seeking relief under the said D.V. Act must be accompanied with a Domestic
Incident Report or even that it should be moved by a Protection Officer. So also, Rule 6 which
stipulates the form and manner of making an application to a Magistrate does not require that the
Domestic Incident Report must accompany an application for relief under Section 12.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80239614/ 7
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak vs Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... ... on 13 March, 2024
14.It was further held that an obligation to submit a Domestic Incident Report is imposed only on
the Protection Officers under Section 9 of the D.V. Act and upon the service providers under Section
10 of the D.V. Act and the learned Magistrate 'shall' take into consideration, the Domestic Incident
Report if it is filed and not otherwise.
15.Similarly, in Rakesh Choudhary vs. Vandana Choudhary2, the High Court of Jammu and
Kashmir rejected the argument of the petitioner therein that the report of the Protection Officer is
sine qua non for 190 (2012) DLT 647 2019 SCC Online J&K 512 Designation: Assistant
Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary pg. 12 Reason: Authentication Location: HIGH COURT OF
ORISSA, CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024 19:13:15 issuing process in a petition under Section 12 of the
D.V. Act. The Court held that the proviso to Section 12(1) of the D.V. Act only stipulates that the
learned Magistrate shall take into consideration the Domestic Incident Report filed by the
Protection Officer or the Service Provider, but it does not stipulate that a report 'shall be called for'
before any relief could be granted.
16.Learned Counsel has also brought forward the contention of shared household with regard to
payment of maintenance. The Counsel has submitted that any form of compensation or
maintenance should not be provided to the Opposite Party considering that she had deserted her
husband and moreover never stayed in the same house as her in-laws. Therefore, the question of
payment of maintenance does not arise.
17.In this regard, in a judgment of the High Court of Madras in Vandhana v. T. Srikanth and
Krishnamachari3, authored by Ramasubramanian, J., it was held that Sections 2(f), 2(s) and 17 of
the D.V. Act ought to be given the widest interpretation possible. The Court, after observing various
instances and situations, held that many a woman may not even enter into the matrimonial home
immediately after marriage. Therefore, it was concluded that a healthy and correct interpretation to
Sections 2(f) and 2(s) of the D.V. Act would be that the words 'live' or 'have at any point of time
lived' would include in its purview 'the right to live' as interpreted above. It would be useful to quote
from the said judgment as under:-
2007 SCC Online Mad 553 Designation: Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary
Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024 19:13:15 "20. In
a society like ours, there are very many situations, in which a woman may not enter
into her matrimonial home immediately after marriage. A couple leaving for
honeymoon immediately after the marriage and whose relationship gets strained
even during honeymoon, resulting in the wife returning to her parental home straight
away, may not stand the test of the definition of domestic relationship under Section
2(f) of the Act, if it is strictly construed.
A woman in such a case, may not live or at any point of time lived either singly or together with the
husband in the 'shared household', despite a legally valid marriage followed even by its
consummation. It is not uncommon in our society, for a woman in marriage to be sent to her
parental home even before consummation of marriage, on account of certain traditional beliefs, say
for example, the intervention of the month of Aadi. If such a woman is held to be not entitled to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80239614/ 8
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak vs Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... ... on 13 March, 2024
benefit of Section 17 of the Act, on account of a strict interpretation to Section 2(f) of the Act that she
did not either live or at any point of time lived together in the shared household, such a woman will
be left remediless despite a valid marriage.
One can think of innumerable instances of the same aforesaid nature, where the woman might not
live at the time of institution of the proceedings or might not have lived together with the husband
even for a single day in the shared household. A narrow interpretation to Sections 2(f), 2(s) and 17 of
the Act, would leave many a woman in distress, without a remedy. Therefore, in my considered view
a healthy and correct interpretation to Sections 2(f) and 2(s) would be that the words 'live' or 'have
at any point of time lived' would include within their purview 'the right to live'. In other words, it is
not necessary for a woman to establish her physical act of living in the shared household, either at
the time of institution of the proceedings or as a thing of the past. If there is a relationship which has
legal sanction, a woman in that relationship gets a right to live in the shared household. Therefore,
she would be entitled to protection under Section 17 of the Act, even if she did not live in the shared
household at the time of institution of the Designation: Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary
pg. 14 Reason: Authentication Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024
19:13:15 proceedings or had never lived in the shared household at any point of time in the past.
Her right to protection under Section 17 of the Act, co-exists with her right to live in the shared
household and it does not depend upon whether she had marked her physical presence in the shared
household or not. A marriage which is valid and subsisting on the relevant date, automatically
confers a right upon the wife to live in the shared household as an equal partner in the joint venture
of running a family. If she has a right to live in the shared household, on account of a valid and
subsisting marriage, she is definitely in 'domestic relationship within the meaning of Section 2(f) of
the Act and her bodily presence or absence from the shared household cannot belittle her
relationship as anything other than a domestic relationship. Therefore, irrespective of the fact
whether the applicant/plaintiff in this case ever lived in the house of the first respondent/first
defendant after 7.2.2007 or not, her marriage to the first respondent/first defendant on 7.2.2007
has conferred a right upon her to live in the shared household. Therefore, the question as to whether
the applicant/plaintiff ever lived in the shared household at any point of time during the period
from 7.2.2007 to 13.6.2007 or not, is of little significance."
18.Bearing in mind the aforesaid ratio, namely, 'whether it is mandatory for the aggrieved person to
reside with those persons against whom the allegations have been levelled is accordingly answered.
It is held that it is not mandatory for the aggrieved person to have actually lived or resided with
those persons against whom the allegations have been levelled at the time of seeking relief. If a
woman has the right to reside in a shared household, she can accordingly enforce her right under
Section 17(1) of the D.V. Act. If a woman becomes an aggrieved person or victim of domestic
violence, she can seek relief under the provisions of the D.V. Designation: Assistant
Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Date:
02-Apr-2024 19:13:15 Act including her right to live or reside in the shared household under Section
17 read with Section 19 of the D.V. Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80239614/ 9
Krushna Chandra Pattnayak vs Swagatika Swain @ Kaberi Swain .... ... on 13 March, 2024
19.Hence, the Opposite Party herein had the right to live in a shared household i.e., her matrimonial
home and being a victim of domestic violence could enforce her right to live or reside in the shared
household under the provisions of the D.V. Act and to seek any other appropriate relief provided
under the D.V. Act. This is irrespective of whether she actually lived in the shared household.
20.In the present case, from the evidence of the petitioner and the order of the lower Court, it is
evident that she stayed with the Petitioner (and his deceased wife) at Sunabeda till 19.08.2009 but
when the respondents tortured her by demanding one plot at Bhubaneswar, she returned to her
father's house. Accordingly, the point of contention raised by the Petitioner with respect to "shared
household" cannot be accepted. VII. CONCLUSION:
21.In cases of domestic violence, adopting a liberal legal construct is paramount to ensuring
comprehensive protection and support for victims. A liberal approach acknowledges the
multifaceted nature of domestic abuse, encompassing not only physical violence but also emotional,
psychological, and financial forms of coercion and control. By embracing a liberal framework, the
legal system can better address the complexities of power dynamics and societal influences inherent
in such cases.
22.With respect to the aforesaid discussion, this Court is not inclined to interfere with the impugned
order dated 25.10.2019 passed by the Designation: Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary pg. 16
Reason: Authentication Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Date: 02-Apr-2024
19:13:15 Assistant Sessions Judge (Women's), Jagatsinghpur in Misc. Case No. 229/2015 / Comp.
No. 174/2018.
23. Both the criminal revision petitions are, accordingly, dismissed.
( Dr. S.K. Panigrahi ) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack, Dated the 13th March , 2024/ Designation:
Assistant Registrar-cum-Senior Secretary Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK Date:
02-Apr-2024 19:13:15
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80239614/ 10
