Kukuli Mallik vs State Of Odisha on 22 March, 2024
Kukuli Mallik vs State Of Odisha on 22 March, 2024
Bench: D.Dash, V. Narasingh
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
JCRLA No.7 of 2010
In the matter of an Appeal under section 383 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973 and from the judgment of conviction
and order of sentence dated 08.10.2004 passed by the learned
Sessions Judge, Phulbani in Sessions Trial No.178 of 2002.
Kukuli Mallik .... Appellant
-versus-
State of Odisha .... Respondent
Appeared in this case by Hybrid Arrangement (Virtual/Physical Mode):
For Appellant - Mr. A. Mohanty,
Advocate.
For Respondent - Mr. T. K. Praharaj,
Standing Counsel
CORAM:
MR. JUSTICE D.DASH
MR. JUSTICE V. NARASINGH
Date of Hearing :12.03.2024 :: Date of Judgment:22.03.2024
D.Dash, J. The Appellant, by filing this Appeal, from inside the jail, has challenged the judgment of
conviction and order of sentence dated 08.10.2004 passed by the learned Sessions Judge, {{ 2 }}
Phulbani in Sessions Trial No.178 of 2002, corresponding to Balliguda P.S. Case No.42 of 2002 of
the Court of the learned Sub- Divisional Judicial Magistrate, Balliguda.
The Appellant (accused) thereunder has been convicted for commission of offence under section
302 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 (in short, 'IPC') and sentenced to undergo imprisonment for life.
2. Prosecution Case:-
On 03.04.2002 during noon hour, one Arjuna Mallik of village Soutikia had gone to
take bath in the nearby river. He having found a tortoise near the river, he brought it
to their village. He then told the same to Ghasiram (P.W.6), Meher, Champeswar
(P.W.3) and Rameswar (deceased) that they would prepare curry in the evening.
Around 7 pm, all of them gathered in the bari of Champeswar (P.W.3) for preparing
the curry.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39104991/ 1
Kukuli Mallik vs State Of Odisha on 22 March, 2024
Accused arrived there and demanded some curry. Rameswar (deceased) refused the
request of the accused. So there was a quarrel between the two followed by hot
exchange of words. It is stated that the accused then left for his house and came with
a knife. He then again demanded the tortoise curry and as Rameswar (deceased)
refused, he pushed the knife into the left side of his chest causing profused bleeding
resulting his death. It {{ 3 }} is stated that the accused then throwing the knife, left
the spot.
Soon thereafter, Kabiraj, the son of the deceased (P.W.1) arrived and having seen the
dead body of his father Rameswar lying there, went to the Balliguda Police Station.
That Kabiraj (Informant-P.W.1) having presented a written report with the
Officer-in-Charge (OIC) of Balliguda Police Station narrating the above incident and
informing about the death of his father being injured by the accused.
The written report being received by the O.I.C., he treated the same as FIR (Ext.1)
and registering the case, took up investigation.
3. In course of investigation, the I.O (P.W.8) examined the informant (P.W.4) and other witnesses,
held inquest over the dead body of the deceased Rameswar in presence of the witnesses and
prepared the inquest report (Ext.2). He sent the dead body for post mortem examination. He seized
the weapon of offence i.e. a knife from the spot in presence of the witnesses and prepared the report
to that effect vide Ext.3. He also seized the blood stained earth and sample earth from the spot in
presence of the witnesses and prepared the seizure list vide Ext.9. The I.O (P.W.8) seized the
wearing apparels of the deceased in presence of the witnesses on production by Police Constable and
{{ 4 }} prepared the seizure list (Ext.10). He (P.W.8) also seized the wearing apparels of the accused
in presence of the witnesses and prepared the report vide Ext.11. He arrested the accused and
forwarded him in custody to Court. The seized incriminating articles were sent for chemical
examination to SFSL, Bhubaneswar through Court. He examined other witnesses. He too prepared a
spot map under seizure list vide Ext.14.
Finally, on completion of investigation, the I.O (P.W.8) submitted the Final Form placing the
accused to face the Trial for commission of offence under section 302 of the IPC.
4. Learned SDJM, Balliguda on receipt of the Final Form, took cognizance of the offence under
section 302 of the IPC and after observing the formalities, committed the case to the Court of
Sessions. That is how the Trial commenced by framing the charge for the said offence against the
accused.
5. In the Trial, the prosecution in total has examined eight (8) witnesses. Out of them, P.W.1 is the
scribe of the FIR and a post occurrence witness. P.W.2, P.W.3 & P.W.6 are the witnesses to the
occurrence. P.W.4 is the informant, who had lodged the FIR (Ext.1) and son of the deceased. The
doctor who had conducted post mortem over the dead body of the deceased is P.W.5 and the
Investigating Officer has come to the witness box as P.W.8.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39104991/ 2
Kukuli Mallik vs State Of Odisha on 22 March, 2024
{{ 5 }}
6. Besides leading the evidence by examining above the witnesses, the prosecution has also proved
several documents which have been admitted in evidence and marked as Ext.1 to Ext.14/1. Out of
those, the important are the FIR, Ext.1, inquest report, Ext.2, spot map, Ext.14, Post Mortem
Report, Ext.5 and chemical examination report, Ext.12/1.
7. The accused has tendered no evidence in support of his plea of denial and false implication.
8. Learned counsel for the Appellant (accused) at the outset instead of questioning the finding of the
Trial Court that Rameswar met a homicidal death as also the happenings in the incident and the role
of the accused submitted that cumulatively viewing the facts and circumstances of the case which
have emerged in evidence piloted by the prosecution through the witnesses examined as the eye
witnesses to the occurrence for the said role and act played by the accused, he ought to be convicted
for commission of offence under section 304-II of the IPC and not under section 302 of the IPC as
has been recorded by the Trial Court. In support of the same, he has taken us through the evidence
of all the prosecution witnesses who have stated to have seen the occurrence which we would be
discussing hereinafter. In support of the said submission relied upon the decision of the {{ 6 }} Apex
Court in case of Stalin -versus- State represented by the Inspector of Police (2020) 9 SCC 524. He
contended that in that case almost under the similar circumstances as like the present one, keeping
in view the single knife blow by the accused leading to the death of the deceased, the conviction has
been recorded under section 304-II of the IPC. He accordingly urged before us for alteration of the
conviction of the accused to one under section 304-II of the IPC and appropriate reduction of the
sentences as deemed just and proper.
9. Learned Counsel for the Respondent-State refuted the submission of the learned counsel for the
Appellant that for the role of the accused in the said incident, he would be liable for commission of
offence under section 304-II of the IPC. According to him, the accused had come twice to the place
of occurrence and at the first instance, the request of the accused being declined, he got annoyed
and left for his home, and, thereafter leaving some time, he again came and that time when he came,
he was with knife and as per the evidence of the prosecution witnesses, when his renewed prayer
was also refused by the deceased, he stabbed him at his chest. He, therefore, submitted that it was a
calculated move of the accused that he would cause the death of the deceased in the event his
request was again declined. It was also submitted that here not only that the blow had been given by
a {{ 7 }} knife but it is on the chest, and therefore, the Trial Court has rightly convicted the accused
for the offence under section 302 of the IPC.
10. Keeping in view the submissions made, we have carefully read the impugned judgment of
conviction. We have also extensively travelled through the depositions of the witnesses (P.W.1 to
P.W.8) and have perused the documents admitted in evidence and marked as Ext.1 to Ext.14/1.
11. In order to address the submission of the learned counsel for the accused which stands confined
to the alteration of conviction, let us proceed to examine the prosecution witnesses and find out the
circumstances leading to the incident and as to what happened thereafter. P.W.1 states to have gone
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39104991/ 3
Kukuli Mallik vs State Of Odisha on 22 March, 2024
to the spot after hearing the hullah in the bari of Champeswar (P.W.3). He has stated to have heard
from Champeswar (P.W.3), Ghasiram, Arjun and others. As per his evidence, they told him that the
accused came second time with a knife after leaving the place after his first visit when his request to
provide tortoise curry was refused and then he again demanded curry and that being refused by the
deceased, he gave a blow by means of a knife on his chest. He has stated that all those persons then
were drunk and so also the accused. As per his evidence, it is the deceased, {{ 8 }} who had brought
that Salapa Juice (organic intoxicant locally consumed by the people in the rural area for
intoxication). P.W.2 has stated that first accused came and demanded some meat and when he was
refused to be so given by the deceased, there was a quarrel and hot exchange of words. The accused
then left home and came back with a knife and then pushed the same into the left side chest of the
deceased. He does not state that accused having come for the second time, had also asked for the
tortoise curry. Rather his evidence is that when the accused had come for the first time, there was a
quarrel followed by hot exchange of words. Now the evidence of P.W.3 is to the effect that when the
accused first came and demanded the curry, the deceased refused and, therefore, there was a quarrel
between the two and then accused left for his house and came with a knife. He does not state that
there was any good time gap between the first and second visit of the accused to the spot. He is
stating a new story that first accused threatened the deceased to assault if no curry would be given to
him and then deceased having refused the accused gave the blow by knife on his chest. This part of
the incident is not stated by P.W.2 nor P.W.1 states to have been told that by P.W.2 and P.W.3. This
P.W.3 had not stated before the I.O (P.W.8) during investigation that accused had quarreled with
the deceased and accused came with a knife and threatened the {{ 9 }} deceased and so saying, he
pushed the knife on the left side chest of the deceased as he refused to give the curry. The attention
of this witness P.W.3 having been drawn in that regard that has been proved through the I.O
(P.W.8). Thus it appears from the evidence of these three witnesses that some part of the happening
is being suppressed and more particularly, that is with regard to the role of the deceased.
The other witness P.W.4, is the informant and son of the deceased. He states that P.W.2 told him
that when they were preparing curry, accused came and demanded curry but deceased refused and
then accused left for his house and came with a knife and challenged the deceased to give curry and
as he again refused, accused dealt knife blow on the left side chest. This part is not therein in the FIR
(Ext.1) lodged by him that accused had left for his house and came again with the knife and that was
also not in his statement recorded under section 161 of the Cr.P.C. that accused again came and
demanded curry and on being refused, the deceased, he assaulted him with the knife. P.W.8 (I.O)
has stated that P.W.4 had not stated before him that accused again came, demanded curry and on
refusal by the deceased, he assaulted him with the knife. Thus when all have consistently stated that
the accused had given a solitary blow on the chest of the deceased by means of a knife, we find the
evidence of the {{ 10 }} prosecution to be inconsistent as to the happenings prior to the assault by
the accused upon the deceased. However, it is seen that there was some quarrel between the accused
and the deceased and there was hot exchange of words. As already stated nobody has stated about
the deceased to have played any role therein except declining the request of the accused. As already
stated, it is there in the evidence that all having taken Salapa Juice (local intoxicant) were drunk.
The parties hail from the rural background and they are the permanent residents of a village
situated in the scheduled district of the State.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39104991/ 4
Kukuli Mallik vs State Of Odisha on 22 March, 2024
12. In case of Mahesh Balmiki -versus- State of Madhya Pradesh: (2000) 1 SCC 319, the Apex Court
while deciding the question of whether a single blow with a knife on the chest of the deceased would
attract section 302 IPC, held thus:-
"9..... there is no principle that in all cases of a single blow Section 302 I.P.C. is not
attracted. A Single blow may, in some cases, entail conviction under Section 302
I.P.C., in some cases under Section 304 I.P.C and in some other cases under Section
326 I.P.C. The question with regard to the nature of offence has to be determined on
the facts and in the circumstances of each case. The nature of the injury, whether it is
on the vital or non-vital part of the body, the weapon used, the circumstances in
which the injury is caused and the manner in which the injury is inflicted are all
relevant factors which may go to determine the required intention or knowledge of
the offender and the offence committed by him. In the instant case, the {{ 11 }}
deceased was disabled from saving himself because he was held by the associates of
the appellant who inflicted though a single yet a fatal blow of the description noted
above. These facts clearly establish that the appellant had the intention to kill the
deceased. In any event, he can safely be attributed the knowledge that the knife-blow
given by him was so imminently dangerous that it must in all probability cause death
or such bodily injury as is likely to cause death."
13. In case of Dhirajbhai Gorakhbhai Nayak vs. State of Gujarat, (2003) 9 SCC 322, the Apex Court
while discussing the ingredients of Exception 4 of Section 300 IPC, held thus:-
"The Fourth Exception of Section 300 IPC covers acts done in a sudden fight. The
said Exception deals with a case of prosecution not covered by the first exception,
after which its place would have been more appropriate. The exception is founded
upon the same principle, for in both there is absence of premeditation. But, while in
the case of Exception 1 there is total deprivation of self-control, in case of Exception
4, there is only that heat of passion which clouds men's sober reason and urges them
to deeds which they would not otherwise do. There is provocation in Exception 4 as
in Exception 1, but the injury done is not the direct consequence of that provocation.
In fact, Exception 4 deals with cases in which notwithstanding that a blow may have
been struck, or some provocation given in the origin of the dispute or in whatever
way the quarrel may have originated, yet the subsequent conduct of both parties puts
them in respect of guilt upon an equal footing. A "sudden fight" implies mutual
provocation and blows on each side. The homicide committed is then clearly not
traceable to unilateral provocation, nor could in such cases the whole blame be
placed on one side. For if it were so, the Exception more appropriately applicable
would be Exception 1. There is no previous deliberation or determination to fight. A
fight suddenly {{ 12 }} takes place, for which both parties are more or less to be
blamed. It may be that one of them starts it, but if the other had not aggravated it by
his own conduct it would not have taken the serious turn it did. There is then mutual
provocation and aggravation, and it is difficult to apportion the share of blame which
attaches to each fighter. The help of Exception 4 can be invoked if death is caused (a)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39104991/ 5
Kukuli Mallik vs State Of Odisha on 22 March, 2024
without premeditation, (b) in a sudden fight (c) without the offenders having taken
undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner, and (d) the fight must have
been with the person killed. To bring a case within Exception 4 all the ingredients
mentioned in it must be found. It is to be noted that the "fight" occurring in
Exception 4 to Section 300, IPC is not defined in the IPC. It takes two to make a fight.
Heat of passion requires that there must be no time for the passions to cool down and
in this case, the parties had worked themselves into a fury on account of the verbal
altercation in the beginning. A fight is a combat between two and more persons
whether with or without weapons. It is not possible to enunciate any general rule as
to what shall be deemed to be a sudden quarrel. It is a question of fact and whether a
quarrel is sudden or not must necessarily depend upon the proved facts of each case.
For the application of Exception 4, it is not sufficient to show that there was a sudden
quarrel and there was no premeditation. It must further be shown that the offender
has not taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual manner. The expression
"undue advantage" as used in the provision means "unfair advantage".
14. In case of Pulicherla Nagaraju vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, (2006) 11 SCC 444, the Apex Court
while deciding whether a case falls under section 302 or 304 Part I or 304 Part II IPC, held thus:-
"The court should proceed to decide the pivotal question of intention, with care and
caution, as that will decide whether the {{ 13 }} case falls under Section 302 or 304
Part I or 304 Part II. Many petty or insignificant matters-plucking of a fruit, straying
of a cattle, quarrel of children, utterance of a rude word or even an objectionable
glance, may lead to altercations and group clashes culminating in deaths. Usual
motives like revenge, greed, jealousy or suspicion may be totally absent in such cases.
There may be no intention. There may be no pre-meditation. In fact, there may not
even be criminality. At the other end of the spectrum, there may be cases of murder
where the accused attempts to avoid the penalty for murder by attempting to put
forth a case that there was no intention to cause death. It is for the courts to ensure
that the cases of murder punishable under section 302, are not converted into
offences punishable under section 304 Part I/II, or cases of culpable homicide not
amounting to murder, are treated as murder punishable under section 302.
The intention to cause death can be gathered generally from a combination of a few
or several of the following, among other, circumstances: (i) nature of the weapon
used; (ii) whether the weapon was carried by the accused or was picked up from the
spot; (iii) whether the blow is aimed at a vital part of the body; (iv) the amount of
force employed in causing injury; (v) whether the act was in the course of sudden
quarrel or sudden fight or free for all fight; (vi) whether the incident occurs by chance
or whether there was any premeditation; (vii) whether there was any prior enmity or
whether the deceased was a stranger; (viii) whether there was any grave and sudden
provocation, and if so, the cause for such provocation; (ix) whether it was in the heat
of passion;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39104991/ 6
Kukuli Mallik vs State Of Odisha on 22 March, 2024
(x) whether the person inflicting the injury has taken undue advantage or has acted in
a cruel and unusual manner; (xi) whether the accused dealt a single blow or several
blows. The above list of circumstances is not exhaustive and there may be several
other special circumstances with reference to individual cases which may throw light
on the question of intention."
{{ 14 }}
15. In case of Singapagu Anjaiah vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR online 2010 SC 441, the Apex
Court while deciding the question whether a blow on the skull of the deceased with a crowbar would
attract Section 302 IPC, held thus:-
"In our opinion, as nobody can enter into the mind of the accused, its intention has to
be gathered from the weapon used, the part of the body chosen for the assault and the
nature of the injuries caused. Here, the appellant had chosen a crow bar as the
weapon of offence. He has further chosen a vital part of the body i.e. head for causing
the injury which had caused multiple fractures of skull. This clearly shows the force
with which the appellant had used the weapon. The cumulative effect of all these
factors irresistibly lead to one and the only conclusion that the appellant intended to
cause death of the deceased."
16. In case of State of Rajasthan through the Secretary vs. Kanhaiya Lal,(2019) 5 SCC 639, the Apex
Court in paras 7.3, 7.4 and 7.5 held as follows:-
"7.3. In Arun Raj (Supra) this Court observed and held that there is no fixed rule that
whenever a single blow is inflicted, Section 302 would not be attracted. It is observed
and held by this Court in the aforesaid decision that nature of weapon used and vital
part of the body where blow was struck, prove beyond reasonable doubt the intention
of the accused to cause death of the deceased. It is further observed and held by this
Court that once these ingredients are proved, it is irrelevant whether there was a
single blow struck or multiple blows."
"7.4 In the case of Ashokkumar Magabhai Vankar (Supra), the death was caused by
single blow on head of the deceased with a {{ 15 }} wooden pestle. It was found that
the accused used pestle with such force that head of the deceased was broken into
pieces. This Court considered whether the case would fall under Section 302 or
Exception 4 of Section 300 IPC. It is held by this Court that the injury sustained by
the deceased, not only exhibits intention of the accused in causing death of victim,
but also knowledge of the accused in that regard. It is further observed by this Court
that such attack could be none other than for causing death of victim. It is observed
that any reasonable person, with any stretch of imagination can come to conclusion
that such injury on such a vital part of the body, with such a weapon, would cause
death."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39104991/ 7
Kukuli Mallik vs State Of Odisha on 22 March, 2024
"7.5 A similar view is taken by this Court in the recent decision in State of Rajasthan
vs. Leela Ram (2019) 13 SCC 131 and after considering a catena of decisions of this
Court on the issue on hand i.e. in case of a single blow, whether a case falls under
section 302 or section 304 Part I or section 304 Part II, this Court reversed the
judgment (Leela Ram -vs- State of Rajasthan, 2008 SCC OnLine Raj 945) of the High
Court (in that case also the judgment impugned was from the Rajasthan High Court)
and convicted the accused for the offence under section 302 of the IPC. In the same
decision, this Court also considered Exception 4 of Section 300 of the IPC and
observed in paragraph 21 as under:
"21. Under Exception 4, culpable homicide is not murder if the stipulations contained
in that provision are fulfilled. They are:
(i) that the act was committed without premeditation; (ii) that there was a sudden
fight; (iii) the act must be in the heat of passion upon a sudden quarrel; and (iv) the
offender should not have taken undue advantage or acted in a cruel or unusual
manner. "
17. In case of Bavisetti Kameswara Rao @ Babai vs. State of Andhra Pradesh represented by its
Public Persecutor, High Court {{ 16 }} of Andhra Pradesh; (2008) 15 SCC 725, the Apex Court has
observed as under:-
"13. It is seen that where in the murder case there is only a single injury, there is
always a tendency to advance an argument that the offence would invariably be
covered under Section 304 Part II IPC. The nature of offence where there is a single
injury could not be decided merely on the basis of the single injury and thus in a
mechanical fashion. The nature of the offence would certainly depend upon the other
attendant circumstances which would help the court to find out definitely about the
intention on the part of the accused. Such attendant circumstances could be very
many, they being (i) whether the act was premeditated; (ii) the nature of weapon
used; (iii) the nature of assault on the accused. This is certainly not an exhaustive list
and every case has to necessarily depend upon the evidence available. As regards the
user of screwdriver, the learned counsel urged that it was only an accidental use on
the spur of the moment and, therefore, there could be no intention to either cause
death or cause such bodily injury as would be sufficient to cause death. Merely
because the screwdriver was a usual tool used by the accused in his business, it could
not be as if its user would be innocuous."
14. In State of Karnataka vs. Vedanayagam (1995) 1 SCC 326, this Court considered the usual
argument of a single injury not being sufficient to invite a conviction Under Section 302 IPC. In that
case the injury was caused by a knife. The medical evidence supported the version of the prosecution
that the injury was sufficient, in the ordinary course of nature to cause death. The High Court had
convicted the accused for the offence under Section 304 Part II IPC relying on the fact that there is
only a single injury. However, after a detailed discussion regarding the nature of injury, the part of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39104991/ 8
Kukuli Mallik vs State Of Odisha on 22 March, 2024
the body chosen by the accused to inflict the same and other attendant circumstances and after {{ 17
}} discussing clause Thirdly of Section 300 IPC and further relying on the decision in Virsa Singh vs.
State of Punjab; AIR 1958 SC 465, the Court set aside the acquittal under Section 302 IPC and
convicted the accused for that offence. The Court (in Vedanayagam case (supra) para 4 relied on the
observation by Bose, J. in Virsa Singh (supra) case to suggest that:
"16. ... With due respect to the learned Judge he has linked up the intent required
with the seriousness of the injury, and that, as we have shown, is not what the section
requires. The two matters are quite separate and distinct, though the evidence about
them may sometimes overlap."
18. The accused is a member of Scheduled Tribe and hails from Scheduled Area of the State, Judicial
notice of the fact can be taken that their temper usually run high and behaviour often even for silly
reasons seen as abnormal and totally unexpected.
19. Applying the law laid down in the aforesaid decisions more particularly the decisions on the
aspect of single injury, to the facts and circumstances of the case as have emerged in evidence and
aforediscussed, we are of the considered view that the offence could be properly categorized as one
punishable under section 304 Part-I of the IPC. We are thus of the considered opinion that for the
role played and act done by the accused, he would be liable for conviction under section 304 Part-I
of the IPC.
20. In that view of the matter, the conviction of the accused is altered to one under section 304
Part-I of the IPC and we are told {{ 18 }} at the Bar that the accused has undergone in custody for
about nine years; we are of the considered opinion that imposition of sentence of period of
incarceration as undergone, at this distance of time when the Appellant has been enjoying liberty
since 13 years, would serve and meet the end of justice. And it is so directed.
21. With the above modification as to the judgment of conviction and order of sentence, the Appeal
stands disposed of.
(D. Dash), Judge.
V. Narasingh, J. I Agree.
(V.Narasingh),
Judge
Gitanjali
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39104991/ 9
Kukuli Mallik vs State Of Odisha on 22 March, 2024
Designation: Junior Stenographer
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39104991/ 10
