Kuldeep Kour vs Union Of India And Ors on 4 August, 2023
Kuldeep Kour vs Union Of India And Ors on 4 August, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU, KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on : 01.06.2023
Pronounced on: 04.08.2023
SWP No. 2974/2002
Kuldeep Kour .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: Ms. S. Kour, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Michal Dogra, Advocate
Vs
Union of India and Ors. ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Suneel Malhotra, Advocate
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The petitioner (now deceased) had filed the present petition for quashing the order No. 35
Bn/Estt/GSFC-MSB/2002/42-45 dated 02.01.2002, by virtue of which 15 years of the service for
the purpose of promotion and 10 years of the service for the purpose of pension of the petitioner was
forfeited and the petitioner was also severely reprimanded. The petitioner has also sought the
quashing of the proceedings of the General Security Force Court and the charges framed against the
petitioner. The prayer has also been made for quashing the order No.
6/72/2002/Petition/CLO(D&L)/BSF/2661-64 dated 11.03.2002 passed by the Chief Law Officer
(D&L) on behalf of the Director-General of BSF, by virtue of which "mercy appeal" of the petitioner
was rejected being devoid of merit. After the demise of the original petitioner, the present petition is
being prosecuted by the wife of the deceased-petitioner (for reference "the petitioner"
shall mean "the deceased-petitioner").
2. The petitioner after mentioning his past service credentials has stated that false and frivolous
allegations were levelled against the petitioner and the charge under Section 30 (b) of the BSF Act
was framed against the petitioner on 12.10.2001 on the allegations of dishonestly misappropriating
the property belonging to the Government. The false allegations were that at Samba between August
1996 to December 1998, the petitioner while performing the duties of Unit "Q" Clerk dishonestly
misappropriated a sum of (cid:128) 87,004.48 received from various Coys of 35 Bn. on account of casual
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60474085/ 1
Kuldeep Kour vs Union Of India And Ors on 4 August, 2023
diet charges. It is stated that the petitioner had deposited an amount of (cid:128) 2,41,992.91 in the
Government Treasury through cashier/accountant of 35 Bn. BSF. The treasury receipt was not
issued in respect of amount in question and the same was kept pending, as the Commandant during
Company Commanders Conference ordered for the stoppage of depositing of the same amount into
the Government Treasury and further advised for utilization of the said amount for the
improvement of company mess. That was done on the verbal instructions of Commandant during
conference. As there was some difference in the amount of money received by the companies, which
was required to be refunded, the same could not be done because the Unit was moving and the
petitioner was also assigned the duties to hire civil transport from local State Government
Authorities, which took considerable time as the movement of the Unit was uncertain and also the
disposal of land cases was one of the main concern. During that period, the petitioner also fell ill and
remained under treatment for 70 days. During the illness, the unit of the petitioner moved to new
location and HC Rajinder Parsad visited the home of the petitioner to seek his help in sorting out the
board proceedings of tentage required to be handed over to the incoming unit. The petitioner
enquired from him regarding his office almirah, which was kept double locked in the office, as the
petitioner had kept the cash in almirah and instructed Rajinder Parshad to look after almirah. The
petitioner after recovering from illness and after rejoining enquired about the said Almirah from HC
Ramesh Chand, who told the petitioner that his office almirah had been kept in the store duly locked
and a paper patch was pasted by Subedar J P Nathani. The petitioner had not misappropriated any
amount, as the amount was lying in the almirah and was deposited in Government Treasury vide
receipt No. GG-154873 dated 23.12.1999.
3. The petitioner has challenged the orders impugned and also the proceedings of the General
Security Force Court on the grounds that the respondents have not followed any of the provisions of
the BSF Act and the rules framed thereunder. In the petition, the petitioner has hardly left any rule,
which as per the petitioner, has not been violated by the respondents. As per the petitioner, the
whole of the proceedings initiated and conducted were contrary to the BSF Act and Rules framed
thereunder. It is also alleged that the respondents without any reasonable cause and reasons
imposed such harsh punishments, which do not commensurate with the allegations levelled against
the petitioner. It is also urged by the petitioner that the appeal filed by the petitioner has been
rejected in a mechanical manner.
4. The respondents in their reply have stated that in July 1999 ASI/Clerk D. K Mishra was directed
to take over the charge of Q Branch of 35 Bn. BSF from the petitioner vide order dated 07.07.1999. E
Coy of 35 Bn BSF intimated on 23.08.1999 that treasury receipt for (cid:128) 51,439.52 deposited by the Coy
has not been received by them. On asking other Coys, it was revealed that in some other cases also,
the treasury receipt had not been issued. Since no such cash was handed over to ASI/Clerk D K
Mishra by the petitioner, a board of officers were detailed vide order No. 35
Bn/Q/Ration/99/15245-48 dated 24.09.1999 to ascertain the exact amount deposited by the Coys
with the petitioner but not deposited in the Government treasury. The board of officers vide board
proceedings dated 20.10.1999 submitted that a sum of (cid:128) 78,004.48 only received by the petitioner
from different Coys from 06 December 1996 onwards had not been deposited into the Government
treasury. After processing the case, on the basis of board proceedings on 04.12.1999, a show cause
notice was issued to the petitioner vide letter dated 04.12.1999 as to why he kept with him such a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60474085/ 2
Kuldeep Kour vs Union Of India And Ors on 4 August, 2023
huge amount but not deposited with the Government treasury and he was asked to deposit (cid:128)
78,004.48 in the Government treasury within one week. The petitioner did not deposit the amount
within the stipulated time for which the petitioner was brought before the Commandant, 35 Bn BSF
for hearing on charge-sheet under Rule 45 (B) of BSF Rules 1969. The respondents have narrated
the details of the proceedings conducted while taking action against the petitioner. The respondents
have also given the details of the punishments awarded to the petitioner during his service. The
mercy application dated 10.11.2001 was submitted by the petitioner to the Inspector General BSF
R&G Frontier through SHQ BSF, Gujarat and as the representation of the petitioner was received
very late, he was directed to submit a fresh petition to DG BSF, if he so desired. A fresh mercy appeal
dated 03.01.2002 was submitted by the petitioner to DG BSF, New Delhi and the same was
considered but rejected being devoid of merit vide communication dated 11.03.2002. The
respondents have denied the assertions of the petitioner regarding verbal instructions passed during
the Company Commanders Conference for stoppage of depositing of amount in respect of casual
diet with the Government treasury and utilize the amount for improvement of Coy mess. It is further
stated that the petitioner had proceeded on leave several times from 1996 to 1999 but the petitioner
did not bother to hand over the cash to his successor, who was detailed from time to time to look
after his duty in his absence during the leave period. Even after receipt of the notice, the petitioner
did not deposit the amount within the stipulated period but deposited the same on 23.12.1999, only
after establishing the disciplinary case. It is also averred that it was not necessary to conduct Court
of Inquiry because the board of officers had already worked out the actual amount, which was
collected by the petitioner but not deposited in the Government treasury. Hence, the Commandant
heard the petitioner on a charge under section 30 (b) of BSF Act as per BSF Rule 45 (B). Precisely,
the stand of the respondents is that due procedure as prescribed under the BSF Act and the rules
were followed and proper opportunity was afforded to the petitioner to defend the charge against
him. The respondents placed on record the board proceedings, the show cause notice and other
documents to substantiate that proper procedure was followed by the respondents.
5. Ms. Surinder Kour, learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner submitted that the entire
proceedings were conducted by the respondents in derogation of the procedure prescribed under the
BSF Act and Rules framed thereunder. She further submitted that the General Security Force Court
was not convened by competent officer and the petitioner never pleaded guilty to the charge and
also that one witness, namely, HC Ramesh Chand sought to be summoned by the petitioner was
never summoned by the Recording Officer. She also argued that the three punishments could not
have been imposed upon the petitioner under Rules and the punishments imposed upon the
petitioner do not commensurate with the alleged mis-conduct of the petitioner. Ms Kour, learned
senior counsel placed reliance upon the various judgments i.e Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India
reported in 1987AIR (SC) 2386, Lt. Col. Prithi Pal Singh Bedi and ors. v. Union of India & ors
reported in 1982 AIR(SC)1413, Krishan Chand v. Union of India & ors. SWP No. 790/2003, decided
by this Court on 01.06.2023, Santosh Kumar v. Union of India, SWP No. 1415/2006, decided by this
court on 19.04.2023.
6. Mr. Sunil Malhotra, learned CGSC submitted that the due procedure prescribed under the Act
and the Rules framed thereunder was followed during the proceedings. He further submitted that
the fact that the petitioner pleaded guilty is borne from the mercy appeal submitted by the petitioner
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60474085/ 3
Kuldeep Kour vs Union Of India And Ors on 4 August, 2023
annexed as Annexure-D to the writ petition.
7. Heard and perused the record, including the record produced by the respondents.
8. Before this Court proceeds ahead, it needs to be noted that the scope for judicial review in the
disciplinary matters is very limited and the Court cannot act as an appellate authority to
re-appreciate the evidence and interfere with the decision of the disciplinary authority merely on the
ground that another view is also possible on the basis of material available on record. The power of
judicial review is limited only to evaluate the decision-making process and to ensure that procedure
as prescribed by the Act/rules and the principles of natural justice are followed during the course of
disciplinary proceedings. The court also cannot go into the proportionality of the punishment until it
shocks the conscience of the court. It would be relevant to take note of the judgment of the Hon'ble
Apex Court in SBI v. Ajai Kumar Srivastava, (2021) 2 SCC 612, the relevant paras are extracted as
under:
"24. It is thus settled that the power of judicial review, of the constitutional courts, is
an evaluation of the decision-making process and not the merits of the decision itself.
It is to ensure fairness in treatment and not to ensure fairness of conclusion. The
court/tribunal may interfere in the proceedings held against the delinquent if it is, in
any manner, inconsistent with the rules of natural justice or in violation of the
statutory rules prescribing the mode of enquiry or where the conclusion or finding
reached by the disciplinary authority is based on no evidence. If the conclusion or
finding be such as no reasonable person would have ever reached or where the
conclusions upon consideration of the evidence reached by the disciplinary authority
are perverse or suffer from patent error on the face of record or based on no evidence
at all, a writ of certiorari could be issued. To sum up, the scope of judicial review
cannot be extended to the examination of correctness or reasonableness of a decision
of authority as a matter of fact.
25. When the disciplinary enquiry is conducted for the alleged misconduct against
the public servant, the court is to examine and determine:
(i) whether the enquiry was held by the competent authority;
(ii) whether rules of natural justice are complied with;
(iii) whether the findings or conclusions are based on some evidence and authority
has power and jurisdiction to reach finding of fact or conclusion.
28. The constitutional court while exercising its jurisdiction of judicial review under Article 226 or
Article 136 of the Constitution would not interfere with the findings of fact arrived at in the
departmental enquiry proceedings except in a case of mala fides or perversity i.e. where there is no
evidence to support a finding or where a finding is such that no man acting reasonably and with
objectivity could have arrived at those findings and so long as there is some evidence to support the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60474085/ 4
Kuldeep Kour vs Union Of India And Ors on 4 August, 2023
conclusion arrived at by the departmental authority, the same has to be sustained."
9. Now keeping the above principles in mind, this Court would examine the contentions raised by
the deceased petitioner.
Whether there has been any violation of the provisions of the BSF Act and Rules framed thereunder,
during the course of the proceedings? The charge sheet in terms of rule 44 of the Rules, as provided
in Appendix-VI was prepared against the petitioner for commission of offence under section 30(b)
of BSF Act and the same is reproduced as under:
"In that he at Bn Samba,(J&K) while performing the duties of unit Q/Clerk
dishonestly misappropriated a sum of Rs. 78004.48 collected/received from various
Coys on a/c casual diet charge of ration on various dates during the year 96-97, the
property of the Government."
10. The charge was read over to the petitioner on 19.12.1999 by the respondent No. 5 and the
respondent No.5 ordered the preparation of record of evidence by Sh. B.S Rana AC. The Recording
Officer recorded the statements of eight witnesses and the petitioner was afforded an opportunity to
cross- examine the witnesses. The petitioner did not choose to cross-examine any witness. After the
witnesses were examined, the deceased petitioner was cautioned in terms of Rule 48 (3) and
thereafter his statement was recorded. The deceased petitioner examined two witnesses, namely, HC
Rajinder Parshad and Subedar J.P Nathani. After the recording of evidence, the Recording Officer
gave a certificate in terms of Rule 48 (8). This Court finds that Rule 48 has been complied during
the preparation of the Record of Evidence. The record of evidence was forwarded to the Officer who
ordered the preparation of record of evidence, who submitted an application in terms of Rule 51-A
read with Rule 52, for convening the General Security Force court for the trial of the petitioner. The
respondent No. 3 vide order dated 30.10.2001 convened the General Security Force Court
comprising of 5 officers and Senior Officer to sit as Presiding Officer. Two members were appointed
as waiting members. Law Officer, Officer under Instruction and Prosecutor were also appointed.
The petitioner received the charge sheet, convening order and the copy of order of defending officer
on 02.11.2001 (Annexure-5 to the reply submitted by the respondents to the writ petition). After
satisfying itself with the requirements of Rule 65, the petitioner was called before the Court. Sh.
Amitav Roy was prosecutor and Sh. Kulwant Singh was defending officer and both were not legally
qualified. The names of the Presiding officer and the members of the court were read over in the
hearing of the petitioner. In response to the question by the Presiding Officer to the petitioner in
respect of his objection for his trial by the Presiding Officer or by any of the officers, the petitioner
did not object to any of the members of the court. It was done to ensure the compliance of Rule
66. The provisions of Rules 67 and 68 were also complied as the Presiding Officer, the members,
and the officer under instructions were duly affirmed. The petitioner reported no objection to the
Shorthand writer. Rule 69 also stands complied with. Thereafter, in compliance to Rule 71, the
charge sheet was read over by the law Officer to the petitioner and was asked whether he was guilty
or not guilty of the charge which he had heard. He replied- Guilty. As the petitioner had pleaded
guilty to the charge, in compliance to Rule 78, before the Court accepted the plea, the Law Officer
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60474085/ 5
Kuldeep Kour vs Union Of India And Ors on 4 August, 2023
explained to the petitioner about the nature of charge and general effect of his plea and the
difference and procedure when the accused pleads guilty and when he does not plead guilty to the
charge and ascertained whether the petitioner had understood the same as explained to him in
English as well as in Hindi. The petitioner was again read over the charge and he still pleaded guilty
to the charge. Thereafter the court decided to accept the plea of guilt by the petitioner and recorded
its finding. The finding of the court was read. The record of evidence was also read by the Law
officer. It was done to ensure the compliance of Rule 81. The petitioner was asked as to whether he
wished to call any witness as to the character but he replied in negative. One witness was examined
in respect of the previous convictions and the deceased petitioner was afforded an opportunity to
cross-examine the said witness but he did not choose to cross-examine. Thereafter the court was
closed for consideration of sentence. The Court on 07.11.2001 sentenced the deceased petitioner as
under:
a) To forfeit 15 years of service for the purpose of
promotion and;
b) To forfeit 10 years of service for the purpose of
pension and;
c) to be severely reprimanded.
The sentence was confirmed by the respondent No. 3 on 26.11.2001.
11. The contentions of the petitioner that the deceased petitioner did not plead guilty, was not
provided with the record of evidence as well as the Defending Officer are mis-conceived. This court
has examined the record of the proceedings and this court does not find any infraction of the
procedure prescribed by the BSF Rules. The deceased petitioner was granted full opportunity to
defend himself in accordance with Rules. It was also contended by the learned Senior counsel for the
petitioners that the petitioner had sought the summoning of three witnesses in defence during the
preparation of the record of evidence but only two witnesses Rajinder Parsad and J P Nathani were
summoned and the third witness namely HC Ramesh Chand was not summoned. From the minutes
of the proceedings during the preparation of record of evidence dated 06.03.2000 it is evident that
the petitioner sought examination of two witnesses namely Rajinder Parsad and J P Nathani only,
who were examined. No request for the examination of third witness namely HC Ramesh Chand was
made by the petitioner. It is mentionable here that the petitioner had signed the said minutes of the
proceedings, as such this submission made by learned Senior Counsel is contrary to record and as
such is rejected. The contention of the learned Senior Counsel that the petitioner did not plead
guilty is also contrary to record as the petitioner pleaded guilty to the charge. In the mercy appeal
(Annexure-D to the writ petition) also, the petitioner pleaded guilty. The relevant portion is
extracted as under:
"-----I made a lapse to refund the money received on account of casual diet charges
due to ignorance of clear instructions and remain with me in office almirah. So the
lapse and the charge I accepted greatly in the court---"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60474085/ 6
Kuldeep Kour vs Union Of India And Ors on 4 August, 2023
As such, there is no force in the submission made by the learned Senior Counsel that the petitioner
did not plead guilty.
12. Whether the General Security Force Court was not properly convened ?
By virtue of section 65 of the BSF Act, a General Security Force Court may be convened by the
Central Government or the Director-General or by any officer empowered in this behalf by warrant
of the Director-General. It needs to be noted that in terms of Rule 65, the Security Force Court
before beginning the trial is required to satisfy itself as to whether the court has been convened in
accordance with the Act and the Rules. In this case, the GSFC has been convened by the respondent
No.3. In this regard, the respondents have relied upon the warrant dated 27.10.1971 issued by DG
BSF whereby IG BSF Rajasthan has been authorised to convene GSFC under section 65 of the BSF
Act. It needs to be mentioned that initially there was one IG, BSF for Rajasthan Gujarat Frontier and
it was in the year 2004 that two separate Frontiers for Rajasthan and Gujarat were created as is
evident from the communication dated 29.07.2004. Since the GSFC has been convened in the
present case by the respondent No.3 who was duly authorised in terms of section 65 of the BSF Act,
this court does not find any illegality in the convening of the GSFC, as such this contention too is
rejected.
13. Whether the punishments imposed upon the petitioner are dis- proportionate to the alleged
mis-conduct of the petitioner? Lastly, it was contended by the learned Senior Counsel that the three
punishments imposed upon the petitioner are shockingly dis-proportionate to the alleged
mis-conduct of the petitioner, as the petitioner had not mis-appropriated the amount and in fact
deposited the same after the instructions were issued to the petitioner. The petitioner has been
handed over the following three punishments by the respondents:
(a) Forfeiture of 15 years of service for the purpose
of promotion.
(b) Forfeiture of 10 years of service for the
purpose of pension.
(c) Severe Reprimand.
14. It is not in dispute that the Union of India has not suffered any financial loss and the alleged
amount of misappropriation is Rs. 78,0004.48. The alleged mis-appropriated amount includes 48
paisa as well. The charge against the petitioner was only one and the amount stands deposited by
the petitioner. The three punishments for single charge is prima facie, shockingly disproportionate.
The petitioner joined the service in the year 1969 and was at the verge of retirement and due to
retire on 30.04.2003. Once the 15 years of the service were forfeited for the purpose of promotion,
further forfeiture of 10 years of service for purpose of pension is shockingly dis-proportionate to the
alleged act of misconduct and would have consequences during the old age of not only the petitioner
but also upon the wife of the petitioner, when less income shall be at their disposal after
superannuation of the petitioner. In Bhagwan Lal Arya Vs. Commissioner of Police Delhi, reported
in 2004 AIR (SC) SC 2131, the Apex Court has held as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60474085/ 7
Kuldeep Kour vs Union Of India And Ors on 4 August, 2023
"We are of the view that the punishment of dismissal/removal from service can be
awarded only for the acts of grave nature or as cumulative effect of continued
misconduct proving incorrigibility of complete unfitness for police service. Merely
one incident of absence and that too because of bad health and valid and justified
grounds/reasons cannot become basis for awarding such a punishment. We are,
therefore, of the opinion that the decision of the Disciplinary Authority inflicting a
penalty of removal from service is ultra vires of Rule 8 (a) and 10 of the Delhi Police
(Punishment & Appeals Rules, 1980) and is liable to be set aside. The appellant also
does not have any other source of income and will not get any other job at this age
and the stigma attached to him on account of the impugned punishment. As a result
of not only he but his entire family totally dependant on him will be forced to starve.
These are the mitigating circumstances which warrant that the punishment/order of
the Disciplinary Authority is to be set aside. Thus, the present one is a case wherein
we are satisfied that the punishment of removal from service imposed on the
appellant is not only highly excessive and disproportionate but is also one which was
not permissible to be imposed as per the Service Rules. Ordinarily we would have set
aside the punishment and sent the matter back to the Disciplinary Authority for
passing the order of punishment afresh in accordance with law and consistently with
the principles laid down in the judgment. However, that would further lengthen the
life of litigation. In view of the time already lost, we deem it proper to set aside the
punishment of removal from service and instead direct the appellant to be reinstated
in service subject to the condition that the period during which the appellant
remained absent from duty and the period calculated upto the date on which the
appellant reports back to duty pursuant to this judgment shall not be counted as a
period spend on duty. The appellant shall not be entitled to any service benefits for
this period. Looking at the nature of partial relief allowed hereby to the appellant, it
is now not necessary to pass any order of punishment in the departmental
proceedings in lieu of the punishment of removal from service which has been set
aside. The appellant must report on duty within a period of six weeks from today to
take benefit of this judgment.
15. In S.R. Tewari v. Union of India, (2013) 6 SCC 602, the Hon'ble Apex Court has held as under:
24. The question of interference on the quantum of punishment has been considered
by this Court in a catena of judgments and it was held that if the punishment awarded
is disproportionate to the gravity of the misconduct, it would be arbitrary, and thus,
would violate the mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution. In Ranjit Thakur v. Union
of India [Ranjit Thakur v. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 2386] , this Court observed as
under :
"25. But the sentence has to suit the offence and the offender. It should not be
vindictive or unduly harsh. It should not be so disproportionate to the offence as to
shock the conscience and amount in itself to conclusive evidence of bias. The doctrine
of proportionality, as part of the concept of judicial review, would ensure that even on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60474085/ 8
Kuldeep Kour vs Union Of India And Ors on 4 August, 2023
an aspect which is, otherwise, within the exclusive province of the court martial, if the
decision of the court even as to sentence is an outrageous defiance of logic, then the
sentence would not be immune from correction.
27. In the present case the punishment is so strikingly disproportionate as to call for
and justify interference. It cannot be allowed to remain uncorrected in judicial
review."
(emphasis supplied)
16. In view of above, this Court is of the considered view that the two punishments i.e. forfeiture of
15 years of service for the purpose of promotion and severe reprimand, shall be sufficient
punishment for the alleged act of misconduct on the part of the deceased-petitioner. Accordingly,
the order of sentence to the extent of forfeiture of 10 years of the service for the purpose of pension
of the petitioner and the consequential order No. 35 Bn/Estt/GSFC- MSB/2002/42-45 dated
02.01.2002 to the extent of forfeiture of 10 years of the service for the purpose of pension of the
petitioner are quashed. The respondents shall refix the pension and pay the arrears to the petitioner
within three months from the date the copy of the order is served upon the respondents.
17. Record be returned to learned CGSC.
(RAJNESH OSWAL) JUDGE Jammu 04.08.2023 Rakesh Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/60474085/ 9
