Kuldip Krishan Kapoor (Dead) & Anr vs State Of J & K on 22 February, 2023
Kuldip Krishan Kapoor (Dead) & Anr vs State Of J & K on 22
February, 2023
Sr. No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
CRMC No. 78/2014
IA No. 94/2014
Reserved on: 14.02.2023
Pronounced on:22.02.2023
Kuldip Krishan Kapoor (Dead) & Anr. .....Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. V R Wazir, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Abhishek Wazir, Advocate
v/s
State of J & K .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy AG
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Petitioners have invoked the inherent jurisdiction of this court in terms of section 561-A of since
repealed J&K CrPC (akin to section 482 of the Central CrPC) for quashing the challan titled "State vs
Ankur Kapoor & Ors.", pending before the Court of learned 3rd Additional Munsiff ( Judicial
Magistrate) Jammu, arising out of FIR No. 17/2006 dated 28.01.2006 registered at Police Station
Women Cell, Gandhi Nagar Jammu (for short impugned FIR), wherein the petitioners are accused
of being involved in the commission of offences punishable under Sections 498-A, 109, 504, 506
RPC (since repealed penal law of J&K).
2. Petitioner/accused pleaded following facts:-
a) That on a false and baseless complaint filed on 15.06.2006 by the father of Nandita
Avasthi to the Senior Superintendent of Police, Jammu for registration of FIR against
the petitioners and son of petitioner No.1 Ankur Kapoor alleging therein that
marriage of Nandita Avasthi D/O Vijay Kumar Avasthi was arranged with Ankur
Kapoor who had come from Canada to India to meet his parents and Roka ceremony
took place on 19.06.2003; that Ankur Kapoor started delaying the marriage on one or
the other pretext and was insisting for court marriage. Ankur Kapoor again came to
India and on 04.11.2014 engagement/ring ceremony was solemnized, whereas the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76114296/ 1
Kuldip Krishan Kapoor (Dead) & Anr vs State Of J & K on 22 February, 2023
marriage was solemnized on 06.11.2004 at Jammu, which was also got registered
with the Registrar of Marriages, Jammu on 08.11.2004. After one week of the
marriage, Ankur Kapoor left for Canada i.e. on 12.11.2004 leaving Nandita Kapoor to
stay behind for three months at Jammu and during this period she was appointed in
Dental Hospital, Jammu and remained there till the completion of her visa
formalities to Canada. The visa of Nandita Kapoor/Avasthi was approved for USA
and she went to San Francisco USA on 14.02.2005.
b) That Ankur Kapoor and Nandita Kapoor/Avasthi, came to India on 18.012006 and
on 26.01.2006 respectively to attend the marriage of his brother-in-law which was
scheduled on 02.02.2006, they again left for USA on 25.02.2006. Vijay Kumar
Avasthi S/O Hans Raj Avasthi lodged a complaint with SSP, Jammu on 15.06.2006
and on the said complaint an FIR No.17/2006 came to be registered against Ankur
Kapoor and the petitioners herein. A divorce petition came to be filed by Ankur
Kapoor for dissolution of marriage with Nandita Kapoor in the court of San Francisco
County Superior Court USA. Accordingly, the court passed the judgment dissolving
the marriage between Ankur Kapoor and Nandita Kapoor on 27.12.2006 awarding
6000 dollars to be paid to Nandita Avasthi in two installments i.e. 2000 dollars at
first installment and 4000 dollars in second installment. Ankur Kapoor paid in
compliance to the court order, thus Ankur Kapoor and Nandita Kapoor ceased to be
husband and wife from 27.12.2006.
c) That on the basis of the said judgment, Nandita Kapoor filed a suit for declaration to the fact that
Nandita Avasthi's marriage with Ankur Kapoor stands dissolved by virtue of judgment dated
27.12.2006 passed by San Francisco County Superior Court, USA, with consequential relief of
permanent injunction restraining the petitioners from creating obstacles in getting the name of
Ankur Kapoor deleted from the record of the Register of Marriages and record of Passport Office,
Jammu.
d) That Nandita Avasthi filed Suit No.286/Civil on 03.11.2006 against petitioners, Ankur Kapoor
and Branch Manager Citizen Cooperative Bank, Jammu claiming therein that the Jewellery
mentioned in the plaint lying in the bank i.e. Citizen Cooperative Bank Channi Himmat Branch,
Jammu is her property in which suit preliminary decree was passed, a Commissioner was appointed
and directed to get the property identified from the parties i.e. Nandita Kapoor Avasthi and the
petitioners herein and accordingly handover the items which belong to the petitioners to the
petitioners and those belong to Nandita Avasthi to Nandita Avasthi. Accordingly on submission of
the report by the Commissioner, a final decree was passed on 28.03.2007. The petitioners never
objected/raised any dispute regarding the property belonging to Nandita Avasthi.
e) That a complaint was also filed under Section 405 and 406 RPC by Nandita Avasthi against the
petitioners on 17.07.2007 which complaint was withdrawn by Nandita Avasthi on 18.12.2007 and
the same was dismissed and the petitioners being the accused stood discharged.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76114296/ 2
Kuldip Krishan Kapoor (Dead) & Anr vs State Of J & K on 22 February, 2023
f) That the petitioners provided all these documents to the SHO Police Station Women Cell, Jammu
who was investigating the FIR No.17/2006 under Sections 498-A/109 RPC and requested the I.O to
close the investigation, but the I.O under the influence of Vijay Kumar Avasthi continued the
investigation and dragged the petitioners as well as Ankur Kapoor in the court of law; that on
transfer of the earlier I.O the investigation was entrusted to the new incumbent who produced the
Ikhthami in the court and prayed for closure of the case but the court of 3rd Additional Munsiff
(Judicial Magistrate) vide its order dated 10.11.2008 directed to re-investigate the matter and
submit the report on or before 15.12.2008. The I.O instead of submitting the report on 15.12.2008 a
Challan was produced on 19.03.2009 against the petitioners and Ankur Kapoor on the basis of
impugned FIR No.17/2006 under sections 498-A/109/504/506 RPC, which is pending before the
Court of 3rd Additional Munsiff (Judicial Magistrate), Jammu and warrants u/s 512 Cr.P.C was
issued against Ankur Kapoor whereas the petitioners are facing the trial.
3. Learned counsel for the respondent, instead of filing reply, despite several opportunities granted,
has orally opposed the petition on the ground that the present petition is not maintainable as the
petition involves factual disputes which can only be adjudicated by leading evidence and requires a
full dressed trial by the trial Court. It is argued that on 15.06.2006 one Vijay Kumar Avasthi S/O
Hans Raj Avasthi R/O 17-C/C Gandhi Nagar Jammu filed a written complaint with SSP Jammu, for
registration of FIR against the petitioners. After receipt thereof, the respondent-SHO Police Station
Women Cell Gandhi Nagar, Jammu registered a case vide FIR No. 17/2006 for the commission of
offences punishable under Sections 498-A, 109, 504, 506 RPC and during investigation, a prima
facie case has been made out against the accused/petitioners, as such, the accused have no legal
right to seek indulgence of this Court for quashment of the challan titled "State vs Ankur Kapoor &
Ors.", pending before the Court of learned 3 rd Additional Munsiff (Judicial Magistrate) Jammu,
arising out of the impugned FIR, thus prayed for dismissal of the present petition.
4. Heard learned counsel for the parties and considered the matter. I have also perused the material
available on record.
5. According to learned counsel for petitioners, the allegations leveled against the petitioners are
totally baseless, malicious and do not disclose any offence. It is averred that allegations made in the
FIR, even if are taken on their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not prima facie constitute
any offence or make out a case against the petitioners and despite such facts, petitioners have been
harassed by the complainant who has also now expired, by lodging the impugned FIR. It is averred
that complainant abused the process of law, solely to wreck vengeance upon the petitioners and to
victimize them, the same deserves to be quashed. Learned counsel for the petitioners has also
apprised the Court with regard to the death of petitioner No.1 as well as the complainant in the case
and even petitioner No.2 is bedridden since long due to illness. In support of his arguments, learned
counsel for the petitioners has relied upon the judgments of Supreme Court, in case titled "Mirza
Iqbal @ Golu & Anr. Vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.", reported as 2022 AIR (SC) 69, "Kahkashan
Kausar @ Sonam & Ors. vs State of Bihar & Ors.", reported as 2022 AIR (SC) 820 and "Veena Mittal
vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.", reported as 2022 (1) R.C.R (Criminal) 818.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76114296/ 3
Kuldip Krishan Kapoor (Dead) & Anr vs State Of J & K on 22 February, 2023
6. The power under Section 482 of CrPC can be exercised by the High Court to prevent the abuse of
process of the Court and otherwise to secure the ends of justice. The authority of the Court exists for
advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to abuse the said authority, the Court has the
power to prevent that abuse. These inherent powers of the High Court are wide in their scope. Wider
the power, higher the degree of responsibility upon the authority vested with such power to exercise
it with circumspection. These powers are generally exercised to secure the ends of justice.
7. The Supreme Court in the case of "Mirza Iqbal @ Golu & Anr. Vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Anr.",
reported as 2022 AIR (SC) 69, has held that if the FIR did not disclose the commission of an offence,
the court would be justified in quashing the proceedings preventing the abuse of process of law. Para
11 which is relevant, is extracted as under:-
"11. The appellants are brother-in-law and mother-in law respectively of the
deceased. A perusal of the complaint filed by the 2nd respondent, pursuant to which
a crime was registered, does not indicate any specific allegations by disclosing the
involvement of the appellants. It is the specific case of the 1st appellant that he was
working as a cashier in ICICI Bank at Khalilabad branch, which is at about 40 kms
from Gorakhpur. The alleged incident was on 24.07.2018 at about 8 p.m. When the
investigation was pending, the 1st appellant has filed affidavit before Senior
Superintendent of Police on 08.08.2018, giving his employment details and stated
that he was falsely implicated."
8. Learned counsel for the petitioners, however, restricted his arguments only to the legal issue that
in absence of any specific allegations against the petitioner No.2, disclosing her active involvement,
the Magistrate has taken cognizance in a routine and mechanical manner. The Supreme Court in a
case titled "Kahkashan Kausar @ Sonam & Ors. vs State of Bihar & Ors.", reported as 2022 AIR (SC)
820, has held that allowing prosecution, in the absence of clear allegations (Section 498-A IPC)
against the in-laws, would simply result in an abuse of the process of law.
9. The Top Court of the Country in the judgment relied upon Kahkashan Kausar @ Sonam's case has
concurred a view taken in its earlier judgment passed in "Preeti Gupta & Anr. V State of Jharkhand
& Anr, reported as (2010) 7 SCC 667. It will be profitable to re-produce Paras 32, 33, 34, 35 and 36
of the judgment relied upon as under:-
"32. It is a matter of common experience that most of these complaints under section
498A IPC are filed in the heat of the moment over trivial issues without proper
deliberations. We come across a large number of such complaints which are not even
bona fide and are filed with oblique motive. At the same time, rapid increase in the
number of genuine cases of dowry harassment are also a matter of serious concern.
33. The learned members of the Bar have enormous social responsibility and
obligation to ensure that the social fiber of family life is not ruined or demolished.
They must ensure that exaggerated versions of small incidents should not be reflected
in the criminal complaints. Majority of the complaints are filed either on their advice
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76114296/ 4
Kuldip Krishan Kapoor (Dead) & Anr vs State Of J & K on 22 February, 2023
or with their concurrence. The learned members of the Bar who belong to a noble
profession must maintain its noble traditions and should treat every complaint under
section 498A as a basic human problem and must make serious endeavour to help
the parties in arriving at an amicable resolution of that human problem. They must
discharge their duties to the best of their abilities to ensure that social fiber, peace
and tranquility of the society remains intact. The members of the Bar should also
ensure that one complaint should not lead to multiple cases.
34. Unfortunately, at the time of filing of the complaint the implications and
consequences are not properly visualized by the complainant that such complaint can
lead to insurmountable harassment, agony and pain to the complainant, accused and
his close relations.
35. The ultimate object of justice is to find out the truth and punish the guilty and
protect the innocent. To find out the truth is a herculean task in majority of these
complaints. The tendency of implicating husband and all his immediate relations is
also not uncommon. At times, even after the conclusion of criminal trial, it is difficult
to ascertain the real truth. The courts have to be extremely careful and cautious in
dealing with these complaints and must take pragmatic realities into consideration
while dealing with matrimonial cases. The allegations of harassment of husband's
close relations who had been living in different cities and never visited or rarely
visited the place where the complainant resided would have an entirely different
complexion. The allegations of the complaint are required to be scrutinized with great
care and circumspection.
36. Experience reveals that long and protracted criminal trials lead to rancour,
acrimony and bitterness in the relationship amongst the parties. It is also a matter of
common knowledge that in cases filed by the complainant if the husband or the
husband's relations had to remain in jail even for a few days, it would ruin the
chances of amicable settlement altogether. The process of suffering is extremely long
and painful."
10. The Supreme Court in the case of "Veena Mittal vs State of Uttar Pradesh & Ors.", reported as
2022 (1) R.C.R (Criminal) 818, has also held that the allegations in FIR must be read as they stand
and it is only if on face of allegations that no offence, made out, that Court may be justified in
exercising its jurisdiction to quash. Relevant Para 6 is extracted as under:-
"In this backdrop, the finding of the High Court to the effect that there is no specific
allegation against the second and third respondents or that, as the mother and sister
of the bridegroom, they would not be either beneficiaries or have a direct link with
the perpetrators of the crime is not based on cogent material or a reading of the FIR.
It is well settled that at the stage when the High Court considers a petition for
quashing Criminal proceedings under Section 482 of the CrPC, 1973 the allegations
in the FIR must be read as they stand and it is only if on the face of the allegations
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76114296/ 5
Kuldip Krishan Kapoor (Dead) & Anr vs State Of J & K on 22 February, 2023
that no offence, as alleged, has been made out, that the Court may be justified in
exercising its jurisdiction to quash. the parameters of the jurisdiction under Section
482 have been reiterated in a consistent line of authorities and, at this stage, it may
be material to refer to the recent decision of this Court in Neeharika Infrastructure v.
State of Maharashtra, 2021 SCC OnLine SC 315. Accordingly, we allow the appeal and
set aside the impugned judgment and order of the High Court dated 15 April, 2019 in
Criminal Miscellaneous Application No.27511 of 2018."
11. The Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana & Ors. vs. Ch. Bhajan Lal & Ors reported as
1992 Suppl (1) SCC 335, has dealt with the scope of power of High Court under Section 482 CrPC
1973 in an elaborate manner. Paragraphs 102 and 103, which enumerates seven categories of cases,
where power can be exercised under Section 482 CrPC, are extracted as follows:-
"102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the
Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a
series of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article
226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted
and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelized and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under 156 (1) of the Code except under an order of a
Magistrate within the purview of Section 155 (2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected
in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against
the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a
non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a
Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155 (2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on
the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76114296/ 6
Kuldip Krishan Kapoor (Dead) & Anr vs State Of J & K on 22 February, 2023
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the
concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance
of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
view to spite him due to private and personal grudge.
103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that the power of quashing a criminal proceeding
should be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases;
that the court will not be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness
or otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR or the complaint and that the extraordinary or
inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the court to act according to its whim or
caprice."
12. From the foregoing survey of law on the subject, it is clear that in a case where allegations made
in the complaint and evidence collected in support of the same do not disclose commission of any
offence or make out a case against the accused, the High Court can exercise its powers under Section
482 of CrPC to quash the proceedings against an accused. The inherent powers cannot be, however,
exercised to stifle or impinge upon the proceedings.
13. On a careful perusal of detailed complaint lodged by complainant Vijay Kumar Avasthi who
happens to be father of Nandita Avasthi the daughter in-law of the petitioners, it transpires that
marriage between the complainant's daughter and Ankur Kapoor son of the petitioners took place
on 06.11.2004 in Jammu and soon after marriage the bridegroom left for USA/Canada where he
was working, leaving behind the bride. There are no specific allegations against the petitioners
herein except mentioned in the complaint that the daughter of the complainant while working in
Government Dental College, Jammu, had asked her father-in-law-petitioner No.1 who has since
expired to provide her a car for her use while attending her duties which was denied by him. In the
considered opinion of this Court, this cannot be a ground to constitute an offence of subjecting the
daughter-in-law to cruelty. Most of the allegations in the complaint are directed against the husband
by the wife with regard to demand of dowry and subjecting her to cruelty/harassment by having
relationship with another woman abroad. The husband is not before this Court in the petition as he
stated to be absconding and not appearing before the Trial Court as well.
14. For the forgoing reasons and the observations made hereinabove, the instant petition is allowed
and the challan titled "State of J&K vs Ankur Kapoor & Ors.", pending before the Court of learned
3rd Additional Munsiff (Judicial Magistrate) Jammu, arising out of FIR No. 17/2006 registered at
Police Station Women Cell, Gandhi Nagar Jammu, against the accused for the commission of
offences punishable under Sections 498-A, 109, 504, 506 RPC, qua the petitioner No.2, namely,
Savita Kapoor, is hereby quashed as the petition in view of the death of petitioner No.1- Kuldip
Krishan Kapoor abates against him. Copy of this order be sent to Court below for compliance.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76114296/ 7
Kuldip Krishan Kapoor (Dead) & Anr vs State Of J & K on 22 February, 2023
15. The petition along with pending application(s), is thus disposed of, accordingly.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge JAMMU 22.02.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No Whether
the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76114296/ 8
