Kuldeep Kumar Kol vs State Of U.P. & 3 Others on 30 April, 2025
Kuldeep Kumar Kol vs State Of U.P. & 3 Others on 30 April, 2025
Author: Siddharth
Bench: Siddharth
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:67920
Court No. - 47
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 33458 of 2024
Applicant :- Kuldeep Kumar Kol
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. & 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Jitenrda Kumar Ojha
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Siddharth,J.
Heard learned counsel for the applicant and learned A.G.A for the State.
Learned A.G.A informs that notice has been served on informant but no one has turned up to
oppose this bail application.
There are allegations against the applicant of abduction of minor girl with intent to marry and
commission of offence of rape.
Counsel for the applicant submits that in the first statement of victim recorded before the doctor
victim has admitted that she eloped with her boyfriend on her own sweet will and entered into
voluntary physical relationship. It is a case of false implication of applicant. He is in jail since
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190401421/ 1
Kuldeep Kumar Kol vs State Of U.P. & 3 Others on 30 April, 2025
03.08.2023 and has no criminal history to his credit.
On the other hand learned A.G.A has opposed the prayer for bail.
This court had to consider whether the implication under POCSO Act would be justified where the
victim appears of have consented to her relationship with an accused despite being minor in the case
of Atul Mishra vs. State of U.P and 3 others in Criminal Misc. Bail Application No. 53947 of 2021.
The relevant paragraphs nos. 11 to 14 are as follows :-
" 11. As mentioned above, undisputedly on the date of incident i.e. 06.11.2019, the
victim Ms. ''A' was a minor girl and her ''consent' as contemplated u/s 375/376 I.P.C.
has got no value in the eyes of law. This seems to be conservative approach to deal
and decide the instant issue and rightly so. But as I have stated in the opening part of
the order, that applicability of any statutory penal provision is not a mathematical
exposition or theorem. It contains inherent flexibility to cope up an extraordinary
situation and to have more meaningful and larger good.
12. There can be no second thought as to the seriousness of the offence under the
POCSO Act and the object to achieve. Enactment of POCSO Act was to effectively
address the heinous crime of sexual abuse and sexual exploitation of children. The
Act was introduced to provide protection of children from the offences of sexual
assault and harassment etc. This Act also provides for safeguarding the interest of the
child at every stage of judicial process. But this laudable object must have some
genuine and inherent exceptions too. It is imperative for the Court of law to draw thin
line that demarcates the nature of acts that should not be made to fall within the
scope of this enactment. There are certain gray areas, where the severity of the
sentences provided under the Act, rightly so be diluted keeping in view the facts of
each case. If these rigors of the enactment is pasted hastily or irresponsibly, it could
lead to irreparable damage to the reputation and future of young whose actions
would have been only innocuous and may lead to spoiling the future life of that
innocent lovers or couple who out of sheer innocence have initially developed and
thereafter established that relationship, which if seen through the bioscope of these
penal provisions of Act of 2012, would fall within the realm of offence.
13. Growing incidences where teenagers and young adults fall victim of the offences
under the POCSO Act, being slapped by the penal provisions of POCSO Act without
understanding the far reaching implication of the severity of the enactment, is an
issue that brings much concern to the conscience of this Court. A reading of the
statement of objects and reasons of POCSO Act would show that, as mentioned, to
protect the child from the offences of sexual abuse, sexual assault and harassment,
pornography, pursuant to the Article-15 of the Constitution of India, 1950 and the
Conservation on the Rights of the children. However, a large array of the cases filed
under the POCSO Act seems to be those arising on the basis of the complaints/F.I.Rs.
lodged by the families of adolescents and teenagers who are involved in romantic
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190401421/ 2
Kuldeep Kumar Kol vs State Of U.P. & 3 Others on 30 April, 2025
relationship with each other. The scheme of the Act clearly shows that it did not
intend to bring within its scope or limits, the cases of the nature where the
adolescents or teenagers involved in the dense romantic affair.
14. This Court deems it fit and necessary to take a moment to delve into an important
aspect, the awareness of which is crucial in understanding and appreciating with the
cases of instant nature. It is crucial to accept the science and psychology of an
adolescent and young adulthood at this juncture. This is because social and biological
phenomenons are widely recognised as determinates of human development, health
and socio-economic attainment across the life course, but our understanding of the
underlying pathways and processes remains limited. Therefore, a "bio-social
approach" needs to be adopted and appreciated i.e. one that conceptualizes the
biological and social requirements of two teenagers, who on account of mutual
infatuation are attracted and decide for their future. Their decision could be
impulsive, immature but certainly not sinful or tainted as branded in the F.I.R. or
complaint of the informant. "
The Bombay High Court in the case of Faizan Wahid Baig vs. The State of Maharashtra in Bail
Application No. 3372 of 2021 in about similar situation held in paragraph nos. 6 and 7 are as follows
:-
"6. Taking an overall view of the material compiled in the charge-sheet, it appears
that the applicant though minor, was capable of understanding the consequences of
her act and she voluntarily accompanied the applicant to he aunt's place. Though she
is minor and he consent become immaterial, in a case like this, where she voluntarily
joined the company of the applicant, and she had categorically admitted that she was
in love with the applicant, whether that she consented for the sexual intercourse or
not, is the matter of evidence. Till what point of time, she accompanied the applicant
and whether she resisted the actual physical indulgence, when according to her, the
applicant forcibly committed sexual intercourse with her against her wishes, will have
to be determined. In any case, the prosecuterix / victim kept quite till her whatsapp
chat with the applicant was objected to, by the family members and then she narrated
the incident which was alleged to have taken place on 06.04.2020. The time gap
between these two eventws is also crucial as it was always open for the prosecuterix to
disclose the aunt about the forcible act if it was committed in her house, but she
continued to remain silent and disclosed the incident only when an objection was
taken for she establishing contact with the applicant.
7. In the aforesaid circumstances and particularly, when the applicant is also a young
boy, the possibility of he also smitten by infatuation, cannot be ruled out and though
he may take the consequences of the accusations levelled against him, at present, he
need not be further incarcerated being arrested on 29.04.2021, when the trial may
consume considerable time.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190401421/ 3
Kuldeep Kumar Kol vs State Of U.P. & 3 Others on 30 April, 2025
This is however, subject to the stipulation that he shall, in no way establish contact
with the prosecutrix and shall move himself along with the family from the area
where the prosecutrix is residing and shall not enter in no way make any attempt to
establish contact with him, either physically or virtually.
Observations made above the prima facie in nature and limited for the purpose of
adjudication of the present application, and shall in no way, bind the Sessions Judge
while he is trying the applicant for the offence with which he is charged."
In view of the above considerations, applicant deserves to be enlarged on bail keeping in view the
consent of victim by her behaviour.
Keeping in view the nature of the offence, evidence, complicity of the accused, submissions of the
learned counsel for the parties noted above, finding force in the submissions made by the learned
counsel for the applicant, larger mandate of the Article 21 of the Constitution of India, considering
the dictum of Apex Court in the case of Manish Sisodia vs. Directorate of Enforcement, 2024
LawSuit (SC) 677 and considering 5-6 times overcrowding in jails over and above their capacity by
the under trials and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the Court is of the
view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is allowed.
Let the applicant, Kuldeep Kumar Kol, involved in Case Crime No. 164 of 2023, under Sections- 363,
366, 376(D), 504 IPC and Section 5(ksha)/6 of POCSO Act, Police Station- Shankargarh, District-
Prayagraj, be released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following conditions. Further, before
issuing the release order, the sureties be verified.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with the evidence or threaten the witnesses.
(ii) The applicant shall file an undertaking to the effect that he shall not seek any adjournment on
the dates fixed for evidence when the witnesses are present in Court. In case of default of this
condition, it shall be open for the Trial Court to treat it as abuse of liberty of bail and pass orders in
accordance with law.
(iii) The applicant shall remain present before the Trial Court on each date fixed, either personally
or as directed by the Court. In case of his absence, without sufficient cause, the Trial Court may
proceed against him under Section 229-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(iv) In case the applicant misuses the liberty of bail during trial and in order to secure his presence,
proclamation under Section 82 Cr.P.C. is issued and the applicant fails to appear before the Court on
the date fixed in such proclamation then the Trial Court shall initiate proceedings against him in
accordance with law under Section 174-A of the Indian Penal Code.
(v) The applicant shall remain present in person before the Trial Court on the dates fixed for (i)
opening of the case, (ii) framing of charge and (iii) recording of statement under Section 313 Cr.P.C.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190401421/ 4
Kuldeep Kumar Kol vs State Of U.P. & 3 Others on 30 April, 2025
If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant is deliberate or without sufficient cause,
then it shall be open for the Trial Court to treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed
against him in accordance with law.
In case, of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
Order Date :- 30.4.2025 Rohit
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190401421/ 5
