Kuldeep Alias Prashant vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Kuldeep Alias Prashant vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:45036
Court No. - 66
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 3254 of 2025
Applicant :- Kuldeep Alias Prashant
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Amit Rai,Gaurav Kakkar,Raghvendra Prakash,Sahibe Alam,Saqib Meezan
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Parvez Alam,G.A.
Hon'ble Sameer Jain,J.
1. Supplementary affidavit filed by applicant is taken on record.
2. Heard Sri Gaurav Kakkar, learned counsel for the applicant, Sri Parvez Alam, learned counsel for
the informant and Sri Pradeep Kumar, learned AGA for the State-respondent.
3. The instant application has been filed seeking release of the applicant on bail in Case Crime No.
463 of 2024, under Sections 103(1), 309(4), 309(6), 317(2) & 3(5) BNS, Police Station- Noorpur,
District- Bijnor, during pendency of the trial in the court below.
4. FIR of the present case was lodged on 28.11.2024 at about 23:20 hours against applicant and one
unknown person and according to FIR, on 27.11.2024 when informant reached home along with his
mother then found that his father was lying dead in the bathroom and thereafter he informed the
police and after the post-mortem and inquest, he came to know that murder of his father was
committed by the applicant and his associate in the intervening night of 27/28.11.2024.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49118747/ 1
Kuldeep Alias Prashant vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
5. Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that however, applicant is named in the FIR but it
reflects, nobody could see the real incident and merely on the basis of suspicion, he was named in
the FIR.
6. He further submitted that FIR of the present case was lodged by the informant on 28.11.2024 at
about 23:20 hours but before lodgement of the FIR, on 28.11.2024 at about 10:52 hours, he himself
moved an application to the police that when he reached home along with his mother then he found
the dead body of his father, which was lying in the bathroom, and in that application he did not raise
any suspicion against the applicant and this fact clearly suggests that subsequently on the basis of
false allegation, he lodged the FIR of the present case against applicant. He further submitted that
application dated 28.11.2024 moved earlier to the FIR of the present case has been annexed along
with G.D. entry at page nos. 23 and 24 of the supplementary affidavit filed in support of the instant
bail application.
7. He further submitted that during investigation, on 29.11.2024 Investigating Officer recorded the
statement of one Lalit, who was servant of the informant and deceased and he tried to give the
evidence of last seen but his statement also does not appear to be convincing as he in his statement
categorically stated that he disclosed the fact that he witnessed the applicant along with the
deceased on the date of incident to the informant but this fact has not been disclosed by the
informant either in the FIR or in the application moved by him earlier to the FIR of the present case
and therefore, no reliance can be placed on the statement of the witness Lalit.
8. He further submitted that however, as per prosecution, when applicant was arrested then he
confessed his guilt and from his possession only Rs. 5,50/- was recovered. It is further submitted, as
per prosecution, applicant was arrested on 29.11.2024 at about 12:27 hours in the afternoon and
within 40 minutes at about 13:05 hours on 29.11.2024, wife of the deceased i.e. mother of the
informant moved an application that after committing the loot of jewelleries and money, applicant
committed the murder of her husband and thus she introduced new facts and thereafter as per
prosecution, on the pointing out of the applicant, who was already in the custody, on 29.11.2024 at
about 13:30 hours in the afternoon the jewelleries were recovered from a bush. He further
submitted that as per prosecution, on the pointing out of the applicant, mobile phone of the
deceased and weapon used in the crime were also recovered.
9. He further submitted that from the recovery memo, which has been annexed at page no. 97 of the
paper book, it could not be reflected that from which place the alleged mobile phone of the deceased
and weapon used in the crime were recovered and even from the recovery memo, it reflects that the
alleged jewelleries were recovered from an open place, which was accessible to all. He further
submitted that merely on the basis of above evidences, it cannot be said that applicant involved in
the present crime.
10. He further submitted that except the above evidences, there is no cogent evidence against the
applicant on record.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49118747/ 2
Kuldeep Alias Prashant vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
11. He further submitted that it is a case of circumstantial evidence and there is no evidence against
the applicant on record, which can connect him with the instant crime.
12. He further submitted that applicant is not having any criminal history and he is in jail in the
present matter since 29.11.2024.
13. Per contra, learned AGA as well as learned counsel for the informant opposed the prayer for bail
and submitted that on the pointing out of the applicant, not only mobile phone of the deceased was
recovered but on his pointing out the alleged looted jewelleries were also recovered.
14. They further submitted that even on the pointing out of the applicant, weapon used in the crime
was also recovered and there is also evidence of last seen against him but both the counsels could
not dispute the fact that evidence of last seen was given by the witness Lalit, who was servant of the
informant and as per his statement, he informed the informant about the fact that he witnessed the
applicant along with the deceased on the date of incident but in spite of that informant did not
disclose this fact either in the FIR or in the application moved earlier by him even before lodgement
of the FIR.
15. They further could not dispute the fact that the recovery of alleged jewelleries was made from a
bush, which was accessible to all and from the recovery memo, it could not be reflected that from
which place the alleged recovery of mobile phone and weapon used in the crime was made. They
further could not dispute the fact that applicant is not having any criminal history.
16. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
17. It is a case of circumstantial evidence and as per prosecution, following circumstances are
against the applicant:-
(a) he was last seen along with the deceased on 28.11.2024 i.e. on the date of incident
by the witness Lalit,
(b) when applicant was arrested then he confessed his guilt and on his pointing out,
weapon used in the crime, mobile phone of the deceased and jewelleries, looted at the
time of commission of crime, were recovered.
18. As far as evidence of last seen given by witness Lalit is concerned, from his statement, it reflects
that he was servant of the informant side and from his statement, it also reflects, the fact that he
witnessed the applicant along with deceased on the date of incident was disclosed by him to the
informant but surprisingly this fact has not been disclosed by the informant either in the FIR or in
the application, which was moved earlier by him even before lodgement of the FIR of the present
case.
19. Further, as far as evidence with regard to recovery is concerned, from the recovery memo, it
reflects that recovery was made from a place, which was accessible to all.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49118747/ 3
Kuldeep Alias Prashant vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
20. Further, from the recovery memo, it could not be reflected that from which place, the alleged
recovery of mobile phone of the deceased and weapon used in the crime was made.
21. Further, except the above circumstances, there is no circumstance against the applicant.
22. After considering the facts and circumstances of the case, this Court finds merit in the argument
advanced by learned counsel for the applicant that there is no cogent circumstance against the
applicant, which can connect him with the instant crime.
23. Further, applicant is not having any criminal history and he is in jail in the present matter since
29.11.2024.
24. Therefore, considering the facts and circumstances of the case discussed above, in my view
applicant is entitled to be released on bail.
25. Accordingly, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the instant bail
application is allowed.
26. Let the applicant- Kuldeep Alias Prashant be released on bail in the aforesaid case on furnishing
a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned
with the following conditions:-
(i) The applicant shall appear before the trial court on the dates fixed, unless his
personal presence is exempted.
(ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make inducement, threat or promise
to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from
disclosing such facts to the Court or any police officer or tamper with the evidence.
(iii) The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal and anti-social activity.
27. In case of breach of any of the above condition, the prosecution will be at liberty to move an
application before this Court for cancellation of the bail of the applicant.
28. It is clarified that the observations made herein are limited to the facts brought in by the parties
pertaining to the disposal of bail application and the said observations shall have no bearing on the
merits of the case during trial.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 KK Patel
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49118747/ 4
