Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on
19 February, 2024
Author: Biraja Prasanna Satapathy
Bench: Biraja Prasanna Satapathy
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.C.(OAC) No. 3097 of 2017
In the matter of an application under Section 19 of the
Administrative Tribunal's Act, 1985.
..................
Kumari Manasi Seth .... Petitioner
-versus-
State of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite Parties
For Petitioner : Mr. S. Behera (Advocate)
For Opp. Parties : Mr. S. Jena,
Addl. Govt. Advocate
PRESENT:
THE HON'BLE JUSTICE BIRAJA PRASANNA SATAPATHY
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of Hearing: 19.02.2024 & Date of Judgment: 19.02.2024
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biraja Prasanna Satapathy, J.
Pursuant to the order passed by this Court on 30.01.2023, instruction provided by the Chief District
Agriculture Officer, Jharsuguda vide letter dtd.16.02.2024, produced in Court be kept in record.
2. Heard Mr. S. Behera, learned counsel for the Petitioner and Mr. B.P. Tripathy, learned Addl.
Govt. Advocate appearing for the Opp. Parties.
// 2 //
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 1
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
3. Petitioner has filed the present writ petition inter alia with the following prayer:-
"Under the circumstances, it is humbly prayed that this Hon'ble Tribunal may be
graciously pleased to quash the order of termination as passed in Annexure-4.
And/Or pass any other order/orders as this Hon'ble Tribunal deems fit and proper in
this case;
And allow this original application with cost."
4. It is the case of the Petitioner that Petitioner's father while in service died on 06.01.2015.
Petitioner thereafter made her application to get the benefit of appointment under the provisions of
Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme by filing appropriate application. It is also the case of the
Petitioner that the only son of the deceased employee died in the meantime on 28.05.2016 as found
from Annexure-2 series.
4.1. Learned counsel for the Petitioner contended that the competent authority on being satisfied
with the claim made by the Petitioner appointed her as a Peon vide office order dtd.10.07.2017. But
the said order was subsequently modified vide order dtd.12.07.2017 under Annexure-3. Vide order
under Annexure-3 Petitioner was posted as a Peon in the office of District Agriculture Officer,
Jharsuguda in existing vacancy. But thereafter, without providing any opportunity of hearing and
without assigning any reason // 3 // whatsoever, Petitioner was terminated from her service
w.e.f.28.10.2017 vide impugned order passed by Opp. Party No. 4 on 28.10.2017 under Annexure-4.
4.2. Learned counsel for the Petitioner contended that since on due consideration of her claim,
Petitioner was appointed as a Peon under the provisions of Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme vide
order dtd.10.07.2017 so modified vide order dtd.12.07.2017 under Annexure-3, there was no
occasion on the part of Opp. Party No. 4 to terminate the Petitioner from her services without
issuing any show-cause and without following the principle of natural justice and also without
assigning any reason.
4.3. It is also contended that the Tribunal while issuing notice of the matter vide order
dtd.14.11.2017, though stayed the operation of order dtd.28.10.2017, but on the face of such order
passed by the Tribunal, Petitioner was not allowed to continue and she is going without employment
till date. It is accordingly contended that since without following the principle of natural justice and
without assigning any reason whatsoever, Petitioner was terminated from her services
w.e.f.28.10.2017 and she was not allowed to continue on the face of the interim order passed by the
Tribunal on 14.11.2017, not only the impugned order is liable to be interfered with by this Court, but
also Petitioner is eligible and entitled to get the benefit of continuity in service with all service and
financial benefits. With regard to non-compliance of principle of natural justice, learned counsel for
the // 4 // Petitioner relied on the decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Menaka
Gandhi vs. Union of India reported in AIR 1978 SC-597, Manohar Manikara Anchula vs. State of
Maharastra reported in AIR 2013 SC-681, State of Orissa vs. Binapani Das reported in AIR 1967
SC-1269 & Ware House Corporation vs. Vijay Narayan Vajpayee reported in AIR 1980 SC 840 as
well as the order passed by this Court in the case of Mulia Patra Vs. State of Odisha & Ors.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 2
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
(W.P.C.(OAC) No. 2390 of 2013) and with regard to non-assigning of any reason relied on the
decision of this Court reported in 2013 (Supp-I) OLR (NOC)-736 (Smt. Pravati Dash & eight Ors. Vs.
State of Odisha & Ors.) and 2012(I) OLR-87 (Akhila Kumar Mohapatra Vs. State of Odisha & Ors.).
4.4. In Menaka Gandhi (supra), Hon'ble Supreme Court in Paragraphs-57, 58 and 61 has held as
under:-
"57. The question immediately arises : does the procedure prescribed by the
Passports Act, 1967 for impounding a passport meet the, test of this requirement ? Is
it 'right or fair or just' ? The argument of the petitioner was that it is not, because it
provides for impounding of a passport without affording reasonable opportunity to
the holder of the passport to be heard in defence. To impound the passport of a
person, said the petitioner, is a serious matter, since it prevents him from exercising
his constitutional right to go abroad and such a drastic consequence cannot in
fairness be visited without observing the principle of audi alteram partem. Any
procedure which permits impairment of the constitutional right to go // 5 // abroad
without giving reasonable opportunity to show cause cannot but be condemned as
unfair and unjust and hence, there is in the present case clear infringement of the
requirement of Article 21. Now, it is true that there is no express provision in the
Passports Act, 1967 which requires that the audi alteram partem rule should be
followed before impounding a passport, but that is not conclusive of the question. If
the statute makes itself clear on this point, then no more question arises. But even
when the statute is silent, the law may in a given case make an implication and apply
the principle stated by Byles, J., in Cooper v. Wandsworth Maneka Gandhi vs Union
Of India on 25 January, 1978 Indian Kanoon -
http://indiankanoon.org/doc/1766147/ 57 Board of Works(2). "A long course of
decision---, beginning with Dr. Bentley's case and ending with some very recent
cases, establish that, although there are no positive words in the statute requiring
that the party shall be heard, yet-the justice of the common law will supply the
omission of (1) [1974]2S.C.R.348. (2) [1863]14C.B.N.S.180. the legislature". The
principle of audi alteram partem, which mandates that no one shall be condemned
unheard, part of the rules of natural justice. In fact, there are two main principles in
which the rules of natural justice are manifested, namely, Nemo Judex in Sua Causa
and audi alteram partem. We are not concerned here with the former, since there is
no case of bias urged here. The question is only in regard to the right of hearing
which involves the audi alteram partem rule. Can it be imported in the procedure for
impounding a passport ?
58. We may commence the discussion of this question with a few general
observations to emphasise the increasing importance of natural justice in the field of
administrative law. Natural justice is a great humanising principle intended to invest
law with' fairness and to secure justice and over the years // 6 // it has grown into a
widely pervasive rule affecting large areas of administrative action. Lord Morris of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 3
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
Borth- y-Gest spoke of this rule in eloquent terms in his address before the Bentham
Club : "We can, I think, take pride in what has been done in recent periods and
particularly in the field of administrative law by invoking and by applying these
principles which we broadly classify under the designation of natural justice. Many
testing problems as to their application yet remain to be solved. But I affirm that the
area of administrative action is but one area in which the principles are to be
deployed. Nor are they to be invoked only when procedural failures are shown. Does
natural justice qualify to be described as a "majestic" conception ? I believe it does. Is
it just a rhetorical but vague phrase which can be employed, when needed, to give a
gloss of assurance ? I believe that it is very much more. If it can be summarised as
being fair play in action-who could wish that it would ever be out of action ? It
denotes that the law is not only to be guided by reason and by logic but that its
purpose %,,ill not be fulfilled; it lacks more exalted inspiration." (Current Legal
Problems, 1973, Vol. 26, p. 16) And then again, in his speech in the House of Lords in
Wiseman v. Borneman(1), the learned Law Lord said in words of inspired felicity:
"that the conception of natural justice should at all stages guide those who discharge
judicial functions is not merely an acceptable but is an essential part of the
philosophy of the law. We often speak of the rules of natural justice. But there is
nothing rigid or mechanical about them. What they comprehend has been analysed
and described in many authorities. But any analysis must bring into relief rather their
spirit and their inspiration than any precision of definition or precision as to
application. We do not search for prescriptions which will lay down exactly what
must, in various divergent situations, be done. The principles and procedures are to
be applied which, in any particular situation or set of circumstances, are right and
just and fair. Natural justice, it has // 7 // been said, is only "fair play in action." Nor
do we wait for directions from Parliament. The common law has abundant riches :
there we may find what Byles, J., called "the justice of the common law". Thus, the
soul of natural justice is fair play in action' and that is why it has received the widest
recognition throughout the democratic world. In the United States, the right to an
administrative hearing is regarded as essential requirement of fundamental fairness.
And in England too it has been held that 'fair play in action' demands that before any
prejudicial or adverse action is taken against a person, he must be given an
opportunity to be heard. The rule was stated by Lord Henning, M.R. in these terms in
Schmidt v. Secretary of State for Home Affairs(1) :-where a public officer has power
to deprive a person of his liberty or his property, the general principle is that it has
not to be done without his being given an opportunity of being heard and of making
representations on his own behalf". The same rule also prevails in other
Commonwealth countries like Canada, Australia and New Zealand. It has even gained
access to the United Nations. Vide American Journal of International Law, Vol. 67,
page 479. Magarry, J., describes natural justice "as a distillate of due process of law".
Vide Fontaine v. Chesterton(2). It is the quintessence of the process of justice
inspired and guided by fair play in action'. If we look at the speeches of the various
law Lords in Wiseman's case, it will be seen that each one of them asked the question
"whether in the particular circumstances of the case, the Tribunal acted unfairly so
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 4
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
that it could be said that their procedure did not match with what justice demanded",
,or, was the procedure adopted by the Tribunal 'in all the circumstances unfair'? The
test adopted by every law Lord was whether the procedure followed was "fair in all
the circumstances" and 'fair play in action' required that an opportunity should be
given to the tax payer "to see and reply to the counter-statement of the
Commissioners" before reaching // 8 // the conclusion that "there is a prima facie
case against him."
The inquiry must, therefore, always be : does fairness in action demand that an opportunity to be
heard should be given to the person affected?.
XXX XXX XXX
61. This Court, speaking through Hegde, J., in ,I. K. Kraipak's case quoted with approval the above
passage from the judgment of Lord Parker, C.J., and proceeded to add : "The aim of the rules of
natural justice is to secure justice or to put it negatively to prevent miscarriage of justice. These rules
can operate only in areas not covered by any law validly made. In other words they do not supplant
the law of the land but supplement it-Till very recently it was the opinion of the courts that unless
the authority concerned was required by the law under which it functioned to act judicially there
was no room for the, application of the rules of natural justice. The validity of that limitation is now
questioned. If the purpose of the rules of natural justice is to prevent miscarriage of justice One fails
to see why those rules should be made inapplicable, to administrative enquiries. Often times it is not
easy to draw the line that demarcates administrative enquiries from quasi- judicial enquiries.
Enquiries which were considered administrative at one time are now being considered as quasi-
.judicial in character. Arriving at a just decision is the aim of both quasi- judicial enquiries as well as
administrative enquiries. An unjust decision in an administrative enquiry may have more far
reaching effect than a decision in a quasi- judicial enquiry. As observed by this Court in Suresh
Koshy George v. The University of Kerala and Ors. (1969)1 S.C.R. 317 the rules of natural justice are
not embodied rules. What particular rule of natural justice should apply to a given case must depend
to a great extent on the facts and circumstances of that case the framework of the law under which
the enquiry is // 9 // held and the constitution of the Tribunal or body of persons appointed for that
purpose. Whenever a complaint is made before a court that some principles of natural justice had
been contravened the court has to decide whether the observance of that rule was necessary for a
just decision on the facts of the case." This view was reiterated and re-affirmed in a subsequent
decision of this Court in D.F.O. South Khari v. Ram Sanehi Singh(1). The law must, therefore, now
be taken to be well settled that even in an administrative proceeding, which involves civil
consequences, the doctrine of natural justice must be held to be applicable.
4.5. In Manohar Manikara (supra), Hon'ble Supreme Court in Paragraph-17 has held as under:-
"17. The State Information Commission is performing adjudicatory functions where
two parties raise their respective issues to which the State Information Commission is
expected to apply its mind and pass an order directing disclosure of the information
asked for or declining the same. Either way, it affects the rights of the parties who
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 5
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
have raised rival contentions before the Commission. If there were no rival
contentions, the matter would rest at the level of the designated Public Information
Officer or immediately thereafter. It comes to the State Information Commission only
at the appellate stage when rights and contentions require adjudication. The
adjudicatory process essentially has to be in consonance with the principles of
natural justice, including the doctrine of audi alteram partem. Hearing the parties,
application of mind and recording of reasoned decision are the basic elements of
natural justice. It is not expected of the Commission to breach any of these principles,
particularly when its orders are open to judicial review. Much less to Tribunals or
such Commissions, // 10 // the Courts have even made compliance to the principle of
rule of natural justice obligatory in the class of administrative matters as well. In the
case of A.K. Kraipak & Ors. v. Union of India & Ors. [(1969) 2 SCC 262], the Court
held as under : 17. It is not necessary to examine those decisions as there is a great
deal of fresh thinking on the subject. The horizon of natural justice is constantly
expanding The aim of the rules of natural justice is to secure justice or to put it
negatively to prevent miscarriage of justice. These rules can operate only in areas not
covered by any law validly made. In other words they do not supplant the law of the
land but supplement it. The concept of natural justice has undergone a great deal of
change in recent years. In the past it was thought that it included just two rules
namely: (1) no one shall be a judge in his own case (Nemo debet esse judex propria
causa) and (2) no decision shall be given against a party without affording him a
reasonable hearing (audi alteram partem). Very soon thereafter a third rule was
envisaged and that is that quasi-judicial enquiries must be held in good faith, without
bias and not arbitrarily or unreasonably. But in the course of years many more
subsidiary rules came to be added to the rules of natural justice. Till very recently it
was the opinion of the courts that unless the authority concerned was required by the
law under which it functioned to act judicially there was no room for the application
of the rules of natural justice. The validity of that limitation is now questioned. If the
purpose of the rules of natural justice is to prevent miscarriage of justice one fails to
see why those rules should be made inapplicable to administrative enquiries. Often
times it is not easy to draw the line that demarcates administrative enquiries from
quasi- judicial enquiries. Enquiries which were considered administrative at one time
are now being considered as quasi- judicial in character. Arriving at a just decision is
the aim of both quasi-judicial enquiries as well as administrative enquiries. An unjust
decision in an Manohar vs State Of // 11 // Maharashtra & Anr on 13 December, 2012
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136770833/ 6 administrative enquiry
may have more far reaching effect than a decision in a quasijudicial enquiry. As
observed by this Court in Suresh Koshy George v. University of Kerala the rules of
natural justice are not embodied rules. What particular rule of natural justice should
apply to a given case must depend to a great extent on the facts and circumstances of
that case, the framework of the law under which the enquiry is held and the
constitution of the Tribunal or body of persons appointed for that purpose. Whenever
a complaint is made before a court that some principle of natural justice had been
contravened the court has to decide whether the observance of that rule was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 6
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
necessary for a just decision on the facts of that case.
4.6. In State of Orissa vs. Binapani Das, Hon'ble Supreme Court in Paragraph-12 has
held as under:-
"12. It is true that some preliminary enquiry was made by Dr. S, Mitra. But the report
of that Enquiry Officer was never disclosed to the first respondent. 'The rafter the
first respondent was required to show cause why April 16, 1907, should not be accept
das the date of birth and without recording any evidence the order was passed. We
think that such an enquiry and decision were contrary to the basic concept of justice
and cannot have any value. It is true that the order is administrative in character, but
even an administrative order which involves civil consequences as already stated
must be made consistently with the rules of natural justice after informing the first
respondent of the case of the State, the evidence in support thereof and after giving
an opportunity to the first respondent of being heard and meeting or explaining the
evidence. No such // 12 // steps were admittedly taken; the High Court was, in our
judgment, right in setting aside the order of the State."
4.7. In Ware House Corporation (supra), Hon'ble Supreme Court in Paragraph-14 has held as
under:-
"14. The appellant is a Corporation constituted under the Uttar Pradesh State
Warehousing Corporation (Act 28) of 1956, which was subsequently replaced by the
Central Act 58 of 1962. It is a statutory body wholly controlled and managed by the
Government. Its status is analogous to that of the Corporations which were under
consideration in Sukhdev Singh's case (ibid). The ratio of Sukhdev Singh's case,
therefore, squarely applies to the present case. Even if at the time of the dismissal,
the statutory regulations had not been framed or had not come into force, then also
the employment of the respondent was public employment and the statutory body,
the employer, could not terminate the services of its employee without due enquiry in
accordance with the statutory Regulations, if any in force, or in the absence of such
Regulations, in accordance with the rules of natural justice. Such an enquiry into the
conduct of a public employee is of a quasi-judicial character. The respondent was
employed by the appellant-Corporation in exercise of the powers conferred on it by
the statute which created it. The appellants' power to dismiss the respondent from
service was also derived from the statute. The Court would therefore, presume the
existence of a duty on the part of the dismissing authority to observe the rules of
natural justice, and to act in accordance with the spirit of Regulation 16, which was
then on the anvil and came into force shortly after the impugned dismissal. The rules
of natural justice in the circumstances of the case, required that the respondent
should be given a reasonable opportunity to deny his guilt, to defend himself and //
13 // to establish his innocence which means and includes an opportunity to cross-
examine the witnesses relied upon by the appellant- Corporation and an opportunity
to lead evidence in defence of the charge as also a show-cause notice for the proposed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 7
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
punishment. Such an opportunity was denied to the respondent in the instant case.
Admittedly, the respondent was not allowed to lead evidence in defence. Further, he
was not allowed to cross-examine certain persons whose statements were not
recorded by the Enquiry Officer (Opposite Party No. Managing Director, Uttar
Pradesh vs Vinay Narayan Vajpayee on 16 January, 1980 in the presence of the
respondent. There was controversy on this point. But it was clear to the High Court
from the report of enquiry by the Opposite Party No. 1 that he relied upon the reports
of some persons and the statements of some other persons who were not examined
by him. A regular departmental enquiry takes place only after the charge-sheet is
drawn up and served upon the delinquent and the latter's explanation is obtained. In
the present case, no such enquiry was held and the order of dismissal was passed
summarily after perusing the respondent's explanation. The rules of natural justice in
this case, were honoured in total breach. The impugned order of dismissal was thus
bad in law and had been rightly set aside by the High Court."
4.8. In the case of Mulia Patra (supra), this Court in Paragraph 33 & 34 has held as under:-
"33. From the materials available on record, it is apparent that the conduct of the
Opposite Party No.3 reflects a sorry state of affairs. Though the proceeding against
the Petitioner initiated under Annexure-4 was a proceeding under Rule-15 of the
Rules, but the Petitioner was never provided with the documents as prayed for under
Annexure-5 and thereby enabling him to file // 14 // his written statement of
defence. Not only that the enquiry report was also never supplied nor any show-cause
was issued proposing the order of punishment if any. Therefore, the initial order of
punishment passed by the Opposite Party No.3 on 10.06.2003 under Annexure-13
was set aside by the appellate authority by remanding the matter for fresh enquiry
and disposal. The Opposite Party No.3 after such remand once again without
following the provision contained under Rule-15, proceeded with the matter and
upheld the order of punishment passed on 10.06.2003 vide order dated 26.03.2013
under Annexure-19. From the aforesaid conduct of the Opposite Party No.3, this
Court finds that the order of punishment has been passed in complete violation of the
principle of natural justice.
34. Relying on the decision cited by Mr. Rath and the view expressed by the Hon'ble
Apex Court, this Court has got no hesitation in interfering with the office order dated
26.03.2013 passed under Annexure-19. While quashing the same, this Court directs
that since the Petitioner has retired in the meantime, the Petitioner will be treated to
have been continued in his service till his superannuation. While directing so, this
Court further directs the Opposite Parties to sanction and disburse all service and
financial benefits as due and admissible in favour of the Petitioner within a period of
four months from the date of receipt of this order. In order to mitigate the hardship
caused to the Petitioner, this Court while allowing the Writ Petition imposes a cost of
Rs.20,000/- on the then Inspector of Schools, Keonjhar who have passed the initial
order of dismissal on 10.06.2003 and the subsequent order on 24.03.2013. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 8
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
aforesaid cost is to be recovered from the salary / pension of the said District
Education Officer, Keonjhar."
4.9. In the case of Pravati Dash (supra), this Court in Paragraph 13 has held as under:-
// 15 // "13. After giving our anxius hearing to the matter and keeping in mind the
position of law and the CCA Rules, we are constrained to hold that the learned
Tribunal failed to exercise its jurisdiction in the matter. The impugned order of the
Tribunal smacks of application of judicial mind and conscience.
It is to be remembered that the reasons are the soul of orders. Non-recording of reasons could lead
to dual infirmities; firstly, it may cause prejudice to the affected party and secondly, more
particularly, hamper the proper administration of justice. The orders of the Court must reflect what
weighed with the Court in granting or deciding the relief claimed by the Petitioner." 4.10. In the case
of Akhila Kumar Mohapatra (supra), this Court in Paragraph 8 & 10 has held as under:-
"8. Admittedly, the aforesaid order does not contain any reason for rejection of the
bid and cancellation of the tender. Law is no more res integra that an authority must
pass a reasoned order indicating the material on which its conclusions are based."
xxx xxx xxx
10.Reason is the heartbeat of every conclusion. It introduces clarity in an order and
without the same it becomes lifeless."
5. Mr. B.P. Tripathy, learned Addl. Govt. Advocate made his submission basing on the stand taken
in the counter affidavit so filed by Opp. Party Nos. 1 to 4. It is contended that since at the time of
death of the deceased employee, wife of the deceased employee as well as the son were alive, but the
Petitioner being the daughter of the deceased employee made the application to get the benefit, the
then Deputy Director of Agriculture, // 16 // Jharsuguda without proper appreciation of the
provisions contained under Rule 2(b) of OCS (R.A.) Rules, 1990, provided appointment to the
Petitioner vide order dtd.10.07.2017 so modified further vide order dtd.12.07.2017 under
Annexure-3.
5.1. Learned State Counsel accordingly contended that since the wife of the deceased employee was
very much available at the time of death of the deceased employee, Deputy Director of Agriculture,
Jharsuguda was not competent to consider the claim of the Petitioner and provide her appointment
vide order dtd.10.07.2017 so modified vide order dtd.12.07.2017 under Annexure-3. When the said
fact was brought to the notice of the higher authority, basing on the direction issued by the Under
Secretary to Govt. of Odisha, Department of Agriculture & Farmer's Empowerment vide letter
dtd.21.10.2017, Petitioner was terminated from her services w.e.f.28.10.2017 vide order under
Annexure-4. It is accordingly contended that since Petitioner was so appointed under the provisions
of Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme in violation to Rule 2(b) of OCS (R.A.) Rules, 1990, direction
was issued by the Govt. to terminate the Petitioner from her services, which was complied by Opp.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 9
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
Party No. 4 while issuing order dtd.28.10.2017 under Annexure-4. It is accordingly contended that
no illegality has been committed by Opp. Party No. 4 in issuing the order under Annexure-4.
// 17 // 5.2. With regard to non-compliance of the interim order dt.14.11.2017, it is contended that
since the Petitioner was terminated from her service w.e.f.28.10.2017, there was no occasion to
allow her to continue, even though the order impugned was stayed.
6. To the submission made by the learned State Counsel regarding the ground of termination,
learned counsel for the Petitioner contended that Opp. Parties are not permitted to take such a plea
as it was not the ground on which she was terminated vide the impugned order dt.28.10.2017. In
support of the submission, learned counsel for the Petitioner relied on the decision of the Hon'ble
Apex Court in the case of Mohinder Singh Gill & Anr. vs Chief Election Commissioner, reported in
1978 AIR 851. Hon'ble Apex Court in Para 8 of the Judgment in the case of M.S. Gill (Supra) has
held as follows:-
"8. The second equally relevant matter is that when a statutory functionary makes an
order based on certain grounds, its validity must be judged by the reasons so
mentioned and cannot be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape of affidavit or
otherwise. Otherwise, an order bad in the beginning may, by the time it comes to
court on account of a challenge, get validated by additional grounds later brought out.
We may here draw attention to the observations of Bose J. in Gordhandas Bhanji
(AIR 1952 SC 16 (at p.18):
"Public orders, publicly made, in exercise of a statutory authority cannot be
construed in the light of explanations subsequently given by the officer making the
order of what he meant, or of what was in Ms mind, or what he intended to, do.
Public orders made by public authorities are meant to have public effect and are
intended to effect the actings and conduct of those to whom they are addressed and
must be construed objectively with reference to the language used in the order itself."
// 18 // Orders are not like old wine becoming better as they grow older:
A Caveat".
7. A further instruction has been provided that since the concerned authority illegally appointed the
Petitioner under the provisions of Rehabilitation Assistance Scheme, a proceeding was initiated
against the Officer in question and he has been imposed with punishment vide order
dtd.04.07.2022. It is accordingly contended that no illegality or irregularity has been committed
while terminating the Petitioner from her services vide order under Annexure-
4.
8. This Court taking into account the interim order passed by the Tribunal on 14.11.2017 when
passed an order on 30.01.2024 directing the learned State Counsel to obtain instruction as to why
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 10
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
on the face of the interim order passed by the Tribunal, Petitioner was not allowed to continue,
instruction has been provided by the Chief District Agriculture Officer, Jharsuguda vide letter
dtd.16.02.2024. In the said instruction a stand has only been taken that Petitioner was terminated
from her services w.e.f.28.10.2017 and she is not in service since then. No instruction has been
provided as to why on the face of the interim order passed by the Tribunal, Petitioner was not
allowed to continue even though she was appointed under the provisions of Rehabilitation
Assistance Scheme.
// 19 //
9. Having heard learned counsel appearing for the Parties and after going through the materials
available on record, this Court finds that Petitioner's father while in service died on 06.01.2015 and
the only son of the deceased employee also died on 28.05.2016 as found from Annexure-2 series.
Petitioner being the daughter of the deceased employee was also eligible to make her application in
terms of the provisions contained under Rule 2(b) of the OCS (R.A.) Rules, 1990 so upheld by this
Court in the case of Ajit Kumar Barik Vs. State of Odisha & Ors. (2018 (II) OLR P-10). The ratio
decided in the case of Ajit Kumar Barik has also been upheld by the Hon'ble Apex Court. This Court
in the case of Ajit Kumar Barik in Para 6 has held as follows:-
"6. The Rules as contended in the above paragraph nowhere restricted the
jurisdiction of the appointing authority to consider the application for appointment
in a suitable available vacancy under his control. The Rules also define "Family
Members" means include the following members in order of preference-
(i) Wife/Husband;
(ii) Sons or step sons or sons legally adopted through a
registered deed;
(iii) Unmarried daughters and unmarried step daughters;
(iv) Widowed daughter or daughter-in-law residing permanently
with the affected family;
(v) Unmarried or widowed sister permanently residing with the
affected family;
(vi) ) Brother of unmarried Government servant who was wholly
dependent on such Government servant at the time of death."
// 20 // 9.1. Therefore, the stand taken by the Opp. Parties for terminating the Petitioner from her
services on the ground that since the wife of the deceased employee was available and Petitioner was
wrongly appointed by the authority concerned, is not acceptable to this Court in view of the decision
in the case of Ajit Kumar Barik. Not only that since such a ground as contended is not reflected in
the impugned order, Opp. Parties are not permitted to take such a plea in view of the decision of the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of M.S. Gill as cited supra.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 11
Kumari Manasi Seth vs State Of Odisha & Ors. .... Opposite ... on 19 February, 2024
9.2. It is also found from the record that prior to terminating the Petitioner from her services vide
order under Annexure-14, no opportunity of hearing was given nor any show-cause was issued. Not
only that no reason has also been assigned in the impugned order under Annexur-4 as to on what
ground Petitioner was terminated from her services save and except indicating therein that in terms
of the letter issued by the Govt. on 21.10.2014, Petitioner is hereby terminated.
9.3. It is also found that on the face of the interim order passed by the Tribunal on 14.11.2017,
wherein the operation of order dtd.28.10.2017 was stayed, Petitioner was not allowed to continue. In
view of such material irregularity which is apparent on the face of the record, this Court placing
reliance on the decisions as cited supra is inclined to quash office order dtd.28.10.2017 under
Annexure-4. While quashing the same, this Court held // 21 // the Petitioner to be in service for the
period from 28.10.2017 till she is allowed to rejoin in her post. But since Petitioner because of the
impugned order did not continue in service, the period from the date of termination till she rejoins
be regularized on notional basis. Opp. Party No. 4 is directed to allow the Petitioner to join in her
post within a period of two (2) weeks from the date of receipt of this order. Petitioner is permitted to
provide a copy of this order before Opp. Party No. 4 for compliance.
10. The writ petition is disposed of accordingly.
(Biraja Prasanna Satapathy) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack Dated the 19th of February,
2024/Sneha Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160581195/ 12
