Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
Author: S. Sunil Dutt Yadav
Bench: S. Sunil Dutt Yadav
1
R
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 04TH DAY OF AUGUST 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE S. SUNIL DUTT YADAV
WRIT PETITION No.1383 OF 2020 (GM-KEB)
C/W
WRIT PETITION No.53302/2018
WRIT PETITION No.6087/2019
IN W.P. No.1383/2020
BETWEEN:
MRS. REKHA
WIFE OF LATE N. SUBRAMANYA
AGED ABOUT 34 YEARS
RESIDING AT NAGANAHALLI VILLAGE,
UCHANGI POST, YESALUR HOBLI
SAKALESHPUR TALUK.
HASSAN DISTRICT - 573 137.
... PETITIONER
(BY SRI SHRIDHAR PRABHU, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. KARNATAKA POWER TRANSMISSION
CORPORATION LIMITED
K.G. ROAD
BENGALURU - 560 001
REPRESENTED BY ITS
MANAGING DIRECTOR.
2. THE CHAMUNDESHWARI ELECTRIC
SUPPLY CORPORATION LIMITED
NO.29, KAVERI GRAMEENA BANK ROAD
VIJAYANAGAR 2ND STAGE,
HINKAL, MYSURU - 570 017
REPRESENTED BY ITS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 1
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
MANAGING DIRECTOR
2
3. ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
OFFICE OF THE ELECTRICAL INSPECTOR
SAGARA NILAYA, 1 FLOOR
SRI RAGHAVENDRASWAMY TEMPLE ROAD
I CROSS, RAVINDRA NAGAR
HASSAN - 573 201.
4. THE STATE OF KARNATAKA
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
VIKASA SOUDHA
DR. AMBEDKAR VEEDHI
BENGALURU - 560 001
REPRESENTED BY ITS
ADDITIONAL CHIEF SECRETARY.
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI H.V. DEVARAJU, ADVOCATE FOR R1;
SRI D.C. PARAMESWARAIAH, HCGP FOR R3 & R4;
SMT. PADMA S. UTTUR, ADVOCATE FOR R2)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226 & 227 OF
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA, PRAYING TO ISSUE A WRIT OF MANDAMUS
OR ANY OTHER WRIT OR ORDER OR DIRECTION OF THE LIKE NATURE
AND DIRECT THE RESPONDENTS TO PAY THE COMPENSATION
AMOUNT OF RS.5,00,000/- (RUPEES FIVE LAKH ONLY) AS PER 1ST
RESPONDENT KPTCL'S ORDER BEARING NO.KPTCL/B7/2476/95-96
VOL.1 BENGALURU, DATED 09.11.2017, PRODUCED HEREIN AS
ANNEXURE-A AND ETC.
IN W.P. NO.53302/2018
BETWEEN:
KUMARI CHANDANA K.,
D/O KS KRISHNAMURTHY,
AGED ABOUT 15 YEARS
RESIDING AT NO.192/27,
10TH CROSS, LOTTEGOLLAHALLI,
DEVI NAGAR, BENGALURU - 560 094.
REPRESENTED BY HER NATURAL GUARDIAN
AND FATHER KS KRISHNAMURTHY
S/O SOORE GOWDA
AGED ABOUT 43 YEARS
RESIDING AT NO.192/2017
10TH CROSS, LOTTEGOLLAHALLI,
3
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 2
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
DEVI NAGAR,
BENGALURU - 560 094.
... PETITIONER
(BY SRI CLIFTON D' ROZARIO, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. PRINCIPAL SECRETARY
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
VIKASA SOUDHA
BENGALURU - 560 001
2. BANGALORE ELECTRICITY COMPANY (BESCOM)
REPRESENTED BY MANAGING DIRECTOR
K R CIRCLE
BANGALORE - 560 002.
3. KARNATAKA STATE COMMISSION FOR
PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS
4TH FLOOR, KRISHI BHAVAN
NRUPATHUNGA ROAD,
AMBEDKAR VEEDHI,
SAMPANGI RAMA NAGAR
BENGALURU - 560 002.
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI D.C. PARAMESWARAIAH, HCGP FOR R1;
SRI H.V. DEVARAJU, ADVOCATE FOR R2;
R3 - SERVED)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLE 226 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA, PRAYING TO ISSUE AN APPROPRIATE WRIT,
ORDER OR DIRECTION TO THE 1ST AND 2ND RESPONDENT DIRECTING
THEM TO PAY COMPENSATION OF RS.90,00,000/- (RUPEES NINETY
LAKHS ONLY) TO THE PETITIONER ALONG WITH INTEREST THEREON
AND ETC.
IN W.P. NO.6087/2019
BETWEEN:
MUIZZ AHMAD SHARIFF
S/O SHRI MAQSOOD AHMED SHARIF
AGED ABOUT 7 YEARS
RESIDING AT NO.17, 1ST FLOOR, 2ND MAIN,
4
GURANANPALYA B.G. ROAD
BENGALURU - 560 029.
REPRESENTED BY HIS NATURAL GUARDIAN
AND FATHER, SHRI MAQSOOD AHMED SHARIF
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 3
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
S/O LATE SHRI MAQBOOL AHMED
AGED ABOUT 35 YEARS
RESIDING AT NO.17, 1ST FLOOR, 2ND MAIN,
GURANANPALYA B.G. ROAD
BENGALURU - 560 029.
... PETITIONER
(BY SRI CLIFTON D' ROZARIO, ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. STATE OF KARNATAKA
REPRESENTED BY THE
PRINCIPAL SECRETARY
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY
VIKASA SOUDHA
BENGALURU - 560 001
2. THE MANAGING DIRECTOR
KARNATAKA POWER TRANSMISSION
CORPORATION LIMITED
CAUVERY BHAVAN,
BENGALURU - 560 001.
3. KARNATAKA STATE COMMISSION FOR
PROTECTION OF CHILD RIGHTS
4TH FLOOR, KRISHI BHAVAN
NRUPATHUNGA ROAD, AMBEDKAR VEEDHI,
SAMPANGI RAMA NAGAR
BENGALURU - 560 002.
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI S. SRIRANGA, SENIOR ADVOCATE FOR
SMT. SUMANA NAGANAND, ADVOCATE FOR R2;
SRI D.C. PARAMESWARAIAH, HCGP FOR R1;
SMT. B.V. VIDYULATHA, ADVOCATE FOR R3)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLE 226 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA, PRAYING TO ISSUE AN APPROPRIATE WRIT,
ORDER OR DIRECTION TO THE 1ST AND 2ND RESPONDENT DIRECTING
THEM TO PAY COMPENSATION OF RS.90,00,000/- (RUPEES NINETY
LAKHS ONLY) TO THE PETITIONER ALONG WITH INTEREST THEREON
ANNEXURES-U TO Y AND ETC.
5
THESE WRIT PETITIONS HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED
ON 28.06.2022 AND COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT OF ORDERS,
THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:
ORDER
S. SUNIL DUTT YADAV. J This Order has been divided into the following Sections to facilitate
analysis:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 4
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
A. Nature of Liability of Transmission Utility and 22 Distribution Company:
a) Liability under Common Law
b) Liability under Statutory Framework imposing duty to ensure safety during
transmission and distribution C. Relegation to Civil Court after granting 50
provisional compensation D. Right to claim Compensation irrespective 56 of
paymnet of Exgratia/Solatium Amount I PREAMBLE:
W.P.No.53302/2018, 6087/2019 and 1383/2020 all are legal actions initiated
invoking writ jurisdiction claiming compensation by way of a public law remedy
consequent upon injuries suffered (W.P.No.53302/2018 and 6087/2019) and death
due to electrocution (W.P.No.1383/2020). As the legal basis for relief sought similar,
as also the claim being made against the transmission utility and distribution
companies i.e., Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited ("KPTCL" for
brevity), Bengaluru Electric Supply Company ("BESCOM" for brevity)
(W.P.No.53302/2018 and W.P.No.6087/2019) and Chamundeshwari Electric Supply
Company ("CESCOM" for brevity) (W.P.No.1383/2020), the matters are taken up
together and disposed off by a common order.
II PRAYER:
2. Following are the relief's sought for in these petitions:
(a) Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to respondent nos.1 and 2 directing
them to pay compensation of Rs.90,00,000/- to the petitioner along with interest.
(b) Issue a direction to the authorities to install and maintain all the electrical wires,
conductors, apparatus etc., in accordance with Electricity Act, Rules and Regulations
etc., so that no untoward incident takes place in future.
(a) Issue an appropriate writ, order or direction to the respondent nos.1 and 2
directing them to pay compensation of Rs.90,00,000/- to the petitioner along with
interest thereon.
(a) Issue a writ of certiorari or any other writ or order or direction of the like nature
quashing Order No.KPTCL/B7/2476/95-96 Vol I BENGALURU dated 09.11.2017
vide Annexure-'A'.
(b) To direct the respondents to pay compensation of Rs.68,74,000/- along with applicable interest.
III FACTS:
3. The facts giving raise to the petitions in each of the matters are as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 5
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
(i) The petitioner who was a student studying in IX Standard, on 19.10.2017 while
carrying an iron mop stick while climbing the staircase in her residence came in
contact with 11 KV Electrical line and was electrocuted and suffered grievous injuries.
(ii) LIST OF EVENTS:
19.10.2017 Petitioner suffered injuries due to electrocution. 06.01.2018
Vidyaranyapura P.S. registered a First Information Report in Crime No.0007/2018
(Annexure-H - Copy of FIR; Annexure- J - Copy of complaint) 17.09.2018 Electrical
Inspector submitted enquiry report (Annexure-R1 to Statement of Objections of
respondent no.2) 27.03.2018 The Karnataka State Commission for Protection of
Child Rights ("KSCPCR" for brevity) passed an order directing the Respondent No.2
to pay compensation of Rs.50,00,000/-and further directed the second respondent
to provide robotic arm to the petitioner (Annexure-K)
02.08.2018 Representation by petitioner to BESCOM to implement the order of KSCPCR
26.09.2018 Representation addressed to the Additional Chief Secretary to the Government, Energy
Department to pay compensation for the disability suffered in terms of the judgments of the
Supreme Court. 30.08.2019 Order was passed in W.P.No.48907/2018 declaring that the order of
Commission is to be treated as recommendatory and orders to be passed by the State Government
after affording an opportunity of hearing to the parties.(Annexure-R6 of statement of objections of
respondent no.2) 28.01.2020 Order passed by the Additional Chief Secretary, Energy Department
pursuant to the direction of the Commission and directing payment of Rs.2,50,000/- towards
rehabilitation and treatment. 05.03.2020 Communication addressed by BESCOM to implement the
order of Additional Chief Secretary, Energy Department. (Annexure-R8 of statement of objections of
respondent no.2)
(i) Muizz Ahmed Shariff who is aged about 05 years 08 months, on 16.09.2017 jumped from his
building onto the neighbouring building to retrieve a cricket ball was electrocuted when he came
within the induction zone of 66 KV High Tension Line and suffered severe injuries.
(ii) LIST OF EVENTS:
16.09.2017 Electrical accident resulting in injuries when the child came within the
induction zone of 66 KV High Tension Line.
17.09.2017 Suddaguntepalya P.S. registered an FIR in Crime No. 0007/2018
(Annexure-S) 18.09.2017 Counseling Notes of Rainbow Hospital indicating injuries
caused by electrocution (Annexure-C)
----- Discharge Summaries (Annexure - F to N) 19.02.2018 Report of the Electrical
Inspector (Annexure-R1 of statement of objections of respondent no.2) 12.04.2018
KSCPCR passed an order directing the Managing Director to pay compensation of
Rs.40,00,000/- to the petitioner (Anexure-T) 30.08.2019 Order was passed in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 6
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
W.P.No.26329/2018 declaring that the order of Commission is to be treated as
recommendatory and orders to be passed by the State Government.
09.03.2020 Order passed by the Additional Chief Secretary, Energy Department pursuant to the
direction of the Commission directing payment of Rs.5,00,000/- towards rehabilitation and
treatment. Representation submitted to Chief Secretary (Annexure-U) to the Energy Department
-----
(Annexure-V), to Chairman, KPTCL (Annexure-W) seeking payment of compensation.
(i) Petitioner is stated to be the widow of late N.M.Subramanya, an agricultural worker who is stated
to have died in an electrical accident while working in a coffee plantation while harvesting pepper
using an aluminum ladder which came in contact with 11 KV Feeder Line resulting in electrocution
and he succumbing to the injuries eventually leading to his death.
(ii) LIST OF EVENTS:
DATE EVENTS
22.02.2018 Petitioner's husband lost his life in an electrical accident leading to death.
22.02.2018 FIR was registered (Annexure-C) 31.05.2018 Electrical Inspector submitted enquiry
report (Annexure-E) 05.10.2018 Petitioner gave a representation to the Additional Chief Secretary,
Department of Energy, Government of Karnataka requesting payment of solatium in terms of the
order of the KPTCL dated 09.11.2017.
30.04.2019 KPTCL addresses communication to the Superintending Engineer disputing report of
Electrical Inspector and declined to pay compensation.
10.05.2019 CESCOM by its communication to the Executive Engineer has also declined to pay
compensation to the legal representatives of the deceased contending that there was no fault on its
part.
IV Contentions of Parties :
4. The contentions raised by the parties to the petition in each of the matters are as follows:
(a) Contentions of Petitioner
(i) The petitioner has contended that the principle of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 7
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
strict liability without defences would apply insofar as electricity is a dangerous commodity and the
respondents are engaged in supply/transmission and distribution of electricity which is an
inherently dangerous activity. It is contended that the liability as laid down in Naval Kumar @ Rohit
Kumar v. State of H.P. & Ors.1 requires to be applied. Reliance is also placed on the judgment in the
case of M.C.Mehta and Another v. Union of India and Others2, M.P.Electricity Board v. Shail
Kumari and (2015) SCC Online HP 731 (1987) 1 SCC 395 Others3 and Smt.Bhagyabai and Others v.
Principal Secretary, Department of Energy and Others.4
(ii) It is specifically contended that the question of negligence as regards children cannot be raised
as a defence. While placing reliance on Naval Kumar (supra) it is contended that concept of
contributory negligence cannot be made applicable to a child.
(iii) As regards quantification of compensation, it is contended that the recommendation of the
Karnataka State Commission for Protection of Child Rights ('KSCPCR' for brevity) whereby a
compensation amount of Rs.50 Lakhs was recommended ought to have been accepted. Though the
High Court had declared that recommendation of the State Commission was only recommendatory
and pursuant to such recommendation, the Government had taken a decision and awarded a sum of
Rs.2,50,000/-, subsequently, the Apex Court in the case of National Commission for Protection of
Child Rights and Others (2002) 2 SCC 162 W.A.No.3249/2010 & 3540-43/2010 DD: 25.10.2010 v.
Dr. Rajesh Kumar and Others5 has held that the Court would normally expect that the Government
would accept the recommendations of the State Commission.
(iv) Petitioner has filed a memo calculating compensation and while relying on the calculation of
compensation in Naval Kumar (supra), compensation in terms of medical expenses, loss of future
income and under other heads like loss of companionship, loss of amenities and compensation on
the ground of pain and sufferings has been quantified in terms of the memo dated 07.02.2022.
Further, as per memo dated 21.03.2022, estimated expenditure for further treatment has been
placed on record.
b) Contentions of Respondent No.2
(i) The respondent no.2 has contended that there
was no negligence by BESCOM as the distance between the electric line and building was 1.2 meters
as was prescribed. It is further contended that the order in W.P.No.48907/2018 (2020) 11 SCC 377
clarified that the order of the State Commission was to be treated as a recommendatory and State
Government was required to pass an order, which order has been passed holding that there was no
negligence on the part of BESCOM.
(ii) It was further submitted that the State Government had however directed BESCOM to pay a sum
of Rs.2,50,000/- as solatium towards rehabilitation and for providing prosthetic forearm to her left
hand and steps have been taken in terms of Annexure- R8 of the statement of objections to pay the
said amount. Accordingly, any further claim of enhanced amount was a matter for consideration
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 8
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
before the Civil Court.
(a) Contentions of Petitioner
(i) The petitioner has contended that the authorities have violated Rule 80 of Indian Electricity
Rules, 1956 insofar as the distance of the high voltage line from the building. It is further submitted
that the respondents were aware of such violation and had issued notice to the owner. But upon
taking an undertaking from the owner that it would be the liability of the owner of the house in case
of an electrical accident, it had proceeded to provide for power supply. Accordingly, it is submitted
that the respondent no.2 is to be fastened with liability.
(ii) It is also submitted that the KSCPCR had also passed an order directing the respondent to pay
compensation which had also recorded a finding that the respondent was guilty of dereliction of
duty for not taking proper action against the persons who put up the structure and had failed to
maintain distance from the high tension wires.
(iii) Petitioner has also filed a memo calculating compensation vide memo dated 07.02.2020.
Further, as per memo dated 21.03.2022, estimated expenditure for further treatment has been
placed on record.
b) Contentions of Respondent No.2 (Power Transmission Corporation)
(i) It is the contention of respondent No.2 that the petition is not maintainable in light of the
disputed facts and ought to have been filed before the trial court.
(ii) It is further contended that there has been violation in adherence to Rule 80 and 82 of the
Indian Electricity Rules, 1956 insofar as putting up of structure within the buffer distance to be
maintained from high voltage lines.
(iii) It is also contended that the petitioner was of a height of 3.5 Feet and the 66 KV Power
Transmission Line was at a height of 9 feet and the only manner by which the child would have
come in contact with the line was by way of additional contraption which act has caused the accident
and liability for which cannot be attributed to the respondent.
(iv) It is contended that exception to Strict Liability would apply as the accident was as a result of
negligence of the owner and compensation is required to be apportioned by fastening liability on the
building owner also.
(v) The petitioner having obtained compensation of Rs.1,00,000/- from the Karnataka Wakf Board
and Rs.50,000/- from BBMP cannot pursue the present remedy and must be relegated to the Civil
Court.
(vi) It is also submitted that pursuant to the order of the KSCPCR, matter was referred to the
Government for necessary decision (order dated 30.08.2019 in W.P.No.26329/2018) on the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 9
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
recommendation of the Commission and the Government has ordered payment of Rs.5,00,000/-
towards rehabilitation and treatment of the child, which is also a ground for relegation of the
petitioner for the claim of further compensation before the Civil Court.
a) Contentions of Petitioner:
(i) The petitioner had contended that respondent
no.1 - KPTCL was to be held responsible in light of the report of the Electrical Inspector who has
observed that there has been lapse on part of KPTCL in maintenance of 'power braker' attached to
the 11 KV Feeder Line, which did not trip, cutting off the power supply. It is submitted that the
Electrical Inspector had concluded that there was violation of Regulation 45 (2) (ii).
(ii) It is further contended that respondent no.2 which is a Distribution Company was also to be held
liable. It is contended that in terms of the 'Electrical Accidents - A Consumer Guide to Claim
Solatium', whenever the accident takes place, the consumer/victim or relatives upon informing the
authorities as per the procedure to be followed, compensation is to be paid based on the documents,
reports submitted and investigation conducted by the Chief Electrical Inspector, Government of
Karnataka ('CEIG' for brevity) within two months of the report of the CEIG. It is also contended that
wherever overhead electrical lines are the cause of the accidents/fatality, compensation shall be paid
without waiting for the report of the CEIG.
It is submitted that the said procedure has not been followed in granting the compensation fixed in
terms of the Government Order No.KPTCL/B7/2476/95-96/Vol-I/ Bengaluru dated 09.07.2017.
(iii) As regards the quantum of compensation, claim of Rs.68,74,000/- has been made and
calculated as per the pleadings found in Para 23 and 24 of the petition by applying principles as
followed in determining compensation in claim petitions under the Motor Vehicles Act. b.
Contentions of Respondent No.2 (Electricity Supply/ Distribution Corporation)
(i) The respondent no.2 has contended that there was no leakage of power in the line and that the
connections were intact and accordingly, there was no fault on the part of the Corporation.
(ii) It is further contended that there are disputed facts and matter is to be subjected to trial before
the Civil Court, that the incident occurred due to the fault of the owner of the land who had provided
an aluminum ladder and accordingly, accident was due to negligence on the part of the owner and is
to be construed as due to 'act of third party'.
c) Contentions of Respondent No.1 (Power Transmission Corporation)
(i) Maintenance of 11 KV Feeder Line does not come within the purview of KPTCL and fall within the
control and supervision of the second respondent.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 10
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
(ii) The conclusion arrived at by the Electrical Inspector has been disputed and reliance is placed on
report of the Assistant Executive Engineer (Annexure-R2) which certifies that the 'Backup Relays'
were in goods condition.
V Analysis:
A Nature of Liability of Transmission Utility and
Distribution Company:
5. In the present factual matrix, it must be noted that the transmission of electricity is by KPTCL and
the distribution of electricity is by the CESCOM.
6. The nature of liability is as follows:
a) Liability under Common Law
(i) The Power Supply Company in these matters
have sought to repudiate liability on the ground that the acts of negligence by the victims was the
cause or contribution for the accident or that the intervening acts by strangers/third parties were
responsible for the accident.
(ii) The principle of strict liability was evolved in the case of Rylands v. Fletcher6, which provides
that when a person who for his own purpose brings on to his land and collects and keeps there
anything likely to do mischief and if it escapes he keeps it is at his peril and he is prima-facie (1868)
3 HL 330:: (1861-73) All ER Rep 1 liable for the damage caused to the natural consequence of its
escape. Though this principle admits of exception which includes act of strangers, the courts have
negatived the applicability of defence of strict liability in case of consequences of accidents
attributed to supply and distribution of electricity.
It is a settled position that electricity has been treated to be a hazardous substance for the purpose of
applicability of the rule in Rylands v. Fletcher (supra).
(iii) The Apex Court in the case of M.C.Mehta (supra) where claims for compensation were sought
on behalf of persons who had suffered consequent to escape of oleum gas from the units of Sriram
Foods & Fertilizers Industries has laid down the law as regards consequences of accidents where
inherently dangerous activities are carried on. The principle of absolute liability was laid down
whereby liability was made absolute i.e., strict liability sans defences. The observations of the Apex
Court at Para 31 is self-explanatory and reads as follows:
"....We would therefore hold that where an enterprise is engaged in a hazardous or
inherently dangerous activity and harm results to anyone on account of an accident
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 11
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
in the operation of such hazardous or inherently dangerous activity resulting, for
example, in escape of toxic gas the enterprise is strictly and absolutely liable to
compensate all those who are affected by the accident and such liability is not subject
to any of the exceptions which operate vis-a-vis the tortious principle of strict liability
under the rule in Rylands v. Fletcher."
This principle propounded by the Apex Court in M.C.Mehta has been extended to be applicable in
the case of electrical accidents also in the case of Shail Kumari (supra).
(iv) In Shail Kumari, a workman in a factory, while riding on a bicycle returning from his factory
rode over a live electric wire and was electrocuted instantaneously and while considering the
defence of the Power Companies, the Apex Court has observed at Para 7 and 8 as follows:
"7. It is an admitted fact that the responsibility to supply electric energy in the particular locality was
statutorily conferred on the Board. If the energy so transmitted causes injury or death of a human
being, who gets unknowingly trapped into it, the primary liability to compensate the sufferer is that
of the supplier of the electric energy. So long as the voltage of electricity transmitted through the
wires is potentially of dangerous dimension the managers of its supply have the added duty to take
all safety measures to prevent escape of such energy or to see that the wire snapped would not
remain live on the road as users of such road would be under peril. It is no defence on the part of the
management of the Board that somebody committed mischief by siphoning such energy to his
private property and that the electrocution was from such diverted line. It is the lookout of the
managers of the supply system to prevent such pilferage by installing necessary devices. At any rate,
if any live wire got snapped and fell on the public road the electric current thereon should
automatically have been disrupted. Authorities manning such dangerous commodities have extra
duty to chalk out measures to prevent such mishaps.
8. Even assuming that all such measures have been adopted, a person undertaking an activity
involving hazardous or risky exposure to human life, is liable under law of torts to compensate for
the injury suffered by any other person, irrespective of any negligence or carelessness on the part of
the managers of such undertakings. The basis of such liability is the foreseeable risk inherent in the
very nature of such activity. The liability cast on such person is known, in law, as "strict liability". It
differs from the liability which arises on account of the negligence or fault in this way i.e. the concept
of negligence comprehends that the foreseeable harm could be avoided by taking reasonable
precautions. If the defendant did all that which could be done for avoiding the harm he cannot be
held liable when the action is based on any negligence attributed. But such consideration is not
relevant in cases of strict liability where the defendant is held liable irrespective of whether he could
have avoided the particular harm by taking precautions."
Further, the Apex Court while approving the law laid down in M.C.Mehta (supra), wherein the
principle of absolute liability was laid down, at Para 13 has concluded as follows:
"13. In the present case, the Board made an endeavour to rely on the exception to the
rule of strict liability (Rylands v. Fletcher [(1868) 3 HL 330 : (1861-73) All ER Rep 1]
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 12
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
) being "an act of stranger". The said exception is not available to the Board as the act
attributed to the third respondent should reasonably have been anticipated or at any
rate its consequences should have been prevented by the appellant-Board ...."
The Apex Court has specifically declined to entertain the defence of 'Act of God' and 'Acts of
Strangers' while referring to other judgments as per the observations made in Para 14 which reads
as follows:
"14. The Privy Council has observed in Quebec Rly., Light, Heat and Power Co.
Ltd. v. Vandry [1920 AC 662 : 89 LJPC 99 : 123 LT 1] that the company supplying
electricity is liable for the damage without proof that they had been negligent. Even
the defence that the cables were disrupted on account of a violent wind and
high-tension current found its way through the low-tension cable into the premises of
the respondents was held to be not a justifiable defence. Thus, merely because the
illegal act could be attributed to a stranger is not enough to absolve the liability of the
Board regarding the live wire lying on the road."
(v) In another judgment of the Apex Court in the case of H.S.E.B and Others v. Ram Nath and
Others7 the same principle was extended where liability was sought to be disowned by the Power
Supply Company by contending that the unauthorised structure near the electric line had
contributed to the accident, the Apex Court overruled such objection in the following words:
"6. The appellants are carrying on a business which is inherently dangerous. If a
person were to come into contact with a high-tension wire, he is bound to receive
serious injury and/or die. As they are carrying on a business which is inherently
dangerous, the appellants would have to ensure that no injury results from their
activities. If they find that unauthorised constructions have been put up close to their
wires it is their duty to ensure that that (2004) 5 SCC 793 construction is got
demolished by moving the appropriate authorities and if necessary, by moving a
court of law. Otherwise, they would take the consequences of their inaction. If there
are complaints that these wires are drooping and almost touching houses, they have
to ensure that the required distance is kept between the houses and the wires, even
though the houses be unauthorised. In this case we do not find any disputed question
of fact."
(vi) The same legal position has been reiterated by a Co-ordinate Bench at Dharwad in the case of
The Managing Director, HESCOM and others v. Shri Nagappa Manneppa Naik and Others8 at Paras
32 to 34.
(vii) All doubts regarding imposition of strict liability without defences on the power companies
which are in fact statutory corporations have been removed by virtue of the clarification regarding
the applicability of strict liability principles by the Apex Court in the case of Union of India v.
Prabhakaran Vijaya Kumar and Others9 in the following words-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 13
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
W.P.No.101244/2016 & Conn. Matters DD: 03.09.2021 (2008) 9 SCC 527 "39. The decision in M.C.
Mehta case [(1987) 1 SCC 395 : 1987 SCC (L&S) 37 : AIR 1987 SC 1086] related to a concern working
for private profit. However, in our opinion the same principle will also apply to statutory authorities
(like the Railways), public corporations or local bodies which may be social utility undertakings not
working for private profit.
40. It is true that attempts to apply the principle of Rylands v. Fletcher against public bodies have
not on the whole succeeded vide Administrative Law by P.P. Craig, 2nd Edn., p. 446, mainly because
of the idea that a body which acts not for its own profit but for the benefit of the community should
not be liable. However, in our opinion, this idea is based on a misconception. Strict liability has no
element of moral censure. It is because such public bodies benefit the community that it is unfair to
leave the result of a non-negligent accident to lie fortuitously on a particular individual rather than
to spread it among the community generally.
47. However, apart from the principle of strict liability in Section 124-A of the Railways Act and
other statutes, we can and should develop the law of strict liability dehors statutory provisions in
view of the Constitution Bench decision of this Court in M.C. Mehta case [(1987) 1 SCC 395 :
1987 SCC (L&S) 37 : AIR 1987 SC 1086] . In our opinion, we have to develop new
principles for fixing liability in cases like the present one.
49. There are dicta both ancient and modern that the known categories of tort are not
closed, and that novelty of a claim is not an absolute defence. Thus, in Jay Laxmi Salt
Works (P) Ltd.
v. State of Gujarat [(1994) 4 SCC 1 : JT (1994) 3 SC 492] the Supreme Court observed : (SCC p. 10,
para 8) "8. ... law of torts being a developing law its frontiers are incapable of being strictly
barricaded."
50. In Ashby v. White [(1703) 2 Ld Raym 938 :
92 ER 126] it was observed (vide Pratt, C.J.):
"Torts are infinitely various, not limited or confined."
51. In Donoghue v. Stevenson [1932 AC 562 :
1932 All ER Rep 1 (HL)] , it was observed by the House of Lords (per Macmillan, L.J.)
: (All ER p.
30 A)
"... the conception of legal
responsibility may develop in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 14
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
adaptation to altering social conditions and standards. The criterion of judgment
must adjust and adapt itself to the changing circumstances of life."
The above view was followed in Rookes v. Barnard [1964 AC 1129 : (1964) 2 WLR 269 :
(1964) 1 All ER 367 (HL)] and Home Office v.
Dorset Yacht Co. Ltd. [1970 AC 1004 : (1970) 2 WLR 1140 : (1970) 2 All ER 294 (HL)]
52. In view of the above, we are of the opinion that the submission of learned counsel for the
appellant that there was no fault on the part of the Railways, or that there was contributory
negligence, is based on a total misconception and hence has to be rejected."
(viii) Accordingly, in light of the principle ubi jus ibi remedium the remedy will have to be worked
out in light of the consequences of injury to the person arising out of changing nature of the
activities of the State.
(ix) The trend of the state instrumentalities in attempting to unsettle the settled questions after
having suffered orders and having accepted the same, requires to be frowned upon. The question of
liability under common law was explained and applied in a detailed order of the Co-ordinate bench
at Dharwad in Shri Nagappa Manneppa Naik (supra) at para 32 to 34 which is extracted as follows:
"C) Nature of liability of Power Supply Company
32. The Power Supply Companies have sought to repudiate liability on the ground
that the claimant by his/her acts of negligence was responsible for the accident and
hence the company was not liable, that there were intervening acts by strangers/third
parties which were responsible for the accident. All such contentions raised are no
longer available for being canvassed in light of the law laid down by the Apex Court in
the case of Madhya Pradesh Electricity Board (supra). The facts of the case was that
the deceased who was riding a bicycle rode over a live wire, lying on the road which
was inundated with water and the victim died of electrocution. The defence taken was
that one Hari Gaikwad had taken a wire from the main supply line to pilfer power
and the line got unfastened from the hook and it fell over the road which caused the
accident. While the court reiterated the applicability of strict liability but explicitly
ruled the inapplicability of the defences available to 'strict liability' including that of
an "an act of stranger".
33. The Court while approving the law laid down in the case of M.C.Mehta v. Union of India
reported in 1987 1 SCR 819 has in effect declared that there would be absolute liability i.e., strict
liability as per the rule of Rylands and Fetcher without any of the exceptions.
34. This position of law has been reiterated by the Division Bench of this court in the case of
Bhagyabai v. Principal Secretary, Department of Energy and Others in W.A.No.3249/2010 and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 15
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
W.A.No.3540-43/2010 dated 25.10.2010. Accordingly, the contention of the Power Supply
Companies regarding absence of liability while raising defences is liable to be rejected."
x. Despite having accepted such order and not having challenged the same, the petitioner before the
Dharwad bench in Shri Nagappa Manneppa Naik (supra) being KPTCL and Electricity Distribution
Companies and the same entities are before this court as respondents, the statement of objection
however filed seeking to unsettle the very legal position that is binding upon them, reflects upon a
tendency that would only contribute to increased pendency of litigation and it is time that the State
entities ought to keep in mind the larger picture and having suffered orders which have attained
finality, ought not to seek for re-opening the same before other benches which in effect amounts to
forum shopping.
b) Liability under Statutory Framework imposing duty to ensure safety during transmission and
distribution:
(i) Having discussed the liability of the Power Transmission and Distribution
Companies under the Common Law, what also requires to be noticed is the duty to
ensure safety as imposed by statutes upon the Companies.
(ii) The following provisions under the Electricity Act, 2003 throw light on such duty:
• Section 53 (Provisions relating to safety and electricity supply):
The Authority may,in consultation with the State Government, specify suitable
measures for -
(a) protecting the public (including the persons engaged in the generation,
transmission or distribution or trading) from dangers arising from the generation,
transmission or distribution or trading of electricity, or use of electricity supplied or
installation, maintenance or use of any electric line or electrical plant;
(b) eliminating or reducing the risks of personal injury to any person, or damage to
property of any person or interference with use of such property;
(c) prohibiting the supply or transmission of electricity except by means of a system
which conforms to the specification as may be specified;
(d) giving notice in the specified form to the Appropriate Commission and the
Electrical Inspector, of accidents and failures of supplies or transmissions of
electricity;
(e) xxx
(f) xxx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 16
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
(g) specifying action to be taken in relation to any electric line or electrical plant, or
any electrical appliance under the control of a consumer for the purpose of
eliminating or reducing the risk of personal injury or damage to property or
interference with its use.
• Section 68. Overhead lines (1) An overhead line shall, with prior approval of the Appropriate
Government, be installed or kept installed above ground in accordance with the provisions of
sub-section (2). (2) The provisions contained in sub-section (1) shall not apply-
(a) in relation to an electric line which has a nominal voltage not exceeding 11 kilovolts and is used
or intended to be used for supplying to a single consumer;
(b) in relation to so much of an electric
line as is or will be within premises in the
occupation or control of the person
responsible for its installation; or
(c) in such other cases, as may be prescribed.
(3 ) xxx
(4) xxx
(5) Where any tree standing or lying near an overhead line or where any structure or other object
which has been placed or has fallen near an overhead line subsequent to the placing of such line,
interrupts or interferes with, or is likely to interrupt or interfere with, the conveyance or
transmission of electricity or the accessibility of any works, an Executive Magistrate or authority
specified by the Appropriate Government may, on the application of the licensee, cause the tree,
structure or object to be removed or otherwise dealt with as he or it thinks fit.
(6) When disposing of an application under sub- section (5), an Executive Magistrate or authority
specified under that subsection shall, in the case of any tree in existence before the placing of the
overhead line, award to the person interested in the tree such compensation as he thinks reasonable,
and such person may recover the same from the licensee.
Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, the expression "tree" shall be deemed to include any
shrub, hedge, jungle growth or other plant. • Section 161.Notice of accidents and injuries:
(1) If any accident occurs in connection with the generation, transmission,
distribution, supply or use of electricity in or in connection with, any part of the
electric lines or electrical plant of any person and the accident results or is likely to
have resulted in loss of human or animal life or in any injury to a human being or an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 17
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
animal, such person shall give notice of the occurrence and of any such loss or injury
actually caused by the accident, in such form and within such time as may be
prescribed, to the Electrical Inspector or such other person as aforesaid and to such
other authorities as the Appropriate Government may by general or special order,
direct.
(2) The Appropriate Government may, if it thinks fit, require any Electrical Inspector,
or any other person appointed by it in this behalf, to inquire and report -
(a) as to the cause of any accident affecting the safety of the public, which may have
been occasioned by or in connection with, the generation, transmission, distribution,
supply or use of electricity, or
(b) as to the manner in, and extent to, which the provisions of this Act or rules and
regulations made thereunder or of any licence, so far as those provisions affect the
safety of any person, have been complied with.
(3) Every Electrical Inspector or other person holding an inquiry under subsection
(2) shall have all the powers of a civil court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908
for the purpose of enforcing the attendance of witnesses and compelling the
production of documents and material objects, and every person required by an
Electrical Inspector be legally bound to do so within the meaning of section 176 of the
Indian Penal Code, (45 of 1860)."
(iii) Provision under Indian Electricity Rules, 1956 are as follows:
• Rule 30 - Service lines and apparatus on consumer's premises-
(1) The supplier shall ensure that all electric supply lines, wires, fittings and
apparatus belonging to him or under his control, which are on a consumer's
premises, are in a safe condition and in all respects fit for supplying energy and the
supplier shall take due precautions to avoid danger arising on such premises from
such supply lines, wires, fittings and apparatus.
(2) Service-lines placed by the supplier on the premises of a consumer which are
underground or which are accessible shall be so insulated and protected by the
supplier as to be secured under all ordinary conditions against electrical, mechanical,
chemical or other injury to the insulation.
(3) The consumer shall, as far as circumstances permit, take precautions for the safe
custody of the equipment on his premises belonging to the supplier.
(4) The consumer shall also ensure that the installation under his control is
maintained in a safe condition."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 18
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
iv) Provisions of Central Electricity Authority (Measures relating to Safety and
Electric Supply) Regulations, 2010 are as follows:
• Section 12. General safety
requirements, pertaining to
construction, installation, protection, operation and maintenance of electric supply
lines apparatus:-
(1) All electric supply lines and apparatus shall be of sufficient rating for power,
insulation and estimated fault current and of sufficient mechanical strength, for the
duty cycle which they may be required to perform under the environmental
conditions of installation, and shall be constructed, installed, protected, worked and
maintained in such a manner as to ensure safety of human beings, animals and
property.
(2) xxx (3) xxx • Section 13. Service lines and apparatus on consumer's premises: -
(1) The supplier shall ensure that all electric supply lines, wires, fittings and
apparatus belonging to him or under his control, which are on a consumer's
premises, are in a safe-
condition and in all respects fit for supplying electricity and the supplier shall take precautions to
avoid danger arising on such premises from such supply' lines, wires, fittings and apparatus. (2)
Service lines placed by the supplier on the premises of a consumer which are underground or which
are accessible shall be so insulated and protected by the supplier as to be secured under all ordinary
conditions against electrical, mechanical, chemical or other injury to the insulation.
(3) The consumer shall, as far as circumstances permit, take precautions for the safe custody of the
equipment on his premises belonging to the supplier.
(4) The consumer shall also ensure that the installation under his control is, maintained in a safe
condition.
• Section 35. Supply and use of electricity:-
(1) xxx (2) The following controls of requisite capacity to carry and break the current
shall be placed as near as possible after the point of commencement of supply so as to
be readily accessible and capable of being easily operated to completely isolate the
supply to the installation, such equipment being in addition to any equipment
installed for controlling individual circuits or apparatus, namely: -
(i) a linked switch with fuse or a circuit breaker by consumers of voltage which does
not exceed 650 V; .
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 19
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
(ii) a linked switch with fuse or a circuit breaker by a consumer of voltage exceeding
650V but not exceeding 33 KV having aggregate installed transformer or apparatus
capacity up to 1000KVA to be supplied at voltage up to 11 KV and 2500KVA at higher
voltages (above 11 KV and not exceeding 33 KV);
(iii) a circuit breaker by consumers at voltage exceeding 650 V but not exceeding 33
KV having an aggregate installed transformer and apparatus capacity above
1000KVA and supplied at voltage up to 11 KV and above 2500 KVA at higher voltages
(above 11 KV and not exceeding 33 KV);
(iv) a circuit breaker by a consumer of voltage exceeding 33 KV.
Provided that where the point of commencement of supply and the consumer
apparatus are near each other, one linked switch with fuse or circuit breaker near the
point of commencement of supply shall be considered sufficient.
(3) xxx (4) xxx (5) xxx (6) All insulating materials shall be chosen with special regard
to the circumstances of their proposed use and their mechanical strength shall be
sufficient for their purpose and so far as is practicable of such a character or so
protected as to maintain adequately their insulating property under all working
conditions in respect of temperature and moisture; and (7) Adequate precautions
shall be taken to ensure that no live parts are so exposed as to cause danger.
(8) xxx
v) Accordingly, it is to be noticed that it is the duty of the Transmission Utility and
Distribution Company to ensure safety of the equipment used for transmission and
supply which extends to ensuring the safety of the equipments in the consumer's
premises. This duty to ensure safety is irrespective of the duties imposed on the
consumers and accordingly, in the event of any accident, liability as discussed above
emanating from Common Law is reinforced by the duty imposed under the existing
statutory framework resulting in the Power Companies being made liable for
consequences of an electric accident.
vi) It is made clear that even in the absence of liability imposed through the statutory
framework, the companies cannot wish away liability under the Common Law.
B. Maintainability of Writ Petition:
7. There are instances also where the State Entities commit torts giving rise to claims
for compensation which is sought to be asserted by way of a Writ Petition. Liability
for torts committed by the agents of the State being an accepted principle, question
whether a litigant is to be driven to avail of the remedy before the Civil Court is not a
necessity. Once the liability of the State Entity is established as in the present case in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 20
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
light of discussion, by virtue of principle of absolute liability the quantification is also
an aspect that has been made by the courts even in exercise of writ jurisdiction by
resort to settled principles to monetarily quantify loss of life or injury to a person as is
applied in motor vehicle accidents which is the methodology adopted by the Division
Bench of this court in Baghyabhai (supra). The Co-ordinate Bench of this court has
also adopted similar principles to calculate compensation and grant relief in case of
death or injury due to electrocution in Shri Nagappa Manneppa Naik and Others
(supra).
8. Accordingly, even in case of concurrent remedies being available for claim of
compensation by tortious acts committed by State Entities, the invocation of writ
jurisdiction cannot be objected to as the tort-feasor being State under Article 12 of
Constitution of India, remedy against such tort-feasor is open to be asserted by
invoking such jurisdiction.
9. In the present case it must be noticed that there is absolute liability as regards the
activity of the corporation as accordingly under common law liability, State being
liable, remedy to enforce compensation as a result of consequences following from
such tortious acts is being asserted by the petitioners. That apart claim of
compensation would also be construed to be consequences of breach of statutory
obligation.
10. In an action for compensation arising out of wrongs by the State and if on
available facts there is clarity regarding liability and quantification though partial,
then to such extent, there is no reason for denial of remedy to claim compensation in
writ proceedings.
11. In the present case, taking note that the petitioner in W.P.No.6087/2019 is a child
of a contract worker, who suffered severe burn injuries and petitioner in
W.P.No.53302/2018 is a child of an auto rickshaw driver, whose hand has been
amputated requiring continuous medical treatment including plastic surgery, the
delay in grant of compensation would have the effect of curtailing treatment and
threatening life and existence with dignity as a normal human being which would
amount to infringement of Article 21 of the Constitution of India, thereby
necessitating permitting invocation of writ remedy.
Insofar as W.P.No.1383/2020, the petitioner being wife of an deceased agricultural labourer,
relegation to the Civil Court may not be desired course of action when otherwise facts are sufficient
to grant compensation on demonstrable legal liability.
12. The respondents have relied on various judgments essentially contending that remedy for
compensation relating to electrical accident ought to be decided by the Civil Court in light of
disputed questions of facts.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 21
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
13. It must be noted that in all of the judgments relied on by the respondents, the judgment of the
Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in M.C.Mehta (supra) wherein, damages was awarded in writ
jurisdiction on the principle of absolute liability has not been referred to.
In fact, the Apex Court in Shail Kumari (supra) has granted compensation while endorsing and
following the principle laid down in M.C.Mehta (supra).
14. Insofar as reliance by the respondents on the judgment of Chairman, GRID Corporation of
Orissa Ltd. (GRIDCO) and Others v. Smt.Sukamani Das & Another10, it must be noted that the
Apex Court in H.S.E.B (supra) has referred to the judgment of the Apex Court in Sukamani Das and
while noticing that there were disputed questions of facts in Sukamani Das and while referring to
the facts in the particular case as there was no such dispute, has granted compensation.
(1999) 7 SCC 298
15. It must be noted that in Sukamani Das there is no reference to the decision of the Constitution
Bench in the case of M.C.Mehta. In fact, subsequent to the judgment in Sukamani Das in 1999, the
Apex Court in Shail Kumari (2002) (supra) has affirmed the principle of law laid down in
M.C.Mehta (supra). Further, in H.S.E.B.(2004) (supra) the Apex Court has once again upheld grant
of compensation in exercise of writ jurisdiction while distinguishing Sukamani Das (supra).
16. The only later judgment of the Apex Court relied on by the respondents is S.D.O. Grid
Corporation of Orissa Ltd. and Others v. Timudu Oram11 wherein the Apex Court had declined to
entertain claim for compensation while holding that there were disputed questions of facts.
However, a close scrutiny to the relevant facts of the said case would reveal that the original suit
filed claiming compensation relating to the death caused due to the electrical accident had come to
be dismissed and only subsequently, without challenging the (2005) 6 SCC 156 dismissal of such
suit, writ came to be filed before the High Court claiming compensation on the same cause of action.
17. In fact, the Division Bench of this court in Bhagyabai (supra) has reiterated the legal position
emanating from Shail Kumari (supra) while distinguishing and holding as non-applicable the
judgment of the Apex Court in S.D.O. Grid Corporation (supra). The said judgment of the Division
Bench granting compensation as regards death due to electrocution has attained finality by virtue of
dismissal of Special Leave Petition in BESCOM and Others v. Bhagyabai and Others12. Observations
at Para 10 of the order of the Division Bench of the High Court in Bhagyabai (supra) points out to
the distinction in the following words:
"10. The facts in the said decision cannot be said to be analogus, since, firstly the
petition under Article 226 of Constitution of India was filed belatedly after a civil suit
had already been dismissed on the same cause of action; secondly, the decision in the
case of Shail Kumari cited by the learned counsel for the appellants herein, though
noticed by the Hon'ble SLP (Civil) 3295-3299/2011) Supreme Court has not been
commented upon or disapproved in the said decision, though subsequent, but, has
only been distinguished as not applicable to the facts which was examined by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 22
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
Hon'ble Supreme Court. In that background, since we have already noticed that a
similar defence putforth in the case on hand has been rejected by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in the case of Shail Kumari wherein it was held that the dependants of
the deceased were entitled to compensation, in the instant case also, the appropriate
compensation is to be determined and granted."
It is also relevant to note that the court in Bhagyabai (supra) has also calculated the compensation
adopting parameters applied under the Motor Vehicles Act.
18. Insofar as the contention that the writ petition is not maintainable, it is to be noticed that the
Petition filed under article 226 of the Constitution of India for enforcement of Public Law Remedy is
de-hors the remedy available to claim compensation under the Private Law Remedy before the Civil
Courts.
19. The breach of a statutory obligation resulting in harm to a person can be sought to be addressed
by way of a Public Law Remedy through a petition under Article 226. The compensation granted in
such an action is made in the nature of making monetary amends for such breach of statutory duty
by a State Authority.
C. Relegation to Civil Court after granting provisional compensation :-
20. It is the contention of the respondents that the only appropriate remedy is to relegate the parties
to invoke remedy available in the nature of claim for damages in an action based on law of torts
before the appropriate Civil Courts.
21. It is contended that the disputed facts which may arise in relation to the cause of the accident
and also quantification of damages as regards income earning capacity and economic potential of a
child. As an alternative argument, it is also contended that the petitioners having accepted
compensation in terms of the decision of the Government pursuant to recommendation of the Child
Rights Commission following the order of this Court in W.P.No.48907/2018 and
W.P.No.26329/2018. The remaining grievance is to be redressed by the Civil Court which are
competent to enter into an adjudication of disputed facts.
22. It is also contended that even if it is accepted that present remedy is a Public Law Remedy and
the petitioners cannot be relegated to the Civil Court, an appropriate manner of construing such
enforcement of Public Law Remedy would be to relegate the petitioners to the Civil Court after
payment of solatium.
23. It is also pertinent to note that the contention of the respondents in the alternate that after grant
of compensation by way of Exgratia/Solatium under the Government Order, as regards the claim of
further compensation matter is to be relegated to the Civil Court as such determination of
compensation would involve disputed facts is also liable to be rejected. The Division Bench of this
Court in Bhagyabai (supra) has specifically observed at Para 11 that guidance could be obtained from
the judgment of Sarla Verma and Others v. Delhi Transport Corporation and Another13, wherein
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 23
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
parameters relating to grant of compensation has been considered. The court then adopted the
principles followed in assessment of compensation under the Motor Vehicles Act and quantified
compensation. Accordingly, even as regards quantification of compensation, the courts in exercise of
writ jurisdiction could adopt principles available under the Motor Vehicles Act or the Employees
Compensation Act without relegating the parties to the Civil Court.
24. The respondents have placed reliance on the judgment of Coordinate Bench in the case of Sri.
P.Mallappa and Others v. Bengaluru Electric Supply Company and Others14 as well as Sri.
Hanumantappa v. The Chief Engineer, Bengaluru Electric Supply Company Limited and Others15 in
both of which, court refers to remedy available under the Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 while relegating
the parties to the Civil AIR 2009 SC 3104 W.P.No.54502/2015 & Connected Matters DD: 16.10.2017
W.P.No.6726/2017 DD: 20.11.2019 Court. However, it must be noted that the remedy under the
Fatal Accidents Act, 1855 falls within the sphere of Private Law remedy while the present claims
being the remedy available in Public Law and on such ground the judgments of the Co-ordinate
Bench referred to above are distinguishable.
25. The judgments relied upon by the respondents contending that there are disputed questions of
facts and parties are required to be relegated to the Civil Court are all cases where there was no
report of the Electrical Inspector under Section 161 of the Indian Electricity Act and not as in the
present cases.
26. The report under Section 161 being made in exercise of the statutory scheme which provides for
an inquiry in the event of loss of animal or human life requires to be given due weightage and be
construed to be binding on the respondent Corporations as long as the same is not set aside and is to
be construed to be a conclusive finding regarding the cause of accidents.
The relevant provision under Section 161 is extracted here below:
S.161 (2) The Appropriate Government may, if it thinks fit, require any Electrical
Inspector, or any other person appointed by it in this behalf, to inquire and report-
(a) as to the cause of any accident affecting the safety of the public, which may have
been occasioned by or in connection with, the generation, transmission, distribution,
supply or use of electricity, or
(b) as to the manner in, and extent to, which the provisions of this Act or rules and
regulations made thereunder or of any licence, so far as those provisions affect the
safety of any person, have been complied with.
Accordingly, the question of there being any dispute regarding the above aspect does not arise where
there are reports of the Electrical Inspector as in the present case.
27. The further reliance on the judgment of the Co-ordinate Bench in Mrs. Ashwini Manoj Patil and
Others v. M/s.Bangalore Electricity Supply Company Ltd. and Others16 and Sri.Ranganath v.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 24
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
Managing W.P.No.9667/2014 DD: 07.04.2016 Director, Bangalore Electricity Supply Company
Ltd.17 all are judgments which do not notice the law laid down by the Division Bench in Bhagyabai
(supra) which eventually has been approved by the Apex Court and is binding on this court.
28. To state that once an ad hoc amount by way of solatium is paid either under Government Order
or has been paid as per the decision of the Government following the order of this court pursuant to
the recommendation of the Commission (as per Government Order dated 28.01.2020 - Annexure
R7 to statement of objection of respondent no.2 in W.P.No.53302/2018 and Government Order
dated 09.03.2020 - Annexure R4 to statement of objection of respondent no.2 in
W.P.No.6087/2019) no further prosecution of proceeding before the writ court requires to be
permitted and claimant must be relegated to the Civil Courts also cannot be accepted.
W.P.No.40476/2019 & Connected Matters DD: 12.02.2020 D Right to claim Compensation
irrespective of payment of Exgratia/Solatium Amount
29. Insofar as the specific attack as regards the validity of the Government Order bearing
No.KPTCL/B7/ 2476/95-96/Vol-I/Bengaluru dated, 09.07.2017 which provides payment of
compensation by the Electric Supply Company in form of exgratia/solatium on the ground that
under it further payment is not warranted, it would be appropriate to read down the notification and
save its operation in the manner as construed by this court in the case of Shri Nagappa Manneppa
Naik and Others (supra) as per the observation made in Para 321 which is extracted as follows:
"320. .. The award of exgratia compensation cannot have the effect of extinguishing
the right to claim compensation even if the compensation is paid under the authority
of a Notification which provides that the claimant cannot plead negligence in any
further proceeding as regards the company, amounting to effectively give up all
claims.
321. It must be noted that the right to claim compensation particularly in the case of
death is a constitutional right that flows from Article 21 of the Constitution of India
which, even when being exercised seeking to enforce a statutory right cannot be
waived. The compensation given under any notification would at the most be treated
to be exgratia compensation which however could be set off from the eventual
compensation awarded. Accordingly, the contention of the company as regards this
aspect is rejected."
E Apportionment of Liability :
30. Finally as regards the contention that there ought to be apportionment of
compensation amongst the joint tort-feasors as is sought to be made out in
W.P.No.6087/2019 where it is contended that the building owner who had put up
construction in violation of Rule 80 and 82 of the Indian Electricity Rules 1952, and
in W.P.No.1383/2020 the land owner who gave the aluminum ladder to the labourer
for pepper harvesting was also negligent and are to be made liable is also liable to be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 25
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
rejected.
31. The scope of grant of compensation in an action invoking a Public Law remedy
cannot be enlarged into a further enquiry relating to apportionment of liability
amongst the joint tort-feasors when they are private entities. Whether acts of the
owner in providing an aluminum ladder as well as the act of constructing a building
within the prohibited distance by the owner of the property contributing to the
accident would make them joint tort-feasors and if that were to be so, manner of
apportionment of liability is also an aspect of separate and further enquiry which
cannot be made in the writ proceedings.
32. The Apex Court while affirming the order of the Division Bench in Bhagyabai
(supra) has reserved right to the BESCOM, which was held liable to pay
compensation to proceed against the joint tort-feasors in separate proceedings.
33. Insofar as the impleading application filed seeking to include BBMP on the
premise that the authority had permitted illegal construction in contravention of
Regulations of the Authority relating to maintaining of safe distance from the electric
lines, the same requires to be rejected. The role of the BBMP by its inaction or action
in permitting putting up of construction and thus construing it to be a joint
tort-feasor/contributory to the accident is again a matter of separate enquiry. In fact,
the Apex Court in H.S.E.B. (supra) has specifically rejected the defence of the Power
Corporation relating to unauthorised construction by observing that it was the duty
of the Power Corporation to ensure that unauthorised buildings are demolished and
such plea of unauthorised buildings would not defeat the claim against the Power
Corporation as observed supra at para V A (a) (v).
F. Contributory Negligence of Child:
34. It is the contention of the respondent in W.P.No.53302/2018, that a 13 year old
victim had come in contact with the electrical line only by virtue of the iron-
mop that was being carried and accordingly the victim had contributed to the accident.
On similar lines in W.P.No.6087/2019, the victim who was a child of 5years 8 month, jumped into
neighbouring house to retrieve the cricket ball and came within the induction zone of the electrical
line, hence it was also contended that there was contributory negligence on part of the child.
35. It is to be noted that the Apex Court in the case of Sudhir Kumar Rana v. Surinder Singh18, has
observed at para 4 to 6 as follows:
"4. The question which arises for consideration is as to whether the appellant can be
said to be guilty of contributory negligence. Ordinarily, the doctrine of contributory
negligence is not applicable in case of children with the same force as in the case of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 26
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
adults.
5. We do not intend to lay down a law that a child can never be guilty of contributory
negligence but ordinarily the same is a question of fact. (See Muthuswamy v. S.A.R.
Annamalai [1990 ACJ 974 (Mad)] .)
6. A contributory negligence may be defined as negligence in not avoiding the
consequences arising from the negligence of some other person, when means and
opportunity are afforded to do so. The question of contributory (2008) 12 SCC 436
negligence would arise only when both parties are found to be negligent."
36. As regards children, the standard of care that could be expected of them cannot be the same
standard of care expected of adults as the thought process of children is often governed by 'impulse',
'instinct', and 'innocence'. (see para 11 in M.P. State Road Transport Corporation v. Abdul
Rahman19)
37. In Abdul Rahman (supra) eventually the Division Bench of Madhya Pradesh High Court has
rejected the claim of contributory negligence on a child's part. Para 11 of the said judgment is
extracted as herein below:
"11. From the aforesaid discussion relating to contributory negligence on the part of a
child of tender age there is no doubt that the concept of contributory negligence
cannot be made applicable to a child. A child functions according to his own
reasoning and his intelligence. Logicality and rationality are not expected from a
child as a child of tender age has no continuous thinking process and is governed by
his impulse, instinct and innocence. Can one ever conceive that a child, if would have
been aware of the peril, would ever commit an act which is AIR 1997 MP 248,
dangerous or hazardous for him? The answer has to be a categorical 'No', because a
child's action is child-like and really innocent. Possibly for that reason, it has been
said:--
"The Maker of the Stars and Sea, become a Child on earth for me?"
A child remains a child in spite of all training and directions and if anything sparkles it is the glory of
his innocence which makes him indifferent to the risks which an adult apprehends and pays
attention.
In view of our aforesaid analysis, we conclude and hold that Riyaz, the child of four, was not liable
for contributory negligence." The same view has been reiterated by the Division Bench of Himachal
Pradesh High Court in Naval Kumar (supra).
38. Accordingly in both the cases, viz.,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 27
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
(a) W.P.No.6087/2019 by no stretch of imagination could it be asserted that the child ought to have
exercised due care and caution in not going near the high tension electrical line and coming within
the induction zone as the child could not be expected to maintain the buffer distance.
(b) In W.P.No.53302/2018, the child could not be expected not to carry any objects under the high
tension electrical line and could not be imposed with such duty of care and caution as that expected
of adults and where a child has acted according to normal 'impulse and instincts', question of
fastening of contributory negligence on the child would not arise.
This is only in addition to the discussion made relating to absolute liability where the issue stands
settled that none of these defences which are sought to be relied upon to contend contributory
negligence could ever come into play. VI Conclusion:
39. In light of above consideration, the petitions are dealt as below:
(i) As regards the occurrence of accident, though FIR is registered belatedly on
06.01.2018, the inquiry by the Electrical Inspector concludes that the electrical
accident has happened within the Arcing Zone of the 11 KV Electric line. The report
being a statutory report in terms of Section 161, as long as same has not been set
aside, it is required to be accepted as binding by the respondent-BESCOM.
(ii) The fact that distance between the electrical line and building was 1.2 Meters as
required would by itself not absolve the company from liability.
(iii) The other contention relating to liability under Common Law is settled and no
defence would save the respondents from their liability. In fact, the respondent in the
statement of objections has observed that the petitioner had touched the 11 KV line
with a metal mop to collect the veil which had accidentally fallen on the 11 KV line,
which would indicate that the accident had occurred due to the negligence of the
petitioner. Such defence cannot be accepted and result in absolving the respondent.
(iv) The receipt of compensation in the nature of solatium would not absolve the
respondent from further liability. The recommendation of the KSCPCR and the order
of the Government on such recommendation granting Rs.2,50,000/- as solatium
would not have the effect of defeating the right to claim compensation.
(v) The report of Electrical Inspector would support the conclusion that the accident
has been caused when the child came within the Arcing Zone.
(i) The accident has occurred when the petitioner jumped on the terrace of house of
Abdul Rauf and came within the induction zone of 66 KV Distribution line resulting
in the electrical accident as recorded in the order of the Electrical Inspector.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 28
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
(ii) The Electrical Inspector has recorded a finding that the requisite distance to be
maintained between 66 KV Electrical line and the structure of 4 meters in terms of
Regulation 61 (2) (ii) was not maintained. In fact, while servicing the connection, an
undertaking has been obtained by the owner of the building that in the event of any
electrical accident, the owner would be liable. The report of the Electrical Inspector
also refers to the letter addressed to the owner of the building on 26.09.2017 stating
that power supply would be cut off if the distance of 4 meter is not maintained
between the building and 66 KV Electrical line.
The accident has occurred subsequently thereto and there is a specific finding of the Electrical
Inspector that the distance of 4 meters between the building and 66 KV Electrical line has not been
maintained.
(iii) Payment of solatium under the Government Order of 09.03.2020 is only in the nature of
Exgratia payment and such payment cannot in any way absolve the respondent from being held
liable for compensation by invoking the Public Law remedy.
(iv) The respondent-KPTCL has filed an application to implead the owner of the building as well as
respondent- BBMP contending that the building was constructed in violation of Regulation that
required clearance of 4 meter distance to be maintained between the building and the line and the
BBMP also having failed to discharge its duties was joint tort-feasor. However, the scope of the
proceedings cannot be enlarged by bringing in private respondent viz., owner of the building.
(v) Further, right of the KPTCL to seek for apportionment of liability is also a matter dealt with
separately. As referred to earlier, the Apex Court in H.S.E.B (supra) has in similar factual matrix
held that in the event of a structure being put up close to the wires, it is the duty of the Electric
Supply Company to have it demolished by moving the appropriate authorities or else, they would
bear the consequences of their inaction.
(i) The contention relating to existence of disputed facts requiring the matter to be relegated to the
Civil Court does not merit acceptance. The report of the Electrical Inspector in the context of
undisputed facts is clear and is refers to violation of Regulation 45 (2) (ii) insofar as, where the earth
fault current exceeds the limit of current for keeping the contact potential within the reasonable
value and the earth fault or earth leakage protection must be sufficient to disconnect the supply
automatically. As such disconnection of power supply did not ensue accordingly, the finding of the
Electrical Inspector that there was a lapse by the KPTCL requires acceptance.
(ii) There is no dispute regarding the manner of occurrence of accident. The report of the Electrical
Inspector stands corroborated by the version in the FIR registered on 22.02.2018, which was
registered on the same day at 3.00 p.m., while the incident is stated to have occurred during the
morning hours.
(iii) Though the respondent no.1 has relied on Annexure-'R2' which is the report of the Assistant
Executive Engineer which certifies that the 'back-up relays' was satisfactory, there is no explanation
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 29
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
as to why there was no cutting off of power supply when the accident occurred if indeed the relays
were working. The report of the Electrical Inspector is to be given due weight as such report is made
in terms of the statutory scheme under Section 161 precisely where accidents occur in generation,
transmission etc., resulting in loss of human life. It may not be open for the KPTCL to dispute such
finding of the Electrical Inspector. Even otherwise, the report of the Electrical Inspector if not
accepted is to be appealed against before the appropriate Appellate Authority under Section 162 (2)
of the Act. Once the report has attained finality, same cannot be called in question in the present
proceedings.
(iv) As the finding of the Electrical Inspector is that there has been violation of Regulation 45 (2)
which relates to earth fault or earth leakage protection which relates to the equipment within the
control of respondent KPTCL, the respondent-KPTCL is to be fastened with liability.
(v) The action of the respondent in not disbursing the exgratia compensation in terms of the
Government Order is an arbitrary action insofar as the very object of providing exgratia
compensation stands defeated by non- disbursement. 'Electrical Accidents - A Consumer Guide to
Claim Solatium' lists out the procedure for claiming solatium in case of electrical accidents. The
relevant extract is reproduced below:
ELECTRICAL ACCIDENTS A CONSUMER GUIDE TO CLAIM SOLATIUM
Protecting the interests of the electricity customers is one of the mandates of the
Karnataka Electricity Regulatory Commission and also of the electricity companies.
Despite several measures taken to protect customers from the hazards of electricity,
accidents do occur leading to loss of life and property.
Electrical accidents may arise due to several reasons. Faulty equipments, live wires
lying on the ground or hanging at arms length, overhead wires passing within
reachable distance of human hands etc. are the major causes of accidents. Whatever
be the reason, the result will be injury or death to human beings and animals.
It is true that loss of limbs or life cannot be compensated. Yet it is the obligation of
the electricity companies to provide some relief to the victim or his/her family
members to mitigate the hardships. Over the years the erstwhile Karnataka
Electricity Board and the Karnataka Power Transmission Corporation Limited have
framed certain rules and regulations with regard to payment of compensation in case
of electrical accidents.
However, consumers in general are not aware of these procedures, partly because
these documents are inaccessible. Besides, the various procedural formalities are not
available at a single source.
The Office of Consumer Advocacy of KERC has taken the initiative of providing
consumers with necessary information on matters relating to the procedures to be
followed and the documents to be submitted in case of claiming compensation in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 30
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
following paragraphs.
STEP 1 As soon as the accident takes place, the consumer/victim or his/her relatives
should inform, in writing on a plain paper, to the respective Section Officer of the
respective Electricity Supply Company Limited. In addition, copies of the report
should be submitted to the following officials:
Sub-Divisional Officer of the concerned Electricity Supply Company Ltd.
Managing Directors of the concerned Electricity Supply Companies The address of
ESCOMS is given at the end of this Manual.
Chief Electrical Inspector, Government of Karnataka, Mysugar Buildings,
Jayachamarajendra Road, Bangalore - 560 002.
The accident should be reported within 24 hours from the time of occurrence of the
accident.
STEP 2 In case of death of the victim, the following documents are to be collected by
the kith and kin/relatives to claim compensation •Death Certificate (in original)
•Postmortem Report •First Information Report (FIR) and Mahajar Report from the
Police •Witness statement •Report from the Chief Electrical Inspector, Govt.of
Karnataka •Legal heir certificate for payment of compensation •Detailed report of the
accident by the section officer duly counter signed by the respective Sub Division
officer.
Based on the documents, reports submitted and the investigations conducted by the
CEIG, the concerned electricity supply company will pay the compensation within
TWO MONTHS from the date of receipt of the Report from the Chief Electrical
Inspector, Government of Karnataka.
Wherever overhead lines are the cause of the accident/fatality, the electricity supply
company shall pay the compensation without waiting for the report of the CEIG.
In case of non-reply from the electricity supply company even after THREE
MONTHS from the date of submitting all the required documents/information, a
copy of the claim for compensation along with the above documents may be
forwarded to KERC.
The details about amount of compensation can be obtained from the jurisdictional
Sub Divisional office of the Corporate Office of the electricity supply companies.
(vi) Accordingly, wherever accidents are caused due to overhead lines there is an
obligation to disburse exgratia compensation without waiting for report of CEIG.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 31
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
Even otherwise once the report under section 161 is submitted to the Supply and Distribution
Company, compensation is to be disbursed forthwith.
VII Quantum of Compensation:
40. The compensation could be quantified in terms of settled principles as applied in Motor Vehicles
Accidents cases. Solely on the ground that determination of compensation would involve certain
factual consideration, that by itself will not be a ground to relegate the petitioners to the Civil Court
as recorded supra. Taking note of the law laid down in Bhagyabai (supra) at Para 11, wherein the
court has adopted the principles as applicable under the Motor Vehicles Act, compensation is
determined in the present case following the same principle.
41. The Apex Court in United India Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Satinder Kaur20 has interpreted the law
laid down in Pranay Sethi (supra) in light of the judgment of the Apex Court in Magma General
Insurance Co. Ltd. v. Nanu Ram21, wherein, consortium was interpreted to include spousal
consortium, parental consortium, as well as filial consortium.
(2021) 11 SCC 780 (2018) 18 SCC 130
42. The Apex Court while dealing with the compensation payable to children has enunciated
principles in Mallikarjun v. Divisional Manager, National Insurance Co. Ltd. and Another22 and
observations at Para 7, 8 and 12 are of relevance and are extracted as below:
"7. It is unfortunate that both the Tribunal and the High Court have not properly
appreciated the medical evidence available in the case. The age of the child and
deformities on his body resulting in disability, have not been duly taken note of. As
held by this Court in R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) (P) Ltd. [(1995) 1 SCC
551 :
1995 SCC (Cri) 250] , while assessing the non- pecuniary damages, the damages for
mental and physical shock, pain and suffering already suffered and that are likely to
be suffered, any future damages for the loss of amenities in life, like difficulty in
running, participation in active sports, etc., damages on account of inconvenience,
hardship, discomfort, disappointment, frustration, etc. have to be addressed
especially in the case of a child victim. For a child, the best part of his life is yet to
come.
8. While considering the claim by a victim child, it would be unfair and improper to
follow the structured formula as per the Second Schedule to the Motor Vehicles Act
for reasons more than one. The main stress in the formula is on pecuniary damages.
For children there is no (2014) 14 SCC 396 income. The only indication in the Second
Schedule for non-earning persons is to take the notional income as Rs 15,000 per
year. A child cannot be equated to such a non-earning person. Therefore, the
compensation is to be worked out under the non-pecuniary heads in addition to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 32
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
actual amounts incurred for treatment done and/or to be done, transportation,
assistance of attendant, etc. The main elements of damage in the case of child victims
are the pain, shock, frustration, deprivation of ordinary pleasures and enjoyment
associated with healthy and mobile limbs. The compensation awarded should enable
the child to acquire something or to develop a lifestyle which will offset to some
extent the inconvenience or discomfort arising out of the disability. The appropriate
compensation for disability should take care of all the non-
pecuniary damages. In other words, apart from this head, there shall only be the claim for the actual
expenditure for treatment, attendant, transportation, etc.
12. Though it is difficult to have an accurate assessment of the compensation in the case of children
suffering disability on account of a motor vehicle accident, having regard to the relevant factors,
precedents and the approach of various High Courts, we are of the view that the appropriate
compensation on all other heads in addition to the actual expenditure for treatment, attendant, etc.
should be, if the disability is above 10% and up to 30% to the whole body, Rs 3 lakhs; up to 60%, Rs
4 lakhs; up to 90%, Rs 5 lakhs and above 90%, it should be Rs 6 lakhs. For permanent disability up
to 10%, it should be Rs 1 lakh, unless there are exceptional circumstances to take a different
yardstick."
43. Insofar as compensation as regards to children, the Apex Court has revisited the legal aspect in
the case of Kajal v. Jagadish Chand and Others23. The Apex Court in Para 20 has observed that each
case will have to be evaluated on the factual matrix available and has taken note of potentiality and
has awarded future prospects. The Apex Court has also granted compensation under the head 'loss
of marital prospects' and also 'attendant charges' by noting that attendants would be required to
look after the child during hospitalisation as observed in Para 21 of the judgment.
44. In light of the above principles the calculation would be as under:
1. Age of the victim : 36 years
2. Occupation : Agricultural worker
3. No. of Dependents : Wife (34yr);
three unmarried daughters 12,15,17yrs); son (9yr) (2020) 4 SCC 413
4. Monthly income : Rs.13,500/- (Claimed Income)
5. Multiplier : 15
6. Loss of dependency : 1/4 Calculation of Compensation are as follows:
(i) Towards loss of Income/salary:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 33
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
The incident had occurred in the year 2018 and the notional income in the year 2018
as per the Schedule of Income notified by the Lok Adalath was Rs.12,500/-.
Deduction towards Personal and living expenditure shall be 1/4th of Rs.12,500 i.e.,
Rs.9,375/-, following the law laid down by the Apex Court in Sarla Verma (supra),
wherein the Apex Court has held that the deduction towards personal and living
expenses of the deceased should be one-fourth (1/4th) where the number of
dependent family members is 4 to 6. Therefore the compensation under the head
shall be calculated by using the formula [Monthly wages after deduction x Multiplier
x 12] i.e., 9,375 x 12 x 15 = 16,87,500. Therefore compensation amount of
Rs.16,87,500/- is awarded under this head.
(ii) Towards Future Prospects:
In light of law laid down in Pranay Sethi (supra) addition of 40% shall be made
towards income i.e., 16,87,500 x 40% = 6,75,000. Therefore compensation amount of
Rs. 6,75,000/- is awarded under this head.
(iii) Loss Of Estate, Loss Of Consortium And Funeral Expenses:
The compensation under the head shall be awarded as follows:
Loss Of Estate : Rs.15,000/-
Funeral Expenses : Rs.15,000/-
Spousal consortium : Rs.40,000/-
Parental consortium : Rs.1,20,000/- (40,000 x 3) Total : Rs.1,90,000/-
Sl. Heads Amount
No Rs.
1. Loss of Income including Deduction 16,87,500/-
from Personal Expenses
2. Future prospects 6,75,000/-
3. Loss of estate, Loss of consortium 1,90,000/-
and Funeral expenses
Total Rs. 25,52,500/-
1. Age of the victim : 5 years 8 months
2. Disability : 80% burn with 40% deep burn
3. Amount received : BBMP Mayor Fund - 50,000/-
Wakfs Board - 1,00,000/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 34
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
2nd Respondent- 5,00,000/-
(Annexure- D, E, R4)
Calculation of Compensation are as follows:
(i) Expenses relating to treatment, hospitalisation, medicines, transportation, etc.:
The child was treated as inpatient for nearly one and a half months for the following
period from 16.09.2017 to 12.10.2017; 17.10.2017 to 18.10.2017; 24.10.2017 to
25.10.2017; 31.10.2017; 06.11.2017 to 09.11.2017;
14.112014; 21.11.2017; 28.11.2017. Records reveal the following:
i. 80% burn with 40% deep burn ii. On ventilation till 23.09.2017 iii. Frequent
debridement and dressing of wounds iv. Medicines Following the observation made
in Kajal (supra) the amount of compensation payable for the actual medical
expenditure incurred will be Rs.4,50,000/- and transportation charges incurred
during the period of treatment would be Rs.50,000/-. Therefore the total
compensation awarded under this head is Rs.5,00,000/-.
(ii) Loss of earning:
The child has suffered 80% burn injuries with 40% deep injuries, the injuries
suffered will affect future earning of the child when compared to a normal child.
Therefore, the loss of earning can be determined by taking into consideration of
Notional Income in terms of law laid down in Kajal's case. The electrical accident
occurred in the year 2017 and the Notional Income for the year 2017 was Rs.11,000.
In terms of the law laid down by the Apex Court in Sarla Verma (supra), multiplier of
18 can be adopted.
With regards to deductions to be made on dependency, it is to be noted that from the
present state of the child it is difficult to determine marriage of the child, therefore no
deductions shall be made. Hence the compensation under the head works out to
Rs.23,76,000/- (11,000 x 18 x 12).
(iii) Attendant charges:
The child was hospatilised for almost one and a half month, it is pertinent to note
that the victim being a 6 year old child he would require an attendant to carry out his
daily routine. Therefore compensation amount of Rs.4,00,000/- is awarded under
this head.
(iv) Pain and Suffering and Compensation for Disfigurement:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 35
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
It is pertinent to note that the child had to undergo long term medical treatment. It is
evident from Annexure-
Z and Z (1,2,3,4,5) that the child requires to undergo skin grafting and plastic
surgery. Therefore an amount of Rs.5,00,000/- is awarded for Disfigurement.
(v) Loss of marriage prospects:
Rs.3,00,000/- is awarded under this head.
(vi) Future medical treatment :
The petitioner through memo dated 21.03.2022 has produced an estimate of future
medical treatment which amounts to Rs.10,06,050/-, therefore an amount of
Rs.10,06,050/-, is awarded under this head.
Sl. Heads Amount
No Rs.
1. Expenses relating to treatment, 5,00,000/-
hospitalisation, medicines,
transportation, etc
2. Loss of earnings 23,76,000/-
3. Attendant charges 4,00,000/-
4. Pain, suffering, Compensation for 5,00,000/-
Disfigurement
5. Loss of marriage prospects 3,00,000/-
6. Future medical treatment 10,06,050/-
Total 50,82,050/-
Amount already received 6,50,000/-
Compensation awarded 44,32,050/-
1. Age of the victim : 13yrs (annexure-D)
2. Disability : 75% (annexure-F)
3. Amount received : Rs.2,50,000/- Annexure R8
Calculation of Compensation are as follows:
(i) Expenses relating to treatment, hospitalisation, medicines, transportation, etc.:
In annexure D (Report of Plastic Surgery Dept, Victoria Hospital) it is stated that the
petitioner was hospatilised from 19.10.2017 to 27.11.2017. It further stated that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 36
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
petitioner underwent elbow amputation. It is further submitted through memo Dated
08.07.2022 that a sum Rs.2,00,000/- was paid towards plastic surgeries. It was
prescribed that post discharge the petitioner should attend regular dressing for two
months. Therefore compensation amount of Rs.5,00,000/- is awarded including
transportation expenses.
It is to be noted that the Apex Court in Mallikarjuna (supra), has held that in cases of
disability additional compensation of Rs.4,00,000/- in addition to the actual
expenditure incurred for treatment has to be awarded.
Therefore the total compensation under the above head works out to Rs.9,00,000/-.
(ii) Loss of earning:
The child has suffered permanent disability of 75% with amputation of left hand. Therefore, the loss
of earning can be determined by taking into consideration of Notional Income in terms of law laid
down in Kajal (supra). The electrical accident occurred in the year 2017 and the Notional Income for
the year 2017 was Rs.11,000. In terms of the law laid down by the Apex Court in Sarla Verma
(supra), multiplier of 18 can be adopted. With regards to deductions made on dependency, it is to be
noted that from the present state of the child it is difficult to determine marriage of the child,
therefore no deductions shall be made. Hence the compensation Rs.23,76,000/- (11,000 x 18 x 12) is
awarded under this head.
(iii) Attendant charges:
The child was hospatilised for almost one month and her elbow was amputated
therefore she would require an attendant to carry out her daily routine throughout
her life.
Hence compensation of Rs.5,00,000/- is awarded under this head.
(iv) Pain and Suffering and Compensation for Disfigurement:
Rs.5,00,000/- is awarded under this head.
(v) Loss of marriage prospects:
Rs.3,00,000/- is awarded under this head.
(vi) Future medical treatment :
The memo dated 21.03.2022 and 08.07.2022 provides the estimate of future medical
treatment along with the cost of robotic arm. It is further provided that the petitioner
has to undergo two surgeries amounting to Rs.2,00,000/- and robotic arm
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 37
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
amounting to Rs.2,90,000/-, also to be taken into consideration as expenses incurred
on medication.
Therefore, compensation amount of Rs.6,00,000/- is awarded under the above head.
Sl.No Heads Amount
Rs.
1. Expenses relating to treatment, 9,00,000/-
hospitalisation, medicines,
transportation, etc
2. Loss of earnings 23,76,000/-
3. Attendant charges 5,00,000/-
4. Pain, suffering, Compensation for 5,00,000/-
Disfigurement
5. Loss of marriage prospects 3,00,000/-
6. Future medical treatment 6,00,000/-
Total 51,76,000/-
Amount already received 2,50,000/-
Compensation to be Paid 49,26,000/-
45. In light of the above discussion, I pass the following:
ORDER
(i) In W.P.No.53302/2018 the petitioner is entitled to receive compensation amount
of Rs.49,26,000/- (See Para 44.3) The respondent no.2 shall deposit compensation
to the tune of Rs.40,00,000/- in a fixed deposit in a nationalised bank for such a
period till the petitioner attains majority. The interest payable on this amount shall
be released on quarterly basis to the father of the petitioner towards expenses to be
incurred. The remaining compensation amount of Rs.9,26,000/- shall be released to
the father of the petitioner to meet special needs such as medical and other expenses.
(ii) In W.P.No.6087/2019 the petitioner is entitled to receive compensation amount of
Rs.44,32,050/-, (See Para 44.2) The respondent no.2 shall deposit compensation to the tune of
Rs.29,00,000/- in a fixed deposit in a nationalised bank for such a period till the petitioner attains
majority. The interest payable on this amount shall be released on quarterly basis to the father of the
petitioner towards expenses to be incurred. The remaining compensation amount of Rs.15,32,050/-
shall be released to the father of the petitioner to meet special needs such as medical and other
expenses.
iii) In W.P.No.1383/2020 the petitioner is entitled to the sum of Rs.25,52,500/- by way of
compensation (See para 44.1). The respondent No.1 shall deposit compensation to the tune of
Rs.12,76,250/- in a fixed deposit in a nationalised bank for a period of 05 years. The interest payable
on this amount shall be released on quarterly basis to the petitioner-widow. The remaining
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 38
Kumari Chandana K vs Principal Secretary on 4 August, 2022
compensation amount of Rs.12,76,250/- shall be released to the petitioner-widow to meet necessary
needs.
(iv) The compensation stated above is to be paid within three months, in default of payment of
compensation within the time prescribed, amount due would carry further interest at 6% per annum
till date of payment.
(v) The right of the respondents to proceed against the joint tort-feasors or as against others as the
case may be on the principle of contributory negligence is preserved to be exercised in accordance
with law and such liberty would take care of the grievance of financial prejudice as made out by the
respondents.
(vi) The application for impleading filed in W.P.No.1383/2020 (I.A.-1/2022 seeking to implead the
owner of the land) and the application filed in W.P.No.6087/2019 (I.A.-1/2020 seeking to implead
the owner of the building as well as BBMP) are liable to be rejected.
vii) Before parting, after noticing the plight of dependents in W.P.No.1383/2020, wherein the
dependents have lost their sole breadwinner on 22.02.2018 and have not received any amount of
compensation till date, even under the Government Order dated 09.11.2017, it would be appropriate
to direct as follows:
a) Whenever the report under section 161 is furnished to the Distribution/Supply
Company, the exgratia compensation as per Government Order is to be paid within
an outer limit of two months.
b) This is however subject to those cases where the accident is directly attributable to
overhead lines in terms of the Consumer Guide to claim Solatium issued by KERC
(Annexure-'G' in W.P.No.1383/2020), compensation is to be paid under the
Government Order without waiting for report of CEIG.
Accordingly, the petitions are disposed off.
Sd/-
JUDGE Np/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/18379308/ 39
