L. Jayananda Singh vs The Secretary on 20 March, 2024
L. Jayananda Singh vs The Secretary on 20 March, 2024
Author: A.Guneshwar Sharma
Bench: A.Guneshwar Sharma
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No.695 of 2016
L. Jayananda Singh, aged about 37 years,
s/o L.Ibobi Singh, resident of Singjamei
Mayengbam Leikai, Imphal West,
Imphal, Manipur
... Petitioner
-Versus-
1. The Secretary, Manipur Legislative
Assembly, Government of Manipur, Imphal.
2. The Manipur Legislative Assembly,
Represented by its Secretary, Government of
Manipur.
3. Smt. Thokchom Nivedita Devi, Under Secretary,
Manipur Legislative Assembly Secretariat,
Imphal, Manipur.
... Respondents
BEFORE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.GUNESHWAR SHARMA
For the Petitioner :: Ms. B.Bidyalakshmi, Advocate
For the Respondents:: Mr.N.Ibotombi, Sr.Advocate,
Mr.Kh.Tarunkumar, Sr.Advocate &
H.Samarjit, Government Advocate
Date of Hearing :: 06.11.2023.
Date of Order :: 20.03.2024
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86310093/ 1
L. Jayananda Singh vs The Secretary on 20 March, 2024
WP(C) NO. 695 OF 2016 1
O R D E R (CAV)
[1] Heard Ms. B. Bidyalakshmi, learned counsel for the petitioner; Mr.Kh.Tarunkumar, Sr. Advocate
assisted by Ms. Rebati, learned counsel for respondent Nos.1&2; Mr. N. Ibotombi, Sr. Advocate
assisted by Mr. A. Rommel, learned counsel for respondent No.3; and Mr. H. Samarjit, learned GA
for respondent No.4.
[2] The instant writ petition has been filed by the petitioner herein challenging the appointment
order dated 22.11.2011, appointing the respondent No.3 as Under Secretary in the Manipur
Legislative Assembly. The said appointment was made on the basis of Advertisement dated
14.10.2011. Before advertisement of the said post of Under Secretary in the Manipur Legislative
Assembly, some employees who were working as Under Secretary submitted resignation letters and
in that view of such submission of resignation letters, the authority anticipated that some vacancies
were likely to occur to the post of Under Secretary and as such while issuing the above
Advertisement dated 14.10.2011, the authority added a rider "the number of vacancy for the above
two posts may be increased subject to the availability of vacancy".
[3] The petitioner neither applied for the post of Under Secretary nor challenge the Advertisement
dated 14.10.2021 but the ground for challenging the appointment of the respondent No.3 is that the
official respondent had appointed the respondent No.3 in excess of the advertised post.
[4] The writ petition challenging the appointment order dated 22.12.2011 was filed only on
14.09.2016, after a delay of about five years, which is also not explained.
[5] The respondent No.3 who entered service as Under Secretary on 22.12.2011 was given promotion
to the post of Deputy Secretary vide order dated 22.09.2014 and thereafter again promoted to the
post of Joint Secretary vide order dated 06.07.2021. The writ petitioner has not filed any rejoinder
affidavit denying the plea/explanation given/taken by the respondents in their counter affidavit.
[6] It is the case of the petitioner that although the petitioner possessed all the essential and
desirable qualifications for the said post as per notification, he did not apply for the said post as the
number of vacancy was only one. However, if the number of vacancy was more than one he would
have definitely applied for the said post and as the petitioner did not have sufficient resource for
engagement of lawyers for filing case in the Court for challenging the said appointment order dated
22.12.2011, approached the High Court Legal Services Committee, Imphal, and Mr.Ng.Kumar,
Advocate was appointed as Legal Aid Counsel for the petitioner.
[7] Further, it is the case of the petitioner that the number of vacancies/posts advertised is only one,
however the official respondents appointed respondent No.3 in excess of the advertised posts and as
such, the action of the State respondents in appointing the respondent No.3 is wholly arbitrary and
is in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution and prays for a direction to the respondents to
hold fresh DPC for filling up the said resultant vacancy/post of Under Secretary held by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86310093/ 2
L. Jayananda Singh vs The Secretary on 20 March, 2024
respondent No.3 afresh enabling the petitioner to apply and compete for the same.
[8] The respondent Nos. 1 & 2 have filed affidavit in opposition raising the preliminary point on
maintainability of the present writ petition being filed after a delay of about five years, which
deserves to be dismissed and even if the prayer of the petitioner is allowed and a fresh
DPC/recruitment test for filling the post of Under Secretary, present held by the answering
respondent, is to be held, the petitioner will not be eligible for the said post since the petitioner is
age barred.
[9] In the additional affidavit it is further stated that on the recommendation of the DPC, the
Speaker, Manipur Legislative Assembly, appointed the respondent No.3 as Deputy Secretary on
promotion vide order dated 22.09.2014 with immediate effect and thereafter, the respondent No.3
has been appointed on promotion to the post of Joint Secretary on the recommendation of the DPC
and the respondent No.3 is discharging duty as Joint Secretary. Similar plea is taken by respondent
No.3 in her counter affidavit. [10] Ms. B. Bidyalakshmi, learned counsel for the petitioner has drawn
the attention of this Court that only one post of Under Secretary was advertised by respondent Nos.1
& 2. However, the respondent No.3 was appointed as Under Secretary vide order 22.12.2011 in
excess of the post advertised, after appointment of one Km. Santasri Elangbam as Under Secretary
vide order dated 18.11.2011. It is stated that the same is in violation of the settled proposition of law
as held in the case of Rakhi Ray v. High Court of Delhi: (2010) 2 SCC 637 that vacancies cannot be
filled up over and above the advertised and the candidate on panel cannot be appointed against the
vacancy arising out of subsequent resignation of the person appointed. It is also stated that the
petitioner did not apply for the post of Under Secretary as only one post was advertised. If more
than one post were to advertised, he would have applied as he was eligible for the same post. [11]
Mr. Kh. Tarunkumar, learned senior counsel for the respondent Nos. 1 & 2 has raised the
preliminary objections that -
(i) the delay of 5 years for filing the writ petition has not been explained properly, (ii)
the petitioner has no locus to file the present writ petition as he did not apply for the
post of Under Secretary, and
(iii) the issue will be academic only as the petitioner will not be eligible in subsequent
recruitment process due to age bar. On merit, learned senior counsel submits that
there is no illegality in appointing more candidates that the number of post
advertised, as it was specifically mentioned in the advertised that the number of
vacancy may be increased subject to availability of vacancy. In its proceedings dated
10.11.2011, the DPC for direct recruitment of Under Secretary recommended the
name of Santasri Elangbam for appointment and that of the respondent No.3 as wait
list panel to meet anticipated exigency of vacancy. It is clarified that the respondent
No.3 was appointed against the resultant vacancy available. It is submitted that the
writ petition be dismissed being devoid of any merit.
[13] Mr. N. Ibotombi, learned senior counsel for the respondent No.3 also adopts the submission of
Mr. Kh. Tarunkumar, learned counsel for respondent Nos. 1 & 2. He further submits that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86310093/ 3
L. Jayananda Singh vs The Secretary on 20 March, 2024
petitioner has no locus for filing the writ petition as he has not applied for the post of Under
Secretary in pursuance of the Notification dated 14.10.2011. He refers to the decisions in the case of
RK Jain v. Union of India: (1993) 4 SCC 19 and B. Srinivasa Reddy v. Karnataka Urban Water
Supply & Drainage Board Employees Association: (2006) 11 SCC 731 to the point that third party
has no locus in service matter. Learned senior counsel also refers to the case of P S Sadasivaswamy
v. State of Tamil Nadu: (1975) 1 SCC 152 to the point of unexplained delay in approaching court and
reluctance of the court to entertain such petition to unsettle the already settled matter. It is pointed
out that the petitioner has miserably failed to explain the delay of 5 years and during this time,
respondent No.3 has been promoted to Deputy Secretary and Joint Secretary. It is also stated that
the petitioner has not rebutted the averments of the respondents by filing rejoinder affidavit thereby
admitting the same as held in (1993) Suppl 4 SCC 46 and (2003) 8 SCC 673. It is prayed that the
writ petition be dismissed.
[14] Mr. H. Samarjit, learned GA submits that the present case relates to Manipur Legislative
Assembly and State Government has no role in the appointment made by it.
[15] This Court has considered the materials on record, the submissions made by the parties and
relevant law in this regard. [16] From the pleading of the parties, it is seen that the petitioner did not
apply for the post of the Under Secretary in pursuance to the Notification dated 14.10.2011 and
hence, he is not an aggrieved party. Accordingly, he has no locus to challenge the appointment of the
respondent No.3 as Under Secretary in the Manipur Legislative Assembly. It is the settled
proposition of law that a third party has no locus to challenge appointment order of a person by a
writ of certiorari, except for a writ in the nature of quo warranto on limited question of ineligible
person occupying public office. Besides, the petitioner has not able to explain the delay of 5 years in
approaching this Court. By entertaining and allowing this writ petition, it will amount to unsettle the
established arrangement and the respondent No.3 in now promoted to the post of Joint Secretary.
On merit also, the Notification specifically mentioned that the vacancy may be increased subject to
availability and the respondent No.3 who was on panel, was adjusted against available vacancy. The
case law cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner is not applicable in the present case.
[17] Accordingly, the writ petition is dismissed both on maintainability as well as on merit. No cost.
JUDGE FR/NFR Priyojit RAJKUMA Digitally signed by RAJKUMAR R PRIYOJIT PRIYOJIT
SINGH Date: 2024.04.10 SINGH 11:52:34 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/86310093/ 4
