L.S. Punii vs State Of Manipur & Anr on 28 January, 2022
L.S. Punii vs State Of Manipur & Anr on 28 January, 2022
Author: Lanusungkum Jamir
Bench: Lanusungkum Jamir
Item No. 40
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 112 of 2021
L.S. Punii.
...Petitioner
- Versus -
State of Manipur & Anr.
...Respondents
(VIDEO CONFERENCE)
B EF O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE LANUSUNGKUM JAMIR
ORDER
28-01-2022 Heard Mr. N. Jotendro, learned senior counsel for the petitioner as well as Mr.
Napolean, learned G.A. appearing on behalf of the State respondents.
By this writ petition, the petitioner is praying for a direction to the respondents to release the
undisputed bill amount of Rs. 85,86,083/- in favour of the petitioner which has been lying pending
with the respondents.
It is the case of the petitioner that the petitioner was awarded with various work orders under the
Public Health Engineering Department, Manipur from the year 2013 to 2019. It is also submitted
that part payments were also made to the petitioner from time to time in respect of the works that
was executed by him.
The State respondents has filed counter affidavit wherein it is stated that work orders executed by
the petitioner before 2018 onwards under the Old Scheme has been abolished by the Union of India
and therefore, the work executed by the petitioner is time barred and he cannot claimed further bills
at this belated stage. It is also submitted that the petitioner had slept for more than 6 (six) years
after completion of works and as the release of the pending bills being time barred and a closed
scheme, the representation made by him on 08.01.2021 cannot be disposed by the competent
authority as it is beyond the control of the State Government.
A perusal of the affidavit filed by the respondent No. 1 would clearly indicate that there is no denial
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64221408/ 1
L.S. Punii vs State Of Manipur & Anr on 28 January, 2022
that the petitioner has completed his work allotted to him. The only ground taken is that as the work
was sanctioned under the Old Scheme which does not exist anymore, the State respondents are not
in a position to make payment. However, it is important to note that when the work order was
issued to the petitioner, the same was done when the Old Scheme was in existence and sanction of
amount has also made towards such Old Scheme, it is incumbent upon the respondents to make the
payment for the completed works to the petitioner and therefore, the plea that the work was done
when the Old Scheme was in existence and as the scheme does not exist anymore, payment cannot
be made to the petitioner, cannot be accepted by this Court. Further, when there is no denial that
the petitioner has not completed his work, the respondents are duty bound to pay the petitioner for
the works completed by him.
In that view of the matter, this writ petition is disposed of by directing the respondents to examine
the case of the petitioner and pay the undisputed bill to the petitioner after proper verification
within a period of 4 (four) months from the date of receipt of a copy of the order of this Court.
With the above observations and directions, writ petition is disposed of.
Furnish copy of this order to the learned counsel for all the parties through their respective
e-mails/Whatsapp.
JUDGE
joshua
KH. JOSHUA JOSHUA MARING
MARING Date: 2022.02.09
01:15:42 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/64221408/ 2
