Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6
August, 2024
Digitally signed by
KHOIROM KHOIROM
BIPINCHAN BIPINCHANDRA
SINGH
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
DRA SINGH Date: 2024.08.06
14:04:20 +05'30' AT IMPHAL
MAT. APP. NO. 10 OF 2018
Laishram Sanamatum Singh, aged about 58 years, S/o
L. Ningthemjao Singh by occupation Sub-Inspector,
(now retired), a resident of Sunisiphai Mayai Leikai,
P.O. & P.S. Bishnupur, District:- Bishnupur, Manipur.
.... Appellant/Respondent
- Versus -
Km. Laishram Ronika Devi, aged about 26 years, D/o Smt. Leima Devi and L. Sanamatum Singh, a
resident of Bishnupur Ward No. 4, Municipality Road, P.O. & P.S. Bishnupur, District:- Bishnupur,
Manipur.
.... Respondent/Petitioner BEFORE HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. SIDDHARTH MRIDUL
HON'BLE MRS. JUSTICE GOLMEI GAIPHULSHILLU For the appellant : Mr. I. Lalitkumar, Sr.
Advocate For the respondent : Mr. K. Achouba, Advocate Date of hearing : 08.05.2024 Date of
Judgment &Order : 06.08.2024 P a g e 1 | 20 JUDGEMENT & ORDER (CAV) (Golmei
Gaiphulshillu, J.) [1] Heard Mr. I. Lalitkumar, learned sr. counsel appears on behalf of the appellant
and Mr. K. Achouba, learned counsel appears on behalf of the respondent.
[2] The present appeal has been filed by the appellant challenging the impugned Judgment and
order dated 02.04.2018 passed in Cril. (Maintenance) Case No. 1 of 2018 by the Ld. Judge, Family
Court, Bishnupur. In the said Cril. (Maintenance) the present appellant is the respondent and the
above named respondent is the petitioner. [3] The above referred Mat (Maintenance) case No. 3 of
2016 was filed by the respondent as petitioner against the appellant as respondent under Section 20
read with Section 3 (b) of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 thereby claiming the
maintenance allowances with the marriage expenses to be incurred in Marriage Ceremony. The
respondent/petitioner is the daughter of Smt. Leima Devi (wife of appellant/respondent) now living
with her mother along with her elder brothers.
Section 20 and Section 3(b) of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 are extracted as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 1
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
follows:
P a g e 2 | 20 Section 20 of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 :
(1) Subject to the provisions of this Section a Hindu is bound, during his or her
life-time, to maintain his or her legitimate or illegitimate children and his or her aged
or infirm parents.
(2) A legitimate or illegitimate child may claim maintenance from his or her father or
mother so long as the child is minor.
(3) The obligation of a person to maintain his or her aged or infirm parent or a
daughter who is unmarried extends in so far as the parent or the unmarried
daughter, as the case may be, is unable to maintain himself or herself out of his or her
own earnings or other property.
Section 3(b) of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956:
Section 3(b) "maintenance" includes - (i) in all cases, provision for food, clothing,
residence, education and medical attendance and treatment; (ii) in the case of an
unmarried daughter, also the reasonable expenses of and incident to her marriage.
[4] It is seen and observed that from the pleadings of the parties and on perusal of
the impugned order, the respondent/petitioner herein claims maintenance allowance
with the marriage expenses to be incurred in her marriage from her father, the
appellant. Prior to that, instead of living with her mother since the separation of her
mother and father and subsequent divorce, she never claimed maintenance for
herself from her father (appellant).
P a g e 3 | 20 [5] It is also seen and observed that the respondent/petitioner relied
upon for her maintenance including her education from her mother and brothers. It
is also seen and observed that not only the respondent/petitioner, the two elder
brothers who lived with their mother did not ask for maintenance including their
education from the appellant/respondent.
[6] The appellant/respondent was serving as Police Officer (Sub-Inspector) in
Manipur Police, Department enjoying salary of more than Rs. 35,000/- at the
relevant point of time. The respondent/petitioner alleged that with the help of her
mother and elder brothers very hardly completed her B.A. Course in the year 2014
from C.I. College, Bishnupur and now, she is joining a computer course at private
Technology Firm at Bangalore by staying with her second elder brother, she further
alleged that in earlier occasion she had approached the appellant/respondent to
maintain her but the appellant/respondent did not care. By now, she is going to
marry with one Laithangbam Santosh Singh, S/o (L) Shanti Singh of Bishnupur
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 2
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
Ward No. 9 as engaged by the relatives and such marriage was fixed on 16th Nov.,
2016 for which the respondent/petitioner through her relatives approached the
appellant/respondent on 20/08/2016 and 26/08/2016 to maintain the
respondent/petitioner and also help her marriage ceremony. But, due to
non-payment of the maintenance as well as the marriage expenses, the P a g e 4 | 20
respondent/petitioner filed the above referred case against the appellant/respondent
on the following relief:
(a) a decree for maintenance allowance of Rs.
5,00,000/- from the appellant/respondent.
(b) a decree for Marriage Expenditure of Rs. 5,00,000/-
from the appellant/respondent.
(c) Interim maintenance.
(d) Cost of litigation.
(e) Pass appropriate order or orders in the nature of the
case for the ends of justice.
[7] However, the appellant/respondent also contested the
above referred case before the Family Court, Bishnupur, Manipur thereby denying
almost all the allegation of the respondent/petitioner stating that the
appellant/respondent and his wife Smt. Leima Devi had been separated for more
than 12 years ago and their marriage was dissolved by a Decree of Divorce passed in
Mat (Div.) Case No. 61/2014/4/2014 of the Hon'ble Family Court, Bishnupur,
Manipur for which the entire homestead land measuring an area of 0.10 acres
including the house which include 13(thirteen) rented rooms and a sum of Rs. Rs.
1,00,000/-
in cash were given to the mother of the respondent/petitioner as alimony of the Divorce mother, by
now the appellant/respondent is living in a rented house with another wife and not in state service
as retiring from service during the pendency of the above referred case.
P a g e 5 | 20 [8] It is an admitted position of the fact that during the course of divorce between the
mother of the respondent/petitioner and present appellant, in MAT (Div.) Case No. 61/2014/4/2014
in the Family Court, Bishnupur, as alimony, the present appellant has given 0.10 acres of land
including 13 rented rooms and a sum of Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees one lakh). But, as per facts as set
out by both the parties, the said alimony was only for the wife. But, there is no whisper from the side
of the appellant petitioner about the maintenance for his children. In the facts and circumstances,
the appellant/respondent cannot escape his duty as a father towards the respondent/petitioner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 3
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
[9] The appellant/respondent alleged that the arrange marriage said to be solemnized on 16th
November, 2018, was not make known to him. He further alleged that while deciding the matter in
issue the Ld. Judge, Family Court, Bishnupur had abruptly passed impugned order dated
02.04.2018 thereby directing the appellant/respondent to pay a sum Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees one
lakh) for maintenance and Rs. 2,00,000/- for marriage expenses on the ground that the father of
the respondent/petitioner has obligation to maintain his legitimate daughter till her marriage and to
pay her marriage expenses even if the respondent/petitioner lives separately from her father and
presumed that the appellant/respondent is a government employee and enable to provide such
maintenance allowances and marriage expenses without P a g e 6 | 20 considering and looking into
the statement adduced by the witnesses recorded at the time of cross examination and abruptly
passed order dated 02.04.2018 and the same is not prepare the final decree and moreover, the Ld.
Judge, Family Court, Bishnupur have converted the petition under section 20 read with Section 3(b)
of the Hindu Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 as a criminal case without having any jurisdiction
to convert and treated as Cril. Case. He further alleged that on the basis of the impugned judgment
and order dated 02.04.2018, the respondent/petitioner filed an Execution case No. 8 of 2018 before
the Hon'ble Family Court, Bishnupur, Manipur for enforcing the order and the Ld. Judge, Family
Court, Bishnupur without preparing any Decree entertained the execution proceeding under Section
20 read with Sec 3(b) of the Hindu Maintenance Adoption Act, 1956. Being aggrieved by such
impugned judgment and order 02.04.2018, the appellant/respondent preferred this present Mat.
Appeal before this Hon'ble Court.
In this regard, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in "Abhilasha vs. Parkash & Ors. [(2021) 13 SCC 99]"
observed that-
"23. The judgment of this Court in Jagdish Jugtawat is sheet anchor of the learned
counsel for the appellant. The question which came up for consideration before this
Court in Jagdish Jugtawat case has been noted in para 3 of the judgment which is to
the following effect: (SCC p. 423) P a g e 7 | 20 "3. In view of the finding recorded and
the observations made by the learned Single Judge of the High Court, the only
question that arises for consideration is whether the order calls for interference."
24. This Court answered the question noticed in para 3 as above in para 4 in the following words:
(Jagdish Jugtawat case, SCC pp. 423-24) "4. Applying the principle to the facts and circumstances of
the case in hand, it is manifest that the right of a minor girl for maintenance from parents after
attaining majority till her marriage is recognised in Section 20(3) of the Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance Act. Therefore, no exception can be taken to the judgment/order passed¹¹ by the
learned Single Judge for maintaining the order passed by the Family Court which is based on a
combined reading of Section 125, Code of Criminal Procedure and Section 20(3) of the Hindu
Adoptions and Maintenance Act. For the reasons aforestated we are of the view that on facts and in
the circumstances of the case no interference with the impugned judgment/order¹¹ of the High
Court is called for.
26. In classical Hindu law prior to codification, a Hindu male was always held morally and legally
liable to maintain his aged parents, a virtuous wife and infant child. Hindu law always recognised
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 4
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
the liability of father to maintain an unmarried daughter. In this context, we refer to Paras 539 and
543 of Mulla, Hindu Law, 22nd Edn., which is as follows:
"539. Personal liability: liability of father, husband and son. A Hindu is under a legal
obligation to maintain his wife, his minor sons, his unmarried daughters, and his
aged parents whether he possesses any property or not. The obligation to maintain
these relations is personal in character and arises from the very existence of the
relation between the parties.
Sections 18 and 20 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 deal with the
question of maintenance of wife, children and aged parents. Reference may be made
to the notes under those sections.
543. Daughter.-(1) A father is bound to maintain his unmarried daughters. On the
death of the father, they are entitled to be maintained out e of his estate."
P a g e 8 | 20
28. Section 20(3) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 is nothing but recognition of
principles of Hindu law regarding maintenance of 9 children and aged parents. Section 20(3) now
makes it statutory obligation of a Hindu to maintain his or her daughter, who is unmarried and is
unable to maintain herself out of her own earnings or other property.
29. Section 20 of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 casts a statutory obligation on a
Hindu to maintain his daughter who is unmarried and unable to maintain herself out of her own
earnings or other property. As noted above, Hindu law prior to enactment of the 1956 Act always
obliged a Hindu to maintain unmarried daughter, who is unable to maintain herself. The obligation,
which is cast on the father to maintain his unmarried daughter, can be enforced by her against her
father, if she is unable to maintain herself by enforcing her right under Section 20.
32. The provision of Section 20 of the 1956 Act casts clear statutory obligation on a Hindu to
maintain his unmarried daughter who is unable to maintain herself. The right of unmarried
daughter under Section 20 to claim maintenance from her father when she is unable to maintain
herself is absolute and the right given to unmarried daughter under Section 20 is rightly granted
under Personal law, which can very well be enforced by her against her father. The judgment of this
Court in Jagdish Jugtawat2 laid down that Section 20(3) of the 1956 Act recognised the right of a
minor girl to claim maintenance after she attains majority till her marriage from her father.
Unmarried daughter is clearly entitled for maintenance from her father till she is married even
though she has become major, which is a statutory right recognised by Section 20(3) and can be
enforced by unmarried daughter in accordance with law.
36. The maintenance as contemplated under the 1956 Act is a larger concept as compared to concept
of maintenance under Section 125 CrPC. Section 3(b) while defining maintenance gives an inclusive
definition including marriage expenses in the following words:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 5
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
"3. Definitions. In this Act unless the context otherwise requires-
(b) "maintenance" includes-
(i) in all cases, provision for food, clothing, residence, education and medical
attendance and treatment;
(ii) in the case of an unmarried daughter also the reasonable expenses of and incident
to her marriage;
P a g e 9 | 20
(c) "minor" means a person who has not completed his or her age of eighteen years."
In the present case, it is not denied that both the parties are Hindus and as such, governed by Hindu
Law.
[10] The learned counsel for the appellant/respondent contended that the Ld. Judge, Family Court,
Bishnupur failed to ascertain as to whether the respondents/petitioner actually informed the
appellant/respondent about the marriage through her relatives or not. He further contended that
the Ld. Judge without proper examination of the statement adduced by the witnesses recorded at
the time of cross examination and abruptly passed order dated 02.04.2018. [11] The learned counsel
for the appellant/respondent, further, contended that while observing issue No. 4, the Ld. Judge,
Family Court, Bishnupur failed to consider the statement of the respondent/petitioner witnesses to
the effect that whether the Respondent/Petitioner has sufficient income to maintain herself or not.
Ignoring and neglecting such statement, the Ld. Judge, Family Court, Bishnupur passed such
impugned order without applying her mind and without any evidence on record. He, further,
submits that the monthly allowance of the appellant/respondent was not Rs. 35,000/- during the
pendency of the case as he has already retired from service in the month of April, 2017. Therefore,
the said impugned order is ill conceived and devoid of merit.
P a g e 10 | 20 And the factum of appellant income cannot be ignored while deciding such case in
determining the quantum of marriage expenses as well as other maintenance allowances as such,
apart from the lack of proper examination of the material on record available before this Court, the
Ld. Family Court, Bishnupur Manipur had abruptly passed such order of marriage expenses without
any specific calculation inspite of the fact that the respondent/petitioner never informed the
appellant/ respondent about their arrange marriage and moreover, in the marriage invitation card,
the name of the father was not included.
[12] As per the pleadings as stated above, the respondent/petitioner did not ask for day-to-day
maintenance from the appellant/respondent from the time she started living with her mother and
brothers and the present maintenance and expenses are the only monetary expenses asked for from
her father(appellant/respondent).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 6
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
The relation between the appellant/respondent and respondent/petitioner are father-daughter
relationship not the business partner where calculation of day-to-day business activities and
accounts are required.
On perusal of the invitation card referred to above, it is found that the said invitation card which is
relied upon by the P a g e 11 | 20 respondent/appellant is the groom's invitation card not bride's
invitation card.
[13] However, in the instant case, it is seen and observed that the present respondent/petitioner's
income is not shown but, as per the pleading of the respondent/petitioner, she relied upon even for
her studies on her mother and brothers.
In this regard, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Padmja Sharma vs. Ratan Lal Sharma [(2004) 4 SCC
266] observed that -
"10. Maintenance has not been defined in the Act or between the parents whose duty
it is to maintain the children. The Hindu Marriage Act, 1955, the Hindu Minority and
Guardianship Act, 1956, the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act, 1956 and the
Hindu Succession Act, 1956 constitute a law in a coded form for the Hindus. Unless
there is anything repugnant to the context definition of a particular word could be
lifted from any of the four Acts constituting the law to interpret a certain provision.
All these Acts are to be read in conjunction with one another and interpreted
accordingly. We can, therefore, go to the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act,
1956 (for short "the Maintenance Act") to understand the meaning of "maintenance".
In clause (b) of Section 3 of this Act "maintenance includes - (i) in all cases, provision
for food, clothing, residence, education and medical attendance and treatment; (ii) in
the case of an unmarried daughter also the reasonable expenses of and incident to
her marriage;" and under clause (c) " 'minor' means a person who has not completed
his or her age of eighteen years".
Under Section 18 of the Maintenance Act a Hindu wife shall be entitled to be maintained by her
husband during her lifetime. This is of course subject to certain conditions with which we are not
concerned. Section 202 provides for maintenance of children and aged parents. Under this section a
Hindu is bound, during his or her lifetime, to maintain his or her children. A minor child so long as
he is a minor can claim maintenance from his or her father or mother.
P a g e 12 | 20 Section 20 is, therefore, to be contrasted with Section 18. Under this section it is as
much the obligation of the father to maintain a minor child as that of the mother. It is not the law
that how (sic howsoever) affluent the mother may be it is the obligation only of the father to
maintain the minor."
[14] The learned counsel for the appellant/respondent, further, submitted that even assuming but
not admitting the fact that the impugned judgment and order dated 02.04.2018 was passed after
consideration of all the material records available before the Hon'ble Trial Court, till date the Decree
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 7
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
is not yet prepared as per law. As such, the Judgment and Decree dated 02.04.2018 passed in Cril.
(Maintenance) Case No. 1 of 2018 of the Hon'ble Family Court, Bishnupur, Manipur could not and
should not stand therefore, the impugned order is ill conceived, illegal and not binding to the
appellant/respondent and deserves to be rejected forthwith.
[15] The learned counsel for the appellant/respondent, further, contended that the Ld. Judge,
Family Court, Bishnupur, Manipur has any jurisdiction to entertain and heard the matter in issue
under Section 3(b) read with 20 of the Hindu adoption and maintenance Act as a criminal case.
Registering and maintaining such a Civil Suit as a Criminal Case is very much contrary to the very
provision of law. As such, the judgment and order dated 02.04.2018 passed in Cril. (Maintenance)
Case No. 1 of 2018 is not tenable in the eyes of law inasmuch as the Ld. Judge, Family Court,
Bishnupur, Manipur has no inherent power and jurisdiction to convert a Civil Case into a Criminal
Case. Therefore, the impugned P a g e 13 | 20 judgment and order dated 02.04.2018 is perverse, ill
conceive; hence, it is not tenable in the eyes of law and deserved to be rejected forthwith. He,
further, contended that the finding/observation of the Ld. Judge, Family Court is irrational,
perverse, vexatious and capricious and the same is liable to be quashed and set aside to maintain the
justice.
Here also, we relied upon the Hon'ble Supreme Court's observation made in "Abhilasha vs. Parkash
& Ors. [(2021) 13 SCC 99]"(supra). It is undeniably very clear that Section 20(3)(ii) of the Hindu
Adoption and Maintenance Act, 1956 clearly stated that the father is duty bound to pay reasonable
expenses during the incident of her marriage.
[16] It is an admitted position of the fact that the respondent/petitioner filed the said Cril.
Maintenance Case No. 1 of 2018 under Section 20 read with Section 3(b) of the Hindu Adoption and
Maintenance Act, 1956 claiming for maintenance allowance with the marriage expenses to be
incurred for her marriage ceremony. In this regard, the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Jagdish Jugtawat
vs. Manju Lata & Ors. [(2002) 5 SCC 422] observed that -
"4. Applying the principle to the facts and circumstances of the case in hand, it is
manifest that the right of a minor girl for maintenance from parents after attaining
majority till her marriage is recognized in Section 20(3) of the Hindu Adoptions and
Maintenance Act. Therefore, no exception can be taken to the judgment/order passed
by the learned Single Judge for maintaining the order passed by the Family Court
which is based P a g e 14 | 20 on a combined reading of Section 125 CrPC and Section
20(3) of the Hindu Adoptions and Maintenance Act. For the reasons aforestated we
are of the view that on facts and in the circumstances of the case no interference with
the impugned judgment/order of the High Court is called for."
Considering the observation made above by the Hon'ble Supreme Court, we are of the view that the
Ld. Family Court rightly dealt with the case and passed the impugned order.
[17] On 27.02.2023, the learned counsel for the appellant/respondent filed an Additional Affidavit
on behalf of the appellant/respondent in which he had presented an invitation card filed by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 8
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
appellant. He had further contended that on careful perusal of such marriage invitation card, the
respondent/petitioner have intentionally and willfully desisted from putting the name of the
appellant/respondent of being a father thereby completely discharging the moral obligation of being
a father of the respondent/petitioner in the society. The said Invitation Card is very much necessary
to settle the matter in issue.
[18] In support of the case, the learned counsel appearing for the appellant/respondent referred to
the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, which run as under:
P a g e 15 | 20 Rajnesh v. Neha & Anr. [(2021) 2 SCC 324] -
"73. Parties may lead oral and documentary evidence with respect to income,
expenditure, standard of living, etc. before the court concerned, for fixing the
permanent alimony payable to the spouse.
75. Provision for grant of reasonable expenses for the marriage of children must be
made at the time of determining permanent alimony, where the custody is with the
wife. The expenses would be determined by taking into account the financial position
of the husband and the customs of the family.
76. If there are any trust funds/investments created by any spouse/grandparents in
favour of the children, this would also be taken into consideration while deciding the
final child support.
79. In Manish Jain v. Akanksha Jain, this court held that the financial position of the
parents of the applicant wife, would not be material while determining the quantum
of maintenance. An order of interim maintenance is conditional on the circumstance
that the wife or husband who makes a claim has no independent income, sufficient
for her or his support. It is no answer to a claim of maintenance that the wife is
educated and could support herself. The court must take into consideration the status
of the parties and the capacity of the spouse to pay for her or his support.
Maintenance is dependent upon factual situations; the court should mould the claim
for maintenance based on various factors brought before it.
82. Section 23 of the HAMA provides statutory guidance with respect to the criteria
for determining the quantum of maintenance. Sub-Section (2) of Section 23 of the
HAMA provides the following factors which may be taken into consideration: (i)
position and status of the parties, (ii) reasonable wants of the claimant, (iii) if the
petitioners/claimant is living separately, the justification for the same, (iv) value of
the claimant's property and any income derived from such property, (v) income from
claimant's own earning or from any other source."
State of Madhya Pradesh v. Narmada Bachao Andolan & Anr. [(2011) 7 SCC 639 -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 9
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
"8. It is a settled proposition of law that a party has to plead its case and
produce/adduce sufficient evidence to substantiate the averments made in the
petition and in case the pleadings are not complete, the court in under no obligation
to entertain the pleas.
P a g e 16 | 20
9. In Bharat Singh v. State of Haryana, this Court has observed as under (SCC p. 543,
para 13) "13. ................. In our opinion, when a point which is ostensibly a point of
law is required to be substantiated by facts, the party raising the point, if he is the
writ petitioner, must plead and prove such facts by evidence which must appear from
the writ petition and if he is the respondent, from the counter-affidavit. If the facts
are not pleaded or the evidence in support of such facts is not annexed to the writ
petition or the counter-affidavit, as the case may be, the court will not entertain the
point......... there is a distinction between a pleading under the Code of Civil
Procedure and a writ petition or a counter-affidavit. While in a pleading, this is, a
plaint or a written statement, the facts and not (the) evidence are required to be
pleaded, in a writ petition or in the counter-affidavit not only the facts but also the
evidence in proof of such facts have to be pleaded and annexed to it. (emphasis
supplied).
A similar view has been reiterated by this Court in Larsen & Toubro Ltd. V. State of
Gujarat, Atul Castings Ltd. V. Bawa Gurvachan Singh and Rajasthan Pradesh Vaidya
Samiti v. Union of India.
10. Pleadings and particulars are required to enable the court to decide the rights of
the parties in the trial. Thus, the pleadings are more to help the court in narrowing
the controversy involved and to inform the parties concerned to the question(s) in
issue, so that the parties may adduce appropi9at evidence on the said issue. It is
settled proposition that "as a rule relief not founded on the pleadings should not be
granted". Therefore, a decision of a case cannot be based on grounds outside the
pleadings of the parties."
Virendra Kashinath Ravat & Anr. v. Vinayak N. Joshi & Ors. [(1999) 1 SCC 47] -
"17. The object of the Rules is twofold. First is to afford the other side intimation
regarding the particular facts of the case so that they may be met by the other side.
Second is to enable the court to determine what is really the issue between the
parties. The words in the sub-rule "a statement in a concise form" are definitely
suggestive that brevity should be adhered to while drafting pleadings. Of course
brevity should not be at the cost of setting out necessary facts, but it does not mean
niggling in the pleadings. If care is taken in the syntactic progress, pleadings can be
saved from tautology. Elaboration of facts in pleadings is not the ideal measure and
that is why the sub-rule embodied the P a g e 17 | 20 words "and contain only" just
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 10
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
before the succeeding words "a statement in a concise form of the material facts".
[19] In view of the facts and circumstances and as per our observation made above, we observe that
the above cited cases relied upon by the appellant/respondent is not applicable in the instant case.
[20] After applying the principle to the facts and circumstances of the case in hand and also
considering the submissions made above by the learned counsels for the parties and after taking
note of the settled law enunciated by the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in the extracted cases
(supra), we observe the following:
A Hindu father under legal obligation to maintain his unmarried daughter(s) and
obligation to maintain this relation is personal in character and arises from the very
existence of the relation between the parties.
It is manifest that right of a minor girl for maintenance from parents after attaining
majority till her marriage is recognized in Section 20(3) of the Hindu Adoption and
Maintenance Act, 1956.
It is statutory obligation of a father to maintain his daughter who is unmarried and
unable to maintain herself, as such cast upon the father to maintain his unmarried
daughter and the father is under obligation to incur reasonable expenses of an
incident to her marriage.
P a g e 18 | 20 This right can be enforced upon by the daughter against her father. It
is customary of the parents of the son/daughter who is getting married to deploy
their resources for the wedding to the best of their financial capacity. This is
particularly true when marrying of a daughter, as the parents try to ensure that she is
well provided for in the matrimonial home when she would begin her new life.
Every father is under an obligation to maintain his daughter and even to get them
married; the obligation to maintain the daughter and get her married is said to be
personal in character and arises from the very existence of the relationship.
Now, we come to the question of quantum of the expenses of the marriage, as per
Section 3(b)(ii) of the Act, in case of an unmarried daughter, maintenance include
not only the reasonable expenses of marriages but also expenses incident to her
marriage i.e. which are directly incurred for marriage and which are incurred
indirectly or incidentally to the marriage. In the instant case, the Ld. Family Court
rightly awarded the maintenance in two parts i.e. Rs. 1,00,000/- for maintenance
and Rs. 2,00,000/- for marriage expenses.
[21] The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Rajnesh v. Neha & Anr. [(2021) 2 SCC 324]
observed that -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 11
Laishram Sanamatum Singh vs Km. Laishram Ronika Devi on 6 August, 2024
"Both, the working mother and working father, have to take the liability of the child
and if the mother is working, it does not mean that the father will be absolved from
taking responsibility of his child. The father is legally bound to maintain his child
according to the status and life style. Hon'ble Supreme P a g e 19 | 20 Court has taken
a serious note in Para-13, wherein it is provided that maintenance laws have been
enacted as a measure of social justice to provide recourse to dependent wives and
children for their financial support, so as to prevent them from falling into
destitution and vagrancy."
After due consideration of the above stated, we come to the conclusion that the appellant is
undeniably responsible/duty bound to maintain and to bear the expenses for the marriage of his
daughter i.e. the present the respondent/petitioner.
[22] For the reasons aforestated, we are of the view that on the facts and circumstances of the case,
no interference with the impugned order of the Ld. Family Court, Bishnupur is called for. [23]
Accordingly, the present Matrimonial Appeal No. 10 of 2018 is dismissed as devoid of merit. The
appellant is directed to pay the awarded amount mentioned above to the respondent/petitioner
within a period of 1 (one) month from the date of receipt of a copy of this judgment & order.
[24] Send an extract copy of this order to the Ld. Family Court, Bishnupur.
JUDGE CHIEF JUSTICE
FR/NFR
Bipin
P a g e 20 | 20
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/130406780/ 12
