Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10
April, 2025
THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRLREV No.660 of 2024
(In the matter of an application under Section 397 read with Section 401
of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973; r/w Section 442 read with
Section 438 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023)
Lakshman Srinivasan ....... Petitioner
-Versus-
Republic of India (CBI) ....... Opposite Party
For the Petitioner : Mr. Debashis Sinha, Advocate
For the Opp. Party : Mr. Sarthak Nayak,
Special P.P. -Cum- Retainer Counsel (CBI)
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE SIBO SANKAR MISHRA
Date of Hearing: 13.03.2025 : Date of Judgment: 10.04.2025
S.S. Mishra, J. The present Criminal Revision Petition is filed by the
petitioner under Section 397 read with Section 401 of the Cr.P.C, 1973,
[Corresponding provision- Section 442 read with Section 438 of the
Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023], assailing the order dated
14.08.2024 passed by the learned Special Judge (CBI), Court No.1 -cum-
the Additional Sessions Judge, Bhubaneswar in Crl. Misc Case No.32 of
2024 arising out of T.R. No.03 of 2023 corresponding to CBI/SCB/Kol
P.S. Case No.RC.30/S/2014-Kol dated 05.06.2014 rejecting the
application filed by the petitioner U/s. 451 read with Section 457 of
Cr.P.C, 1973 seeking release of cash seized by the CBI; during
investigation.
2. The learned Special Judge (CBI) - Court No.1-cum- The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 1
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
Additional Sessions Judge, Bhubaneswar, rejected the application of the
petitioner seeking release of Rupees Fifteen Lakhs which was seized by
CBI by the impugned order. It will be apposite to reproduce the
operative part of the impugned order which reads as under:
"...The cash of Rs.l5 lakhs seized from the office chamber of
the accused-petitioner during search is not properly
accounted for by him. The source of the seized cash is not
clear as to whether it is legal or illegal from the averments of
the petition and submissions made on behalf of the petitioner.
5. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case,
nature of allegation and gravity of the offence as well as
improper keeping of huge unaccounted money in shape of
cash I am not inclined to allow the petition filed by the
petitioner to release the cash of Rs. 15 lakhs in his favour..."
Aggrieved by such finding of the court below, the present Revision
Petition has been preferred by the petitioner.
Page 2 of 26
3. Heard, Mr. Debashis Sinha, learned Counsel for the petitioner
and Mr. Sarthak Nayak, learned Special P.P. -Cum- Retainer Counsel
(CBI) for the opposite party.
4. The present petitioner who is an accused in this case, is alleged
to have been involved in an illegal money collusion fraud through M/s
Infinity Realcon Ltd. by operating various investment schemes without
obtaining the requisite statutory approval from the Reserve Bank of
India. Following his arrest on 26th September 2022, officials of the
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) conducted searches on the same
day at multiple locations, including the office of M/s. Finshore
Management Services Ltd. at Anand Lok Building, 227, A.J.C. Bose
Road, Kolkata - 700020, his previous residence at Tolly Apartments and
Golf Towers, and his present residence during the late hours of that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 2
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
night. During the search, an amount of (cid:128)15.00 lakh cash was seized from
the cupboard of his chamber/exclusive room at Anand Lok Building,
227, A.J.C. Bose Road. Subsequently, the accused petitioner was granted
bail by the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 03.10.2023 in SLP
No. 9318/2023.
Page 3 of 26
5. Mr. Sinha, the learned counsel for the petitioner while justifying
the source of the cash contended that out of the total amount seized,
(cid:128)4.50 lakh was withdrawn from the petitioner's and his spouse's bank
accounts, while (cid:128)4 lakh was received as a loan from a professional
friend, who is a family to him. Additionally, a portion of the amount
comprised the petitioner's mother's widow pension of (cid:128)30,000 per
month, which had been accumulated over a long period, along with gifts
received from various relatives. It is further submitted that the
petitioner's mother had entrusted him with these funds for medical and
other emergency and family expenses. The amount was kept in the
office, because several hospitals are situated in the vicinity, allowing for
immediate access in case of emergencies.
6. Learned counsel for the petitioner further submits that the
present petitioner is the rightful custodian of the money seized and for
that the money should be accordingly released and given back to the
petitioner. While contending this, the learned counsel places reliance on
Section 451 read with Section 457 of Cr.P.C., 1973. For ready reference,
the said provisions are reproduced as under: -
Page 4 of 26
"451. Order for custody and disposal of property pending
trial in certain cases.
When any property is produced before any Criminal Court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 3
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
during any inquiry or trial, the Court may make such
order as it thinks fit for the proper custody of such
property pending the conclusion of the inquiry or trial,
and, if the property is subject to speedy and natural decay,
or if it is otherwise expedient so to do, the Court may,
after recording such evidence as it thinks necessary, order
it to be sold or otherwise disposed of.
Explanation. - For the purposes of this section, "property"
includes -
(a)property of any kind or document which is produced
before the Court or which is in its custody;
(b)any property regarding which an offence appears to
have been committed or which appears to have been used
for the commission of any offence."
"457. Procedure by police upon seizure of property.
(1)Whenever the seizure of property by any police officer
is reported to a Magistrate under the provisions of this
Code, and such property is not produced before a
Criminal Court during an inquiry or trial, the Magistrate
may make such order as he thinks fit respecting the
disposal of such property or the delivery of such property
to the person entitled to the possession thereof, or if such
person cannot be ascertained, respecting the custody and
production of such property.
(2)If the person so entitled is known, the Magistrate may
order the property to be delivered to him on such
conditions (if any) as the Magistrate thinks fit and if such
person is unknown, the Magistrate may detain it and shall,
in such case, issue a proclamation specifying the articles
of which such property consists, and requiring any person
who may have a claim thereto, to appear before him and
establish his claim within six months from the date of such
proclamation."
Page 5 of 26
Further, he has relied upon the following passage from the
judgment of Hon'ble Apex Court in Sunderbhai Ambalal Desai v. State
of Gujarat1:
"5. Section 451 clearly empowers the court to pass appropriate
orders with regard to such property, such as:
(1) for the proper custody pending conclusion of the inquiry or
trial;
(2) to order it to be sold or otherwise disposed of, after recording
such evidence as it thinks necessary;
(3) if the property is subject to speedy and natural decay, to
dispose of the same.
7. In our view, the powers under Section 451 CrPC should be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 4
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
exercised expeditiously and judiciously. It would serve various
purposes, namely:
1.
owner of the article would not suffer because of its remaining unused or by its misappropriation;
2. court or the police would not be required to keep the article in safe custody;
3. if the proper panchnama before handing over possession of the article is prepared, that can be
used in evidence instead of its production before the court during the trial. If necessary, evidence
could also be recorded describing the nature of the property in detail; and
4. this jurisdiction of the court to record evidence should be exercised promptly so that there may
not be further chance of tampering with the articles.
8. The question of proper custody of the seized article is raised in a number of matters. In Basavva
Kom Dyamangouda Patil v. State of Mysore [(1977) 4 SCC 358 : 1977 SCC (Cri) 598] this Court dealt
with a case where the seized articles were not available for being returned to the complainant. In
that case, the recovered ornaments were kept in a trunk in the police station and later it was found
missing, the question was with regard to (2002) 10 SCC 283 payment of those articles. In that
context, the Court observed as under: (SCC p. 361, para 4) "4. The object and scheme of the various
provisions of the Code appear to be that where the property which has been the subject-matter of an
offence is seized by the police it ought not to be retained in the custody of the court or of the police
for any time longer than what is absolutely necessary. As the seizure of the property by the police
amounts to a clear entrustment of the property to a government servant, the idea is that the
property should be restored to the original owner after the necessity to retain it ceases. It is manifest
that there may be two stages when the property may be returned to the owner. In the first place it
may be returned during any inquiry or trial. This may particularly be necessary where the property
concerned is subject to speedy or natural decay. There may be other compelling reasons also which
may justify the disposal of the property to the owner or otherwise in the interest of justice. The High
Court and the Sessions Judge proceeded on the footing that one of the essential requirements of the
Code is that the articles concerned must be produced before the court or should be in its custody.
The object of the Code seems to be that any property which is in the control of the court either
directly or indirectly should be disposed of by the court and a just and proper order should be
passed by the court regarding its disposal. In a criminal case, the police always acts under the direct
control of the court and has to take orders from it at every stage of an inquiry or trial. In this broad
sense, therefore, the court exercises an overall control on the actions of the police officers in every
case where it has taken cognizance."
Learned counsel for the petitioner in addition to this also placed reliance on the judgement of the
High Court of Delhi in the case of Manjit Singh v. State2, 2014 SCC OnLine Del 4652 "65. The
currency notes seized by the police may be released to the person who, in the opinion of the Court, is
lawfully entitled to claim after preparing detailed panchnama of the currency notes with their
numbers or denomination; taking photographs of the currency notes; and taking a security bond.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 5
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
66. The photographs of such currency notes should be attested or countersigned by the complainant,
accused as well as by the person to whom the custody is handed over and memo of the proceedings
be prepared which must be signed by the parties and witnesses.
67. The production of the currency notes during the course of the trial should not be insisted upon
and the releasee should be permitted to use the currency."
Learned counsel relying on the aforesaid judgments contended that the petitioner is entitled to the
release of the seized money as its rightful custodian. He submitted that the Hon'ble Supreme Court,
in the case of Sunderbhai Ambalal Desai v. State of Gujarat (supra) has emphasized that property
seized by the police should not be retained unnecessarily and must be released to the rightful owner
at the earliest. He has further contended that under Sections 451 and 457 of Cr.P.C., 1973, the court
has the power to order the return of seized property to its lawful owner, subject to appropriate
safeguards.
Additionally, the learned counsel draws the court's attention to the judgment of the High Court of
Delhi in the case of Manjit Singh v. State (supra) which lays down specific guidelines regarding the
release of seized currency notes in the course of investigation and while pending trial. He argued
that as per the principles enunciated in the said case, the seized amount may be returned to the
petitioner after proper documentation, including a detailed panchnama, photographing of the
currency notes, and obtaining a security bond.
7. However, on the contrary, Mr. Nayak, learned Special P.P. - Cum- Retainer Counsel(CBI) for the
opposite party vehemently opposed the contentions of the petitioner's counsel and submitted that
the afore- said judgements would only be applicable in the case when the person is lawfully entitled
to such currency notes and relied on the order of the Trial Court which state that the seized amount
was properly not accounted for by the accused-petitioner and the source of seized cash was not clear
as to whether the same was legal or illegal.
8. In addition to this, Mr. Nayak, learned Special P.P. -Cum- Retainer Counsel(CBI) for the opposite
party submitted that the present case against the accused petitioner was registered pursuant to the
Hon'ble Supreme Court's orders in WP(C) No. 401 of 2013 and WP(C) No. 413 of 2013, treating FIR
No. 82 dated 14.05.2013 as the original FIR. During the investigation, it was revealed that investors
had deposited money with M/s IRL through its agents under various illegal schemes, amassing
approximately (cid:128)565 crores in between 2009-2014, out of which (cid:128)343 crores remained unpaid to
investors.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court, in Subrata Chattoraj v. Union of India3, noted the involvement of
influential persons and the need for further investigation into the money trail. In compliance, the
CBI probed deeper into the larger conspiracy, regulatory lapses, and financial misappropriation.
The investigation revealed that the accused-petitioner, Lakshman Srinivasan, conspired with the
Directors of M/s IRL and facilitated the formation of two Multi-State Credit Co-operative Societies,
M/s Golden Society and M/s Pride Society, using fraudulent means to bypass (2014) 8 SCC 768
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 6
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
regulatory scrutiny. The accused-petitioner received (cid:128)4.15 crores from M/s IRL without any legal
documentation, and misappropriated (cid:128)3.93 crores for personal gain.
Additionally, the petitioner has been involved in multiple similar scams, amounting to crores of
rupees misappropriated from the hard- earned money of the public. Furthermore, it is submitted
that the investigation still remains open under Section 173(8) Cr.P.C., 1973. In the preliminary
charge-sheet, it has conclusively established the petitioner's direct role in aiding and abetting the
illegal deposit schemes. Therefore, it is submitted that the present application is devoid of merit and
ought not to be entertained owing to the gravity and magnitude of economic offences caused by the
petitioner.
9. I have carefully scrutinized the materials placed before this Court and the judgment cited by both
the learned Counsel appearing for the parties. The larger picture emerging from the facts of the
present case is that petitioner and others targeted the innocent citizens, exploited them and
amassed huge wealth, sometimes resulting in cash currency hounding. When application for release
of said cash/currency of economic offences of such magnitude, the Courts become circumspective to
release the amount. However, the release of money ensures that the seized currency remains in
circulation, thereby aiding the national economy. If the money remains stagnant, it serves no
practical purpose and fails to contribute to economic activity. Currency is meant to be in circulation
to facilitate trade, commerce, and overall economic growth. Keeping large sums of money idle in
custody neither benefits the State nor the affected individuals. Instead, it restricts liquidity in the
financial system and prevents the owner from utilizing the funds for legitimate purposes.
10. In recent past when a question relating to the release of the currency note came before this Court
in the case of Santosh Kumar Tripathy Vs. State of Odisha4, this Court in the disposal order held
thus:
"4. Regard being had to the submissions made by the learned counsel and the facts of
the present case, I am inclined to allow the petition. The trial court is directed to
release the CRLMC No. 2631 of 2023, High Court of Orissa, Cuttack seized cash
deposited by the I.O. in the court in favour of the petitioner by preserving color
photographs of the currency notes. It is open for the trial court to impose any other
condition as deemed fit and proper."
Similar modus can be applied in the present case. Furthermore, in Santosh Kumar Tripathy v. State
of Odisha (supra), this Hon'ble Court recognized the importance of preserving the evidentiary value
of seized cash through colour photographs while ensuring that the currency itself remains available
for economic use. This principle aligns with broader economic considerations, where unnecessary
stagnation of monetary resources can hinder financial fluidity. Releasing the seized cash with proper
safeguards, such as the preparation of Panchnamas and photographic documentation, balances both
the interests of justice and economic utility.
Thus, allowing the release of the seized currency under appropriate conditions would not only
comply with legal precedents but also serve the larger public interest by ensuring that money
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 7
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
continues to contribute to the economy rather than remaining unutilized in the custody.
11. In light of the above discussion and considering the judicial precedents, this Court is inclined to
direct the release of the seized amount of (cid:128)15.00 lakhs (Fifteen Lakhs) to the accused petitioner,
subject to certain conditions that ensure both the integrity of the investigation and the smooth
conclusion of trial.
It is well established that money, as a movable property, should not remain stagnant in judicial
custody when it can be preserved through alternative means without prejudicing the prosecution's
case. In the lights of the judgements cited, the release of seized cash should be considered while
ensuring that its evidentiary value is duly preserved, which can be used for trial.
Accordingly, before releasing the amount, the following broad safeguards shall be ensured:
I. Preparation of a Detailed Panchnama - A formal record (Panchnama) of the seized
cash shall be prepared under the supervision of the trial court, documenting essential
details such as the total amount, denominations, serial numbers (where feasible), and
other relevant particulars.
II. Preservation of Colour Photographs - High-resolution colour photographs of the
seized currency shall be taken to ensure that its physical attributes are recorded for
evidentiary purposes. These photographs shall be signed by the investigating officer,
the accused petitioner, and two independent witnesses before being placed on record.
III. Security for the Released Amount - To balance the interests of justice and
financial security, the petitioner shall be required to furnish a bank guarantee
equivalent to 50% of the seized amount (i.e., (cid:128)7.50 lakh) which shall remain valid
until the conclusion of the trial. Additionally, the petitioner shall also secure the
remaining 50% (i.e., (cid:128)7.50 lakh) through the indemnification of any immovable
property or other financial security, to the satisfaction of the trial court, as an
assurance against potential liabilities arising from the case.
IV. Undertaking of Compliance - The petitioner shall submit an affidavit affirming
that the released amount shall remain available for restitution if required by the court
at a later stage, and that any misuse or misappropriation of the released amount shall
lead to immediate legal consequences.
With these conditions in place, the Court finds no justifiable reason to retain the
seized cash in judicial custody when its circulation could contribute to economic
activity without compromising the investigation or trial proceedings.
Similar course of action may be taken in such cases arising out of the jurisdiction of
this Court, keeping in mind the demand and need (which may vary) in different
cases.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 8
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
12. In addition to this, it is also desirable that not only regarding cash but also other materials which
are seized such appropriate action must be taken by the authorities and courts below to do the
needful and dispose of the items unless necessary to be in custody, which will additionally save the
resources of the state and will also aid in the well- being of the rightful owner.
By taking into consideration, the law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Sundarbhai
(supra) judgement and various other High Courts, this Court feels it expedient to cull out following
principles regarding disposal of the seized article in form of broader guidelines, which may not be
exhaustive but to some extent inclusive:
1. General Principles 1.1 Courts and investigating authorities must ensure that seized
property is not retained indefinitely without valid legal justification. It is imperative
to take steps for its prompt release or disposal unless required for an ongoing
investigation or trial. 1.2 The disposal process should adhere to the provisions of
Sections 451, 452, and 457 of the Criminal Procedure Code (Cr.P.C.) and be guided by
established judicial precedents. 1.3 The primary objective should be to prevent
unnecessary storage, avoid wastage of resources, and ensure that valuable assets
retain their utility keeping in mind the investigation and trial process is not
compromised.
2. Handling of Seized Cash 2.1 In cases involving seized currency, courts may
consider its release upon fulfilment of the following conditions:
(cid:129) High-resolution colour photographs should be taken for permanent
record-keeping.
(cid:129) A detailed panchnama should be prepared and signed by the investigating officer,
the claimant, and other relevant parties and/or witnesses.
(cid:129) Appropriate conditions or security bonds should be imposed to ensure compliance.
2.2 If immediate release is not feasible, the cash must be deposited in a nationalized
bank to prevent stagnation and contribute to the economy. Keeping cash in judicial
or police custody for extended periods serves no practical purpose.
3. Releasing of Bank Deposits/ Fixed Deposits 3.1 Bank deposits and/or fixed
deposits may be released against similar or varied amount of property securities or
bank guarantee made by the accused petitioner, as per the direction of the competent
authorities or court.
3.2 Such bank deposits/fixed deposits, shall not be released, in case when attachment
and/or confiscation proceeding regarding the same assets have already been
initiated. In such cases the release shall be decided by the competent court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 9
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
4. Disposal of Seized Vehicles
4. Vehicles that remain impounded in police stations deteriorate in value and become
unfit for use. To prevent such depreciation, courts and authorities must ensure their
early release by:
(cid:129) Verifying ownership and allowing release to the rightful owner upon submission of
a security bond and valid proof of ownership.
(cid:129) Ensuring that any legal dispute concerning ownership are resolved efficiently
through judicial orders. (cid:129) If a vehicle cannot be immediately returned, it should be
stored in a secure facility instead of being left exposed to damage.
(cid:129) If the rightful owner is untraceable or the vehicle is linked to a serious crime, the
court may order its auction or disposal through appropriate channels after preserving
appropriate records and photographs for the process of trial(in case linked to a
crime) subjecting the provisions of law.
5. Management of Precious Articles (Gold, Jewellery, and Valuables) 5.1 Precious
items such as gold, silver, and gemstones should not be kept in police custody for
extended periods. Instead, they should be stored in proper lockers or bank lockers
under court supervision. 5.2 If ownership is clear, the magistrate may order their
release after verification, ensuring that:
(cid:129) Photographic or video graphic evidence is recorded for reference. (cid:129) The claimant
provides a bond ensuring return if required for trial. 5.3 If ownership is contested or
the valuables are crucial evidence, they should be preserved under strict security
protocols until the matter is resolved.
6. Disposal of Seized Liquor and Narcotic Substances 6.1 Alcoholic beverages and
narcotic drugs must not be stockpiled unnecessarily. Authorities must ensure that:
(cid:129) Necessary samples are collected and properly sealed for forensic analysis and trial
purposes.
(cid:129) The remaining quantity is destroyed promptly after obtaining court approval in
accordance with law.
6.2 Large consignments of seized liquor should not be stored indefinitely in police
stations, as this poses logistical and security challenges. Once samples are preserved
for legal proceedings, the rest should be disposed of under proper supervision and in
accordance with law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 10
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
6.3 In narcotics cases, forensic examination of samples should be conducted without
delay, and the remaining substances should be disposed of as per the provisions of
the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act.
7. Perishable Goods and Agricultural Products 7.1 Perishable goods such as food and
agricultural produce must be handled on a priority basis to prevent spoilage. Courts
may consider:
(cid:129) Immediate release to the rightful owner, if legally permissible. (cid:129) Auctioning or
distribution through government agencies, in cases where the goods have no direct
claimant. 7.2 If required for legal proceedings, only small representative samples
should be retained, and the rest should be disposed of efficiently.
8. Firearms, Explosives, and Dangerous Weapons 8.1 Firearms, ammunition, and
explosives should be stored in designated armouries instead of police stations to
ensure safety and security.
8.2 If the weapons are lawfully owned, they may be returned to the rightful owner
after proper verification. However, if the arms are linked to criminal activities or pose
a public threat, courts may order destruction or forfeiture to the State.
8.3 Any delay in processing these items may pose safety hazards;
therefore, courts should prioritize their disposal.
9. Electronic Devices and Digital Evidence 9.1 Seized electronic devices, including mobile phones,
laptops, hard drives, other storage devices, surveillance footage and other such digital evidences,
must be handled with care to prevent tampering. Authorities should:
(cid:129) Create forensic copies or digital images of the data using proper digital forensic
tools so that the integrity of the digital evidences is not lost, before returning the
device. (cid:129) A proper chain of custody must be maintained on record to ensure
authenticity.
9.2 If the device is not crucial to the case, it should be released to the owner without
unnecessary delay. However, if it at all is a key piece of evidence and authenticity of
the digital evidence can be challenged at a later stage then strict storage protocols
must be followed for storing the evidence.
10. Disposal of Miscellaneous Seized Property
10.1 Items that do not fall under specific categories should be assessed based on their legal relevance
and economic value. 10.2 If an item is no longer required for investigation or trial, it should be:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 11
Lakshman Srinivasan vs Republic Of India (Cbi) ....... ... on 10 April, 2025
(cid:129) Returned to its rightful owner, if identifiable. (cid:129) Auctioned or disposed of, if no
claimant comes forward within a reasonable time.
10.3 Courts should introduce a time-bound review mechanism to prevent
unnecessary accumulation of seized goods.
11. Role of the Courts and Investigating Authorities
11.1 Magistrates should take proactive measures to ensure that seized property is not retained for an
extended period without justification. Court directives for the return or disposal of property should
be issued without undue delay.
11.2 Investigating officers must regularly report on seized property and seek judicial orders for its
appropriate handling. 11.3 A system of periodic review and compliance checks should be established
to prevent excessive backlog and mismanagement of seized assets.
By implementing aforementioned structured guidelines, courts and law enforcement agencies can
ensure that seized property is managed in a manner that is efficient, legally sound, and beneficial to
both the justice system and society at large.
The Registry of this Court is advised to transmit a copy of this judgment to all District Courts,
Special Courts, and other subordinate courts. Additionally, copies may also be forwarded to the
Director General of Police, Odisha Police Headquarters, and all other law enforcement agencies,
including the State Vigilance Directorate, Excise Department, Forest Department, and other
investigating agencies, for the purpose of guidance.
13. With the above observations and directions the CRLREV is allowed, subject to compliance with
the conditions as stipulated above.
(S.S. Mishra) Judge The High Court of Orissa, Cuttack Dated the 10th of April, 2025/ Swarna
Designation: Senior Stenographer Location: High Court of Orissa
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13460873/ 12
