Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
Author: Rajeev Ranjan Prasad
Bench: Rajeev Ranjan Prasad
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
CRIMINAL APPEAL (DB) No.374 of 2023
Arising Out of PS. Case No.-23 Year-2019 Thana- MAHILA PS District- Darbhanga
======================================================
Lal Babu Paramhans Son of Sitaram Mahto Resident of Village - Sisho West,
P.S.- Sadar (Mabbi O.P.), District - Darbhanga.
... ... Appellant
Versus
The State of Bihar
... ... Respondent
======================================================
Appearance :
For the Appellant : Mrs. Shama Sinha, Advocate
Mr. Surya Prakash, Advocate
Mr. Vijayansh Pratap Singh, Advocate
Ms. Aprajita, Advocate
For the State : Mr. Parmeshwar Mehta, APP
For the Informant : Mrs. Smiti Bharti, Advocate
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE RAJEEV RANJAN PRASAD
and
HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE SOURENDRA PANDEY
ORAL JUDGMENT
(Per: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE RAJEEV RANJAN PRASAD)
Date : 08-10-2025
Heard learned counsel for the appellant, learned counsel
for the informant and learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the
State.
2. The present appeal has been preferred for setting
aside the judgment of conviction dated 07.02.2023 (hereinafter
referred to as the 'impugned judgment') and the order of sentence
dated 17.02.2023 (hereinafter referred to as the 'impugned order')
passed by learned Exclusive Special Judge (POCSO Act),
Darbhanga (hereinafter called the 'learned trial court') in POCSO
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 1
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
2/35
G.R. Case No. 16 of 2019 arising out of Darbhanga (Mahila) P.S.
Case No. 23 of 2019.
3. By the impugned judgment, the appellant has been
convicted for the offence punishable under Sections 376(3), 506 of
the Indian Penal Code (in short 'IPC') and Section 6 of the
Protection of Children from Sexual Offences Act (in short
'POCSO Act'). By the impugned order, he has been sentenced to
undergo rigorous imprisonment for thirty years with a fine of
Rs.30,000/- under Section 376(3) IPC and in default of payment of
fine, he shall further undergo simple imprisonment for six months.
He has also been sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
thirty years with a fine of Rs.30,000/- under Section 6 of the
POCSO Act and in default of payment of fine, he shall further
undergo simple imprisonment for six months. He has further been
sentenced to undergo one year rigorous imprisonment with a fine
of Rs.5,000/- under Section 506 IPC and in default of payment of
fine, he shall further undergo simple imprisonment for one month.
All the sentences are to run concurrently.
Prosecution Case
4. The prosecution case is based on the written
application of the informant who is the mother of the victim (PW-
1) submitted to the S.H.O., Mahila Police Station, Laheriasarai,
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
3/35
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 2
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
Darbhanga. In her written application, she has stated that in the
evening at about 7:00 pm on 24.03.2019, Lal Babu Parmahans
who is residing in front of her house has committed rape upon her
daughter (PW-2) in mango orchard and on hearing her cry, some
villagers went there then found her anxious and the villagers saw
Lal Babu Paramhans running from there. The informant asked her
daughter then she disclosed weeping that earlier also the appellant
had committed rape with her and threatened to kill her parents by
showing pistol on disclosure of this matter to them. The informant
alleged that they are musclemen and after the occurrence, the
entire family of the appellant threatened the informant on visiting
her house and offered money to settle the dispute.
5. On the basis of this written application, Mahila P.S.
Case No. 23 of 2019 dated 26.03.2019 was registered under
Sections 376, 506 IPC and Section 4, 6 of the POCSO Act against
the appellant. After investigation, Police submitted chargesheet
bearing No. 95 of 2019 dated 25.09.2019 against this appellant
under Sections 376, 506 IPC and Section 4, 6 of the POCSO Act.
On the basis of the chargesheet, learned trial court vide order
dated 17.02.2020 took cognizance of the offences punishable
under above-mentioned sections. Charges were read over and
explained to the appellant in Hindi to which he pleaded not guilty
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
4/35
and claimed to be tried. Accordingly, vide order dated 09.01.2021,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 3
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
charges were framed under Sections 376(3), 506 IPC and Section 6
of the POCSO Act.
6. In course of trial, the prosecution examined as many
as nine witnesses and exhibited several documents to prove it's
case. The list of the prosecution witnesses and the list of exhibits
are being shown hereunder in tabular form:-
List of Prosecution Witnesses
PW No. Name of Witnesses Detail of witnesses
PW-1 Ms. Z The mother of the
victim/informant in this
case
PW-2 Ms. X The victim/injured in this
case
PW-3 Mr. Y The father of the victim
PW4 Ram Pukar Sahni Other witnesses
PW5 Nurul Nadaaf Other witness
PW6 Ram Jatan Mahto Other witness
PW7 Munni Kumari Investigating Officer (IO)
of this case.
(Police Witness)
PW8 Dr. Alka Mishra The Medical Officer
(MO) of this case who
has conducted the
medical examination of
victim.(Medical Witness)
PW9 Vikash Kumar Jha I/C Principal of Rajkiya
Madhaya Vidalya
Sisodih, Darbhanga.
List of Exhibits produced on behalf of Prosecution
Ext-P-1/PW1 Signature of mother of victim/informant PW1 (Ms. Z) in
this case on written application.
Ext-P-2/PW2 Signature of victim PW2 (Ms. X) on her statement recorded
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
5/35
u/s 164 of Cr. P.C.
Ext-P-3/PW3 Signature of father of victim (PW3) (Mr. Y) on written
report.
Ext-P-4/PW7 Endorsement in writing and signature of SHO on the
written application of informant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 4
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
Ext-P-5/PW7 Whole Formal FIR.
Ext-P-6/PW8 Entire medical Report in writing and signature of medical
officer (PW8)
Ext-P-7 Entire statement of victim recorded u/s 164 Cr.P.C.
Ext-P-8/PW9 The entry and date of birth mentioned in admission register
regarding admission of victim in primary school where the
victim had enrolled for schooling.
7. Thereafter, the statement of the appellant was recorded
under Section 313 of the CrPC. He took a plea that he is innocent.
The defence examined one witness, namely, Yogendra Mahto (DW-
1) and produced several documentary evidences. List of Exhibits
brought on behalf of the Defence is mentioned in tabular form
hereunder:-
List of Exhibits on behalf of Defence
Ext-D-1/DW1 Copy of application dated 14-03-2019 of
accused Lal Babu Paramhans filed before
Circle officer, Sadar of Darbhanga
regarding dispute of drainage.
Ext-D-2/DW1 Identity Card issued to Lal Babu
Paramhans regarding election of member of
Panchyat Samiti, Sishodih Paschimi.
Ext-D-3/DW1 Entry card of Lal Babu Paramhans issued
by election officer.
Ext-D-4/DW1 Original Scrutiny certificate issued by
election officer.
Ext- D-X/DW1 The photocopy of statement of election
result of member of Panchayat Samity
Shisho Paschimi.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
6/35
Findings of the Learned Trial Court
8. Learned trial court after appreciating the evidences
available on the record found that the victim in her testimony
before the court has substantially supported the allegation and
charges against the accused. The victim has also corroborated her
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 5
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
previous statement made under Section 164 Cr.P.C. Learned trial
court found that the parents of the victim has also supported the
case of the prosecution and the statement of the victim who came
to know about the occurrence from the victim just after the
occurrence.
9. Learned trial court found that the FIR was promptly
lodged and minor discrepancies and exaggeration can not done
away the statement of victim and statement of her parents.
10. Learned trial court found the statement of the victim
and her parents quite trustworthy and true disclosure of the facts,
hence the occurrence and the allegation against accused that the
accused has committed rape with the victim who was below the
age of 16 years at the time of occurrence and the accused has also
committed aggravated penetrative sexual assault with the victim
more than once which has been duly proved by the prosecution.
Accordingly, learned trial court convicted the appellant and
sentenced him as stated above.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
7/35
Submissions on behalf of the appellant
11. Mrs. Shama Sinha, learned counsel for the appellant,
has assailed the impugned judgment and order on various grounds.
It is submitted that in this case, the learned trial court has not
assessed/determined the age of the victim girl in accordance with
law. For purpose of determination of age, a photocopy of School
Transfer Certificate was produced, which was marked 'X' at the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 6
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
instance of the I.O. (PW-7). I.O. has stated that this photocopy was
made available to him by the parents of the victim. Referring to
the evidence of the In-charge Principal of Rajkiye Madhya
Shishodih, Darbhanga (PW-9), learned counsel submits that PW-9
produced admission register of the school pertaining to the year
2012-2017 and submitted that the victim was admitted in the said
school in Class-VI on 10.04.2015. In the said admission register,
the date of birth of the victim was mentioned as 16.10.2004,
however, PW-9 has admitted in paragraph '5' of his deposition that
no basis of entering the date of birth in the register is mentioned.
He has further stated that normally the guardians get admitted their
wards in the school by reducing the age to 2-3 years.
12. Learned counsel submits that in view of the judicial
pronouncements on the subject, the age determination has to take
place in terms of the Scheme of Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
8/35
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (hereinafter referred
to as the 'J.J. Act'). In this case, the first school admission register
was not produced and the School Transfer Certificate cannot fit in
the scheme of Section 94 of the J.J. Act. In this regard, reliance has
been placed on the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of P. Yuvaprakash vs. State Represented by Inspector of
Police reported in 2023 SCC OnLine SC 846.
13. Learned counsel further submits that a bare reading
of the evidence of the informant (PW-1) it would appear that she
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 7
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
has lodged the case on the basis of the information furnished to her
by the victim girl. The initial case of PW-1 was that the appellant
had taken the victim girl to the orchard on 24.03.2019 at 7:00 PM
and had committed rape on her. At that time, some villagers heard
the shouts of the victim girl and went there where the victim was
found ill-tempered. She asked her daughter as to what happened
then she told that earlier also the appellant had committed wrong
with her and had said that if she would disclose it to her parents,
then he would shoot her parents and her. He had also shown the
pistol and he is said to be an influential person. She also alleged
that after the occurrence, all the family members of the appellant
came to her house and threatened her to hush up the matter for
some consideration. In course of trial, however, she has stated that
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
9/35
she heard hulla and rumour about the occurrence whereupon she
asked her daughter as to what had happened and then she told the
entire story. She has stated that the written information was written
by one Munni Madam on which she had put her signature. She has
admitted that her daughter had not told her earlier about the
occurrence which had earlier taken place.
14. Learned counsel further submits that the evidence of
the victim (PW-2) would not inspire confidence. In her deposition,
she has stated that the house of the appellant is situated in front of
the house of the victim, opposite to the road. She had been
occasionally visiting the house of the appellant on occasion of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 8
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
marriage and some feast. The appellant has two sons and two
daughters. She has stated that the family of the accused is
comparatively rich and reputed. She was suggested by defence that
there was a dispute between the family of the accused and the
victim on account of drainage of water, but she denied the
suggestion. She admitted that her father had good relationship with
Nurul Naddaf and her father was working in the brick kiln of
Shoaib Khan. This witness has also admitted in paragraph '51' that
her father had gone to Shoaib Khan on the next day of the
occurrence to inform him about the occurrence which had taken
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
10/35
place with her and her father had also made a complaint to
Mukhiya and Sarpanch regarding the occurrence.
15. It is submitted that neither Shoaib Khan nor the
Mukhiya or Sarpanch have been examined in this case. The
defence case is that the appellant was having bitter relationship
with the people of the Muslim community, who were in majority
in the village, and it has come in the evidence of the prosecution
witnesses that the appellant had contested election of Panchayat
Samiti Member against Nihal Ahmed Khan.
16. Learned counsel further submits that it has come in
the evidence of the father of the victim, who has deposed as PW-3,
that there are sauchalaya in the courtyard of the house but PW-3
has stated that the sauchalaya are of his brothers. The submission
is that it cannot be believed that despite there being sauchalaya in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 9
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
the courtyard of the house of the victim, she would go to the
orchard to defecate in the late evening. PW-1 has stated about
good relationship with her husband's brother family but no one of
them has supported the prosecution case. It is pointed out that the
mother and father of the victim have said differently about how
they came to know about the occurrence and when they came to
know it. They are materially inconsistent and their statement
would not inspire confidence.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
11/35
17. Learned counsel further submits that in this case two
prosecution witnesses, namely, Ram Pukar Sahni (PW-4) and Ram
Jatan Mahato (PW-6) have not supported the prosecution case.
They have also not been declared hostile. All these witnesses have
stated that there were enmity between the parties. Father of the
victim works in the brick kiln of Shoaib and Shoaib Khan has got
the case lodged through the father of the victim by instigating him.
PW-4 has stated that in the panchayat election, Lal Babu
Paramhans (the appellant) and Shoaib Khan both had contested for
the post of Mukhiya and this witness has also stated that there was
a dispute on playing of loudspeakers on the occasion of marriage
of the niece of Lal Babu. PW-4 has stated that there is no
complaint against Lal Babu Paramhans in the village and the
society. He lives peacefully with all the villagers.
18. It is submitted that Noorul Naddaf (PW-5) who has
good relationship with the father of the victim has stated that he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 10
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
had come to know that there was a quarrel at the time of marriage
of the niece of Lal Babu on playing of band baja which was
passing through the Masjid. He has stated that except this case, he
had not heard about any complaint against Lal Babu. He has also
confirmed that Lal Babu had contested election. It is submitted
that though this witness has deposed in his examination-in-chief
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
12/35
that he had seen Lal Babu fleeing away when he was going from
the village towards the orchard where is his gaushala and had seen
2-4 ladies present there but on a scrutiny thereof the same would
not be reliable. He has not stated any material circumstance
showing involvement of the appellant in commission of any sexual
assault upon the victim.
19. It is also submitted that Ram Jatan Mahato (PW-6)
has neither deposed on the occurrence nor on the circumstances
after the occurrence. This witness has been cross-examined by
defence and in his cross-examination, this witness has
categorically stated in paragraph '10' that Lal Babu Paramhans has
been implicated by all these people in a false case.
20. It is further submitted that I.O. (PW-7) has
categorically deposed that she had not found any abnormal mark
of either movement or dragging at the place of occurrence which
was shown to her. She had taken over charge of investigation on
26.03.2019
and had produced the victim girl for the first time in court on 28.03.2019. The victim had stated in
her statement about giving of Rs. 200 by the appellant though it was not mentioned in the written
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 11
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
application or in the restatement. The I.O. has stated in paragraph '24' that the independent witness
Ram Jatan Mahato had said that Lal Babu Paramhans has four children, there is no Patna High
Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 complaint against him, he is a person of good
moral and character and prior to this occurrence, there were disputes between both the families on
account of drainage of dirty water and for that reason a false case has been registered. I.O. has also
stated in paragraph '25' that Ram Pukar Sahni (PW-4) had stated that the allegations against Lal
Babu Paramhans are false and he has been falsely implicated on account of dispute over drainage of
water and also due to local politics. The I.O. has recorded in paragraph '26' of her deposition that
the victim had submitted an application for getting compensation. She has also contradicted the
statement of the informant as according to her, the informant had not stated either in her written
statement or in her restatement that two days prior to Holi when the victim had gone to ease
out/defecate at 6-7:00 PM then the accused had committed rape on her and one day after Holi when
she had gone to defecate then the accused pulled her and showed pistol and threatened her to kill.
The informant had only stated that the accused had said that if she would tell it to her mother and
father then she would be killed.
21. Learned counsel submits that it is a clear case of false implication of a reputed person in the
village only because of the quarrel between the two families, taking advantage of the same Shoaib
Khan and other local political opponents of the appellant, Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of
2023 dt.08-10-2025 who belong to another community, hatched a conspiracy and falsely implicated
the appellant. It is pointed out that the doctor (PW-8) has clearly opined that there was no
conclusive evidence to show commission of sexual intercourse with emission with her. There was no
injury either external or internal on the body of the victim. It is submitted that if a forcible act of
rape could have been committed on the victim in the orchard, then some mark of injury on her back
or any other part of the body would have been definitely there but that has not been found.
Submissions on behalf of the State and the Informant
22. On the other hand, learned Additional Public Prosecutor for the State as well as learned counsel
for the informant have opposed the appeal. It is submitted that in this case the alleged occurrence
took place on 24.03.2019. Her date of birth as mentioned in the school admission register is
16.10.2004 and the doctor has assessed her age between 14-15 years. Thus, there cannot be any
dispute that the victim was a minor at the time of occurrence.
23. Learned counsel further submits that to prove the prosecution case it is not required to prove
that there must be some external or internal injury on the body of the victim. It is submitted that in
this case, the sole testimony of the victim (PW-2) may be Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of
2023 dt.08-10-2025 relied upon to sustain the conviction of the appellant. Save and except some
minor contradictions in the prosecution evidence, there is no major contradiction to disbelieve the
prosecution case.
Consideration
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 12
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
24. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the trial court's records. On perusal
of the records, we find that so far as the age of the victim girl is concerned, the prosecution has
brought on record a photocopy of School Transfer Certificate which was marked 'X' at the instance
of the I.O. (PW-
7) but it has not been proved later on in accordance with law. The In-charge Headmaster of the
school (PW-9) produced a school admission register of Class-VI showing that the victim was
admitted in the said school on 10.04.2015 in Class-VI. Thus, this is not the first school admission
register of the victim. The date of birth of the victim recorded in the said register is 16.10.2004. In
view of the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of P. Yuvaprakash (supra), the
School Transfer Certificate cannot be relied upon to prove the age of the victim. However, we find
that in this case, the doctor (PW-1) has also opined that the medical examination of the victim
revealed her age between 14-15 years. A plus/minus two years with the same would also lead to a
maximum upper extremity age of only seventeen years, therefore, the victim Patna High Court CR.
APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 (PW-2) in this case would come in the category of a child
as defined under Section 2(d) of the POCSO Act.
25. At this stage, we would therefore examine as to whether the victim (PW-2) in this case may be
taken as a sterling witness so as to rely upon her testimony for purpose of conviction of the appellant
and further we would also examine whether the appellant has been able to demonstrate that it is a
case of false implication because of his local rivalry particularly because he was contesting elections
against some persons who did not like him.
26. On going through the evidences on the record, we have noticed that in this case, the first
occurrence of rape is said to have been committed two days prior to Holi festival. The victim (PW-2)
has stated in her evidence that about two years ago, there was a shop in her house which was being
run by her mother, sister, father and brother were also attending their shop. She has stated in
paragraph '36' of her deposition that four days prior to Holi festival, the appellant had given her 200
rupees at her shop. He had not purchased anything but just went away after giving Rs. 200. There
was no one else at that time at the shop. She has stated that she had not opposed to the giving of that
money and had not asked that why the appellant had given that money to her. In paragraph '41' she
has also stated that she had not disclosed this fact of Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of
2023 dt.08-10-2025 giving of Rs. 200 to her mother, father, brother, sister and uncle. The accused
has said not to disclose it but except that he had not said anything else. Having said so in paragraph
'42', this witness again says that she had disclosed this fact to her mother, father, brother and sister
after 4-5 days. She has stated in her deposition that she had gone in the orchard to defecate two days
prior to Holi festival in the orchard of one Lakshmi Ram and one day after Holi festival also she had
gone in the orchard of Lakshmi Ram. She had gone alone in the orchard. She had received threat on
the first day but she had not disclosed it to her mother and father. She disclosed the second
occurrence to her mother and father and at that time only her mother, father and sister were there.
She has stated in paragraph '57' that she had told the Magistrate and police that two days prior to
Holi when she had gone to defecate then the appellant was present there from before who pulled her
there and committed rape on her.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 13
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
27. In paragraph '58' she has stated that after one day of Holi when she had again gone to defecate at
about 6-7 PM, the appellant had committed rape on her and threatened her by showing gun that if
she would tell it to anyone then her parents and she would be killed. In paragraph '60' she has stated
that she had objected to the occurrence which took place with her. She was Patna High Court CR.
APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 dragged for 9-10 feet and during this she had also shouted
but on her shoutings no woman came. She has stated that some boys came after she had already
been raped. She has stated that when the appellant was present there then she had shouted and boys
had come. She had started shouting immediately when he had caught hold of her and within 3-4
minutes thereafter the boys had come and during this period in order to save herself 'uthapatak'
with her and the appellant kept on going and there were soil on her body and her leg was also
injured, her backside had bruises due to dragging and her hands were injured. On analysis of this
part of the evidence of PW-2 it appears that prior to the first occurrence, she had been given Rs. 200
by the appellant but without saying anything that why the money is being given to her. She did not
disclose this to her parents immediately and two days prior to Holi, she says that she had gone to the
orchard where rape was committed. During the commission of rape at first instance, there is no
allegation that any threat was given to the victim (PW-2) by the appellant but she chose not to
disclose it to her parents.
28. This Court further finds that regarding the second occurrence she has stated that it took place
one day after Holi festival and this time the appellant had shown her gun and threatened her to kill
and committed rape on her but in the same Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023
dt.08-10-2025 deposition, the victim (PW-2) says that the moment the appellant caught hold of her
hand, she started shouting and within 3-4 minutes some boys came there, during this period she
was trying to save herself and in the said exercise 'uthpatak' between the accused and the victim
were going on in which the victim has sustained injury also. This statement of the victim in
paragraph '60' of her deposition is completely contrary to paragraph '58' of her deposition where
she has stated that the appellant had committed rape with her by showing threat of gun. The victim
has not disclosed the name of the boys who had arrived within 3-4 minutes in the orchard. She has
stated that the whole body was having soils, she had suffered bruises on her leg and back as also
injured her hand but the doctor (PW-8) has categorically stated that no injury or stains were found
on external or internal part. There was no injury either external or internal on the body of the
victim.
29. The medical examination report (Exhibit 'P-6/PW-8') clearly rules out the story made by PW-2
in paragraph '60' of her deposition. Thus, it can be safely held that the story propounded by PW-2
that there were 'uthapatak' for 3-4 minutes and then the boys had come in the orchard are only an
afterthought which have been developed in course of trial. This medical report gets further
strengthened from the deposition of the I.O. (PW-7) who has Patna High Court CR. APP (DB)
No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 clearly stated in paragraph '19' of her deposition that at the place of
occurrence, which was shown to her, she had not found any sign of movement of any person or
dragging of any person. She had not found any abnormal circumstance at the place of occurrence.
This Court, therefore, finds it unsafe to rely upon the testimony of PW-2 as regards the place and
manner of occurrence. It cannot be believed that the appellant will give Rs. 200 to the victim
without saying anything and then the victim would go to the orchard two days prior to Holi where
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 14
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
the appellant would be present from before and would commit rape on her which she would not
disclose to her parents.
30. This Court further finds that in paragraph '64' of her deposition, the victim (PW-2) has stated
that she had given information about the occurrence after 4-5 days of Holi at 8:00 PM in her house
where her parents and sister were present. Her parents were very angry. They disclosed this
occurrence to Mukhiya and Sarpanch and bade papa. She has stated that Nihal Ahmad @ Chhote
Khan is a Member of the Panchayat Samiti. She has stated that Mukhiya and Sarpanch advised to
lodge a complaint in Mabby Police Station. She was suggested by the defence that Mukhiya and
Sarpanch had called the media people but the witness denied her awareness regarding this. It is
evident from her deposition that the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
present case was lodged on the advice of Mukhiya and Sarpanch. In this background, the defence
has suggested that because of the local politics, the particular community to which Mukhiya and
Sarpanch belong to and at the instance of Shoaib Khan, under whom her father was working, the
present case was lodged. The victim denied this suggestion, however, we find from the evidence of
the father of the victim that he has stated in paragraph '6' that he came to know about the
occurrence when there was a rumour in the whole village in the same night when the second
occurrence had taken place. According to him, the villagers were talking to each other regarding the
occurrence on which he had asked his wife and then he came to know about the occurrence. Thus,
PW-3 claims that he had come to know about the occurrence on the very next day of the occurrence.
At the same time, the mother of the victim (PW-1) has also stated in paragraph '35' that her
daughter had given the information regarding the occurrence one day after the occurrence in the
morning at 6-7:00 AM whereafter on the next day she had gone to the police station. It is, thus,
evident that two days after the alleged second occurrence, the informant had gone to the police
station to lodge the present case after the Mukhiya and Sarpanch told her to lodge the case in Mabby
Police Station. Thus, PW-1, PW-2 and PW-3 are materially inconsistent on the Patna High Court CR.
APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 point of information with regard to the occurrence
available to them. PW-1 has stated that her husband had not submitted any written complaint to
Sarpanch or in Mabby O.P.
31. As regards the enmity between the prosecution side and the appellant, there are sufficient
materials on the record. In this regard, we refer the evidence of PW-1. She denied her awareness
that the appellant had contested Panchayat Election. In paragraph '22' of the deposition, she denied
the suggestion that the appellant had given an application to the Circle Officer against drainage
water but we find that through defence witness no. 1, the appellant has brought on record the
acknowledgment receipt of the application dated 14.03.2019 of the clerk in the Circle Office as
Exhibit D-1/DW-1 and the identity card of the candidate issued by the Panchayat Election Officer
showing that the appellant was a candidate for member of Panchayat Samiti, he has also proved the
candidate entry pass in the name of the appellant of 2016 Panchayat Election. These documents are
Exhibits 'D-2/DW-1' and 'D-3/DW-1' respectively. From Exhibit 'D-4/DW-1' and Exhibit
'D-X/DW-1', it is further proved that the appellant had contested the Election. DW-1 has stated that
the appellant had lost the Election to his opponent Mohd. Nehal Ahmad. Despite all this, PW-1
denied her knowledge that the appellant had contested Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of
2023 dt.08-10-2025 Panchayat Election. This conduct of PW-1 shows that she was trying to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 15
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
suppress the fact that there were enmity between the appellant and her family on account of
drainage of water and that there was local political rivalry between the appellant and some persons
of a particular community.
32. This Court further finds that when the victim came to depose as PW-2, she was also suggested by
the defence that there was dispute over drainage of dirty water of the sewerage and in this
connection, a quarrel had taken place between the appellant and her mother but PW-2 denied the
suggestion. Thus, she also tried to suppress this quarrel on account of drainage of sewerage water.
In her deposition, PW-2 has admitted in paragraph '27' that her father has good relationship with
Nurul Naddaf. It is evident that the father of the victim was having good relationship with the
opponents of the appellant. She has also stated in paragraph '51' of her deposition that her father
had gone to the brick kiln owner Shoaib Khan to tell him about the occurrence. It is evident from the
deposition of PW-2 that her father was in the company of the local political opponents of the
appellant, therefore, the case of the defence that the appellant has been framed in a false case cannot
be thrown away. There are ample materials on the record to prove the bad relationship between the
parties.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
33. On behalf of the prosecution, Ram Pukar Sahni (PW-
4) has been examined as an independent witness. He is a neighbour of the informant and knows the
appellant also. In his examination-in-chief, he has stated that the appellant and the informant had
regular quarrel over drainage of the sewerage water. He has also stated that on the occasion of
marriage (matkor) of the niece of the appellant, Shoaib Khan and his 2-4 persons had come near
Masjid and beaten the band baja people on playing the bands, due to this, both the parties had
enmity. PW-4 has further stated that the father of the victim works in the brick kiln of Shoaib and it
is Shoaib Khan who has got a case lodged falsely implicating the appellant by instigating the father
of the victim. In his cross- examination, PW-4 has stated that there is no complaint in the village
and the society against the appellant. The Muslim community is in majority in the panchayat and
they do not behave well with the Hindu community. In paragraph '9' of his deposition, this witness
has stated that the appellant lives peacefully in the village.
34. This witness has though deposed against the prosecution's case, he has not been declared hostile
by the prosecution. Similarly, another independent witness, Ram Jatan Mahato (PW-6) has not
deposed in favour of the prosecution. He Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023
dt.08-10-2025 has deposed on the line of PW-4 only. In paragraph '7' of his deposition, this witness
has stated that on the occasion of the marriage (matkor) of the niece of the appellant, there were
quarrel between the two groups and the people of a particular community had threatened the
appellant that he would bear the consequences. This witness has stated in paragraph '10' that those
people had falsely implicated the appellant. This witness is also a neighbour of the informant. He
has stated that the two brothers and other members of the family of the father of the victim had not
supported this case and therefore they have not deposed in favour of the prosecution. This witness
has also not been declared hostile.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 16
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
35. What will be the effect of not declaring PW-4 and PW-6 hostile may be found in the judgment of
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case of Mukhtiar Ahmed Ansari vs. State (NCT of Delhi) reported in
(2005) 5 SCC 258. Paragraph '30' and '31' of the said judgment are being extracted hereunder for a
ready reference:-
"30. A similar question came up for consideration before this Court in Raja Ram v.
State of Rajasthan, (2005) 5 SCC 272. In that case, the evidence of the Doctor who
was examined as a prosecution witness showed that the deceased was being told by
one K that she should implicate the accused or else she might have to face
prosecution. The Doctor was not declared "hostile". The High Court, however,
convicted the accused. This Court held that it was open to the defence to rely on the
evidence of the Doctor and it was binding on the prosecution.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025
31. In the present case, evidence of PW 1 Ved Prakash Goel destroyed the genesis of
the prosecution that he had given his Maruti car to police in which police had gone to
Bahai Temple and apprehended the accused. When Goel did not support that case,
accused can rely on that evidence."
36. In the case of Raja Ram vs. State of Rajasthan reported in (2005) 5 SCC 272, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has held that the testimony of PW-8 Dr. Sukhdev Singh would be binding on the
prosecution because he was not declared hostile by the Public Prosecutor in the trial court. On the
strength of these judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, this Court would conclude that the
evidence of PW-4 and PW-6 would be binding upon the prosecution as they have not been declared
hostile.
37. So far as the evidence of Nurul Naddaf (PW-5) is concerned, in his examination-in-chief, he has
stated that at about 6:00 PM, he was going from his village towards the orchard where his gaushala
is situated, he saw the appellant fleeing away, after some time, he saw that in the orchard 2-4
women and men were standing. This evidence of PW-5 in his examination-in-chief would not
inspire confidence for the reason that the victim (PW-2) has stated in her evidence that when the
appellant caught hold of her hand, she started shouting but on shouting no women had come in the
orchard, after 3-4 minutes some boys had come. According to PW-2, at that time, the darkness had
already Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 prevailed and she has
categorically stated in her deposition that she had identified the appellant by his voice. In paragraph
'59', she has stated that at the time when occurrence had taken place, the night was dark and there
were darkness at the place of occurrence. PW-5 has admitted in paragraph '3' of his deposition that
he had not received any notice from court to depose. He had come to depose on the asking of the
father of the victim with whom he had good relationship. This witness has also admitted in his
cross- examination that he had heard about the quarrel which had taken place at the time of
marriage of the niece of the appellant on playing of the band baja near the Masjid. In his deposition,
he has stated that he had seen the appellant going towards the village, at that time it was 6:00 PM
and there were light (ujala), he had seen 4-5 ladies and gents but he cannot say their names and he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 17
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
had not seen them by face. It is evident that the statement of PW-5 is in complete contradiction with
the evidence of the victim (PW-2) with regard to the conditions prevailing at the place of occurrence
at the relevant time and the presence of any women.
38. Munni Kumari (PW-7) in this case is the Sub-
Inspector of Police who has given a completely different place of occurrence and according to her,
the place of occurrence in this case is situated one kilometre south to the house of the informant
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 and up to 500 metres, there are
houses whereafter there are mango and bamboo orchards. She has stated that the place of
occurrence is said to be the orchard of Lakshmi Ram. In the north, there is orchard of Mirjapur
people which is looked after by the appellant, in south there is a wheat field of Panchkari Yadav, in
east there is orchard of Kalar Yadav and in west, there is mango orchard of Vishnu Yadav. The
victim has, however, stated that there are 40-50 houses in between her house and the orchard and
after 40 houses from her house, the orchard starts but according to the I.O. the place of occurrence
is 500 metres inside the orchard. She says "?kVukLFky okfnuh ds ?kj ls yxHkx 1 fdeh nf{k.k gSA
ftlesa 500 ehVj rd ?kj gSA mlds ckn vke ,oa ckal dk cxhpk 'kq: gksus ls 500 ehVj ckn bl dkaM dk
?kVukLFky y{eh jke dk vke dk cxhpk gSA "
39. It is evident from the deposition of the I.O. that at least half kilometre inside the orchard of
mango and bamboos, the occurrence is said to have taken place. It is highly unbelievable that the
victim would go to defecate in the dark evening/night 500 metres inside the orchard. This is another
circumstance which seems highly improbable and falsifies the prosecution story. The I.O. (PW-7)
has clearly stated in paragraph '19' of her deposition that at the place of occurrence, she had not
found any sign of movement of persons or dragging or any other abnormal Patna High Court CR.
APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 circumstance. To this Court, therefore, there is no iota of
doubt that the prosecution has miserably failed to prove the place of occurrence and the whole story
of the victim that the occurrence had taken place when she had gone to defecate in the orchard of
Lakshmi Ram is not duly proved.
40. We have already taken note of the evidence of doctor (PW-8) who has stated that there was no
injury either external or internal on the body of the victim. If the victim would have indulged in
'uthapatak' for 3-4 minutes at the place of occurrence in the orchard and she claimed that she had
suffered injury on her back, leg and hands, the medical examination of the victim (PW-2) would
have definitely revealed at least some scratches on her back but nothing of that sort has been found.
41. In the present case, this Court is also required to take note of Section 29 of the POCSO Act which
reads as under:-
"29. Presumption as to certain offences.- Where a person is prosecuted for
committing or abetting to commit any offence under Sections 3, 5, 7 and Section 9 of
this Act, the Special Court shall presume, that such person has committed or abetted
or attempted to commit the offence, as the case may be unless the contrary is
proved."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 18
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
42. In the case of Veerpal @ Titu versus State (CRL.A.223/2023 dated 15th April, 2024), the
Hon'ble Delhi High Court has dealt with the presumptions provided under Section 29 of the POCSO
Act. This Court has discussed the case Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023
dt.08-10-2025 laws in the case of Subrata Biswas and Another versus State reported in 2019 SCC
Online Cal 1815, State of Kerala reported in (2019) 1 KLT 935 and in the case of Heera Das Vs. State
of Bihar & Anr. reported in 2025 (2) BLJ 517. Paragraph '33', '34' and '35' of the judgment in the
case of Heera Das (supra) are quoted hereunder for a ready reference:-
"33. In the case of Veerpal @ Titu (supra), the Hon'ble Delhi High Court has
discussed the kind of presumption provided under Section 29 of the POCSO Act.
Paragraph '20' of the judgment in the case of Veerpal @ Titu (supra) is quoted
hereunder for a ready reference:-
"20. Section 29 of POCSO Act provides that Court shall presume that the accused has
committed the offence for which he is charged with, until contrary is proved.
However, the presumption would operate only when the prosecution proves the
foundational facts in the context of allegation against the accused beyond reasonable
doubt. After the prosecution establishes the foundational facts, the presumption
raised against the accused can be rebutted by discrediting the prosecution witnesses
through cross-examination and demonstrating the gaps in prosecution version or
improbability of the incident or lead defence evidence in order to rebut the
presumption by way of preponderance of probability. Keeping the same in
perspective, the prosecution in the first instance is required to establish the
foundational fact that the incident, as alleged, was conveyed by the victim to her dadi
(grandmother) on 16.09.2016 (i.e. the day of lodging of FIR). However, the evidence
and statements during investigation, as discussed above, reflect different dates of
alleged communication of the incident, which throws a doubt on the prosecution
version. In view of above, in absence of foundational fact not being Patna High Court
CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 proved beyond reasonable doubt, the
reliance placed upon presumption under Section 29 & 30 of POCSO Act by learned
Trial Court to base conviction, appears to be misplaced. Taking in the alternative,
even if the foundational facts are considered to be proved, to make the presumption
under Section 29 of POCSO Act, the same stands discredited by way of discrepancies
brought in cross-examination of the victim, PW3 and witnesses examined in defence.
The presumption of guilt under Section 29 & 30 of POCSO Act taken by the learned
Trial Court could not be an edifice to convict the appellant since testimony of victim
is unreliable and there are serious flaws and gaps in the prosecution case. As a
wrongful acquittal shakes the confidence of people, a wrongful conviction is far
worse. A child abuser in the eventuality of false implication even continues to suffer a
blot of social stigma which is much more painful than the rigours of a trial and
imprisonment. Prosecution case is marred by inadequacies and contradictions which
strike to the root of prosecution case and, as such, prosecution has failed to bring
home the charge against the accused beyond reasonable doubt.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 19
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
For the foregoing reasons, appeal is allowed and the judgment and order on sentence
passed by the learned Trial Court is set aside. Appellant is acquitted and be released
forthwith, if not required in any other case.
Pending applications, if any, also stand disposed of.
A copy of this judgment be forwarded to the Jail Superintendent and the learned
Trial Court for information and compliance. A copy be also provided to the appellant,
free of cost."
34. Similarly, in the case of Subrata Biswas (supra), the Hon'ble Division Bench of Calcutta High
Court has discussed the scope of statutory presumption under Section 29 of the POCSO Act, 2012.
Paragraphs '22' and '23' of the judgment in the case of Subrata Biswas (supra) are quoted hereunder
for a ready reference:-
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 "22. The statutory
presumption applies when a person is prosecuted for committing offence under
Sections 5 and 9 of the Act and a reverse burden is imposed on the accused to prove
the contrary. The word "is prosecuted" in the aforesaid provision does not mean that
the prosecution has no role to play in establishing and/or probablising primary facts
constituting the offence. If that were so then the prosecution would be absolved of the
responsibility of leading any evidence whatsoever and the Court would be required to
call upon the accused to disprove a case without the prosecution laying the firm
contours thereof by leading reliable and admissible evidence. Such an interpretation
not only leads to absurdity but renders the aforesaid provision constitutionally
suspect. A proper interpretation of the said provision is that in a case where the
person is prosecuted under Section 5 and 9 of the Act (as in the present case) the
prosecution is absolved of the responsibility of proving its case beyond reasonable
doubt. On the contrary, it is only required to lead evidence to establish the
ingredients of the offence on a preponderance of probability. Upon laying the
foundation of its case by leading cogent and reliable evidence (which does not fall
foul of patent absurdities or inherent probabilities) the onus shifts upon the accused
to prove the contrary. Judging the evidence in the present case from that perspective,
I am constrained to hold that the version of the victim (PW-1) and her mother
(PW-2) with regard to twin incidents of 24th March, 2016 and 18th April, 2016 if
taken as whole, do not inspire confidence and runs contrary to normal human
conduct in the backdrop of the broad probabilities of the present case.
23. Hence, I am of the opinion that the evidence led by the prosecution to establish
the primary facts suffer from inherent contradictions and patent improbabilities
particularly the inexplicable conduct of the victim herself. One part of the
prosecution case improbabilises the Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023
dt.08-10-2025 other part to such an extent that no man of reasonable prudence
would accept the version as coming from the witnesses. Hence, I am of the opinion
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 20
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
that the factual matrix of the case does not call for invocation of the aforesaid
statutory presumption so as to convict the appellant on the charges levelled against
him."
35. The same views have been expressed by the Hon'ble Kerala High Court in the case of Joy versus
State of Kerala reported in (2019) 1 KLT 935. It has been held that the duty to rebut the presumption
arises only after the prosecution has established the foundational facts of the offence alleged against
the accused and the court must be on guard to see that the application of presumption, without
adverting to essential facts shall not lead to injustice. In the present case, the foundational facts such
as that the victim was taken away by the appellant at 11:00 am by alluring her after giving a biscuit
and then the rape was committed inside the house has not been established. The prosecution story
as discussed in the written report giving rise to the present FIR and then the evidence of PW-7 are
materially inconsistent and this Court has discussed hereinabove why the evidence of PW-7 would
not inspire confidence."
43. In a case under POCSO Act, the presumption of innocence of an accused would not belie. In the
case of Ramanand vs. State of U.P. reported in AIR 2022 (SC) 5273, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has
held in paragraph '99' and '101' as under:-
"99. It is sufficient if the accused person succeeds in proving a preponderance of
probability in favour of his case. It is not necessary for the accused person to prove
his case beyond a reasonable doubt or in default to incur a verdict of guilty. The onus
of proof lying upon the accused person is to prove his case by a preponderance of
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 probability. In
American Jurisprudence, 2nd Edn., Vol. 30, the expression "preponderance of
evidence" has been defined in Article 1164. In America the term means "the weight,
credit and value of the aggregate evidence on either side, and is usually considered to
be synonymous with the term greater weight of the evidence", or "greater weight of
the credible evidence". It is a phrase which, in the last analysis, means probability of
the truth. To be satisfied, certain, or convinced is a much higher test than the test of
"preponderance of evidence". The phrase "preponderance of probability" appears to
have been taken from Charles R. Cooper v. F.W. Slade Charles R. Cooper v. F.W.
Slade, (1857-59) 6 HLC 746. The observations made therein make it clear that what
"preponderance of probability" means "more probable and rational view of the case",
not necessarily as certain as the pleading should be.
101. The inalienable interface of presumption of innocence and the burden of proof in
a criminal case on the prosecution has been succinctly expounded in the following
passage from the treatise The Law of Evidence, 5th Edn. by Ian Dennis at p. 445:
"The presumption of innocence states that a person is presumed to be innocent until
proven guilty. In one sense this simply restates in different language the rule that the
burden of proof in a criminal case is on the prosecution to prove the defendant's guilt.
As explained above, the burden of proof rule has a number of functions, one of which
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 21
Lal Babu Paramhans vs The State Of Bihar on 8 October, 2025
is to provide a rule of decision for the fact-finder in a situation of uncertainty.
Another function is to allocate the risk of mis-decision in criminal trials. Because the
outcome of wrongful conviction is regarded as a significantly worse harm than
wrongful acquittal the rule is constructed so as to minimise the risk of the former.
The burden of overcoming a presumption that the defendant is innocent therefore
requires the State to prove the defendant's guilt.""
44. In our considered opinion, the appellant in this case has been able to demonstrate in his favour
by way of preponderance of probability of his false implication in this case.
Patna High Court CR. APP (DB) No.374 of 2023 dt.08-10-2025 As we have held that the victim
(PW-2) in this case cannot be said to be a sterling witness and the evidences available on the record
do not corroborate her testimony by any stretch of imagination, this Court is of the considered
opinion that the impugned judgment and order cannot sustain and the appellant has made out a
case of acquittal giving him benefit of doubt. Accordingly, we set aside the impugned judgment and
order. The appellant is acquitted of the charges giving him benefit of doubt. He shall be released
forthwith if not wanted in any other case.
45. This appeal is allowed.
46. Let a copy of this judgment together with the trial courts' record be sent down to the learned
trial court.
(Rajeev Ranjan Prasad, J) (Sourendra Pandey, J) Rishi/-
AFR/NAFR
CAV DATE
Uploading Date 10.10.2025
Transmission Date 10.10.2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/114128808/ 22
