Lal Sahab Bairagi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 15 May, 2019
Lal Sahab Bairagi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 15 May,
2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 MP 1818
Bench: S.K. Seth, R.S.Jha, Nandita Dubey, Rajeev Kumar Dubey, Sanjay
Dwivedi
1
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH JABALPUR
LARGER BENCH
Writ Petition No.16549 of 2016
Lal Sahab Bairagi
S/o. Late Madhavdas Bairagi,
Aged about 74 years, Retired
Chief Municipal Officer,
Majhouli, District Jabalpur,
M.P., R/o. Ward No.7, Sihora,
District Jabalpur, M.P.
...Petitioner
V/s.
1. State of Madhya Pradesh through
Secretary, Nagriya Vikas Avam
Paryavaran Vibhag, Mantralaya,
Vallabh Bhawan, Bhopal, M.P.
2. Deputy Secretary, Nagriya Vikas
Avam Paryavaran Vibhag,
Mantralaya, Vallabh Bhawan,
Bhopal, M.P.
3. Deputy Director,
Nagriya Vikas Avam Paryavaran
Vibhag, Mantralaya, Vallabh
Bhawan, Bhopal, M.P.
4. Chief Executive Officer,
Nagar Palika Parishad, Majhouli,
District Jabalpur, M.P.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15599631/ 1
Lal Sahab Bairagi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 15 May, 2019
..Respondents
2
Shri Vipin Yadav, Advocate, for the
petitioner.
Shri Rajendra Tiwari, Advocate
General with Shri Shashank Shekhar,
Additional Advocate General for the
respondent-State.
Present:
HON'BLE CHIEF JUSTICE S.K. SETH,
HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE R.S.JHA,
HON'BLE SMT. JUSTICE NANDITA DUBEY,
HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE RAJEEV KUMAR DUBEY,
HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE SANJAY DWIVEDI JJ.
O R D E R
(Delivered on 15th May, 2019) Per Seth C.J.
1. This reference to the Full Bench arises on the following facts.
2. Petitioner was posted as a Chief Municipal Officer, Majholi. He was prosecuted and convicted by
the Special Judge (PC Act) for offences punishable under Section 409, 120B of the IPC and Section
13(i)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,1988. The learned trial Judge found
him guilty, therefore convicted and sentenced him to undergo period of sentence awarded. Against
the conviction and sentence, petitioner preferred a Criminal Appeal and this Court has suspended
the jail sentence awarded to the petitioner. After retirement, by order dated 8.8.2016, State
Government forfeited pension of the petitioner.
3. Petitioner challenged the order dated 8.8.2016 in this Court and contended that the said order is
unsustainable in law as no opportunity of hearing was afforded to him before passing the order
dated 8.8.2016. In support of the contention, reliance was placed on the full Bench decision in the
case of Ram Sewak Mishra Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh reported in 2017 (4) MPLJ 482 wherein the
majority approved the decision of the learned single judge in Dau Ram Maheshwar Vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh reported in 2017 (1) MPLJ 640.
4. The Division Bench before which the above writ petition came up for hearing, doubted the
correctness of the majority view taken in Ram Sewak Mishra (supra) and by order dated 26.11.2019
referred the matter for consideration of the larger Bench. That is how the matter has come up for
hearing before us.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15599631/ 2
Lal Sahab Bairagi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 15 May, 2019
5. The following questions have been referred to this Larger Bench:-
"1. Whether in view of the specific exclusion of the procedure for providing hearing
incorporated in Rule 8(3) of the Pension Rules of 1976, in respect of the cases falling
under Rule 8(2), the same can be insisted upon in the light of the Full Bench decision
in the case of Ram Sewak Mishra (supra) ?
2. Whether the Full Bench judgment in the case of Ram Sewak Mishra (supra)
deserves to be re-examined and reconsidered in view of the words "in a case not
falling under Sub-rule 2"
clearly and specifically incorporated in Rule 8(3) of the Pension Rules of 1976 ?
3. Whether the authority is required to issue a show cause notice prior to passing of an order in
terms of Rules 8 and 9 of the Pension Rules of 1976, in cases of withdrawal of pension or part
thereof on account of conviction in a criminal case?"
6. It is well settled that payment of pension to a pensioner is regulated by the
provisions of M.P. Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1976, and that the same has been
made statutorily subject to future good conduct of the pensioner. The provisions of
Rule 8 of the M.P. Civil Services (Pension) Rules, 1976, is reproduced herein below
for ready reference :-
"8. Pension subject to future good conduct. - (1) (a) Future good conduct shall be an
implied condition of every grant of pension and its continuance under these rules.
(b) The pension sanctioning
authority may, by order in
writing withhold or withdraw a
pension or part thereof, whether permanently or for a specified period, if the
pensioner is convicted of a serious crime or is found guilty of grave misconduct:
Provided that no such order shall be passed by an authority subordinate to the
authority competent at the time of retirement of the pensioner, to make an
appointment to the post held by him immediately before his retirement from service:
Provided further that where a part of pension is withheld or withdrawn, the amount
of such pension shall not be reduced below [the minimum pension as determined by
the Government from time to time].
(2) Where a pensioner is convicted of a serious crime by a Court of law, action under
clause (b) of sub-rule (1) shall be taken in the light of the judgment of the Court
relating to such conviction.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15599631/ 3
Lal Sahab Bairagi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 15 May, 2019
(3) In a case not falling under sub-rule (2), if the authority referred to in sub-rule (1)
considers that the pensioner is prima facie guilty of grave misconduct, it shall before
passing an order under sub-rule (1)-
(a) serve upon the pensioner a notice specifying the action proposed to be taken
against him and the ground on which it is proposed to be taken and calling upon him
to submit, within fifteen days of the receipt of the notice or such further time not
exceeding fifteen days as may be allowed by the pension sanctioning authority, such
representation as he may wish to make against the proposal; and
(b) take into consideration the representation, if any, submitted by the pensioner
under clause
(a).
(4) Where the authority competent to pass an order under sub-rule (1) is the
Governor, the State Public Service Commission shall be consulted before the order is
passed.
(5) An appeal against an order under sub-rule (1); passed by any authority other than
the Governor, shall lie to the Governor and the Governor shall in consultation with
the State Public Service Commission pass such order on the appeal as he deems fit.
Explanation. - In this rule,-
(a) the expression "serious crime"
includes a crime involving an offence under the Official Secrets Act 1923 (No. 19 of 1923);
(b) the expression "grave
misconduct" includes the
communication or disclosure of
any secret official code or pass word or any sketch, plan, model, article, note, document or
information such as is mentioned in Section 5 of the Official Secrets Act, while holding office under
the government so as to prejudicially affect the interests of the general public, or the security of the
country. [Note - The Provisions of this rule shall also be applicable to family pension payable under
Rules 47 and 48. The authority competent to make an appointment to the post held by the deceased
Government servant/ pensioner immediately before the death or retirement from the service, as the
case may be, shall be the competent authority to withhold or withdraw any part of family pension."
7. From the perusal of Rule 8 as reproduced here in above, it is clear that pension sanctioning
authority may by an order in writing withhold or withdraw a pension or part thereof if the pensioner
is convicted of a serious crime or is found guilty of grave misconduct. The pension can be withheld
or withdrawn permanently or for a specified period. Rule 8(2) deals with cases of pensioner who has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15599631/ 4
Lal Sahab Bairagi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 15 May, 2019
been convicted in a Criminal Case while Rule 8(3) deals with cases of pensioner found guilty of
grave misconduct.
8. From a perusal of the provisions of Rule 8(3) of the Rules of 1976, it is clear that the said
provision prescribes that where an authority considers a pensioner prima facie guilty of grave
misconduct, it shall, before passing an order under Sub-rule (1) of Rule 8 of the Rules of 1976, serve
upon the pensioner a notice specifying the action proposed to be taken against him; the ground on
which the action is proposed to be taken; call upon him to submit a representation within 15 days or
any further time that is extended by the authority, take into consideration the representation filed
by the pensioner and thereafter pass an order.
9. It is, however, apparent from a bare perusal of the first few words of Rule 8(3) of the Rules of
1976, that the aforesaid procedure prescribed for passing orders against the pensioner in cases
where he is prima facie guilty of grave misconduct, has no applicability to cases falling under Rule
8(2) of the Rules of 1976 which deals with the action to be taken against a pensioner convicted by a
Criminal Court. The starting words of Rule 8(3) of the Rules of 1976, "In a case not falling under
sub-rule (2)", make it abundantly clear and state in no uncertain terms, that the provisions of Rule
8(3) of the Rules of 1976, shall apply only to those cases that do not fall under Sub-rule (2) of Rule 8
of the Rules of 1976.
10. A perusal of Rule 8 of the Rules of 1976, makes it further clear that the category of cases that fall
under Rule 8(2) of the Rules of 1976, are those cases in which action has been taken in the light of
the judgment of the Court where the pensioner is convicted of a serious crime by a Court of law and
that while taking such action, the elaborate procedure prescribed under Rule 8(3) of the Rules of
1976, would not apply as the same has been expressly excluded by the opening words of Rule 8(3) of
the Rules of 1976. Rule 8(2) of the Rules of 1976, does not contemplate giving of an opportunity of
hearing when the pension is withheld or withdrawn on account of conviction of a serious crime.
11. The aforesaid aspect and interpretation of the Rules is apparent from a bare perusal and reading
of the Rules. The language of Rule 8(3) of the Rules of 1976, is simple, unambiguous and clear and
leads to no other interpretation, meaning or conclusion.
12. In view of the clear and unambiguous language of the provisions of Rule 8(3) of the Rules of
1976, which incidentally was neither considered nor brought to the notice of the Full Bench in the
case of Ram Sewak Mishra vs. State of M.P. and another (supra), it is held that the principles of
natural justice cannot be read into Rule 8(2) of the Rules of 1976, as they are statutorily and
expressly excluded by the opening words of Rule 8(3) of the Rules of 1976.
13. The principles of natural justice or holding of an enquiry is neither a universal principle of justice
nor inflexible dogma. The principles of natural justice are not incapable of exclusion in a given
situation. For example, Article 311(2) of the Constitution, which essentially embodies the concept of
natural justice, itself contemplates that there may be situations which warrant or permit the non-
applicability of the principles underlying Article 311(2) of the Constitution. Reference may be made
to the second proviso to Article 311 of the Constitution. The Supreme Court in Union of India vs
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15599631/ 5
Lal Sahab Bairagi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 15 May, 2019
Tulsiram Patel AIR 1985 SC 1416 = (1985)3 SCC 398 had in terms of Art 311 ruled that not only, can
the principles of natural justice be modified but in exceptional cases they can even be excluded.
14. The Rule 8(2) enables the authority to exercise power under Rule 8(1)(b) upon conviction of
serious crime in the light of the Judgment of the criminal court. While doing so, it must consider
whether his conduct which has led to his conviction was such as warrants the
withholding/withdrawing of pension. For that purpose it will have to peruse the judgment of the
criminal court and consider all the facts and circumstances of the case. This, however, has to be
done by it ex parte and by itself and without hearing the concerned pensioner reason of the
exclusionary effect of the starting words of Rule 8(3) upon exercise of powers under Rule 8(2) of the
1976 Rules.
15. In view of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in the case of Tulsiram (supra), which is fully
applicable to the present case as well, the authority must, however, bear in mind that a conviction
on a criminal charge does not automatically entail withdrawal or withholding of pension. This can
be done in the light of the judgment of the Court relating to such conviction. No direction for taking
action in the judgment of the criminal Court is necessary or required for taking action under Rule
8(2) of the Rules of 1976. This authoritative judgment of the Supreme Court was completely
overlooked by the learned Single Bench while deciding Dau Ram Maheshwar case(supra) on the
basis of decision of Chhatisgarh High Court. The majority view in Ram Sewak Mishra(supra)
wrongly did not apply the decision of Tulsi Ram Patel (supra) to the Rules of 1976. On the other
hand the earlier Full Bench in Laxmi Narayan Hayaran v. State of M.P. reported in 2004(4) MPLJ
555 after considering the relevant case law including Tulsi Ram Patel (supra), correctly held that no
prior hearing is required before passing an order under Rule 8(2) of 1976 Rules consequent upon
conviction.
16. The upshot of the whole discussion is that the decision of the Single Bench as well as the Full
Bench in Ram Sewak v. State of M.P.(supra) does not lay down the correct law, while the earlier Full
Bench decision in Laxmi Narayan Hayaran v. State of M.P. (supra) lays down the correct law.
17. The answer to the questions referred to this Larger Bench is given accordingly by clearly stating
that:-
(i) The principles of natural justice are specifically and expressly excluded and have
no application to the cases falling under Rule 8(2) of 1976 Rules in view of the
opening words of Rule 8(3) of the Rules of 1976, therefore, when an action is taken
against the pensioner under Rule 8(2) of the Rules of 1976, no notice is required to be
issued to the pensioner nor can he insists upon prior opportunity of representation
on the strength of the principles of Natural Justice.
(ii) The decision of the Full Bench in the case of Ram Sewak Mishra (supra) and the
decision in the case of Dau Ram Maheshwar (supra) are hereby over-
ruled.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15599631/ 6
Lal Sahab Bairagi vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 15 May, 2019
(iii) It is held that the authority is not required to issue notice or afford prior opportunity of
representation before passing the order under Rule 8(2) of the Pension Rules of 1976, in respect of a
pensioner who has been convicted in the criminal cases. However, the power of the authority to take
action under the Rules would be subject to the guidelines as stated by the Supreme Court in the case
of Tulsiram Patel (supra) and reiterated by this Bench in the preceding paragraphs of this judgment.
18. The Reference made to the Larger Bench is answered accordingly. The petition may now be
placed before the appropriate Bench as per Rules and Roster, for further orders.
(S.K.Seth) (R.S.Jha) (Smt. Nandita Dubey)
Chief Justice Judge Judge
(Rajeev Kumar Dubey) (Sanjay Dwivedi)
Judge Judge
rao
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/15599631/ 7
