Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Digitally
KABOR signed by
AMBAM KABORAMBA
M SAPANA
SAPAN CHANU
Date:
A 2022.05.23
CHANU 13:58:45
+05'30'
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
MC (Cril. A.) No. 20 of 2021
Ref: Cril. Appeal No. 2 of 2021
Lalremkima, aged about 30 years, S/o (L) Soitinkhup of Moreh Super Market
Ward No. 2, P.O. & P.S. Moreh, District-Tengnoupal, Manipur-795131.
......Applicant
Sougaijam Robindro Singh, aged about 29 years, S/o S. Ibotombi Sing of
Kakching Wairi Thongam Leikai, P.O., P.S. & District-Kakching, at present
Moreh Super Market Ward No. 2, P.O & P.S. Moreh, District-Tengnoupal,
Manipur-795131. .... Accused person
-Versus-
The State of Manipur, through Officer-in-Charge NAB Police Station, Old
Nambulane, Imphal West District, Manipur-795001.
......Respondent.
B E F O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
For the petitioner : Mr. H. Kenajit, Advocate
For the respondent : Mr. Y. Ashang, PP
Date of Hearing : 11.04.2022
Date of Order : 23.05.2022.
ORDER
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 1
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
[1] Heard Mr. H. Kenajit, learned counsel appearing for the applicant and Mr. Y. Ashang, learned PP
appearing for the respondent. [2] The present application had been filed on behalf of the
above-named accused person, Mr. Sougaijam Robindro Singh, by his brother in law with a MC
(Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 1 prayer for suspending the operation of the impugned conviction
order dated 27.11.2020 and sentence order dated 07.12.2020 and to release the above name
convicted person on bail during the pendency of the connected appeal. [3] The learned Special
Judge (ND&PS), Manipur passed the impugned judgment and order dated 27.11.2020 in Special
Trial Case No. 13 of 2019, holding the above name accused person guilty and convicted him under
section 29 read with section 21 (b)/ 22 (c) of the ND&PS Act, 1985 and passed the order dated
07.12.2020 sentencing him to undergo twelve years R.I. with a fine of Rs. 1,00,000/- (Rupees one
lakh only). [4] In support of the prayer made in the present application, the learned counsel for the
applicant raised the following two grounds:-
(a) the prosecution has totally failed to prove the alleged seizure of the contrabands
from the possession or at the instance of the aforesaid convicted person inasmuch as,
the independent witnesses did not corroborate with the statements of the PWs No. 1
& 2, who are interested witnesses;
(b) search and seizure was carried out without complying with the mandatory
provisions of section 41 (2) and 42 (1) & (2) of the ND&PS Act, 1985, inasmuch as, the
information obtained by the concerned officers about commission of the offence was
not taken down in writing and produced before the Trial Court during the course of
the Trial.
MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 2
[5] In connection with the first ground raised by the learned counsel for
the applicant, it has been submitted that as per the prosecution story two
independent witnesses were present at the time of search and seizure of the
contrabands from the possession of the convicted persons. However, during the Trial,
the prosecution produced only one of the independent witness, viz, Lemapokpam
Michael (PW No. 3), who clearly stated in his cross-
examination that he puts his signature in the seizure memo dated 04.05.2018 at the NAB Police
Station, Imphal and that he had never visited Moreh in his life.
The learned counsel further submitted that the said PW No. 3 was not declared by the prosecution
as a hostile witness and accordingly, the statements given by the said independent witness cannot be
ignored and that on consideration of the statements given by the said PW No. 3, it is crystal clear
that he was never present at the time of search and seizure of the contraband from the possession of
the convicted person.
Mr. H. Kenajit submitted that section 100 (4) & (5) of the CrPC mandates that a search should be
carried out in the presence of two independent witnesses and the list of all things seized in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 2
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
course of such search should be signed by two independent witnesses, however, in the present case
no independent witnesses were present at the time of the search and seizure and accordingly, the
prosecution had totally failed to establish the seizure of the contrabands from the possession of the
convicted persons. According to the learned counsel, such lapses on the part of the MC (Cril.A.) No.
20 of 2021 Page 3 prosecution vitiates the trial and the conviction of the accused persons is liable to
be set aside.
[6] It has also been submitted by the learned counsel for the applicant that the learned Special
Judge (ND&PS), Manipur convicted the accused persons solely on the testimony of the PW No. 1
and PW No. 2, who are both Police Officers and interested witnesses and accordingly, the impugned
judgment and order passed by the learned Special Judge (ND&PS), Manipur is not sustainable in
the eyes of law and deserves to be quashed and set aside. In support of his contentions, the learned
counsel cited the following judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court:-
(1) "Naresh Kumar Alias Nitu vs. State of Himachal Pradesh"
reported in (2017) 15 SCC 684 "7. The public bus, on which the appellant was
travelling, was going from Nerwa to Chamunda. The ticket issued to the appellant
Ext. DX, proved by the bus conductor DW 2, bears the time of issuance 6.51 a.m.,
visible to the naked eye. The distance from Nerwa to Majhotli, is 26 km as deposed by
DW 1. We find substance in the submission on behalf of the appellant, that the
travelling time for the bus, in the hills, for this distance would be one hour or more.
Prima facie, the prosecution story that the appellant was apprehended at Majhotli at
6.15 a.m. becomes seriously doubtful if not impossible. The bus would have reached
Majhotli at about 8.00 a.m. or thereafter only. The conclusion of the High Court that
passage of time, and memory loss, were sufficient explanation for the time difference,
is held to be perverse, and without proper consideration of Ext. DX. PW 2, the
independent witness has stated that he was stopped at Majhotli by the police at 10.30
a.m. and was allowed to leave after verification of his motorcycle papers. The witness
has specifically denied that the appellant was apprehended in his presence and that
any MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 4 search, seizure and recovery was conducted in
his presence. He had deposed that he was called to the police station at 1.00 p.m. and
asked to sign the papers. The witness was declared hostile. This aspect has not been
considered by the High Court, which proceeded on the only assumption that the
signatures were admitted."
"8. In a case of sudden recovery, independent witness may not be available. But if an
independent witness is available, and the prosecution initially seeks to rely upon him,
it cannot suddenly discard the witness because it finds him inconvenient, and place
reliance upon police witnesses only. In the stringent nature of the provisions of the
Act, the reverse burden of proof, the presumption of culpability under Section 35,
and the presumption against the accused under Section 54, any reliance upon Section
114 of the Evidence Act in the facts of the present case, can only be at the risk of a fair
trial to the accused. Karamjit Singh v. NCT of Delhi is distinguishable on its facts as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 3
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
independent witness had refused to sign because of the fear of terrorists. Likewise S.
Jeevanantham v. State also does not appear to be a case where independent
witnesses were available."
"10. In the facts of the present case, and the nature of evidence as discussed, the
prosecution had failed to establish the foundational facts beyond all reasonable
doubt. The Special Judge committed no error in acquitting the appellant. The High
Court ought not to have interfered with the same. The submissions regarding non-
compliance with Section 50 of the Act, or that the complainant could not be the
investigating officer are not considered necessary to deal with in the facts of the
case."
(2) "Noor Aga Vs. State of Punjab & Another" reported in (2008) 16 SCC 417 "109. In Baldev Singh it
was stated: (SCC p. 199, para 28) "28. This Court cannot overlook the context in which the NDPS
Act Operates and particularly the factor of widespread illiteracy among persons subject to
investigation for drug offences. It must be borne in mind that severer the punishment, greater has
MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 5 to be the care taken to see that all the safeguards provided in a
statute are scrupulously followed. We are not able to find any reason as to why the empowered
officer should shirk from affording a real opportunity to the suspect, by intimating to him that he
has a right 'that if he requires' to be searched in the presence of a gazetted officer or a Magistrate, he
shall be searched only in that manner. As already observed the compliance with the procedural
safeguards contained in Section 50 are intended to serve a dual purpose--to protect a person against
false accusation and frivolous charges as also to lend credibility to the search and seizure conducted
by the empowered officer. The argument that keeping in view the growing drug menace, an
insistence on compliance with all the safeguards contained in Section 50 may result in more
acquittals does not appeal to us. If the empowered officer fails to comply with the requirements of
Section 50 and an order or acquittal is recorded on that ground, the prosecution must thank itself
for its lapses. Indeed in every case the end result is important but the means to achieve it must
remain above-board. The remedy cannot be worse than the disease itself. The legitimacy of the
judicial process may come under cloud if the court is seen to condone acts of lawlessness conducted
by the investigating agency during search operations and may also undermine respect for the law
and may have the effect of unconscionably compromising the administration of justice. That cannot
be permitted."
"111. In a case of this nature, where there are a large number of discrepancies, the
appellant has been gravely prejudiced by their non-examination. It is true that what
matters is the quality of the evidence and not the quantity thereof but in a case of this
nature where procedural safeguards were required to be strictly complied with, it is
for the prosecution to explain why the material witnesses had not been examined.
The matter might have been different if the evidence of the investigating officer who
recovered the material objects was found to be convincing. The statement of the
investigating officer is wholly unsubstantiated. There is nothing on MC (Cril.A.) No.
20 of 2021 Page 6 record to show that the said witnesses had turned hostile.
Examination of the independent witnesses was all the more necessary inasmuch as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 4
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
there exist a large number of discrepancies in the statement of official witnesses in
regard to search and seizure of which we may now take note.
[7] In connection with the second ground raised by the applicant, Mr. H. Kenajit,
learned counsel submitted that under section 41 (2) and section 42 (1) & (2) of the
ND&PS Act, 1985, it is mandated that if an empowered officer has reason to believe
from personal knowledge or information given by any person that any person has
committed an offence punishable under the Act, such knowledge or information
should be taken down in writing. The learned counsel further submitted that the
provisions under section 41 and 42 of the ND&PS Act are mandatory and any
violation or non-compliance with the said provisions by the prosecution would vitiate
the trial. In the present case, PW No. 1, who is the I.O. of the case, clearly stated in his
deposition that one of the accused person, viz, Abdul Wahab disclosed that another
accuse namely Chal Mawii Duhlian was involved in the case and that the second
accuse disclosed that her son in law S. Robindro Singh and her daughter Lalrozami
Duhlian, were also involved in the case. According to the learned counsel, there were
two disclosers by two different accused persons at different point of time, however,
neither the SP (NAB) nor the I.O. of the case, to whom such disclosers were made,
did not take down in writing such discloser/information and produced any document
as evidence before the Trial Court as mandated under section 41 and 42 of the
ND&PS Act and that MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 7 such lapses on the part of the
prosecution vitiates the conviction of the accused persons and the impugned
conviction and sentence are liable to quash and set aside.
In support of his contentions, the learned counsel cited the following judgments:-
(1) "State of Punjab Vs. Balbir Singh" reported in (1994) 3 SCC 299 "25. The
questions considered above arise frequently before the trial courts, Therefore we find
it necessary to set out our conclusions which are as follows:-
(1) ****** (2-A) Under Section 41(1) only an empowered Magistrate can issue warrant
for the arrest or for the search in respect of offences punishable under Chapter IV of
the Act etc. when he has reason to believe that such offences have been committed or
such substances are kept or concealed in any building, conveyance or place. When
such warrant for arrest or for search is issued by a Magistrate who is not empowered,
then such search or arrest if carried out would be illegal. Likewise only empowered
officers or duly authorized officers as enumerated in Sections 41(2) and 42(1) can act
under the provisions of the NDPS Act. If such arrest or search is made under the
provisions of the NDPS Act by anyone other than such officers, the same would be
illegal.
(2-B) Under Section 41(2) only the empowered officer can give the authorisation to his subordinate
officer to carry out the arrest of a person or search as mentioned therein. If there is a contravention,
that would affect the prosecution case and vitiate the conviction.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 5
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
(2-C) Under Section 42(1) the empowered officer if has a prior information given by any person, that
should necessarily be MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 8 taken down in writing. But if he has reason
to believe from personal knowledge that offences under Chapter IV have been committed or
materials which may furnish evidence of commission of such offences are concealed in any building
etc. he may carry out the arrest or search without a warrant between sunrise and sunset and this
provision does not mandate that he should record his reasons of belief. But under the proviso to
Section 42(1) if such officer has to carry out such search between sunset and sunrise, he must record
the grounds of his belief.
To this extent these provisions are mandatory and contravention of the same would affect the
prosecution case and vitiate the trial.
(3). Under Section 42(2) such empowered officer who takes down any information in writing or
records the grounds under proviso to Section 42(1) should forthwith send a copy thereof to his
immediate official superior. If there is total non-compliance of this provision the same affects the
prosecution case. To that extent it is mandatory. But if there is delay whether it was undue or
whether the same has been explained or not, will be a question of fact in each case."
2. "State of W.B. and Others vs. Babu Chakraborthy" reported in (2004) 12 SCC 201.
"17. In view of the above, Section 42(2) also stood violated. The proviso to Section
42(1) requires that where an officer has reason to believe that a search warrant or
authorisation cannot be obtained without affording opportunity for the concealment
of evidence or facility for the escape of an offender, he may enter and search such
building, conveyance or enclosed place at any time before sunset and sunrise after
recording the grounds of his belief."
"18. We have perused the evidence Ied in this regard. Neither PW 4 nor PW 2
deposed that he had complied with the procedure under Section 42(1) and the
proviso to Section 42(1) and Section 42(2) before they conducted the search. It is
alleged by them that on search certain polythene bags containing heroin were
recovered.
MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 9 According to them, two independent witnesses of
the locality Swapan Kumar Samanta and Ramkaran Prasad were taken and they
witnessed the search. But unfortunately, these witnesses were not examined and no
attempts were made to summon them at the trial. In fact, PW 2 S.K. Dutta, on a
specific question in cross-examination, deposed that no search memo was prepared
and, PW 4 K.L. Meena said he does not remember if any search memo was prepared.
Further, it is alleged that they came to Memari PS at 11.30 p.m. and Ext. 1 GD entry
was prepared. This GD entry shows that the seized articles were recovered from the
bedroom of the accused. The accused was also arrested on 5-5-1989. Thereafter, the
case was made over to PW 3 and after receiving the report from the Central Public
Health and Laboratories, the accused was sent up for trial. The trial court convicted
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 6
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
the accused and punished the respondent for offences under Section 21 of the Act and
sentenced him to undergo 10 years' RI and pay a fine of Rs 1 lakh."
"23. Great significance has been attached to the mandatory nature of the provisions,
keeping in mind the stringent punishment prescribed in the Act. This Court has
attached great importance to the recording of the information and the ground of
belief since that would be the earliest version that will be available to a court of law
and the accused while defending his prosecution. This Court also held that failure to
comply with Section 42(1), proviso to Section 42(1) and Section 42(2) would render
the entire prosecution case Suspect and cause prejudice to the accused.
"24. In the cases of Abdul Rashid Ibrahim Mansuri v. State of Gujarat, Koluttumottil
Razak v. State of Kerala, Beckodan Abdul Rahiman v. State of Kerala and in the case
of Chhunna v. State of M.P. this Court has held that the non-compliance with the
provisions of the proviso to Section 42 of the Act which is mandatory, the action was
held illegal and the conviction of the accused was set aside. This Court also held that
the onus to prove compliance lies on the prosecution and in the absence of any
prosecution evidence about the compliance with the mandatory procedure, the
presumption would be that the procedure was not complied with."
MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 10 "25. In the case of Saiyad Mohd. Saiyad Umar
Saiyad v. State of Gujarat this Court held that the prosecution is obliged to give
evidence of the search and all that transpired in its connection. It is very relevant that
the prosecution witnesses speak about the compliance with the mandatory procedure
and if the evidence to this effect is not given, the court must assume that the person
to be searched was not informed of the protection. The court must find that the
possession of illicit articles under the Act was not established. It has been held that
when the officer has not deposed that he had followed the procedure mandated, the
Court is duty-bound to conclude that the accused had not had the benefit of the
protection that the Act affords; that, therefore, his possession of articles under the
Act is not established and that the precondition for his having satisfactorily
accounted for such possession had not been met; and to acquit the accused."
"27. Though these observations were made in a case to which Section 50 applies, in
view of the pronouncement of the judgment of three Judges of this Court in Abdul
Rashid Ibrahim Mansuri v. State of Gujarat the approach by the Court in interpreting
the law for the non-compliance with Section 42 and Section 50 must remain the
same. In this case, PW 2 and PW 4 and any other prosecution witness do not speak
about the compliance with the mandatory provisions of Section 42(1), proviso to
Section 42 (1) and Section 42 (2).
"28. It has been held that in any case where mandatory provisions are not complied
with and where independent mahazar witnesses are not examined, the accused would
be entitled to be acquitted and that any seizure in violation of the mandatory
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 7
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
provisions would be inadmissible since these provisions are in the nature of statutory
safeguards."
On the basis of the submissions made above, the learned counsel for the petitioner prayed for
passing an interim order staying the operation of the MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 11 impugned
judgments and orders and for releasing the convicted person on bail during the pendency of the
connected appeal.
[8] With regard to the first ground raised by the applicant, it has been submitted by Mr. Y. Ashang,
learned PP that two witnesses i.e., PW No. 1 (I.O. of the case) and PW No. 2 (DySP/Gazetted
Officer), who were present at the time of seizure of the contraband from the possession of the
convicted persons gave their statements about the said seizure and their statements cannot be
shaken by the defense. The learned PP also submitted that the accused persons did not raised any
objection or point out that the said PW No. 1 and more particularly PW No. 2 bear such enmity
against the accused persons so as to implicate them falsely and that in the absence of any such
objection or ground, the evidences given by the PW No. 1 and PW No. 2 or their deposition cannot
be discarded merely on the ground that they belong to the police force and are either interested in
the investigation or in the prosecution. The learned PP further submitted that since the PW No. 2 is
a Gazetted Officer, the statements given by him of the seizure of the contraband from the possession
or at the instance of the accused persons, which remained unshaken, are trustworthy and totally
reliable and that the Trial Court had convicted the accused persons after elaborate considerations on
this point and by relying in a number of Supreme Court judgments. The learned PP, accordingly
submitted that no ground has been made out by the applicant for interfering with the impugned
judgment and order.
MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 12 In support of his contentions, the learned PP cited the judgment
rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of "Madhu alias Madhuranatha and Anr. vs. State of
Karnataka" reported in AIR 2014 SCC 394, wherein as in held as under:-
"10. Learned counsel for the appellants has vehemently argued that in some of the
recoveries, though a large number of people were available, but only police personnel
were made recovery witnesses. Thus, the whole prosecution case becomes doubtful.
The term 'witness' means a person who is capable of providing information by way of
deposing as regards relevant facts, via an oral statement, or a statement in writing,
made or given in Court, or otherwise.
In Pradeep Narayan Madgaonkar and Ors. v. State of Maharashtra, AIR 1995 SC 1930
: (1995 AIR SCW 2988), this Court dealt with the issue of the requirement of the
examination of an independent witness, and whether the evidence of a police witness
requires corroboration. The Court held that though the same must be subject to strict
scrutiny, however, the evidence of police officials cannot be discarded merely on the
ground that they belong to the police force and are either interested in the
investigation or in the prosecution. However, as far as possible the corroboration of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 8
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
their evidence on material particulars should be sought.
(See also: Paras Ram v. State of Haryana, AIR 1993 SC 1212 : (1993 AIR SCW 169);
Balbir Singh v. State (1996) 11 SCC 139; Kalpnath Rai v. State (Through CBI), AIR
1998 SC 201 : (1997 AIR SCW 4166); M. Prabhulal v. Assistant Director, Directorate
of Revenue Intelligence, AIR 2003 SC 4311 : (2003 AIR SCW 4975); and Ravinderan
v. Superintendent of Customs, AIR 2007 SC 2040 : (2007 AIR SCW 3100)).
"11. Thus, a witness is normally considered to be independent unless he springs from
sources which are likely to be tainted and this usually means that the said witness has
cause to bear such enmity against the accused so as to implicate him falsely. In view
of the above, there can be no MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 13 prohibition to the
effect that a policeman cannot be a witness or that his deposition cannot be relied
upon if it inspires confidence. "12. This Court in Laxmibai (dead) Thr. L.Rs. and Anr.
v. Bhagwantbuva (dead) Thr. L.Rs. and Ors., AIR 2013 SC 1204 : (2013 AIR SCW
949) examined a similar issue and held:
"Furthermore, there cannot be any dispute with respect to the settled legal
proposition, that if a party wishes to raise any doubt as regards the correctness of the
statement of a witness, the said witness must be given an opportunity to explain his
statement by drawing his attention to that part of it, which has been objected to by
the other party, as being untrue. Without this, it is not possible to impeach his
credibility. Such a law has been advanced in view of the statutory provisions
enshrined in Section 138 of the Evidence Act, 1872, which enable the opposite party
to cross- examine a witness as regards information tendered in evidence by him
during his initial examination-in-chief, and the scope of this provision stands
enlarged by Section 146 of the Evidence Act, which permits a witness to be
questioned, inter alia, in order to test his veracity. Thereafter, the unchallenged part
of his evidence is to be relied upon, for the reason that it is impossible for the witness
to explain or elaborate upon any doubts as regards the same, in the absence of
questions put to him with respect to the circumstances which indicate that the
version of events provided by him, is not fit to be believed, and the witness himself, is
unworthy of credit. Thus, if a party intends to impeach a witness, he must provide
adequate Opportunity to the witness in the witness box, to give a full and proper
explanation. The same is essential to ensure fair play and fairness in dealing with
witnesses. (See: Khem Chand v. State of Himachal Pradesh, AIR 1994 SC 226 : (1993
AIR SCW 3675); State of U.P. v. Nahar Singh (dead) and Ors., AIR 1998 SC 1328 :
(1998 AIR SCW 1200); Rajinder Pershad (Dead) by L.Rs. v. Darshana Devi (Smt),
AIR 2001 SC 3207 : (2001 AIR SCW 3042); and Sunil Kumar and Anr. v. State of
Rajasthan, AIR 2005 SC 1096 : (2005 AIR SCW 589))".
[9] With regard to the second point raised by the applicant, the learned PP submitted that the issue
of non-compliance with the provisions of section 41 (2) and section 42 (1) & (2) of the ND&PS Act
was never raised by the MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 14 accused persons during the trial and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 9
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
that if such point had been raised, the prosecution would have certainly placed before the Court the
necessary evidence to show that the prosecution had scrupulously complied with the provisions of
the section 41 (2) and 42 (1) & (2) of the ND&PS Act. The learned PP further submitted that there is
also no statutory requirement that such a record, about taking down in writing the information of
the commission of an offence under the ND&PS Act by the SP (NAB) or by the I.O., should be
produced in Court as a matter of course and accordingly, there is no ground for interfering with the
impugned judgment and order.
In support of his contentions, the learned PP cited the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of
"Union of India vs. Satrohan" reported in (2008) 8 SCC 313 "12. So far as the fulfillment of the
requirement of Section 57 of the Act is concerned it is to be noted that the legal position was stated
by this Court in T. Thomson v. State of Kerala and in State, NCT of Delhi v. Malvinder Singh. In
Malvinder Singh case at JT para 6, it was observed as follows:
(SCC p. 317, para 7) "7. At this juncture, it would be relevant to take note of what has
been stated by this Court in T. Thomson v. State of Kerala. At para 5 it was observed
as follows: (SCC p. 619) "5. Learned Senior Counsel further argued that the record
alleged to have prepared by PW 1 on getting information regarding the movement of
the appellants has not been produced in court. But he conceded that no motion was
made on behalf of the appellants to call for the said record. There is no statutory
requirement that such a record should be produced in the court as a matter of course.
We are, therefore, not disposed to upset the finding on that score either."
MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 15 The learned PP lastly submitted that at
paragraph 29 of the judgment rendered by the Apex Court in the case of "Dadu Alias
Tulsidas vs. State of Maharashtra" reported in (2000) 8 SCC 437, it has been held
that a sentence awarded under the ND&PS Act can be suspended by the Appellate
Court only and strictly subject to the conditions spell out in section 37 of the Act. By
drawing the attention of this Court to the provisions of section 37 of the ND&PS Act,
it has been submitted by the learned PP that no person accused of an offence
punishable for offences under section 19 or section 24 or section 27 A and also for
offences involving commercial quantity shall be released on bail or on his own bond
unless the Court is satisfied that there are reasonable grounds for believing that the
accuse is not guilty of such offence and that he is not likely to commit any offence
while on bail.
The learned PP vehemently submitted that in the facts and circumstances of the present case, there
is no reasonable ground for believing that the convicted person is not guilty of such offences under
which he has been convicted and that there is no ground for believing that he is not likely to commit
any offence while on bail. In view of the above, there is no ground for releasing the convicted person
on bail. [10] I have carefully perused the impugned judgment and order dated 27.11.2020 passed by
the learned Special Judge (ND&PS), Manipur in Special Trial Case No. 13 of 2019. In the said
judgment the learned Special Judge have already considered the first ground raised by the counsel
for the applicant in the present application and dealt with it elaborately by referring to MC (Cril.A.)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 10
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
No. 20 of 2021 Page 16 various judgments of the Honb'le Apex Court and has held that though
ordinarily seizure is to be witnessed by two independent and respectable witnesses of the locality as
mandated by section 100 (4) Cr.PC, the prosecution will not be vitiated if policemen witnessed the
seizure unless it can be shown that they had a history of enmity towards the accuse or were
interested in seeing him getting convicted. In this regard, we can gainfully referred to the judgment
rendered by the Apex Court in the case of "Baldev Singh vs. State of Haryana" reported in (2015) 17
SCC 554, wherein it has been held as under:-
"11. Observing that no infirmity is attached to the testimony of police officials merely
because they belong to police force and that conviction can be based on the testimony
of police officials in Girja Prasad v. State of M.P., it was held as under: (SCC pp.
632-33, paras 25-27) "25. In our judgment, the above proposition does not lay down
correct law on the point. It is well settled that credibility of witness has to be tested
on the touchstone of truthfulness and trustworthiness. It is quite possible that in a
given case, a court of law may not base conviction solely on the evidence of the
complainant or a police official but it is not the law that police witnesses should not
be relied upon and their evidence cannot be accepted unless it is corroborated in
material particulars by other independent evidence. The presumption that every
person acts honestly applies as much in favour of a police official as any other person.
No infirmity attaches to the testimony of police officials merely because they belong
to police force. There is no rule of law which lays down that no conviction can be
recorded on the testimony of police officials even if such evidence is otherwise
reliable and trustworthy. The rule of prudence may require more careful scrutiny of
their evidence. But, if the court is convinced that what was stated by a witness has a
ring of truth, conviction can be based on such evidence.
MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 17 "26. It is not necessary to refer to various
decisions on the point. We may, however, state that before more than half-a-century,
in Aher Raja Khima v. State of Saurashtra, Venkatarama Ayyar, J. stated:
(AIR p. 230, para 40) '40. ...The presumption that a person acts honestly applies as
much in favour of a police officer as of other persons, and it is not judicial approach
to distrust and suspect him without good grounds therefor. Such an attitude could do
neither credit to the magistracy nor good to the public. It can only run down the
prestige of the police administration.'
27. In Tahir v. State (Delhi), dealing with a similar question, Dr A.S. Anand, J. (as His
Lordship then was) stated: (SCC p. 341, para 6) '6. ... Where the evidence of the police
officials, after careful scrutiny, inspires confidence and is found to be trustworthy and
reliable, it can form basis of conviction and the absence of some independent witness
of the locality to lend corroboration to their evidence, does not in any way affect the
creditworthiness of the prosecution case."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 11
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
After careful consideration of the submissions advanced by the learned counsel for the applicant and
after careful perusal of the record of the present case, this Court did not find any new ground being
made out by the counsel for the applicant for interfering with the impugned judgment and order
passed by the learned Special Judge and accordingly, this Court is not inclined to pass any interim
order for suspending the impugned judgment and order on the first ground raised by the applicant.
[11] The second ground is solely based on the statement given by the PW No. 1 (I.O. of the case) to
the effect that on the disclosure of the statement of Abdul Wahab, the accuse namely Chalmawii
Duhlian was involved in the case and that on her further discloser statement, her son in law S.
Robindro MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 18 Singh and her daughter Lalrozami Duhlian were also
involved in the said case. On the basis of such statement given by the PW No. 1, it has been
submitted by the learned counsel for the applicant that Abdul Wahab was arrested on 01.05.2018
and Chalmawii Duhlian was arrested on 04.05.2018 and that these two accused persons disclosed
commission of offence by different persons at different point of time and such disclosures were not
taken down in writing by the SP (NAB) and I.O. of the case as mandated under section 41 (2) and 42
(1) of the ND&PS Act. However, on careful examination of the statement given by the said PW No. 1
in his cross- examination and other relevant records including the charge-sheet of the case, it is
revealed that the accused Abdul Wahab disclosed about the commission of offence by the accused
Chalmawii Duhliam, her son in law S. Robindro Singh and her daughter Lalrozami Duhlian and that
such disclosures have been clearly recorded by the SP (NAB), it is authorization letter dated
03.05.2018 (exhibit P/7) authorizing the I.O. to search the premises of the aforesaid three accused
persons and to seize the contrabands drugs.
In my considered view, there is no provisions under the Act and Rules laying down specifically as to
how the information or disclosures are to be taken down in writing and since the SP (NAB) have
recorded in writing the disclosure about committing offence under the ND&PS Act by the aforesaid
three accused persons in his authorization letter dated 03.05.2018, this Court MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of
2021 Page 19 is of the considered view that the SP (NAB) had substantially complied with the
provisions under section 41 (2) of the ND&PS Act. [12] In the present case, as the search and seizure
had been carried out under the provisions of section 41 (2) & (3) of the ND&PS Act, there is no
question of attracting the provisions of section 42 of the said Act and the contentions advanced by
the learned counsel appearing for the applicant about non-compliance with the provisions of section
42 (1) & (2) are misconceived and does not arise at all.
In view of the above, this Court does not find any ground for interfering with the impugned
judgment and order and for granting bail to the convicted person.
In the result, the present application is hereby rejected, however, without any order as to cost.
JUDGE
FR/NRF
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 12
Lalremkima vs The State Of Manipur on 23 May, 2022
Sapana
MC (Cril.A.) No. 20 of 2021 Page 20
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166294866/ 13
