M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
Author: G.R.Swaminathan
Bench: G.R.Swaminathan
1 W.P.(MD)NO.6755 OF 2020 & batch
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 02.09.2020
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE G.R.SWAMINATHAN
WP (MD)Nos.6755 of 2020, 6760, 7384, 8182, 8888, 8914
and 8936 of 2020
and
WMP(MD)Nos.6136, 6144, 6831, 7600, 7601, 7602, 8145,
8146, 8147, 8158, 8159, 8160, 8172, 8173 & 8174 of 2020
in W.P.(MD)No.6755 of 2020 :
M.Bose ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The District Collector,
O/o.District Collectorate,
Ramanathapuram District.
2.The Revenue Divisional Officer,
The Revenue Divisional Office,
Paramakudi,
Ramanathapuram District.
3.The District Registrar,
Office of the District Registrar,
Sivagangai District.
4.The Executive Engineer,
Public Works Department,
Keelavadinila Kottam,
Vaigai Illam, Paramakudi,
Ramanathapuram District.
5.The Assistant Engineer,
Public Works Department,
Keelavadinila Kottam,
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 1
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
1/3
(cid:12) 2 W.P.(MD)NO.6755 OF 2020 & batch
Vaigai Illam, Paramakudi,
Ramanathapuram District.
6.The Village Administrative Officer,
Thalayadikottai Group,
Paramakudi,
Ramanathapuram District.
7.Thalaiyadikottai Kanmai Pasana
Vivasaigal Nala Sangam,
Rep.by its President Mr.S.Natarajan,
Thalaiyadikottai Village,
Ramanathapuram District. ... Respondents
(R7 is suo motu impleaded vide Court
order dated 13.07.2020 in WP(MD)No.6755 of 2020)
Prayer: Writ petition is filed under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, to issue a Writ of Mandamus, forbearing
the fourth respondent herein from issuing work order to any
other person with respect to the Kudimaramath works of
Thalayadikottai Kanmai (Tank), Thalayadikottai Village,
Nayinarkoil Post, Paramakudi Taluk, Ramanathapuram District
and consequently direct the fourth respondent to conduct the
proper election and provide the Kudimaramath works of
Thalayadikottai Kanmai (Tank).
For petitioners in : Mr.T.Lajapathi Roy
WP(MD)Nos.6755, 6760,
7384, 8888, 8914, 8936 of
2020
For petitioner in : Mr.S.Parthasarathy
WP(MD)No.8182 of 2020 for Mr.B.Anandan
http://www.judis.nic.in
2/3
(cid:12) 3 W.P.(MD)NO.6755 OF 2020 & batch
For respondents Mr.Vijay Narayan
in WP(MD)No.6755 of 2020 Advocate General assisted by
Mr.Jayaprakash Narayanan
State Government Pleader for R1 to
R6
For respondents Mr.Vijay Narayan
in WP(MD)No.6760 of 2020 Advocate General assisted by
Mr.Jayaprakash Narayanan
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 2
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
State Government Pleader
for R1 to R6
Mr.G.Prabhu Rajadurai for R7
For respondents Mr.Vijay Narayan
in WP(MD)No.7384, 8888, Advocate General assisted by
8914, 8936 of 2020 Mr.Jayaprakash Narayanan
State Government Pleader
for R1 to R5
Mr.G.Prabhu Rajadurai for R6
For respondents Mr.Vijay Narayan
in WP(MD)No.8182 of 2020 Advocate General assisted by
Mr.Jayaprakash Narayanan
State Government Pleader
for R1 to R9
Mr.G.Prabhu Rajadurai for R10
COMMON ORDER
The conduct of the writ petitioners herein reminds me of the remark commonly made about the
HR&CE department-that it will enter the scene only when the hundial is full. The petitioners are
water users ie., ayacutdars. Their contention is http://www.judis.nic.in that the maintenance works
in respect of the irrigation tanks should be entrusted only to the farmers' organisations constituted
under the Tamil Nadu Farmers' Management of Irrigation Systems Act, 2000 (hereinafter referred
to as Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 2001) and not to any hastily registered private body. The petitioners knew
that the tenure of the managing committees of the farmers' organizations ended long ago. They did
not do anything to compel the authorities to re-constitute the committees. They kept quiet all these
years. They have now suddenly woken up because of the sanctioning of huge sums of money for
carrying out kudimaramath works. They feel aggrieved because their local rivals have bagged the
contracts on nomination basis.
2.Merely because I take a dim view of the conduct of the petitioners, I cannot abdicate my duty to
examine the legal issues raised by them. Kudimaramath is not something novel. It is a part of Tamil
cultural heritage. Between the end of the north east monsoon and the commencement of the south
west monsoon, there will be a lull in agricultural activities. It will be announced by tom tom that
each household must depute a person for doing physical work for restoration of the local water
http://www.judis.nic.in bodies. If due to some reason, such a person could not be deputed, the
concerned household must hire a worker and send him. There is evidence in Hindu mythology for
this practice. When a Pandiya king ordered his citizens to take part in kudimaramath activity, a lady
by name Vanthiyammai was unable to take part on account of her old age. She therefore prayed to
Lord Shiva who appeared as a coolie and offered to be her substitute. The grateful lady offered
“Puttu” to the Lord for eating. Since it was sumptuous, the Lord dozed off. The king who happened
to come there to monitor the progress of the work, saw the young coolie sleeping. He got angry and
gave a blow on the Lord's back with a cane. It is stated that the blow landed on the back of everyone
including that of the king. To commemorate this miracle, Puttu Thiruvizha is celebrated every year
in Madurai.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 3
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
3.The word “Kudimaramath” can be parsed into two-“Kudi” and “Maramath”. “Kudi” means people
though in the current times it has acquired a vile connotation. “Maramath” means maintenance
work. Thus, carrying out the maintenance works in respect of irrigation systems through peoples'
participation is what is known as Kudimaramath. This ancient practice was http://www.judis.nic.in
officially revived in 1975 by the Government of Tamil Nadu. It directed the entrustment of the
irrigation works including the maintenance, repairs and Kudimaramath works to the ayacutdars
themselves.
4.It was announced on the floor of Assembly on 21.07.2016 that the State Government will embark
on a Mission for Water Resources Management to restore water bodies and revive Kudimaramath
through user communities and that a sum of Rs. 100 crore was set apart as incentive fund. Vide G.O
(Ms) No.12, Public Works (W1) Department, dated 21.01.2017, the Government accorded its
approval for implementing the Kudimaramath plan for the year 2016-17. The procedure set out in
Para 9 of the said G.O reads as under :
“9.......
(i)The Project Implementation and Monitoring Committee for Kudimaramath Project
comprising the following members shall select the tanks and canals on priority basis,
and monitor the effective implementation of the project in time.
Engineer-in-Chief, Water Chairman
Resources Department &
Chief Engineer(General),
Public Works Department
http://www.judis.nic.in
Chief Engineer, Water Nodal Officer &
Resources Department Member
Design, Research and
Construction Support,
Chennai – 5.
Regional Chief Engineers, Member
Water Resources
Department (Chennai
Region/Trichy
Region/Madurai
Region/Coimbatore Region)
concerned.
Chief Engineer, Water Member
Resources Department
Operation and Maintenance
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 4
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
Joint Chief Member
Engineer(Irrigation), Water Secretary
Resources Department
(ii) Necessary estimates for maintenance
considering the requests and requirements of Farmer's Organisations or Farmer's
Councils or Ayacutdars, as the case may be, shall be prepared by the respective
Regions of Water Resources Department.
(iii) Separate estimates for the Minor works and the Major works shall be prepared in
respect of each Farmers' Organisation or Farmers' Council area or equivalent area on
hydraulic basis.
(iv) Estimates shall be sent to the Chief Engineer, Water Resources Department,
Design, Research and Construction Support, who is the Nodal Officer for
implementation of Kudimaramath, for obtaining Administrative Sanction from the
Government.
http://www.judis.nic.in
(v) The execution of the Minor works for a value not exceeding Rs.10.00 lakh shall be done on
nomination basis by following, as the case may be, at estimated rates, subject to the condition that
the other procedures as are applicable contractors are made applicable to the nominated contractors
also, under the Technical guidance of the department Engineers of the Water Resources Department
concerned:-
a) The Farmers' Organisation of the respective area as per the TNFMIS Act, 2000
shall execute the work, where such Farmers' Organisation exists.
b) The Farmers' Council of the respective area as per the Tamil Nadu Societies
Registration Act, 1975 shall execute the work, where such Farmers' Council is alive
and where Farmers' Organisation as per TNFMIS Act, 2000 is yet to be constituted.
c) Where Farmers' Organisation as per TNFMIS Act, 2000 is to be constituted or
reconstituted or any Farmers' Council as per Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act,
1975 is not functioning in that area, an ayacutdar or group of ayacutdars nominated
by the ayacutdars jointly involving, or with the consent in of, the majority of the
ayacutdars benefited from the irrigation works concerned.
The nominated contractor shall be exempted from the payment of Earnest Money Deposit(EMD) &
Security Deposit.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 5
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
(vi) The Executive Engineer concerned of Water Resources Department shall award the works under
9(v) http://www.judis.nic.in as above on nomination basis at estimated rates based on the current
Schedule of Rates.
(vii) The Major works shall be executed by the Water Resources Department by following the usual
tender procedures and Rules and Regulations in force.
(viii) The respective Regional Chief Engineers of Water Resources Department shall send a monthly
progress reports on these works to the Government and the Nodal officer on 5th of succeeding
month indicating the 'progress' during the month and 'cumulative progress' upto the end of the
month.
(ix)Guidelines for entrusting works on nomination basis to the Farmers' Organisation/Farmers'
Council/An Ayacutdar and Agreement Form for execution of Kudimaramath work shall be issued by
the Engineer-in- Chief, Water Resources Department and Chief Engineer(General), Public Works
Department.” Para 7 of the aforesaid G.O makes a clear distinction between minor works and major
works. Minor works whose value did not exceed Rs.10.00 lakhs alone could be done on nomination
basis by dispensing with the tender procedure. Other works including the Major works were to be
executed by the Water Resources Department by following the usual tender procedures and Rules
and Regulations in force.
5.G.O (Ms) No.12, Public Works (W1) Department, dated 21.01.2017 was amended by G.O
(Ms)No.171, Public Works (W1) http://www.judis.nic.in Department, dated 11.08.2017. By this
amendment, Clause 9(vii) of G.O (Ms) No.12 was deleted. Clause 9(vi) was also amended as follows :
9(vi) The Executive Engineer a. The Executive Engineer concerned concerned of
Water of Water Resources Department shall Resources Department award the works
for a value not shall award the works exceeding Rs.30.00 lakh under 9(v) under 9(v)
as above on as above on nomination basis at nomination basis at estimated rates
based on the current estimated rates based schedule of rates.
on the current
schedule of rates b.The Superintending Engineer
concerned of Water Resources
Department shall award the works
for any value exceeding Rs.30.00
lakh under 9(v) as above on
nomination basis at estimated rates
based on the current schedule of
rates.
Clause 11(i) was amended as follows :
11(i) Nomination of Minor Nomination of all works as defined in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 6
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
Works as defined in para 9(v) above shall be assigned
para 9(v) above shall be only to the farmers' organisation or
assigned only to the farmers' organisation or farmers'
farmers' organisation council or ayacutdars or users'
or farmers' council or association without invoking tender
ayacutdars or users' procedure as per the Tamil Nadu
association Transparency in Tenders Act, 1998.
In these writ petitions, it has been contended that the Government has committed an
illegality by dispensing with the procedure laid down in the Tamil Nadu
Transparency in Tenders Act, 1998 (hereinafter referred to as Tamilnadu Act 43 of
1998). http://www.judis.nic.in
6.The learned counsel appearing for the writ petitioners reiterated all the contentions
set out in the affidavits filed in support of the respective writ petitions and wanted
this Court to strike down the impugned amendments. Per contra, the government as
well as the nominated contractors have strongly controverted the allegations made by
the petitioners. The learned Advocate General took me through the pleadings and
also the materials enclosed in the typed set of papers.
7.The learned Advocate General contended that the project is a conscious policy
decision taken by the Government of Tamil Nadu in order to rejuvenate the water
bodies and to encourage peoples' participation. He stated that in view of Section 16 of
the Tamil Nadu Act 43 of 1998, it is open to the Government to dispense with the
procedure laid down therein.
His defence is that since the Managing Committees of the Water Users Associations constituted
under Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 2001 had not been reconstituted after their tenure had ended and since
the instant Kudimaramath works have to be immediately implemented, the Government chose to
authorise the Public Works Department to issue nominations in favour of the ayacutdars or group of
ayacutdars enjoying the confidence of the http://www.judis.nic.in majority. In order to ensure that
there is transparency and accountability, the Government had insisted that the majority group
should be registered under the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, 1975. The jurisdictional
Village Administrative Officers had verified that the registered bodies did indeed have majority of
the ayacutdars with them. Contracts were awarded on nomination basis in favour of such Societies
only after the department was fully satisfied in this regard.
8.The learned Advocate General submitted that the the petitioners herein also took part in the said
exercise. They failed to secure majority. Feeling disgruntled, they have filed these writ petitions. He
also particularly faulted the conduct of Thiru.N.Ganesan, the petitioner in WP(MD)No.8182 of
2020. Thiru.N.Ganesan had earlier filed a Public Interest Litigation in WP(MD)No.6837 of 2020.
The said writ petition suffered a summary dismissal. Even without disclosing the same, he had filed
the present writ petition. The learned Advocate General therefore wanted me to dismiss the said
writ petition on the ground of suppression of material facts.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 7
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
9.The learned Advocate General submitted that the officials cannot be faulted. They had only
implemented the government orders in letter and spirit. The government orders had been issued
with the noblest of objectives and within the four corners of law. They do not suffer from any taint of
illegality. He also would point out that the Kudimaramath works had been substantially completed.
Funds had also been disbursed. According to him, the writ petitions lack merits and they have also
become infructuous.
10.I carefully considered the rival contentions and went through the materials on record. Since
personal experience is often superior to knowledge, in order to acquaint myself with the ground
reality, I undertook field inspection. The learned Advocate General ensured that the officials
cooperated to their fullest. I visited three of the Kanmois in Ramanathapuram District. I must
record that the works had been or were being carried out as per the original proposal. I was also
satisfied that the soil dug out from the water bodies were deposited only on the bund for the purpose
of strengthening the same. There was not even a single complaint of illegal transportation of such
dug out soil. The grievance was primarily over the process of http://www.judis.nic.in election and
nomination. The discontent was palpable. It was obvious that the group which lost was totally
excluded.
11.The situation has been aggravated primarily because the elections were closely fought. For
instance, in the case of Sellur Kanmoi, though the Ayacutdars are 356 in number, the nominated
group led by Thiru.Sankarapandian enjoyed the confidence of only 186 ayacutdars. The other group
comprises 170 ayacutdars. The president of the village panchayat herself is on the other side. In all
the cases, Societies were registered under the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, 1975 just for
the purpose of bagging the nominations. Though the department had entered into agreements with
the various Societies, in practice, it is a one man show. For instance, in the case of Sellur Kanmoi, it
is Thiru.Sankarapandian who is the main person. He frankly told me that he pledged his wife's
jewelry to raise funds for carrying out the works. This is because the department does not release the
funds immediately or within days. It takes a few weeks or even a few months. An ordinary farmer or
an association without much of resources cannot stand this delay. Therefore, what happens is that
invariably a rich farmer of the locality or a person who can http://www.judis.nic.in mobilise
resources takes the lead and bags the nomination. This is definitely not what the government
intended to achieve.
12.The Government of Tamil Nadu had announced that its object is to rejuvenate and strengthen the
water bodies with the participation of the local people. What has been achieved falls miserably short
of the aforesaid mission. It is beyond dispute that the work proposals did not emanate from the
farmers or ayacutdars. The department is having its own standard templates. Since Public Works
Department is regularly engaged in civil works, they are having a schedule of rates. Draft proposals
were prepared in the office of the local Assistant Engineer. Sanctions were obtained. Thereafter, the
Engineers made field visits. Awareness meetings were convened. The engineers informed the
villagers that huge sums of money had been sanctioned for the purpose of Kudimaramath works and
that the villagers may form a body and that the work will be allotted to them. The villagers
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 8
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
understood that while there may be uncertainty regarding the water flow, funds were sure to flow.
This was sufficient to arouse divisions. In all the villages I visited, there were vertical divisions.
http://www.judis.nic.in
13.The scheme states that the people would take part in the maintenance, repair and rejuvenation
works. When I asked the nominated parties to give me the break-up for the money spent, I was
shocked to note that proper accounts were not being maintained. In fact, Clause 2 of the special
conditions mandates that the nominated contractor shall maintain separate accounts for all the
expenditure incurred from time to time for execution of the work. It is also mentioned that such
accounts shall be made available for inspection. A very young person claiming to be the nephew of
the president of the nominated Society for Vadhavaneri Kanmoi told me that he had spent more
than Rs.30.00 lakhs. When I asked for accounts, he did not have even a scrap of paper. All that he
had were some trip sheets indicating operation of the earth movers.
14.A major portion of the money is being spent towards hire charges for earth movers. These are
works that can very well be manually performed. If manual labour has been utilized, wages would
have gone to the local hands. There would have been equitable disbursement of the scheme funds.
That has not happened. This is again because of the shortsightedness of the Public Works
Department. The draft http://www.judis.nic.in proposals were prepared only in April 2020.
Awareness meetings were held in the 3rd week of May 2020. Societies were registered ten or fifteen
days thereafter. That was followed by signing of the agreements with them. In the cases on hand,
this was the sequence.
15.Let us take Sellur Kanmoi. It had been allotted Rs. 99,60,000/- inclusive of GST. The civil cost
alone comes to Rs. 85,99,165/-. The Kanmoi is spread over 180 acres. Seemai Karuvelam had grown
all over the Kanmoi. They can very well be used as fire wood. A sum of Rs.4.50 lakhs was allotted for
clearing them. I wondered as to why the department did not tell the ayacutdars that as a condition
for disbursement of the scheme fund, the villagers should clear the tank of all Karuvelam trees. If
such a condition had been stipulated, all the Karuvelam trees over the entire Kanmoi would have
been cleared. Interestingly, it is not as if by spending Rs.4.50 lakhs, all the karuvelam trees have
been removed. In fact, they have been cleared only to the extent of 30 acres. Over the remaining 150
acres, I could see the Karuvelam trees still standing. If tomorrow water flows into the tank, it will
only further their growth.
http://www.judis.nic.in
16.The aim appears to be to somehow spend the money earmarked for the purpose within the
stipulated period. Another surprising feature was that a big portion of the sanctioned amount was
being spent for strengthening the bunds. The very purpose of the bund is to ensure that water does
not flow out. In many cases, for the last several years, the tanks had not received even a drop of
water. On such kanmois, millions have been spent for bund strengthening.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 9
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
17.The plan prepared by the department should have been more for ensuring the rejuvenation of the
channels. That alone would have eventually restored and rejuvenated the water bodies. Instead, a
major chunk of the money has been spent on bund strengthening. For this, heavy machinery was
deployed. It is well known that these heavy machinery would not be with the ordinary villagers but
only with regular contractors. The officials as well as the office bearers of the nominated societies
told me that only if heavy machinery is deployed, the work will be done within the allotted time.
Thus, the major portion of the Kudimaramath funds had gone towards filling up the pockets of the
owners of earth movers and other such machinery. http://www.judis.nic.in
18.I am not writing an essay. Nor a memoir. I am here to test the legal validity of the impugned G.O
and the actions of the respondents. Two questions arise for my consideration. The first is whether
the impugned amendments are valid. Assuming that they are valid, the second question is whether
the officials have acted in terms of the G.Os. Before answering these two questions, let us have a
quick look at the relevant statutory provisions of the Tamil Nadu Act No.7 of 2001. The said Act was
enacted so as to ensure the farmers' participation in the operation and maintenance of irrigation
systems in the State. The statement of objects and reasons leading to the enactment of the said Act is
as under :
“Availability of irrigation water in a predictable and dependable pattern and at
assured intervals to all the farmers in the entire command area is an essential
requirement for optimising irrigation utilisation and increased crop production
under the system. Currently, in many irrigation projects, the tailend reaches of the
distribution systems or channels are not getting their quota of allocated water and
hence irrigation service to tailend farmers is not satisfactory affecting the increase in
crop production. This has been compounded by a purely Governmental approach
despite the limited capacity for http://www.judis.nic.in Government to intervene,
especially at below the distributory levels of the system. The need for remedying this
situation has been a major concern of the Tamil Nadu Government. Experience all
over the world has shown that transfer of irrigation systems from Government
agencies to the Farmers' Organisations can be a viable alternative. This has also been
reflected in the National Water Policy adopted by the Government of India in the
year 1987 and that of State's Water Policy issued in the year 1994. The Ministry of
Water Resources, Government of India is also advocating the Policy of Participatory
Irrigation Management (PIM) with full involvement of the farmers in Operation and
Maintenance of the Irrigation Systems to ensure effective realisation of the benefits of
irrigation. There is a felt need for reforming the Irrigation Sector for sustainable
Management and Development through democratic decentralization. Farmers
Management with financial autonomy leading to sustainable Water Resources
Management.
2.Keeping the above requirements in view, the Government have decided to
undertake legislation for involving the farmers in the Operation and Management of
the irrigation systems in the State and the Honourable Chief Minister has made an
announcement in the floor http://www.judis.nic.in of the Assembly.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 10
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
3.The Bill seeks to give effect to the above decision.” The said Act contains 7 Chapters
and 53 Sections. Section 4 of the Act reads as follows :
4.Constitution of Water Users Association.- (1) There shall be a Water Users
Association called by its local distinct name for every Water Users Association area
delineated under section 3.
(2)Every Water Users Association shall consist of all the water users in such Water Users
Association area, as members:
Provided that any person, who is in lawful possession and enjoyment of any land,
may, on proof of such possession and such enjoyment in a crop year, claim
membership, notwithstanding whether he is a recorded land holder or not in which
case the Water Users Association shall not refuse the membership of such person for
the purposes of this Act, and such person shall be liable to pay the fees, as if he is the
water user:
Provided further that any person who is eligible to become a member for more than
one territorial constituency of a Water Users http://www.judis.nic.in Association
shall be entitled to be a member of only one territorial constituency, at his option.
(3)The members specified in sub-section (2) shall constitute the general body for the
respective Water Users Association and such members alone shall have the right to
vote.” Section 5 of the Act reads as follows :
“Section 5.-Constitution of managing committee of Water Users Association and
election of its President and members (1) There shall be a managing committee for
every Water Users Association.
(2) The Collector shall make arrangements for the election of the President of the
Managing Committee of the Water Users Association by direct election from among
its members, by the method of secret ballot, in such manner as may be prescribed.
(3) The Collector shall also make arrangements for the election of the members of the
managing committee, consisting of one member from each of the territorial
constituency of the Water Users Association area, by the method of secret ballot, in
such manner as may be prescribed.
http://www.judis.nic.in (4) If at an election held under sub-section (2) or (3), the President or the
member in any territorial constituency is not elected, fresh election shall be held in the same
manner as specified in sub-section (2) or (3), as the case may be:
Provided that the Government may, for the reasons to be recorded in writing, from
time to time, postpone the election.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 11
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
(5)The President and the members of the managing committee shall, if not recalled
under section 13, be in office for a period of five years, from the date of the first
meeting of the managing committee.
(6)The managing committee shall exercise the powers and perform the functions of
the Water Users Association.” Section 15 of the Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 2001 states that
the Farmers' Organisation shall be a body corporate with a distinct name having
perpetual succession and a common seal and vested with a capacity of entering into
contracts and to sue and be sued. Section 42 of the Act reads as under :
Section 42 : Merger of already formed and registered farmers associations and
transitional arrangements (1) Any farmers association already formed and registered
under the Tamil Nadu Societies http://www.judis.nic.in Registration Act, 1975
(Tamil Nadu Act 27 of 1975) for the purpose of carrying out the functions of
participatory Irrigation Management prior to the coming into force of this Act and
functioning in any area declared to be a Water Users Association Area under section
3 shall, as soon as the Managing Committee of the Water Users Association is
constituted in accordance with section 5 in such area, cease to exist:
Provided that where any such farmers
association which has entered into a
Memorandum of Understanding with any
authority of the Water Resources Organisation before coming into force of this Act
shall continue to exercise the powers and functions of a Water Users Association in
the respective area from the date of coming into force of this Act and till the
constitution of the managing committee of the Water Users Association in
accordance with this Act.
(2) The Government may, by notification, appoint officers from the Water Resources
Organisation to exercise the powers and perform the functions of a farmers
organisation and the managing committee thereof, till such time such farmers
organisation is duly constituted or reconstituted and such managing committee
assumes office under the provisions of this Act.” http://www.judis.nic.in G.O (Ms)
No.12, dated 21.01.2017 and G.O (Ms) No.171, dated 11.08.2017 state that the
Farmers' Organizations of the respective areas as per the Tamil Nadu Act No.7 of
2001 shall execute the work where such Farmers' Organizations exist.
Only if they have to be constituted or re-constituted, the question of nominating the ayacutdars or
group of ayacutdars commanding the majority will arise. A plain reading of Clause 9(v) of the G.Os
can lead to only one conclusion. If the Farmers' Organizations have not been constituted earlier, the
authorities are to find out who has the majority. It is admitted in the counter affidavit filed by the
department that Farmers' Organizations were constituted under Section 4 of the Act. If that be so,
their ceasing to exist does not arise. This is because, Section 15 of the Act provides for their
perpetual succession. They are a body corporate. The tenure of the Managing Committees had of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 12
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
course ended. They have not been re- constituted because elections have not been held. But that has
not mean the Farmers' Organizations do not exist. Thus, the officials misread Clause 9(v) of the
G.Os.
19.As Section 42 of the Act indicates, the statute contemplates only a single body of ayacutdars.
Even if Farmers' http://www.judis.nic.in Societies registered under Tamil Nadu Societies
Registration Act, 1975 were in existence, they were to cease to exist. They stood merged with the
Users' Association constituted under Section 4 of the Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 2001. But by the
impugned action of the respondent officials, there has been a resurrection of the Societies whose
existence was put an end to. By permitting the Societies to be registered and by nominating them as
contractors, the officials had acted totally contrary to what is set out in Section 15 and Section 42 (1)
of the Act 7 of 2001. Interestingly, their acts are not in consonance with the impugned G.O also.
20.The next question is whether the Government was justified in dispensing with the tender
procedure. The basic principles are by now well settled. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ramana
Dayaram Shetty vs The International Airport ( 1979 AIR SC 1628), had pointed out that a new form
of property consisting of government largesse was emerging in the social welfare State and that it
was necessary to develop new forms of protection in that regard. The court held that the discretion
of the government is not unlimited in that the government cannot give or withhold largesse in its
arbitrary http://www.judis.nic.in discretion or at its sweet will. The government action must be
based on standards that are not arbitrary or irrational. That is why, the Government of Tamil Nadu
brought in the Tamil Nadu Transparency in Tenders Act, 1998. Section 3 of the Act states that no
procurement shall be made by the procuring entity except by tender. Procurement includes
construction. “Construction” means all works associated with repair or renovation or any other
related work also. Section 16 of the Act, however, exempted certain categories from the application
of Section 9 and 10 of the Act. For instance, procurements of low value need not be based on tender.
One can therefore understand allotment of minor works below a certain value by way of nomination
in favour of the ayacutdars themselves. But if the ordinary rule of inviting tenders is to be departed
from, there must be compelling reasons necessitating such departure. And in the very nature of
things, Section 16 of the Tamil Nadu Act 43 of 1998 will have to be strictly interpreted.
21.In the case on hand, no reason let alone justifiable reason has been set out. In the counter
affidavit, it is contended that if tender process is resorted to, then the very purpose of participatory
approach will be defeated. The learned Advocate http://www.judis.nic.in General also submitted
that the works have to be completed before the onset of monsoon. The catch here is not giving a go
bye to the tender procedure. The issue is in whose favour the nomination can be made. G.O (Ms)
No.171, dated 11.08.2017 has been issued under Section 16(f) of the Tamil Nadu Act 43 of 1998. It
reads as follows :
“16.Provisions of this Act not to apply in certain cases.- The provisions of sections 9
and 10 shall not apply to procurement,-
(a)...
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 13
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
(b)...
(c)....
(d)...
(e)....
(f)by spot purchase of agricultural commodities, agricultural produce and livestock
from primary producers; by spot purchase of cotton by Spinning Mills; by spot
purchase of animals for Government programmes or schemes or for Government
departments from shanties; of Sugarcane purchase from farmers by the State Public
Sector Undertakings or Co-operative Sugar Mills; of paddy by Direct Purchase
Centres of the Tamil Nadu Civil Supplies Corporation; of clothing by the Government
Departments or the State Public Sector Undertakings from the Tamil Nadu
Handloom Weavers’ Co-operative Society; and by http://www.judis.nic.in similar
organizations and of similar goods and services, as may be notified by the
Government.” A careful reading of the aforesaid provision would show that certain
kinds of transactions have been exempted. The persons and the organizations from
whom procurements are to be made have been catalogued. The sub-clause concludes
by referring to “by similar organizations and of similar goods and services, as may be
notified by the Government”. The question is whether the Societies solely and
exclusively formed for the purpose of availing kudimaramath funds can be said to fall
within the scope of Section 16(f) of the Tamilnadu Act 43 of 1998.
22.I have no doubt whatsoever in my mind that such a notification giving up tender process could
have been justified only if it had been made in favour of the Farmers' Organisation contemplated by
Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 2001. A Farmers' Organisation represents all the Water Users of the concerned
ayacut. It is an umbrella body. The Managing Committees of such organisations are elected in terms
of the Tamil Nadu Farmers' Management Irrigation Systems Election Rules, 2003. The Act is fairly
comprehensive and detailed Rules have also been framed in the year 2002. Chapter IV deals with
the deposit http://www.judis.nic.in and administration of the fund of the organization. Its accounts
have to be annually audited. The Collector shall make arrangements for the election of the President
of the Managing Committee. Accountability is also in-built. There is a strong public element
characterizing its constitution and functions. The statute itself lays down its functions. Such a body
will of course qualify to be an entity transactions with whom can be exempted under Section 16 of
the Act. But handing over huge sums of money to individual hands or private bodies will undermine
the very integrity of the process of disbursement of funds.
23.I quash the impugned Government Orders to the extent they permit nominations to be made in
favour of private bodies other than the Farmers' Organizations constituted under Section 4 of the
Tamil Nadu Act 7 of 2001. Though I have upheld the basic contention of the learned counsel
appearing for the petitioners, I am not in a position to grant them any consequential relief. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the decision reported in (1994) 1 SCC 648 (Shri Malaprabha Co-op. Sugar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 14
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
Factory Ltd. vs. Union of India) held as follows :
http://www.judis.nic.in “110.Though normally we would have quashed the
notifications mere quashing of the notifications would lead to nebulous situation
during the interregnum till the refixation of price we are obliged to give the above
direction. In this connection we may usefully quote the following passage occurring
at page 294 of Judicial Remedies in Public Law by Clive Lewis:
The courts now recognise that the impact on the administration is relevant in the
exercise of their remedial jurisdiction. Quashing decisions may impose heavy
administrative burdens on the administration, divert resources towards re- opening
decision, and lead to increased and unbudgeted expenditure. Earlier cases took the
robust line that the law had to be observed, and the decision invalidated Whatever
the administrative inconvenience caused. The courts nowadays recognise that such
an approach is not always appropriate and may not be in the wider public interest.
The effect on the administrative process is relevant to the courts' remedial discretion
and may prove decisive.” As rightly contended by the learned Advocate General, by
the time the writ petitions came to be filed, much water in the figurative sense had
flown under the bridge. Though I quashed http://www.judis.nic.in the offending
portions of G.O (Ms)No.171, Public Works (W1) Department, dated 11.08.2017, the
consequential agreements need not be interfered with.
24.But then, I cannot stop with this. G.O (Ms) No.12 was issued by the Public Works
Department on 21.01.2017. There was no justification for the revenue department to
have remained indifferent. The officials knew that the tenure of the Managing
Committees had expired. Therefore, steps should have been taken to reconstitute the
Managing Committees at the earliest. That is why I held that the reason put forth by
the Government for resorting to nomination process in favour of Societies formed
under the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, 1975 could not be accepted. In
order to avoid recurrence of such situations, I deem it fit and appropriate to issue the
following directions :
(i).The Collectors shall make arrangements for immediate constitution of the
Managing Committees in terms of Section 5 of the Tamil nadu Act 7 of 2001. They
will ensure that the Farmers' Organizations are not without Managing Committees in
future.
(ii).The Public Works Department must call for a holistic plan from the respective
Water Users http://www.judis.nic.in Associations. The plan should identify the
catchment area of the water body. The catchment area should be cleared of all
Karuvelam trees and encroachments. The inlet channels should be identified. The
Village Administrative Officer and the revenue officials shall be involved to identify
the inlet channels based on the village map and the field measurement book. Steps
must be taken to ensure that the excess rain water from agricultural lands drain into
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 15
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
the inlet channels.
The outlet channels must also be properly identified and desilted so that even the tail end farmer
benefits.
(iii)The village map and cadastral map must be perused and status of all water bodies referred to in
the map should be checked. If fraudulent pattas have been issued in respect of water bodies, action
should be taken.
(iv)The area of a water body on ground shall be checked with the area of the water body mentioned
in the UDR “A” Register and the same shall be reconciled. If there is reduction in area, the same
shall be recorded with proper reasons. If encroachments are noted, the same shall be removed.
(v)If a water body has not received any in-
flow, the concerned officials shall record the same http://www.judis.nic.in and identify the reasons
and place it before the District Collector.
(vi)Tree plantation shall be made a mandatory component of Kudimaramath. The Bunds of the
water body shall be strengthened and trees shall be planted along the bund so that it serves the dual
purpose of bund strengthening and boundary demarcation. The concept of dense miyawaki forest in
the middle of the water body shall also be explored. The Irrigation Committee shall be tasked with
the responsibility of maintaining these trees.
(vii)As directed vide order dated 24.09.2017 in WP(MD)No.19627 of 2017 (Ramalingam vs. State of
Tamil Nadu) by His Lordship Mr.Justice M.Sundar, the Government of Tamilnadu shall host all the
guidelines in its website. The website shall also contain the basic data of all the water bodies (Kulam,
Oorani, Kanmai, Kuttai, Varathu, Vaikkal, Eri, etc.,). They shall be geo-tagged with latitude and
longitude, boundaries, inlet and outlet length – width and all other required parameters.
(viii)The data should also indicate the name of the water body (both as per revenue record and as in
common parlance), Location, Type, Sketch (FMB Diagram), Extent (Water Spread Area /
http://www.judis.nic.in Length if it is a channel), Capacity, Number of Weirs, Shutters and its
maintenance detail, Number of sluices (If any) and its maintenance details.
(ix)The survey details as well as the
encroachment details should be mentioned. The
nature and cost of the restoration activities carried out should also be spelt out. The data regarding
the beneficiaries must also be included.
(x)The basic details should be organised and published in a website that is immediately and easily
accessible to the general public. It should contain a chat box where comments and feedback can be
posted by the viewers.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 16
M.Bose vs The District Collector on 2 September, 2020
25.The whole purpose is to ensure that the mission announced by the Government is fulfilled.
Kudimaramath work proposals will have to emanate only from the Farmers' Organizations and the
present top-down model shall have to be given up. The kudimaramath initiatives can be published
well in advance. A calender can be announced with all the details so that the stakeholders can
appropriately respond and there is no need for rushing through the entire process.
http://www.judis.nic.in
26.The writ petitions are partly allowed with the aforesaid directions. No costs. Consequently,
connected miscellaneous petitions are closed.
02.09.2020
Index : Yes / No
Internet : Yes/ No
skm
To:
1.The District Collector, O/o.District Collectorate, Ramanathapuram District.
2.The Revenue Divisional Officer, The Revenue Divisional Office, Paramakudi, Ramanathapuram
District.
3.The District Registrar, Office of the District Registrar, Sivagangai District.
4.The Executive Engineer, Public Works Department, Keelavadinila Kottam, Vaigai Illam,
Paramakudi, Ramanathapuram District.
5.The Assistant Engineer, Public Works Department, Keelavadinila Kottam, Vaigai Illam,
Paramakudi, Ramanathapuram District.
6.The Village Administrative Officer, Thalayadikottai Group, Paramakudi, Ramanathapuram
District.
http://www.judis.nic.in G.R.SWAMINATHAN, J.
skm WP (MD)Nos.6755 of 2020, 6760, 7384, 8182, 8888, 8914 and 8936 of 2020 02.09.2020
http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75998792/ 17
