M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30
November, 2021
Author: R. Mahadevan
Bench: R. Mahadevan
WP 12950 of 2021
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
Order Reserved on : 02.11.2021
Order Pronounced on : 30.11.2021
CORAM :
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE R. MAHADEVAN
Writ Petition No. 12950 of 2021
and
WMP. Nos. 13757, 13759 and 18462 of 2021
M/s. MMTC Limited
represented by the Additional General Manager
Mr. E. Malar Vannan
6, Esplanade, Chennai House
Chennai - 600 108 .. Petitioner
Versus
1. M/s. Kamarajar Port Limited
No.17, Jawahar Buildings
Rajaji Salai, Chennai - 600 001
2. Yes Bank Limited
ONE, International Center, Tower-II
15th Floor, Senapatti Bapat Marg
Elphinstone (W)
Mumbai - 400 013
3. UCO Bank
Chief Manager
Flagship Corporate Branch
1st Floor, Mafatlal Center
Nariman Point, Mumbai - 400 021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 1
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
1/46
(cid:12) WP 12950 of 2021
4. SICAL Logistics Limited
represented by (Insolvency Resolution Professional)
Mr. Sripatham Venkatasubramanian Ramkumar
(Regd.No.IBBI/IPA-001/IP-P00015/2016-2017/10039)
South India House
No.73, Armenian Street
Chennai - 600 001
5. SICAL Iron Ore Terminal Limited
South India House
No.73, Armenian Street
Chennai - 600 001 .. Respondents
Petition filed under Article 226 of The Constitution of India praying to
issue a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus calling for the records of the first
respondent relating to the impugned termination notice KPL/OP/3.12/130
dated 22.03.2021 insofar as terminating the contract entered between first and
fifth respondent is concerned, quash the same and consequently direct the
second respondent to grant extension of time for completion of work and
thereby granting time for making payments to the second respondent.
For Petitioner : Mr.P.H.Aravindh Pandian, Senior Advocate
for Mr.Ramasubramaniam Raja
For Respondents : Mr. R. Sankara Narayanan
Additional Solicitor General
assisted by Mr. Ramaswamy Meyyappan for R1
Mr. Karthick Seshadri for R2
Mr. Anant Merathia for R4
Mr. S. Gopinath for R5
ORDER
The petitioner has come forward with this writ petition praying to issue a Writ of Certiorarified
Mandamus to call for the records of the first https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021
respondent relating to the termination notice bearing No.KPL/OP/3.12/130 dated March 22, 2021
insofar as it relates to the termination of the contract entered between the first and fifth
respondents, quash the same and consequently direct the second respondent to grant extension of
time for completion of work and making payments.
2.The necessary facts, which are required to be appreciated for disposal of this writ petition, are as
under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 2
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
2.1 The petitioner - MMTC Limited is a government owned trading company engaged
in the business of minerals, metals and precious products. It is stated by the
petitioner that the fifth respondent company was incorporated on 05.09.2006 and is
a subsidiary of the fourth respondent company, which is holding 63% equity in the
fifth respondent company. The petitioner company also owns 26% equity in the fifth
respondent company. While so, the first respondent was directed by the Ministry of
Shipping to develop one common user Iron Ore Terminal through Public Private
Partnership (PPP) under Built Operate Transfer (BOT) mode to shift the existing Iron
Ore Export unit from Chennai Port Trust due to pollution and environmental issues.
For this purpose, the first respondent resorted to a competitive bidding process and
entered into a License Agreement with the fifth respondent, a Special Purpose
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 Vehicle jointly promoted by the
fifth respondent (then holding 89% equity) and L&T Infrastructure Development
Projects Limited (holding 11% equity) during September 2006 for development of
Iron Ore berth to handle Iron Ore capacity of 12 MMTPA.
2.2 According to the petitioner, even prior to the license agreement between the first
and fifth respondents, they were already exporting Iron Ore from Chennai Port for
many decades, however, due to pollution and environmental issues, there was every
possibility of closing down of the Iron ore loading at Chennai port, due to which, the
petitioner constructed a temporary jetty with approval of Ennore Port Limited during
the year 2003 and started Iron Ore Vessel loading operations from September 2004
onwards.
Initially, Ennore Port Limited permitted the petitioner to operate jetty for three years, which was
subsequently, extended by another three years. Since the petitioner was already having experience
of running iron ore loading facility, they have entered into a Shareholders Agreement dated
25.02.2009 with the fourth respondent and L & T IDPL thereby holding equity share of 26%, 63%
and 11% respectively in the fifth respondent company. Pursuant to the same, the petitioner invested
large sum of money to acquire 26% equity share in the fifth respondent company from the fourth
respondent company. Thereafter, for https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 the
purpose of establishment of a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV), steps were taken by the petitioner
along with the fifth respondent. While so, the Government of Karnataka imposed a ban on
movement of Iron Ore for export, as a result of which, no cargo was available for export from the
SPV and the trial run could not be conducted and the said ban was partially lifted by the Honourable
Supreme Court during September 2012. On account of these adverse developments in the Iron ore
sector, the fifth respondent could not complete the trial run and load test.
2.3 The petitioner further averred that during April 2015, the Union Ministry of Shipping decided to
allow modification of the existing facility to also handle common user coal and asked the first
respondent to discover the market price of the project by inviting bids including from the fifth
respondent who also had right of first refusal. Consequently, the first respondent issued a Letter of
Intent on 02.06.2016 to the fifth respondent for grant of licence for implementation of the
modification of the existing Iron Ore Terminal, which culminated in execution of Licence Agreement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 3
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
dated 11.07.2016. Thereafter, the petitioner and the fourth respondent entered into a Share
Purchase Agreement dated 30.05.2018 as per which the fourth respondent agreed to purchase the
petitioner's entire shareholding of 26% in the fifth respondent https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP
12950 of 2021 company for Rs.3426 lakhs and paid Rs.50 lakhs as interest free refundable security
deposit. However, due to various reasons, the transaction did not complete and the petitioner
continues to hold 26% equity shares in the fifth respondent company.
2.4 It is also stated by the petitioner that on 07.06.2018 a Common Loan Agreement was entered
into among the fifth respondent, second respondent / Bank, IDBI Trusteeship Services Limited and
the lenders, pursuant to which the second respondent/Bank extended credit facilities to the fifth
respondent and the same was followed by a Substitution Agreement dated 13.06.2018 for financing
the project. As per clause 5 of the agreement, licence period was to commence on the "Zero date"
i.e., the date on which the licensor and licensee satisfy all the conditions, as enumerated under
Clause 3 of the agreement. As per the agreement, the first respondent also announced the zero date
for the project as 19.08.2017 in anticipation of clearance from the Ministry of Environment, Forest
and Climate Change, but such clearance was given only on 11.05.2018. Therefore, the fifth
respondent was constrained to issue a letter dated 28.05.2018 to the first respondent for declaration
of zero date to 14.05.2018, but it was not considered. Subsequently, after procurement of consent
from the Tamil Nadu Pollution Control Board, the fifth respondent
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 once again issued a letter dated 11.09.2018
requesting the first respondent to declare 20.07.2018 as the zero date. Accordingly, the first
respondent fixed the zero date for the project with effect from 20.07.2018, consequent to which
commercial operation date was fixed as 19.07.2019 and it was also intimated to the second
respondent bank. The commercial operation date (COD) was also subsequently extended to
31.01.2020 and thereafter till 31.05.2020. While so, due to the onset of the Covid-19 Pandemic, the
construction/ modification activities of the project were interrupted and the fifth respondent
invoked the Force Majeure clause with effect from 19.02.2020.
2.5 The petitioner further stated that in November, 2019, the contractor engaged by the fifth
respondent had demobilised and stopped the project work due to the default of the second
respondent/bank in not disbursing the funds within the specified time and after the funds were
provided, he resumed the work. Thus, the delay or laches, if any, in completion of the project is
attributable only on the part of the second respondent bank. Even in the month of March 2020, the
Reserve Bank of India has issued a moratorium on the operations of the second respondent/ bank
which led to the disturbance of progress in the project. The fifth respondent also pre-occupied with
discussion with various investors to improve the business prospects and
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 to infuse capital for the project. In such
circumstances, the second respondent/bank, without regard to the prevailing Covid-19 pandemic
situation, classified the facilities granted to the fifth respondent as Non- Performing Asset from
18.08.2020 on unjustified reasons. Following the same, a Notice of Financial default came to be
issued on 07.12.2020 to the fifth respondent referring to certain alleged events of default as per the
substitution agreement and demanding payment of outstanding amounts. Subsequent to the notice
dated 07.12.2020, the second respondent also issued a notice dated 16.12.2020 to the first
respondent referring to the financial default on the part of the fifth respondent and requested the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 4
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
first respondent to issue a 'Notice of Intent to terminate'. Immediately, the fifth respondent sent a
reply notice on 19.12.2020 denying the unsubstantiated allegations made by the second respondent.
Pursuant to the notice dated 16.12.2020, the first respondent issued a notice of intent to terminate
on 21.12.2020 to the fifth respondent without verifying the correctness of the allegations of financial
default raised by the second respondent. Thereafter, on 22.03.2021, the first respondent issued the
impugned termination notice invoking clause 22.3.5 of the License agreement. Challenging the
same, the petitioner is before this Court with this writ petition.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 3.1 The learned senior counsel appearing for
the petitioner, at the outset, submitted that the petitioner, through the shareholders agreement
dated 25.02.2009 invested huge sum and acquired 26% shares of the fifth respondent company. The
fifth respondent company is a joint venture partner of the fourth respondent, petitioner and L & T
Infrastructure Development Projects Limited. The joint venture partnership was constituted for the
purpose of developing the first respondent port. Therefore, the petitioner has locus standi to
question the impugned termination notice issued by the first respondent against the fifth
respondent inasmuch as it will have a direct bearing on the business affairs of the petitioner
company.
3.2 Adding further, the learned senior counsel submitted that the jurisdiction of this Court to grant
relief in favour of the petitioner cannot be denied or curtailed, when the action of the first
respondent terminating the contract entered into with the fifth respondent, impairs not only the
rights of the fifth respondent company, but also the rights of the individual shareholders. The
petitioner being a public sector undertaking is the custodian of public funds and it has to take all
necessary steps to safeguard the interest of the public. That apart, the fifth respondent has been
complacent and has not initiated any action against the termination and the fourth respondent, the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 promoter and majority shareholder of the fifth
respondent has gone before the Company Insolvency Resolution Professional (CIRP). Hence, the
petitioner has no other alternative except to approach this court with this writ petition to protect the
interest of all.
3.3 The learned senior counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the Department of Legal
Affairs, Ministry of Law and Justice, Government of India has issued Office Memorandum dated
31.03.2021 to avoid inter-departmental litigations and to resolve such disputes amicably through
Administrative Mechanism for Resolution of Commercial Disputes (AMRD). As per the Office
Memorandum, none of the judgment in inter- departmental litigations benefit the Government,
whereas, the result only leads to putting money from one pocket to another. The intention behind
the introduction of AMRD is to settle the disputes amicably instead of spending time and money in
unnecessary litigations. The petitioner is a Public Sector Undertaking (PSU) and the first
respondent is a Government owned company and the dispute between them could be settled before
AMRD. However, the AMRD is only a dispute resolution forum and it facilitates the resolution
process to enable the parties to reach an amicable settlement; and that, it is not a judicial body and
is bereft of powers to grant interim protection pending https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950
of 2021 resolution of disputes. Therefore, the petitioner has approached this Court with this writ
petition invoking the extraordinary jurisdiction conferred under Article 226 of The Constitution of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 5
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
India.
3.4 As regards the notice of termination, it is submitted by the learned senior counsel for the
petitioner that a common loan agreement was entered into between the fifth respondent and second
respondent bank to facilitate financing of the project by extending credit facilities. The licence
period was to commence on the 'zero date' which was admittedly extended from time to time due to
delay in obtaining various clearance from the Government. The delay to commence the project was
also attributable due to the nationwide lockdown imposed to arrest the spread of Covid-19
Pandemic. However, the second respondent has declared the accounts of the fifth respondent as
'Non performing Assets' (NPA) without giving any opportunity of hearing to the fifth respondent or
the petitioner. After declaring the account of the fifth respondent as NPA on 18.08.2020, the second
respondent bank sent a notice dated 07.12.2020 to the fifth respondent intimating about the failure
to pay the amount as on 01.10.2020. The second respondent thereafter issued a notice on
16.12.2020 inducing the first respondent to issue the notice of termination of the Licensing
Agreement entered into between the fifth respondent and the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP
12950 of 2021 first respondent. Though the fifth respondent has issued a letter of objection dated
19.12.2020 to both the notices dated 07.12.2020 and 16.12.2020 to the second respondent, after
marking copies to the first respondent, the first respondent without considering the same, has
issued the notice of intent to terminate on 21.12.2020 followed by the impugned order of
termination dated 22.03.2021, which is hasty and without proper application of mind.
3.5 The learned senior counsel further proceeded to submit that as per clause 22.3.1 (II) of the
License Agreement, a notice of intent to terminate shall specify the details relating to defaults
committed by the fifth respondent. In this case, the first respondent, without assigning proper
reasons, has issued the notice of intent to terminate, which simply states that the fifth respondent
has not taken any measures to rectify or remedy the event of financial default. Admittedly, the notice
of intent to terminate was sent by the first respondent on 21.12.2020 after receipt of the objection
dated 19.12.2020 of the fifth respondent. However, the first respondent has not recorded or even
referred to the objections raised by the fifth respondent in the notice of intent to terminate. Thus,
the notice of intent to terminate lacks fairness and is in total violation of the principles of natural
justice.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 3.6 To substantiate his contention, the learned
senior counsel placed reliance on the decision of the Supreme Court in New Horizons Limited and
another vs. Union of India and others [(1995) 1 SCC 478], wherein, it was held that “while dealing
with the public, whether by way of giving jobs or entering into contracts or issuing quotas or licences
or granting other forms of largesse, the Government cannot act arbitrarily at its sweet will and like a
private individual, deal with any person it pleases, but its action must be in conformity with the
standards or norms which are not arbitrary, irrational or irrelevant; and if unreasonableness and
arbitrariness are palpable, the court exercising jurisdiction under Article 226 of The Constitution of
India can interfere with the same, in the larger public interest.
Stating so, the learned senior counsel prayed for setting aside the order of termination passed by the
first respondent against the fifth respondent and allowing this writ petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 6
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
4.1 Per contra, the learned Additional Solicitor General of India appearing for the first respondent
contended that the order, which is impugned in this writ petition, is the one passed against the fifth
respondent. The Board of Directors of the fifth respondent has decided not to question the order of
termination, as the fifth respondent company is not possessed of funds to
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 complete the contract. The sub contractor of
the fifth respondent company has proceeded against the fifth respondent by invoking the arbitration
clause for non-payment of the consideration for the asset alleged to have been created by them.
However, the petitioner has filed this writ petition to quash the said termination notice issued to the
fifth respondent. According to the learned counsel, the petitioner, a shareholder of the fifth
respondent company, is only entitled to receive dividend, attend general meetings, vote on
resolutions proposed to the General meeting and not entitled to sue on behalf of the company or by
making the company as a party to the writ proceedings and therefore, the writ petition filed by the
petitioner is not maintainable and it has to be dismissed in limine.
4.2 Adding further, the learned Additional Solicitor General of India submitted that pursuant to the
notice of termination, which is impugned in this writ petition, a meeting dated 01.04.2021 was
convened between the first respondent and the fifth respondent in accordance with Clause 18.2.12 of
the Licensing Agreement, in which the future course of action was discussed and deliberated.
However, as there was no way and the fifth respondent lacks funds to complete the project, no
solution to revoke or rescind the termination notice could be found out. In effect, it is contended by
the learned Additional https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 Solicitor General of
India that the present writ petition is a derivative action by the shareholder of the fifth respondent
company. Such derivative action is an exception to the general principle of locus and it has to be
strictly treated as such. A requirement for such derivative action to succeed would be to show that
the action is on behalf of the company and that the shareholder has in fact approached this Court
with clean hands. Whereas, in this case, the petitioner admitted that it had already entered into a
share purchase agreement with the fourth respondent in the year 2018 for sale of shareholding in
the fifth respondent company, however, the same did not fructify for obvious reasons, which would
clearly indicate that the petitioner, who has no bona fide interest in the fifth respondent company,
has approached this court with unclean hands. Therefore, the derivative action initiated by the
petitioner by filing this writ petition, is not maintainable.
4.3 The learned Additional Solicitor General of India also contended that the first respondent is a
Major Port Trust and it is a company incorporated under The Companies Act. For the purpose of
developing iron-ore berth, tenders were invited for development of such berth in which the fourth
respondent company along with L&T Infrastructure Developing Projects Limited participated and
emerged as the successful bidder. The fifth https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021
respondent is a Special Purpose Vehicle (SPV) created for running the said project. Subsequently,
the petitioner purchased some shares from the fifth respondent company and presently holds 26%
of the shares. A Letter of Intent was issued to the fifth respondent on 02.06.2016 to undertake the
project. However, the fifth respondent failed to comply with the terms of the Licence Agreement for
want of funds. After granting extension of time from 01.02.2020 to 31.05.2020 with levy of
Liquidated damages, the fifth respondent could not revive the project. Even the fifth respondent
invoked the Force Majeure clause which was accepted by the first respondent from 19.02.2020, but
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 7
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
due to failure on the part of the fifth respondent, the force majeure concession given was revoked on
14.09.2020 and the revised date for completion was set as 25.12.2020. It was at this stage the
second respondent bank invoked the lender's right under Section 3.2.1 of the Substitution
Agreement and declared the assets of the fifth respondent as NPA. Thereafter, the second
respondent issued a notice dated 16.12.2020 listing out the events of financial default committed by
the fifth respondent. It is on the basis of the notice dated 16.12.2020, the first respondent issued the
Notice of intent to terminate under Clause 22.3.1 of the Licensing Agreement giving an option to the
fifth respondent to rectify the events of default within 90 days. However, the fifth respondent could
not rectify the events and therefore, the notice of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of
2021 termination was passed against the fifth respondent. Thus, according to the learned counsel,
the notice of termination was passed in terms of the Licensing Agreement and by following the
principles of natural justice, giving abundant time to the fifth respondent to rectify the events of
default and hence, the same warrants no interference by this court.
4.4 The learned Additional Solicitor General of India also drew the attention of this court to the fact
that after the order of termination was passed, the petitioner sent a letter dated 13.05.2021 to the
first respondent not to proceed with the process of termination and to give time for identifying a
strategic investor for the fifth respondent company. By a reply dated 18.05.2021, the first
respondent informed the petitioner that they are not obliged to exchange any communication with
the petitioner, an individual shareholder and the communication, if any, has to emanate from the
fifth respondent. Even in the reply dated 18.05.2021, reference was made to the necessity to pass the
order of termination owing to financial default committed by the fifth respondent and the failure to
adhere to the obligations set out in the Licensing Agreement and Substitution Agreement.
Thereafter, the fifth respondent by letters dated 08.06.2021 and 11.06.2021 sought three months
time on the ground that the petitioner was non-cooperative and refusing to
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 surrender the possession of the Terminal.
Thus, owing to the action of the petitioner, the fifth respondent could not adhere to the process of
rescind the termination. Therefore, by another letter dated 17.06.2021, the first respondent directed
the petitioner to handover and/or surrender possession of all transfer assets without encumbrance
on or before 20.06.2021. It is at this stage, the petitioner has filed this writ petition to prevent the
first respondent to give effect to the order of termination of the project.
4.5 The learned Additional Solicitor General of India also submitted that the first respondent has
taken all steps to enable the fifth respondent to complete the project. Even the first respondent had
granted extension of time for a period of 196 days, which is more than 50% of the stipulated
construction period by a letter dated 04.11.2019. However, the fifth respondent was unable to
complete the project even in the extended period and achieved only 25% physical progress thereof.
There were several communications exchanged between the first respondent and the fifth
respondent, which would stand testimony to the fact that the first respondent has not hastily passed
the order of termination, but it was a necessity to do so owing to the continued financial events of
default committed by the fifth respondent. Thus, it is contended that all the procedures as
contemplated https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 under the Licensing Agreement
and Substitution Agreement entered into between the first and fifth respondents have been
complied with, before passing the order of termination.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 8
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
4.6 The learned Additional Solicitor General of India also relied on the following decisions:
(i)State of Rajasthan and others v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay [AIR 2016
SC 510] wherein the question arose for consideration before the supreme court is
whether in the given fact situation, the transfer of entire shareholding and change of
all the directors of a newly formed company to which lease rights were transferred by
a declaration that it was mere change of form of partnership business, without any
transfer for consideration being involved, can be taken as unauthorised transfer of
lease, which could be declared void; and it was held that “the state must have a
declared policy for exercise of its power of permitting or refusing transfer of mining
leases and such policy should be operated in a transparent manner. However, even in
absence of a policy and irrespective of exercise of power in the past, transfer of lease
for private benefit without corresponding benefit to the public or the state exchequer
is not permitted. After all, minerals vest in the state and the state has to exercise its
power to deal with them as per doctrine of public trust.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 Thus, in the present case, the state can
certainly entitled to exercise its jurisdiction to cancel lease transferred in violation of rules”.
(ii)Life Insurance Corporation of India v. Escorts Limited and others [AIR 1986 SC 1370] wherein it
was held by the supreme court that in matters of contractual dispute, the interference of the Court
must be limited. Paragraph 104 of the said decision would run thus:
"For example, if the action of the State is political or sovereign in character, the court
will keep away from it. The court will not debate academic matters or concern itself
with the intricacies of trade and commerce. If the action of the State is related to
contractual obligations or obligations arising out of the tort, the court may not
ordinarily examine it unless the action has some public law character attached to it.
Broadly speaking, the court will examine actions of State if they pertain to the public
law domain and refrain from examining them if they pertain to the private law field.
The difficulty will lie in demarcating the frontier between the public law domain and
the private law field. It is impossible to draw the line with precision and we do not
want to attempt it. The question must be decided in each case with reference to the
particular action, the activity in which the State or the instrumentality of the State is
engaged when performing the action, the public law or private law character of the
action and a host of other relevant circumstances. When the State or an
instrumentality of the State ventures into the corporate world and purchases the
shares of a company, it assumes to itself the ordinary role of a shareholder, and dons
the robes of a shareholder, with all the rights available to such a shareholder. There is
no reason why the State as a shareholder should be expected to state its reasons when
it seeks to change the management, by a resolution of the Company like any other
shareholder.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 9
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
(iii)Bacha F. Guzdar v. Commissioner of Income Tax, Bombay [AIR
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 1955 SC 74], wherein, the
supreme court was of the view that the contractual dispute between the first
respondent and the second respondent will not fall within the realm of public interest
and therefore, the writ petition has to be dismissed.
Pointing out the observations made in the aforesaid decisions, it is submitted by the learned
Additional Solicitor General of India that when the fifth respondent has not challenged the order of
termination, the petitioner, who is a shareholder of the fifth respondent, has no locus standi to
maintain this writ petition. Further, the inter se dispute between the first respondent on the one
hand and the fifth respondent on the other is more of private in nature, which cannot be adjudicated
by this Court under Article 226 of The Constitution of India. Therefore, according to the learned
counsel, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
5.1 The learned counsel appearing for the second respondent-bank submitted that this writ petition
has been filed by the petitioner to prevent the second respondent bank from legally enforcing their
terms and conditions of the agreements entered into with the fifth respondent. There was a contract
between the second respondent and the fifth respondent by virtue of a Common Loan Agreement
and a Substitution Agreement. Pursuant thereto, the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of
2021 second respondent had extended financial facilities to the fifth respondent for taking up the
project with the first respondent. The petitioner is a stranger to such loan transaction between the
second respondent bank and the fifth respondent. Merely because the petitioner holds 26% equity
shares in the fifth respondent company, they will not confer with any right to file this writ petition.
The fifth respondent had committed events of financial default and hence, their assets were declared
as NPA after following the due procedures established under law.
5.2 The learned counsel for the second respondent Bank further submitted that the petitioner has
two Directors on board of the fifth respondent company. The fifth respondent had breached the
dates of completion for achieving commercial operations. Hence, the assets of the fifth respondent
were declared as NPA even during August 2020, consequent upon which a financial default notice
was issued to the fifth respondent during December 2020. However, the petitioner did nothing to
remedial the situation relating to the events of default committed by the fifth respondent or made
attempts to assist the fifth respondent to confront such a situation. In such circumstances, the
present writ petition has been filed by the petitioner questioning the termination notice issued to the
fifth respondent, which cannot be allowed to https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021
sustain.
5.3 The learned counsel for the second respondent bank further submitted that the second
respondent is following the guidelines and norms issued by the Reserve Bank of India by way of
Master Circular on Prudential Norms on income recognition, Asset Classification and Provisioning
pertaining to Advances dated 01.07.2015 and it was as per this Circular, the assets of the fifth
respondent were classified as NPA. For declaration of the assets of the fifth respondent, the second
respondent had taken into account the Lender's Independent Engineers Report during June 2019,
as per which the progress of the project till 31.03.2019 by the fifth respondent was estimated at
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 10
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
24.92% as against the estimated progress of 49.20%. Further, during the course of the said project,
FL Smidth, sub-contractor of the fifth respondent, demobilized from the site due to non-payment
and they claimed an outstanding amount of Rs.52.56 crores from the fifth respondent. The issue
with respect to payment between the fifth respondent and the sub-contractor is still subsisting and
FL Smidth also participated in the meeting arranged by the lenders during December 2019. Thus,
according to the learned counsel, the second respondent Bank had acted fairly and diligently in the
best interest of protecting the lender - fifth respondent. There was no delay on the part of the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 second respondent in any manner in relation to
disbursement of the sanctioned loan. In any event, the power to classify an account as NPA is
statutorily mandated by the Circulars issued by the Reserve Bank of India from time to time and the
second respondent is bound by such circulars. The second respondent Bank had requested the first
respondent to issue a notice of intent to terminate by referring to the repeated events of financial
default committed by the fifth respondent. Therefore, the petitioner, being a shareholder, cannot be
permitted to step into the shoes of the fifth respondent and file the present writ petition, when the
petitioner did nothing to ensure the revival of the project by the fifth respondent. Thus, this writ
petition at the instance of the petitioner, is liable to be dismissed.
5.4 The learned counsel for the second respondent Bank placed reliance on the Lender's
Independent Engineer's reports dated 30.07.2019 and 25.03.2020 to show that the performance of
the fifth respondent is dismal and therefore, the classification of the assets of the fifth respondent as
NPA by the second respondent is wholly justified. Therefore, the learned counsel prayed for
dismissal of the writ petition so as to enable the second respondent bank to realise the loan amount
from the fifth respondent.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 6.1 The learned counsel for the fourth
respondent submitted that the fourth respondent was appointed as a Resolution Professional for the
fifth respondent by the National Company Law Tribunal in the order dated 02.06.2021. By placing
reliance on the counter affidavit, the learned counsel submitted that the fourth respondent was
appointed to provide effective, innovative and best solutions for multiple projects being currently
worked upon keeping in mind the interest of stake holders as well as their obligations towards the
society. It is submitted that the fifth respondent herein is a Special Purpose Vehicle incorporated in
the year 2006 under the Companies Act and it was created specifically for the purpose of
development of an iron-ore berth to handle the 12 MMTPA capacity at the port including design,
engineering, financing, construction, operation, maintenance and marketing and they are governed
by the License Agreement dated 11.07.2016. For infusing financial support to the project, the fifth
respondent entered into an agreement with the second respondent bank namely Substitution
Agreement dated 13.06.2018. The construction period for the terminal was 12 months from
01.04.2016, but it was subsequently extended on multiple occasions till 31.12.2020 to get the project
operational. Ultimately, owing to the disruption in project work, the unpaid bills of the fifth
respondent accumulated to Rs.50 crores. By taking account of the huge debts, the second
respondent informed the first respondent https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021
about the events of financial default and it resulted in the first respondent issuing the notice of
intent to terminate and the consequential notice of termination.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 11
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
6.2 According to the learned counsel for the fourth respondent, the fifth respondent has completed
80% of the work in the project and at this stage, the termination would dilute and erode almost half
of the asset base of the Corporate Debtor namely the fifth respondent. It is further submitted that if
the termination process is continued, there would be no means for the fourth respondent to recover
even a single penny from the project, which it has been carefully tending to and building from
scratch after all the hassles of obtaining the relevant clearances from the MoEFCC and State
Pollution Control Board and ultimately, striving to ensure that the contractors complete the
construction of the terminal and make it fully operational. Therefore, according to this respondent,
the license agreement ought not to be terminated, but rather the fifth respondent should be given a
fair chance to revive the terminal, by overcoming the odds of the pandemic, disbursal related
challenges, etc. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 6.3 The learned counsel for the
fourth respondent also submitted that in view of the issuance of termination notice, an application
was filed under Section 60 (5) and Section 19 of the Insolvency and Bankruptcy Code, 2016 by the
fourth respondent before the National Company Law Tribunal, Chennai bearing number
CHE/IA/574/2021 in which the first and fifth respondents are the respondents. The learned counsel
also invited the attention of this Court to various applications filed by Operational Creditors before
the National Company Law Tribunal, Division Bench-I, Chennai against the fifth
respondent-Corporate Debtor and to initiate Corporate Insolvency Resolution Process and for
appointment of an Interim Resolution Professional.
6.4 In effect, the learned counsel for the fourth respondent would contend that unless this Court
protects the fifth respondent against the process of termination initiated by the first respondent,
they will be put to severe hardship and loss. The process of termination would also result in
corporate death thereby ruining the livelihood of numerous employees by setting off a domino
reaction. It is reiterated by the learned counsel that when 80% of the project work has been
completed by the fifth respondent, it would be in the best interest of livelihood of numerous
employees of the Corporate debtor (fifth respondent) to allow the fifth respondent to complete the
project by https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 setting aside the order of
termination. The learned counsel therefore prays for interference by this Court in this writ petition
filed by the petitioner.
7. The learned counsel appearing for the fifth respondent, against whom the order of termination
was passed, would contend that already the National Company Law Tribunal in the order dated
02.06.2021 has appointed the fourth respondent herein as the Resolution Professional. The fifth
respondent is taking all efforts to revive the project, complete the construction of the terminal and
make it operational. The fifth respondent is confronting numerous litigations before the Company
Law Board at the instance of the creditors. In any event, the fifth respondent is only attempting to
process the revival with the various stake holders and has not questioned the order of termination
passed by the first respondent. The learned counsel therefore sought for appropriate orders in the
writ petition filed by the petitioner, on merits.
8. Heard the learned counsel on either side and perused the materials placed on record.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 12
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
9. The facts remain undisputed are that the petitioner is one of the shareholders of the fifth
respondent company and it is a government owned trading company engaged in the business of
minerals, metals and precious products. The fifth respondent company was incorporated on
05.09.2006 and it is a subsidiary of the fourth respondent company, which is holding 63% equity
share in the fifth respondent company. The petitioner company also owns 26% equity share in the
fifth respondent company. In the competitive bidding resorted to by the first respondent, the fifth
respondent participated and eventually it had been declared as successful bidder and the first
respondent entered into a License Agreement with the fifth respondent. The fifth respondent was
appointed by the first respondent as a Special Purpose Vehicle during September 2006 for
development of Iron Ore berth to handle Iron Ore capacity of 12 MMTPA. Admittedly, the fifth
respondent, as a SPV, could not kick-start or operationalise the iron ore berth due to various
reasons. The fifth respondent also could not honour the financial commitments made to the
borrowers, including the second respondent Bank. The second respondent, therefore, declared the
assets of the fifth respondent as NPA, consequent upon which the first respondent issued a notice of
intent to terminate, which was followed by the order of termination dated 22.03.2021. The order
dated 22.03.2021, terminating the contract entered into between the first and fifth
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 respondents is questioned in this writ petition
not by the fifth respondent, but by the petitioner in the capacity of its shareholder.
10. On appraisal of the above factual position, it is evident that the order of termination was passed
by the first respondent against the fifth respondent. However, the fifth respondent has not filed the
present writ petition assailing the said order of termination, whereas the petitioner has filed this
writ petition stating that they are one of the shareholders of the fifth respondent company having
26% of equity shares and any order passed against the fifth respondent would adversely affect their
interest. Therefore, this court has to first examine whether this writ petition at the instance of the
petitioner, is maintainable.
11.1 According to the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner, the petitioner owns 26% of
equity shares in the fifth respondent company and is a joint venture partner with the said company
along with others and thereby invested not only public money, but also its expertise and resources
for development, besides technical assistance to the fifth respondent; and the said joint venture
partnership was constituted for the purpose of developing the first respondent Port. Further, the
petitioner is the custodian of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 public funds and
it has to take all steps to safeguard the interest of the public. Therefore, the petitioner being a
shareholder of the fifth respondent, has locus standi to file this writ petition, to question the
termination notice issued against the fifth respondent. It is also submitted that the second
respondent bank has extended several crores of financial assistance to the fifth respondent
company; when there is involvement of such huge sum of money, the declaration of the fifth
respondent company as a defaulter, would definitely have an element of public interest; and the
coercive action taken by the second respondent bank against the fifth respondent / borrower
through the first respondent and forcing them to accept such action, would not only affect the rights
of the fifth respondent, but also the rights of the individual shareholders. Therefore, this Court has
to interfere with the impugned order of termination.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 13
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
11.2 On the other hand, it is contended on behalf of the first respondent that the order impugned in
this writ petition was passed against the fifth respondent. When the Board of Directors of the fifth
respondent has decided not to question the order of termination, it is futile on the part of the
petitioner to assail the same under the guise of a shareholder of the fifth respondent company
having 26% equity shares. It is further stated that merely because the petitioner is a shareholder of
the fifth respondent company, it will not confer https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021
them any right to sue on behalf of the fifth respondent company. Even otherwise, the order of
termination has been passed for the events of financial default committed by the fifth respondent.
While so, the petitioner has no locus standi to file this writ petition and the writ petition is not
maintainable.
11.3 As a matter of fact, it must be observed that the dispute involved in this writ petition is between
the first respondent, which is a Major Port and a company incorporated under the Companies Act
and the fifth respondent, which is a private entrepreneur. They have entered into several
agreements for undertaking the development of iron ore berth in the land situated at the Kamarajar
Port Limited and are governed by the terms and conditions thereof. The second respondent Bank
extended financial support to the fifth respondent for completing the said project. It is an admitted
fact that the fifth respondent has not completed the project within the time specified as well as
extended by the first respondent and they have also defaulted in payment of dues to the second
respondent bank. Hence, according to the terms of the loan agreement and the guidelines framed by
the RBI, the second respondent bank declared the assets of the fifth respondent as NPA.
Consequently, the first respondent, at the instance of the second respondent bank, issued the notice
of termination followed by the termination order, which is impugned herein to the fifth
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 respondent, in terms of the agreements entered
into between the parties. Such being the position, this court is of the opinion that the said
contractual dispute, which is purely private in nature, cannot be subjected to judicial review in writ
jurisdiction. At this juncture, it is pertinent to point out that the said termination order was not
challenged by the fifth respondent, but by the petitioner, in the capacity as shareholder of the fifth
respondent company. It is settled law that in matters of this nature, the courts cannot exercise the
jurisdiction conferred under Article 226 of The Constitution of India and to grant relief, rather, it
has to observe self-imposed restriction without substituting it's opinion over the decision of one
party, on the basis of the terms and conditions of the contract.
11.4 The extent to which the constitutional courts can interfere with the contractual dispute, has
been dealt with by the Supreme Court in Federal Bank Ltd. v. Sagar Thomas & Others [(2003) 10
SCC 733] and paragraphs 26 to 29, 32 & 33 of the said decision are profitably, extracted below:
“26. A company registered under the Companies Act for the purposes of carrying on
any trade or business is a private enterprise to earn livelihood and to make profits out
of such activities. Banking is also a kind of profession and a commercial activity, the
primary motive behind it can well be said to earn returns and profits. Since time
immemorial, such activities have been carried on by individuals generally. It is a
private affair of the company though case of nationalized banks
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 stands on a different footing.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 14
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
There may, well be companies, in which majority of the share capital may be
contributed out of the State funds and in that view of the matter there may be more
participation or dominant participation of the State in managing the affairs of the
company. But in the present case we are concerned with a banking company which
has its own resources to raise its funds without any contribution or shareholding by
the State. It has its own Board of Directors elected by its shareholders. It works like
any other private company in the banking business having no monopoly status at all.
Any company carrying on banking business with a capital of five lacs will become a
scheduled bank. All the same, banking activity as a whole carried on by various banks
undoubtedly has an impact and effect on the economy of the country in general.
Money of the shareholders and the depositors is with such companies, carrying on
banking activity. The banks finance the borrowers on any given rate of interest at a
particular time. They advance loans as against securities. Therefore, it is obviously
necessary to have regulatory check over such activities in the interest of the company
itself, the shareholders, the depositors as well as to maintain the proper financial
equilibrium of the national economy. The Banking companies have not been set up
for the purposes of building economy of the State on the other hand such private
companies have been voluntarily established for their own purposes and interest but
their activities are kept under check so that their activities may not go wayward and
harm the economy in general. A private banking company with all freedom that it
has, has to act in a manner that it may not be in conflict with or against the fiscal
policies of the State and for such purposes, guidelines are provided by the Reserve
Bank so that a proper fiscal discipline, to conduct its affairs in carrying on its
business, is maintained. So as to ensure adherence to such fiscal discipline, if need
be, at times even the management of the company can be taken over. Nonetheless, as
observed earlier, these are all regulatory measures to keep a check and provide
guideline and not a participatory dominance or control over the affairs of the
company. For other companies in general carrying on other business activities may
be manufacturing, other industries or any business, such checks are provided
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 under the provisions of the
Companies Act, as indicated earlier. There also, the main consideration is that the
company itself may not sink because of its own mismanagement or the interest of the
shareholders or people generally may not be jeopardized for that reason. Besides
taking care of such interest as indicated above, there is no other interest of the State,
to control the affairs and management of the private companies. The care is taken in
regard to the industries covered under the Industries (Development and Regulation)
Act, 1951 that their production which is important for the economy may not go down
yet the business activity is carried on by such companies or corporations which only
remains a private activity of the entrepreneurs/companies.
27. Such private companies would normally not be amenable to the writ jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution. But in certain circumstances a writ may issue to such private bodies or
persons as there may be statutes which need to be complied with by all concerned including the
private companies. For example, there are certain legislations like the Industrial Disputes Act, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 15
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
Minimum Wages Act, the Factories Act or for maintaining proper environment say Air (Prevention
and Control of Pollution) Act, 1981 or Water (Prevention and Control of Pollution) Act, 1974 etc. or
statutes of the like nature which fasten certain duties and responsibilities statutorily upon such
private bodies which they are bound to comply with. If they violate such a statutory provision a writ
would certainly be issued for compliance of those provisions. For instance, if a private employer
dispense with the service of its employee in violation of the provisions contained under the
Industrial Disputes Act, in innumerable cases the High Court interfered and have issued the writ to
the private bodies and the companies in that regard. But the difficulty in issuing a writ may arise
where there may not be any non-compliance or violation of any statutory provision by the private
body. In that event a writ may not be issued at all. Other remedies, as may be available, may have to
be resorted to.
28. The six factors which have been enumerated in the case of Ajay Hasia (supra) and approved in
the later decisions in the case of Ramana (supra) and the seven Judges Bench in the case of Pradeep
Kumar Biswas (supra) may be applied to https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 the
facts of the present case and see as to those tests apply to the appellant bank or not. As indicated
earlier, share capital of the appellant bank is not held at all by the government nor any financial
assistance is provided by the State, nothing to say which may meet almost the entire expenditure of
the company. The third factor is also not answered since the appellant bank does not enjoy any
monopoly status nor it can be said to be an institution having State protection. So far control over
the affairs of the appellant bank is concerned, they are managed by the Board of Directors elected by
its shareholders. No governmental agency or officer is connected with the affairs of the appellant
bank nor anyone of them is a member of the Board of Directors. In the normal functioning of the
private banking company there is no participation or interference of the State or its authorities. The
statutes have been framed regulating the financial and commercial activities so that fiscal
equilibrium may be kept maintained and not get disturbed by the mal-functioning of such
companies or institutions involved in the business of banking. These are regulatory measures for the
purposes of maintaining the healthy economic atmosphere in the country. Such regulatory measures
are provided for other companies also as well as industries manufacturing goods of importance.
Otherwise these are purely private commercial activities. It deserves to be noted that it hardly makes
any difference that such supervisory vigilance is kept by the Reserve Bank of India under a Statute
or the Central Government. Even if it was with the Central Government in place of the Reserve Bank
of India it would not have made any difference, therefore, the argument based on the decision of All
India Bank Employees' Association (supra) does not advance the case of the respondent. It is only in
case of mal-functioning of the company that occasion to exercise such powers arises to protect the
interest of the depositors, shareholders or the company itself or to help the company to be out of the
woods. In the times of normal functioning such occasions do not arise except for routine inspections
etc. with a view to see that things are moved smoothly in keeping with fiscal policies in general.
29.There are a number of such companies carrying on the profession of banking. There is nothing
which can be said to be close to the governmental functions. It is an old profession in
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 one form or the other carried on by individuals
or by a group of them. Losses incurred in the business are theirs as well as the profits. Any business
or commercial activity, may be banking, manufacturing units or related to any other kind of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 16
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
business generating resources, employment, production and resulting in circulation of money are no
doubt, are such which do have impact on the economy of the country in general. But such activities
cannot be classified one falling in the category of discharging duties, functions of public nature.
Thus the case does not fall in the fifth category of cases enumerated in the case of Ajay Hasia
(supra). Again we find that the activity which is carried on by the appellant is not one which may
have been earlier carried on by the government and transferred to the appellant company. For the
sake of argument even if it may be assumed that one or the other test as provided in the case of Ajay
Hasia (supra) may be attracted that by itself would not be sufficient to hold that it is an agency of the
State or a company carrying on the functions of public nature. In this connection, observations
made in the case of Pradeep Kumar Biswas (supra) quoted earlier would also be relevant.
32.Merely because the Reserve Bank of India lays the banking policy in the interest of the banking
system or in the interest of monetary stability or sound economic growth having due regard to the
interests of the depositors etc. as provided under Section 5(c)(a) of the Banking Regulation Act does
not mean that the private companies carrying on the business of or commercial activity of banking,
discharge any public function or public duty. These are all regulatory measures applicable to those
carrying on commercial activity in banking and these companies are to act according to these
provisions failing which certain consequences follow as indicated in the Act itself. Provision
regarding acquisition of a banking company by the Government, it may be pointed out that any
private property can be acquired by the Government in public interest. It is now judicially accepted
norm that private interest has to give way to the public interest. If a private property is acquired in
public interest it does not mean that the party whose property is acquired is performing or
discharging any function or duty of public character though it would be so for acquiring authority.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021
33.For the discussion held above, in our view, a private company carrying on banking business as a
scheduled bank, cannot be termed as an institution or company carrying on any statutory or public
duty. A private body or a person may be amenable to writ jurisdiction only where it may become
necessary to compel such body or association to enforce any statutory obligations or such
obligations of public nature casting positive obligation upon it. We don't find such conditions are
fulfilled in respect of a private company carrying on a commercial activity of banking. Merely
regulatory provisions to ensure such activity carried on by private bodies work within a discipline,
do not confer any such status upon the company nor puts any such obligation upon it which may be
enforced through issue of a writ under Article 226 of the Constitution. Present is a case of
disciplinary action being taken against its employee by the appellant Bank. Respondent's service
with the bank stands terminated. The action of the Bank was challenged by the respondent by filing
a writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. The respondent is not trying to enforce
any statutory duty on the part of the Bank. That being the position, the appeal deserves to be
allowed.” 11.5 In this context, reference can also be made to the order dated 02.07.2021 passed by
this Court in WP No. 12381 of 2021 (Marg Limited, represented by its Director vs. Karaikal Port
Private Limited represented by its Chief Financial Officer and others) [2021 SCC Online Madras
2585] wherein it was held as follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 17
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
"65. The examination of the issue of maintainability of the writ petition ought to be
from the stand point of whose action under challenge and whose interest, it seeks to
unsettle and in the process of any collateral effect of the impugned action cannot be
the basis or reason to hold that the writ is maintainable. If this Court were to accept
the above https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judisarguments, the same principle would
have to be applied to all WP 12950 of 2021 large loan transactions involving crores of
rupees, as any adverse action initiated by the private lender, there would always be
challenges galore from the defaulters in the realm of public law remedies. If the doors
of public law remedy are to open to such defaulters, the public law remedy would
become handy for the large borrowers to approach this Court for judicial review of
action taken by the lenders in the realm of private and commercial relationship. Such
contrived route to be adopted by the defaulters for serving their own commercial
ends would certainly not be in public interest. Therefore, the plea of public interest in
a private loan transaction is only a mask to conceal for petitioners- interest with a
view to obstruct the enforcement of contractual obligation.
66. In exercise of writ jurisdiction, this Court would certainly not get involved in the
commercial disputes entirely arising from the private relationship driven by
commercial consideration and issue any command as that would amount to
injudicious intrusion and invasive transgression into the defined areas of conflict
governed by mutual rights, liabilities and obligations. If the doors of public law are to
be thrown open for matters like the present one, it would only lead to opening the
pandora's box and all the private disputes would find a back door entry and have
recourse to writ jurisdiction as a easier option for serving private ends. Such scenario
would eventually lead to dilution of the essence of the writ jurisdiction namely,
serving public interest.
67. For all the above reasons, this Court finds that the writ petition is not
maintainable and hence, the same is dismissed. No costs. Consequently, connected
miscellaneous petitions are closed.” 11.6 Applying the legal proposition laid down in
the aforesaid decision to the facts of the present case, wherein, the dispute between
the first respondent and the fifth respondent is purely contractual in nature, this
court is of the view that the writ petition arising out of the contractual dispute, cannot
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 be maintainable, that too, at the
instance of the petitioner claiming themselves as a shareholder of the fifth
respondent company, who is a third party to the contract between the parties and
hence, the same is liable to be dismissed on the ground of maintainability.
12.1 The further contention of the learned senior counsel for the petitioner is that the
termination of the contract with the fifth respondent by the first respondent would
cripple the economy of the region and it would have a direct impact on the livelihood
of the entire employees of the fifth respondent company, who will be rendered as
jobless and their families and hence, such action of the first respondent affecting
public interest, is liable to be interfered with by this court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 18
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
12.2 No doubt, the closure of the operation of the fifth respondent company would
provide adverse impact on the livelihood of numerous employees, who depend upon
the fifth respondent company. However, it has to be borne in mind that the fifth
respondent is a private company and its closure or restricted operation would result
in various issues like non-employment, dwindling the economy of the region, etc. Yet,
that does not mean that the same warrants interference by this Court under Article
226 of The Constitution https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 of India.
Further, it is to be noted that the financial default committed by the fifth respondent
will also have an adverse impact in the functioning of the second respondent bank.
12.3 As stated earlier, the fifth respondent failed to honour the obligations under the
common loan agreement with the second respondent bank and committed events of
financial default, which resulted in their assets being declared as NPA by the second
respondent bank on 18.08.2020. The petitioner, knowing fully well about the dismal
performance of the fifth respondent in honouring the financial obligations, did not
offer any remedial measure to the fifth respondent to clear the financial impasse.
Even after issuance of the notice of intent to terminate on 21.12.2020, by the first
respondent, giving 90 days time to the fifth respondent to rectify and cure the events
of default, the petitioner remained as a mute spectator without rendering any
assistance or aid to the fifth respondent to wriggle out of the financial commitments.
The petitioner themselves admitted in this writ petition that they had already entered
into a share purchase agreement with the fourth respondent way back in 2018 for the
sale of its share in the fifth respondent, which did not fructify. It is also specifically
averred in the counter affidavit filed by the first respondent that the petitioner was
unwilling to surrender the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021
possession of the terminal and provide necessary authorization to the fifth
respondent. As such, this court is of the opinion that the petitioner has approached
this court with the present writ petition only for the private interest, which cannot be
entertained.
13. As regards the contention of the learned senior counsel for the petitioner that the
order of termination is liable to be set aside as it was passed without adhering to the
principles of natural justice, it could be seen that before passing the order of
termination dated 22.03.2021, a notice of intend to terminate was issued by the first
respondent, giving 90 days time to enable the fifth respondent to rectify the defects
pointed out therein. Admittedly, the fifth respondent could not comply with the
demands made in the notice of intent to terminate, which resulted in the first
respondent passing the order of termination. Even otherwise, as pointed out by the
learned Additional Solicitor General of India appearing for the first respondent, after
the order of termination has been passed, attempts have been made by the petitioner,
by sending a letter dated 13.05.2021 to the first respondent and requested the first
respondent to give time to the fifth respondent for identifying an investor to infuse
funds. By a reply dated 18.05.2021, the first respondent refused to accede to the
demands made by the petitioner on the ground that the petitioner
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 19
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 is only a shareholder of the fifth
respondent company. Even in the reply dated 18.05.2021, it was stated that the order
of termination came to be passed owing to the events of financial default committed
by the fifth respondent and the failure to adhere to the obligations set out in the
Licensing Agreement and Substitution Agreement. Therefore, it is clear that at each
and every stage, there was a meeting between the petitioner, fifth respondent and
other stakeholders and attempts have been made to revive the fifth respondent to
continue the project, but those attempts ended in vain. While so, it cannot be said
that the order of termination has been passed by the first respondent against the fifth
respondent, without complying with the principles of natural justice. Hence, the said
contention raised on the side of the petitioner is rejected by this court.
14. Furthermore, it is to be pointed out that the Department of Legal Affairs, Ministry
of Law and Justice, Government of India has already issued Office Memorandum
dated 31.03.2021 to avoid inter-departmental litigations and to resolve such disputes
amicably through Administrative Mechanism for Resolution of Commercial Disputes
(AMRD). Further, the fourth respondent was appointed as a Resolution Professional
for the fifth respondent by the National Company Law Tribunal in the order dated
02.06.2021 and they are https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021
resorting to a resolution process to assist the fifth respondent to revive the project.
Some of the creditors have also taken out applications before the National Company
Law Tribunal, Division Bench-I, Chennai against the fifth respondent for appropriate
relief and the same are pending adjudication. As held in the preceding paragraphs,
the writ petition is not maintainable as against a private bank, private entity or
entrepreneur and the contractual duties to be performed by a private body cannot be
enforced by issuing a mandamus. At this stage, it is apt to refer to the observation of
the supreme court in Binny Limited v. V. Sadasivan [2005 (6) SCC 657], which reads
as follows:
“The Writ of Mandamus lies to secure the performance of a public or a statutory duty.
The prerogative remedy of mandamus has long provided the normal means of
enforcing the performance of public duties by public authorities. Originally, the writ
of mandamus was merely an administrative order from the sovereign to
subordinates. In England, in early times, it was made generally available through the
Court of King's Bench, when the Central Government had little administrative
machinery of its own. Early decisions show that there was free use of the writ for the
enforcement of public duties of all kinds, for instance against inferior tribunals which
refused to exercise their jurisdiction or against municipal corporation which did not
duly hold elections, meetings, and so forth. In modern times, the mandamus is used
to enforce statutory duties of public authorities. The courts always retained the
discretion to withhold the remedy where it would not be in the interest of justice to
grant it. It is also to be noticed that the statutory duty imposed on the public
authorities may not be of discretionary character. A distinction had always been
drawn between the public duties enforceable by mandamus that are statutory and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 20
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
duties arising merely from contract. Contractual duties are enforceable as matters of
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis WP 12950 of 2021 private law by ordinary
contractual remedies such as damages, injunction, specific performance and
declaration.” Such being the position of law, this court is of the view that the remedy
available to the petitioner is elsewhere and not before this court.
15. Above all, the other contentions raised on the side of the petitioner challenging
the termination order passed by the first respondent, do not cut ice with this court, as
the writ petition filed by the petitioner itself is not maintainable.
16. Thus, in the ultimate analysis, the writ petition deserves to be dismissed as devoid
of merits and is accordingly, dismissed. No costs.
Consequently, connected miscellaneous petitions are closed.
30.11.2021
Index : Yes/No
Internet : Yes/No
rsh
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) WP 12950 of 2021
R. MAHADEVAN, J
rsh
To
1. M/s. Kamarajar Port Limited
No.17, Jawahar Buildings
Rajaji Salai, Chennai - 600 001
2. UCO Bank
Chief Manager
Flagship Corporate Branch
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 21
M/S. Mmtc Limited vs M/S. Kamarajar Port Limited on 30 November, 2021
1st Floor, Mafatlal Center
Nariman Point, Mumbai - 400 021
Pre-delivery Order in
30.11.2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123582346/ 22
