M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of
State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
Author: B.P. Routray
Bench: B.P. Routray
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.9367 of 2025
M/s. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd. .... Petitioner
represented through its authorized
representative Binod Bihari Pati
-Versus-
Joint Commissioner of State Tax .... Opposite Parties
(Appeal), Sambalpur and others
Advocates appeared in this case:
For Petitioner : Mr. Kartik Kurmy, Advocate
For Opposite Parties : Mr. Sunil Mishra, Standing Counsel
Mr. S. Dash, Addl. Standing Counsel
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
AND
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE B.P. ROUTRAY
JUDGMENT
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of Judgment: 15th May, 2025
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------- HARISH TANDON, CJ.
1. Having suffered an order passed by the appellate authority under Section 107 of the GST Act, 2017
on 28th February, 2025 rejecting the same on the ground of limitation, the instant writ petition is
filed not only assailing the said order, but also the show cause notice dated 27th March, 2023 issued
by opposite party No.2 on the basis whereof the order was passed on 29th March, 2023 in FORM
GST-DRC-07 imposing the penalty of Rs.27,65,016/- (CGST Rs.13,82,508/- + OGST Rs.
13,82,508/-) and redemption fine of Rs.79,87,824/- (CGST Rs.39,93,912/- + OGST Rs.39,93,912/-)
in exercise of power under Section 130 read with Section 122 of the OGST Act, 2017, after having
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 1
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
paid the penalty as well as the redemption fine as demanded.
2. A prelude to the initiation of proceeding can be reasonably traced from a search and seizure
operation conducted on 22nd March, 2003 at the factory/registered office premises of the petitioner
located at village Gurupali, PO-Lapanga, District-Sambalpur, Odisha by a team consisting of the
enforcement officials of the Enforcement Range, Samabalpur, the mining officials of the Deputy
Director of Mines, Sambalpur and local police personnel. During the said search and seizure
operation, the enforcement officials detected a shortage of 341.360 MT of Billet fetching a value of
Rs.1,53,61,200/- and seized various documents/notebooks/registers/files/loose slips under Form
GST-INS-02 which was duly countersigned by the authorized persons of the petitioner. The
descriptions of the seized documents were vividly reflected in the Annexures appended to
FORM-GST-INS-02 which has not been disputed by the petitioner in the writ petition. 2.1. In
furtherance of the said search and seizure operation, the show cause notice dated 27th March, 2023
was issued in FORM GST-DRC-01 along with its annexures for the period March, 2023 to show
cause why the purported shortage detected in relation to supply of MS Billet should not be
confiscated under Section 130 of the OGST Act and the penalty of the amount as indicated
hereinabove be not imposed. It is further indicated therein that in lieu of the confiscation, the
redemption fine as disclosed hereinabove be also not imposed. After the receipt of the show cause
notice dated 27th March, 2023, the petitioner caused a letter intimating to the revenue authority
that as an authorized person and upon consulting the management of the Company, the stock
discrepancies are admitted and the Company has agreed to pay the calculated amount of a penalty
and fine in lieu of the confiscation under Section 130 read with Section 122 of the OGST Act for the
shortage of the stock of goods noticed at the business premises of the petitioner at the time of search
and seizure operation. Since the petitioner agreed to pay the penalty and the redemption fine in lieu
of the confiscation, the authority issued the demand order on 29th March, 2023 vividly reflecting
the conduct of the petitioner in evading the tax in clandestine manner. 2.2. It is pertinent to record
that pursuant to the said demand order dated 29th March, 2023, the petitioner made deposit of the
entire demanded amount which includes the redemption fine in lieu of the confiscation and after
such deposit having made, the documents seized at the time of search and seizure operation were
released to the petitioner. 2.3. After having availed the right conferred under Section 130 of the
OGST Act, the appeal was filed before the appellate authority under Section 107 of the said Act on
7th February, 2025 i.e. almost two years after the date of the said conclusion of the proceeding
raising several points including the authority of the enforcement officials in imposing the
redemption fine and penalty when the goods were not available for confiscation. Obviously, the
appellate authority rejected the said appeal on 28th February, 2025 having filed beyond the
statutory period of limitation, more particularly, that the authority lacks jurisdiction to condone the
delay beyond the outer limit set forth in sub-Section (4) of Section 107 of the said Act.
2.4. Upon dismissal of the appeal on the ground of inordinate delay and lack of power in condoning
the delay beyond the outer cap fixed under sub-Section (4) of Section 107 of the said Act, the writ
petition is filed not only challenging the order of the appellate authority, but the show cause notice
which culminated into a demand order on the premise that the moment the goods are not available,
there may not arise any occasion either for seizure or for confiscation in terms of Section 130 (2) of
the Act and, therefore, the show cause notice and the demand order are palpably illegal having
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 2
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
issued in gross violation of the statutory provision and, therefore, partakes a character of a nullity. It
is further stated that once the foundation is found invalid, illegal and infirm being violative of the
statutory provision, all subsequent decisions/order shall automatically fall.
3. On the backdrop of the aforesaid facts pleaded in the writ petition, the respective counsels were
invited to address the Court and after the closure of the oral submissions, the written notes of
argument are filed by the respective parties which are taken on record.
4. Learned counsel appearing for the petitioner submits that the demand order dated 29th March,
2023 imposing the penalty under Section 130 (1) read with Section 122 (xviii) of the OGST Act, 2017
and the redemption fine under sub-Sections (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7) of Section 130 of the said Act
for shortage of 341.360 MT of MS Billet in the stock, on the basis of a show cause notice dated 27th
March, 2023, are in clear contravention to the Clauses contained in (i), (ii) and (iv) of Section 130
(1) of the Act and, therefore, liable to be quashed and set aside. It is further submitted that on the
alleged shortage of goods, a separate proceeding has been initiated under Section 74 of the CGST
Act/OGST Act, 2017 upon issuing a show cause notice dated 30th May, 2024 and, therefore, the
interest of the revenue is fully protected despite the fact that the petitioner is pursuing its remedy
available under the said Act which is not a subject matter of the instant writ petition. It is arduously
submitted that Section 130 of the Act contains two parts wherein the first part is relatable to goods
liable to confiscation, on the other hand, the second part contains the provision relating to the
condition precedent for confiscation and imposition of redemption fine on physical availability of
the goods sought to be confiscated. It is thus submitted that if the goods are not available for
confiscation, the authority cannot impose redemption fine under the second part of Section 130 of
the Act. In support of the contention that the assessee cannot be compelled to pay the redemption
fine in lieu of a confiscation when the goods are not physically available for confiscation, the reliance
is placed upon the judgment rendered in Chinku Exports v. Commissioner of Customs, Calcutta,
1999 (112) ELT 400 (Tribunal) which was affirmed by the apex Court and such judgment is reported
in 2005 (184) ELT A36 (SC); Commissioner of Customs (Import), Mumbai v. Finesse Creation INC.,
2009 (248) ELT 122 (Bom.) which was further affirmed by the Supreme Court and such order is
reported in 2010 (255) ELT A120 (SC); Commissioner of Customs, Bangalore v. G.M. Exports, 2012
(279) ELT 493 (Kar.); Commissioner of Customs, Amritsar v. Raja Impex (P) Ltd., 2008 (229) ELT
185 (P&H) and Shiv Kripa Ispat Pvt. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Central Excise and Customs, Nasik,
2009 (235) ELT 623 (Tri.-LB).
4.1. It is strenuously argued that once the civil appeal is dismissed by the Supreme Court against the
order passed in Chinku Exports (supra), it would invite the concept of merger and the decision of
the apex Court would operate in the field, which can be supported by a judgment of the Supreme
Court rendered in Kunhayammed v. State of Kerala, 2001 (129) ELT 11 (SC). The counsel further
submits that the redemption fine can be imposed even if the goods are not available, but on the
special facts that after the confiscation of the goods, the same was released upon execution of a
bond. In other words, it is contended that if the goods so confiscated was released on
bond/undertaking given by the assessee, subsequent confiscation cannot be impinged as the goods
are not physically available which would find support from the judgment of Gujarat High Court in
case of Synergy Fertichem Pvt. Ltd. v. State of Gujarat, 2019 SCC OnLine (Gujarat) 6127.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 3
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
4.2. Learned counsel for the petitioner is very much vocal in his submission that no tax shall be
levied or collected by the State save by the authority of law under Article 265 of the Constitution of
India and, therefore, even if the assessee has consented or there appears to be a mistake committed
by the parties, the constitutional provision cannot be whittled down and placed reliance upon the
judgment of the Supreme Court in case of District Magistrate, Haridwar v. Harish Malhotra, (2015)
11 SCC 513 and Bonanzo Engg. & Chemical P. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Central Excise, 2012 (277)
ELT 145 (SC). Learned counsel submits that the matter can be seen from an another angle.
According to him, the moment the foundation of issuance of a show cause notice contemplating to
confiscate the goods which is not physically available is illegal and/or infirm, all subsequent
proceedings founded thereupon shall also be regarded as illegal and/or invalid as once the illegality
strikes at the root of the jurisdiction, all structures standing thereupon would fall. To buttress the
aforesaid submission, the reliance is placed upon the judgment of the apex Court in Kalabharati
Advertising v. Hemant Vimalnath Narichania, (2010) 9 SCC 437; Kiran Singh v. Chaman Paswan
(1954) 1 SCC 710; and Chiranjilal Shrilal Goenka v. Jasjit Singh, (1993) 2 SCC 507. On the
maintainability of the writ petition, the reliance is placed upon a judgment of the Supreme Court in
Union of India v. Vicco Laboratories, 2007 (218) ELT 647 (SC) and Magadh Sugar and Energy
Limited v. State of Bihar, (2022) 16 SCC 428 that if the show cause notice is issued without
jurisdiction, there is no fetter on the part of the aggrieved person to approach the writ Court. Lastly,
it is submitted that even if the penalty and the redemption fine are deposited under protest, in the
event of the show cause notice being an outcome of illegality and violative of the provisions of the
statute, there is no fetter put on the part of the writ Court to interfere with the same and quash and
set aside the subsequent orders founded thereupon.
5. Mr. Sunil Mishra, Standing Counsel appearing for the opposite parties refuted the contention of
the petitioner in contending that there is no infirmity and/or illegality in issuance of the show cause
notice dated 27rd March, 2023 by the authority for confiscation of the goods/documents/books or
the things under Section 130 of the said Act. Mr. Mishra would further submit that Section 67 of the
OGST Act, 2017 confers powers upon the proper officers as indicated therein to arrive at the reason
to believe that any goods liable to confiscation or any documents or books or things which in his
opinion shall be useful for or relevant to any proceeding under the said Act to search and seize the
same. He further submits that there is no challenge thrown in the writ petition on the authority of
the competent persons to search and seize the materials mentioned in Section 67 of the said Act
bestowing power upon the authority to confiscate the same for the other proceedings to be initiated
under the provision of Section 130 and/ or Section 122 of the OGST Act, 2017. He thus submits that
at the time of search and seizure, the authorized revenue authority confiscated the unaccounted
shortage of stocks, the books and the documents from the premises and issued a notice under
Form-GST-INS-02 along with the annexures containing the description of the materials. He
vehemently submits that immediately upon the service of the show cause notice dated 27th March,
2023, the petitioner admitted the stock discrepancies and conveyed a clear intention of payment of
penalty and fine in lieu of confiscation and on the basis of such admission, the authorities issued the
demand order dated 29th March, 2023 and the payment was made by the petitioner not only of the
penalty but the redemption fine in lieu of confiscation. Mr. Mishra would submit that after the
compliance of the demand order, the confiscated materials which include books and the documents
seized at the time of the search and seizure operation were released in lieu of confiscation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 4
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
5.1. Mr. Mishra is very much vocal that having sat for a considerable period of time, the petitioner
filed an appeal against the demand order before the appellate authority under Section 107 of the
OGST Act, 2017 after a gap of almost two years along with an application for condonation of delay
which was rightly rejected by the appellate authority as it sans power to condone the delay beyond
the stipulated period provided in the said provision. According to Mr. Mishra, a person should not
be permitted to approbate and reprobate at the same time by challenging the show cause notice in
the writ petition after having accepted and implemented the demand order dated 29th March, 2023.
Mr. Mishra, vociferously submits that a litigant should not be permitted to achieve a thing which
cannot be achieved directly taking recourse to an indirect manner. He thus submits that the
appellate authority has rightly rejected the appeal being barred by limitation and that the said
authority is denuded of power to condone the delay beyond the outer limit set forth in Section 107
(4) of the Act.
5.2. Mr. Mishra further submits that Section 130 of the Act has to be read by giving meaning to the
words or expressions used therein which not only includes the goods received in contravention to
any provision of Act or the Rules with an intent to evade payment of tax, but also the supplies in the
same line. It is thus submitted that where the goods are supplied without issuing the invoices
resulting into a shortage of the goods with an intent to evade tax, it is not mandatory that the goods
must be found in physical condition and, therefore, the interpretation sought to be made by the
petitioner would tantamount to frustration of the spirit of the said provision. He further submits
that the provision contained under Section 130 of the Act has to be read in conjunction with Section
122 and Section 67 (2) of the said Act and the interpretation so sought to be made by the petitioner if
accepted would render the provision contained under Section 130 of the Act a dead letter. In support
of the contention that the confiscation can be made even when the goods are not physically
available, Mr. Mishra relies upon a judgment of the Gujarat High Court rendered in case of Synergy
Fertichem Pvt. Ltd. (supra) and Madras High Court judgment in M/s. Visteon Automotive Systems
India Limited v. CESTAT, Chennai, 2017 SCC OnLine (Madras) 37615. Mr. Mishra thus submits that
in view of the facts involved in the instant case, the petitioner cannot take a rebound and challenge
the show cause notice and, therefore, the writ petition deserves dismissal.
6. Both the counsels appearing for the respective parties advanced lengthy arguments on the powers
of the competent authorities to confiscate the goods which are not physically available and
imposition of the redemption fine in lieu of such confiscation under Section 130 of the Act. Recently,
the trend has developed in assailing the show cause notice and the demand order in the writ
jurisdiction after exhausting the statutory remedy of appeal provided in the Act belatedly, when the
appellate authority declined to condone the delay beyond the outer limit set forth under Section 107
(4) of the Act on the pretext that once the foundation of initiating the proceeding is found invalid
and illegal, all subsequent decisions taken thereupon are liable to fall and, therefore, the writ Court
is not denuded a power to decide such fundamental issue in exercise of power of judicial review. The
arguments are advanced that once the order passed by the authority is per se illegal and attracts the
principles of nullity, such action or a decision is amenable to be challenged before the Court or even
in collateral proceeding. The authorities on the above proposition have been sighted to achieve a
desired result taking a shelter under Article 226 of the Constitution of India as a collateral
proceeding. The three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court rendered in Kiran Singh (supra) as cited
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 5
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
for the proposition that the decree passed by the Court having inherent lack of jurisdiction is always
perceived as nullity and its invalidity can be set up, anywhere or everywhere, it is sought to be
enforced and even in a collateral proceeding. The relevant excerpt from the said judgment is
reproduced as under:
"6. The answer to these contentions must depend on what the position in law is when
a court entertains a suit or an appeal over which it has no jurisdiction, and what the
effect of Section 11 of the Suits Valuation Act is on that position. It is a fundamental
principle well established that a decree passed by a court without jurisdiction is a
nullity, and that its invalidity could be set up whenever and wherever it is sought to
be enforced or relied upon, even at the stage of execution and even in collateral
proceedings. A defect of jurisdiction, whether it is pecuniary or territorial, or whether
it is in respect of the subject-matter of the action, strikes at the very authority of the
court to pass any decree, and such a defect cannot be cured even by consent of
parties. If the question now under consideration fell to be determined only on the
application of general principles governing the matter, there can be no doubt that the
District Court of Monghyr was coram non judice, and that its judgment and decree
would be nullities. The question is what is the effect of Section 11 of the Suits
Valuation Act on this position."
6.1. Although the judgment rendered by the three Judge Bench in Kiran Singh (supra) was an
authority before a radical amendment had been brought in the Code of Civil Procedure in the year
1977, yet the ratio of the said judgment was considered to have its application and recognized in a
subsequent judgment of the Supreme Court in Chiranjilal Shrilal Goenka (supra) in the following:
"18. It is settled law that a decree passed by a court without jurisdiction on the
subject-matter or on the grounds on which the decree made which goes to the root of
its jurisdiction or lacks inherent jurisdiction is a coram non judice. A decree passed
by such a court is a nullity and is non est. Its invalidity can be set up whenever it is
sought to be enforced or is acted upon as a foundation for a right, even at the stage of
execution or in collateral proceedings. The defect of jurisdiction strikes at the very
authority of the court to pass decree which cannot be cured by consent or waiver of
the party."
6.2 In Kalabharati Advertising (supra), the legal maxim sublato fundamento, cadit opus meaning
thereby in case a foundation is removed, the superstructure falls, was applied in a situation where
the decree passed by a Court lacking inherent jurisdiction over the subject matter would always be
regarded as a nullity and non est in the eye of law in the following:
"21. In Badrinath v. State of T.N. [(2000) 8 SCC 395 :
2001 SCC (L&S) 13] this Court observed that once the basis of a proceeding is gone,
all consequential acts, action, orders would fall to the ground automatically and this
principle of consequential order which is applicable to judicial and quasi-judicial
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 6
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
proceedings is equally applicable to the administrative orders."
7. There is no quarrel to the settled proposition of law as enunciated in the above report that the
Court lacking inherent jurisdiction in relation to a subject matter if passes a decree which is per se
nullity and, therefore, amenable to be assailed even at the stage of execution of the said decree or
order and can further be challenged in any collateral proceedings. It is no longer res integra that the
Court can only assume jurisdiction conferred by law and even by consent of parties such jurisdiction
cannot be assumed. The jurisdiction exercised by the Court flows from the authority of law which
can neither be exercised nor be assumed on the consent of the parties. It also admits no ambiguity in
law that the Court exercising jurisdiction not vested in it in passing an order is regarded as a nullity
and non est in the eye of law. It may have its equal application upon the statutory authority
exercising powers provided in the statute and in the event such power is not so conferred, yet the
same is exercised which may be assailed and/or challenged before the higher forum provided in the
statute and also otherwise. Such broad and fundamental principles discerned from the aforesaid
reports are to be applied on a factual matrix and not in abstract manner. The Court cannot shut its
sight on the conduct of the parties in relation to the proceedings, more particularly, after exhausting
all the remedies available in the statute. Had it been a case that the authority lacks inherent
jurisdiction or powers which does not require a deep scrutiny into it, it is open to the writ Court to
interfere, but the position would be different in the event the power can be traced from the statutory
provisions and the challenge is founded upon irregular exercise of such power in a collateral
proceeding. A distinction must be drawn between an inherent lack of powers or jurisdiction and the
exercise of powers so conferred in an erroneous manner. In the latter situation, it can be corrected
by approaching the appellate forum under the statute and should not be permitted to be opened
under the extraordinary jurisdiction conferred upon the High Courts under Article 226 of the
Constitution. Even though the proceedings may be maintainable under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, yet we see no absolute fetter on the part of the High Court exercising writ
jurisdiction in refusing to entertain the writ petition. The support can be gainfully lend to a
judgment of the apex Court in Vicco Laboratories (supra) where the show cause notice was
challenged invoking the jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and a plea was
taken that the Court should not interfere with such show cause notice as the authorities have not
applied its conscious mind as yet, the apex Court clarified that normally the Court should relegate
the parties to participate in the proceeding, but in the event, the show cause notice is issued either
without jurisdiction or in abuse of process of law, there is no absolute bar that the writ Court would
refuse to entertain the plea at such a stage in the following:
"30. Normally, the writ court should not interfere at the stage of issuance of show
cause notice by the authorities. In such a case, the parties get ample opportunity to
put forth their contentions before the concerned authorities and to satisfy the
concerned authorities about the absence of case for proceeding against the person
against whom the show cause notices have been issued. Abstinence from interference
at the stage of issuance of show cause notice in order to relegate the parties to the
proceedings before the concerned authorities is the normal rule. However, the said
rule is not without exceptions. Where a show cause notice is issued either without
jurisdiction or in an abuse of process of law, certainly in that case, the writ court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 7
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
would not hesitate to interfere even at the stage of issuance of show cause notice. The
interference at the show cause notice stage should be rare and not in a routine
manner. Mere assertion by the writ petitioner that notice was without jurisdiction
and/or abuse of process of law would not suffice. It should be prima facie established
to be so. Where factual adjudication would be necessary, interference is ruled out."
7.1. Even in Magadh Sugar and Energy Limited (supra), the three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court
reiterated and reinstated the situation under which the High Court can exercise its jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in the following:
"20. While a High Court would normally not exercise its writ jurisdiction under
Article 226 of the Constitution if an effective and efficacious alternative remedy is
available, the existence of an alternative remedy does not by itself bar the High Court
from exercising its jurisdiction in certain contingencies. This principle has been
crystallised by this Court in Whirlpool Corpn. v. Registrar of Trade Marks [Whirlpool
Corpn. v. Registrar of Trade Marks, (1998) 8 SCC 1] and Harbanslal Sahnia v. Indian
Oil Corpn. Ltd. [Harbanslal Sahnia v. Indian Oil Corpn. Ltd., (2003) 2 SCC 107]
Recently, in Radha Krishan Industries v. State of H.P. [Radha Krishan Industries v.
State of H.P., (2021) 6 SCC 771] a two- Judge Bench of this Court of which one of us
was a part of (D.Y. Chandrachud, J.) has summarised the principles governing the
exercise of writ jurisdiction by the High Court in the presence of an alternative
remedy. This Court has observed : (Radha Krishan Industries case [Radha Krishan
Industries v. State of H.P., (2021) 6 SCC 771] , SCC p. 795, para 27) "27. The
principles of law which emerge are that:
27.1. The power under Article 226 of the Constitution to issue writs can be exercised
not only for the enforcement of fundamental rights, but for any other purpose as well.
27.2. The High Court has the discretion not to entertain a writ petition. One of the
restrictions placed on the power of the High Court is where an effective alternative
remedy is available to the aggrieved person.
27.3. Exceptions to the rule of alternative remedy arise where : (a) the writ petition
has been filed for the enforcement of a fundamental right protected by Part III of the
Constitution; (b) there has been a violation of the principles of natural justice; (c) the
order or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction; or (d) the vires of a legislation is
challenged. 27.4. An alternative remedy by itself does not divest the High Court of its
powers under Article 226 of the Constitution in an appropriate case though
ordinarily, a writ petition should not be entertained when an efficacious alternative
remedy is provided by law.
27.5. When a right is created by a statute, which itself prescribes the remedy or
procedure for enforcing the right or liability, resort must be had to that particular
statutory remedy before invoking the discretionary remedy under Article 226 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 8
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
Constitution. This rule of exhaustion of statutory remedies is a rule of policy,
convenience and discretion.
27.6. In cases where there are disputed questions of fact, the High Court may decide
to decline jurisdiction in a writ petition. However, if the High Court is objectively of
the view that the nature of the controversy requires the exercise of its writ
jurisdiction, such a view would not readily be interfered with."
21. The principle of alternate remedies and its exceptions was also reiterated recently in the decision
in Commr. of State Tax v. Commercial Steel Ltd. [Commr. of State Tax v. Commercial Steel Ltd.,
(2022) 16 SCC 447] In State of H.P. v. Gujarat Ambuja Cement Ltd. [State of H.P. v. Gujarat Ambuja
Cement Ltd., (2005) 6 SCC 499] this Court has held that a writ petition is maintainable before the
High Court if the Taxing Authorities have acted beyond the scope of their jurisdiction. This Court
observed : (Gujarat Ambuja Cement case [State of H.P. v. Gujarat Ambuja Cement Ltd., (2005) 6
SCC 499] , SCC pp. 517-18, para 23) "23. Where under a statute there is an allegation of
infringement of fundamental rights or when on the undisputed facts the Taxing Authorities are
shown to have assumed jurisdiction which they do not possess can be the grounds on which the writ
petitions can be entertained. But normally, the High Court should not entertain writ petitions unless
it is shown that there is something more in a case, something going to the root of the jurisdiction of
the officer, something which would show that it would be a case of palpable injustice to the writ
petitioner to force him to adopt the remedies provided by the statute. It was noted by this Court in L.
Hirday Narain v. CIT [L. Hirday Narain v. CIT, (1970) 2 SCC 355] that if the High Court had
entertained a petition despite availability of alternative remedy and heard the parties on merits it
would be ordinarily unjustifiable for the High Court to dismiss the same on the ground of
non-exhaustion of statutory remedies; unless the High Court finds that factual disputes are involved
and it would not be desirable to deal with them in a writ petition."
7.2. What emerges from the above report that ordinarily the High Court should refuse to entertain
the writ petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India if the efficacious alternative remedy
is provided in the statute. Ordinarily, the High Court should relegate the parties to exhaust the
statutory remedy so provided unless the challenges thrown in the writ petition to the action of the
authorities is in gross violation of the fundamental rights guaranteed under Part-III of the
Constitution; violation of principles of natural justice; vires of the Act or the subordinate legislation
and the order or the proceeding is wholly without jurisdiction. It is highlighted that the High Court
may decline to entertain the writ petition if it involves a disputed question of facts subject to the
objective satisfaction of the High Court that it invites the exercise of the jurisdiction. Even though
the power of the writ Court is not brindled in absolute sense, yet the High Court may refuse to
entertain the writ petition in the event the point raised therein is amenable to be assailed before the
statutory forum provided the case of such nature as envisaged in the above report is made out. The
plea of jurisdiction striking at the root of the powers exercised by the statutory authority can be
determined by the writ Court provided there appears to be a complete lack of such power and once
the Court find a little departure, it should ordinarily relegate the parties to the forum available in the
statute.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 9
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
8. In the present case, there is no dispute on the conferment of power upon the proper officer to
make inspection, search and seizure upon the formation of a reason to believe that a taxable person
has suppressed any transaction relating to the supply of goods and services or both or the stock of
goods in hand or any goods liable to confiscation or any documents, books or things which in his
opinion shall be useful and relevant to any proceeding under the Act, sub-Section (2) of Section 67 is
quoted as under:
"67. Power of inspection, search and seizure xxx xxx xxx (2) Where the proper officer,
not below the rank of Joint Commissioner, either pursuant to an inspection carried
out under sub-section (1) or otherwise, has reasons to believe that any goods liable to
confiscation or any documents or books or things, which in his opinion shall be
useful for or relevant to any proceedings under this Act, are secreted in any place, he
may authorise in writing any other officer of State tax to search and seize or may
himself search and seize such goods, documents or books or things:
Provided that where it is not practicable to seize any such goods, the proper officer, or
any officer authorised by him, may serve on the owner or the custodian of the goods
an order that he shall not remove, part with, or otherwise deal with the goods except
with the previous permission of such officer:
Provided further that the documents or books or things so seized shall be retained by
such officer only for so long as may be necessary for their examination and for any
inquiry or proceedings under this Act."
9. It is thus evident and eminent from the aforesaid provision that the power is conferred upon the
proper officer to make search and seizure on a perceive reason to believe the eventualities provided
in Section 67 liable to confiscation. It therefore cannot be said that the power to confiscate is
eminently and/or evidently absent in the said proper officer and, therefore, exercise of such power
cannot be fundamentally flawed on the ground of complete lack of inherent jurisdiction and powers.
Even Section 122 of the Act exposes the taxable person liable for a penalty in the event it supplies
any goods or services or both without issue of any invoices or issues an incorrect or false invoice
with regard to any supply apart from the other incidents provided therein. Section 130 of the Act
contains an exhaustive provision relating to the confiscation of goods or a conveyance and a levy of
penalty which imbibes within itself the eventuality of supplying or receiving any goods in
contravention to any provisions of the Act or the Rules made thereunder with intend to evade
payment of tax. Sub-Section (2) of Section 130 of the Act postulates an option to pay a redemption
fine in lieu of the confiscation. The conjoint reading of the provision as aforesaid are the expositions
of the powers and the jurisdiction conferred upon the proper authorities not only to the inspection,
search and seizure, but also the confiscation the goods and the payment of redemption fine in lieu of
such confiscation. It is thus not a case of a complete lack of jurisdiction or powers, but hovers
around the exercise of such powers or jurisdiction in relation to goods liable to confiscation and the
meaning to be assigned to the word 'goods'. The word 'goods' is defined in Section 2 (52) of the said
Act to mean every kind of movable property other than money and securities and includes
actionable claim, growing crops, grass and things attached to or forming part of the land which are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 10
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
agreed to be severed before supply or under a contract of supply.
10. The canon of statutory interpretation in relation to a meaning to be assigned to a word given in
the said statute which contain the expressions, "means and includes" should be given a broader
meaning. The word 'include' in a definition provision is always regarded as expansive definition and,
therefore, a word of wide connotation. It imbibes within itself, the things which apart from the other
meaning, but included within the meaning of the said word and, therefore, to be considered in a
wider perspective. The expression "every kind of movable property" has to be understood on the
meaning assigned to the goods in the said definition section and, therefore, any restrictive meaning
ascribed to the said word would oppose the legislative intent. Although the goods in its grammatical
meaning is understood in the larger perspective, but the moment the definition is given in the
statute, wherever such word is appearing in the said statute, it should be ascribed the meaning as
given thereunder and no external aid should be resorted to. The tangible movable property of every
description or kind is included within the definition of goods and, therefore, the expression supplies
or receives any goods in contravention to the provision of the Act has to be understood in such
literal sense and support from an external aid should be avoided. In catena of judgments relied upon
by the respective parties on the powers of the authorities to confiscate the goods and payment of
redemption fine in lieu thereof delivered in a case of a Customs Act are relied upon by the respective
parties on the doctrine of pari materia. The decision rendered by the Supreme Court in Weston
Components Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs, New Delhi, 2000 (115) ELT 278 (SC) is relied upon
by the several High Courts and the Supreme Court on the proposition when the goods are not
physically available for confiscation whether the redemption fine in lieu of such confiscation is
permissible in law. The apex Court in the said decision held as under:
"It is contended by the learned counsel for the appellant that redemption fine could
not be imposed because the goods were no longer in the custody of the
respondent-authority. It is an admitted fact that the goods were released to the
appellant on an application made by it and on the appellant executing a bond. Under
these circumstances if subsequently it is found that the import was not valid or that
there was any other irregularity which would entitle the customs authorities to
confiscate the said goods, then the mere fact that the goods were released on the
bond being executed, would not take away the power of the customs authorities to
levy redemption fine."
11. The Bombay High Court in Finesse Creation INC (supra) held that there is no fetter on the part of
the authority to confiscate the goods not physically available, but such situation would arise when
the goods which were physically available were released on execution of a bond or undertaking and
not otherwise in the following:
"5. In our opinion, the concept of redemption fine arises in the event the goods are
available and are to be redeemed. If the goods are not available, there is no question
of redemption of the goods. Under Section 125 a power is conferred on the Customs
Authorities in case import of goods becoming prohibited on account of breach of the
provisions of the Act, rules or notification, to order confiscation of the goods with a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 11
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
discretion in the authorities on passing the order of confiscation, to release the goods
on payment of redemption fine. Such an order can only be passed if the goods are
available, for redemption. The question of confiscating the goods would not arise if
there are no goods available for confiscation nor consequently redemption. Once
goods cannot be redeemed no fine can be imposed. The fine is in the nature of
computation to the state for the wrong done by the importer/exporter."
12. In Chinku Exports (supra), the Tribunal in unequivocal term held when the goods are not
available physically for confiscation then in absence of any bond or security for release thereof, the
power of confiscation should not be exercised and consequently, redemption fine in lieu of
confiscation cannot be imposed.
13. The Punjab and Haryana High Court in Raja Impex (P) Ltd. (supra), upon taking note of the
judgment of the apex Court in Weston Components Ltd. (supra) and the judgment of the Tribunal in
Chinku Exports (supra) held thus:
"12. It may also be noticed here that in the case of M/s. Weston Components Ltd. v.
Commissioner of Customs, New Delhi (supra), the goods were released to the
assessee on an application made by it and on the execution of a bond by the assessee
and in those circumstances, the Hon'ble Apex Court held that the mere fact that the
goods were released on the bond being executed would not take away the power of
custom authority to levy redemption fine. A reading of the judgment/order of the
Hon'ble Apex Court in M/s. Weston Components Ltd. v. Commissioner of Customs,
New Delhi (supra), would show that the Apex Court has taken the view that
redemption fine can be imposed even in the absence of the goods as the goods were
released to the appellant on an application made by it and on the appellant executing
a bond. Since the goods were released on a bond the position is as if the goods were
available. The ratio of the above decision cannot be understood that in all cases the
goods were permitted to be cleared initially and later proceedings were taken for
under-valuation or other irregularity, even then redemption fine could be imposed.
We are, therefore, not inclined to accept the contention raised by the appellant on
this issue and set aside the redemption fine.
13. The reliance of learned counsel for the revenue upon the provisions of Section 125
of the Act is also misconceived. Section 125 of the Act is applicable only in those cases
which have been cleared by the concerned authorities subject to furnishing
undertaking/bond etc. However, in the present case, admittedly, the goods were
cleared by the respondent- authorities without execution of any bond/undertaking by
the assessee. Thus, in view of the fact and circumstances of the case, we find no error
in teh impugned orders. No substantial question of law arises for our determination
in the present appeal and the same is hereby dismissed."
14. We need not multiply the other judgments so cited on such proposition as the distinction is
noticeable that in relation to a confiscation of the goods under the Customs Act, in the event, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 12
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
goods are released on bond or on undertaking and subsequently the same is held liable to confiscate,
there is no fetter on the part of the authorities in confiscating such goods even in absence of its
physical presence and imposition of redemption fine in lieu thereof. Even in case of Synergy
Fertichem Pvt. Ltd. (supra), the Division Bench of the Gujarat High Court dealing with the case
concerning the powers of the authority under Section 130 of the Act held that pre-requisite
condition enshrined in Section 130 of the Act is that the goods are liable to be confiscated and the
fine in lieu thereof, if paid, may not invite such confiscation and held as under:
"174. The per-requisite for making an offer of fine under Section 130 of the Act is
pursuant to the finding that the goods are liable to be confiscated. In other words, if
there is no authorisation for confiscation of such goods, the question of making an
offer by the proper officer to pay the "redemption fine", would not arise. Therefore,
the basic premise upon which the citadel of Section 130 of the Act rests is that the
goods in question are liable to be confiscated under the Act. It, therefore, follows that
what is sought to be offered to be redeemed, are the goods, but not the improper
conduct of the owner to transport the goods in contravention of the provisions of the
Act or the Rules. We must also bare in mind that the owner of the goods is liable to
pay penalty under Section 122 of the Act. The fine contemplated is for redeeming the
goods, whereas the owner of the goods is penalized under Section 122 for doing or
omitting to do any act which rendered such goods liable to be confiscated under
Section 130 of the Act. In the aforesaid context, we may refer to and rely upon a
decision of the Madras High Court in the case of M/s. Visteon Automotive Systems
vs. The Customs, Excise & Service Tax Appellate Tribunal, C.M.A No.2857 of 2011,
decided on 11th August, 2017, wherein the following has been observed in para-23;
"23. The penalty directed against the importer under Section 112 and the fine payable
under Section 125 operate in two different fields. The fine under Section 125 is in lieu
of confiscation of the goods. The payment of fine followed up by payment of duty and
other charges leviable, as per sub-section (2) of Section 125, fetches relief for the
goods from getting confiscated. By subjecting the goods to payment of duty and other
charges, the improper and irregular importation is sought to be regularised, whereas,
by subjecting the goods to payment of fine under sub-section (1) of Section 125, the
goods are saved from getting confiscated. Hence, the availability of the goods is not
necessary for imposing the redemption fine. The opening words of Section 125,
"Whenever confiscation of any goods is authorised by this Act ....", brings out the
point clearly. The power to impose redemption fine springs from the authorisation of
confiscation of goods provided for under Section 111 of the Act. When once power of
authorisation for confiscation of goods gets traced to the said Section 111 of the Act,
we are of the opinion that the physical availability of goods is not so much relevant.
The redemption fine is in fact to avoid such consequences flowing from Section 111
only. Hence, the payment of redemption fine saves the goods from getting
confiscated. Hence, their physical availability does not have any significance for
imposition of redemption fine under Section 125 of the Act. We accordingly answer
question No.(iii). "
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 13
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
15. We may not lose sight of a Division Bench judgment of this Court in Shri D. Murali Mohan
Patanaik v. Secretary to Government of Odisha, Finance Department and others (W.P.(C) No.34787
of 2022 decided on 31st January, 2023) wherein in an identical situation and on somewhat parity of
facts, the Court declined to exercise the power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in order
to apply and appreciate the decision of the coordinate Bench, it is our ardent duty to find the facts
parity. Undeniably, on the basis of a search and seizure, several documents/materials were seized
detecting the shortage of the sizable quantity of MS Billet which was not accounted for nor any valid
tax invoices were issued and, therefore, intended to evade the payment of tax. The
materials/documents were sized under Form-GST INS-02. Immediately, the show cause notice was
issued on 27th March, 2023 as to why the proceeding should not be initiated and confiscation of the
goods be not made. The petitioner communicated the authority that the Company has admitted the
stock discrepancies and agreed to pay the calculated amount of penalty and fine in lieu of
confiscation under Section 130 of the Act. Solely on the basis of such confession on the shortage of
stocks and concession on payment of penalty and fine in lieu of confiscation, the demand order was
issued which was challenged under Section 106 of the Act before the appellate authority beyond the
outer limit set forth under the said provision. The appellate authority refused to condone the delay
of nearly two years as the power of condonation of the period in filing the appeal have put a outer
limit beyond which the appellate authority cannot exercise powers.
16. We find no ambiguity in the order of the appellate authority as the law is somewhat settled that
the moment the outer cap is fixed in the statute beyond which the authority cannot travel, the
rejection in this regard cannot be faulted with. The discretion vested upon the authority to condone
the delay if brindled with an outer cap being fixed in the statute, the authority cannot exercise the
power beyond such limit.
17. The petitioner was conscious that the order of the appellate authority in rejecting the application
on the ground of limitation cannot be assailed on the legal parameters took a circuitous route under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India assailing the show cause notice and imposition of the
redemption fine in lieu of confiscation of a goods which is not physically available.
18. In the identical circumstances, the coordinate Bench in case of Shri D. Murali Mohan Patanaik
(supra) as referred above found that once the payment is made without protest it is not open to
challenge the entire procedure adopted for confiscation liable to be struck down. Though the
petitioner in the instant case pleaded that the said payment of redemption fine and penalty was
under protest, but we do not find from the documents that any such protest was recorded; rather,
there has been categorical stand taken before the authority admitting the shortage of the stocks and
conceding the payment of penalty and the fine in lieu of confiscation. The coordinate Bench in such
perspective where the payment is made without any protest refused to exercise the jurisdiction
under Article 226 of the Constitution of India in the following:
"7. Initially, Mr. Pattanaik, learned counsel for the Petitioner repeatedly urged that he
was aggrieved by the above letter. When it was pointed out to him that there was
nothing in the letter about which he can be aggrieved, his contention was that the
Petitioner had actually made payments under protest and was, on account of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 14
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
above letter, unable to file any appeal against the demands already raised and which
had been paid by the Petitioner.
8. If the Petitioner wanted to contest the demand raised, he ought to have adopted
the procedure already outlined under Rule 142 (1A) of the OGST Rules. For reasons
best known to him, he did not opt for that procedure. Also, till date, he has actually
not registered any protest with the Department which ought to have been made
contemporaneous with the making of the payment. Three months after making such
payment, he has sent a vague letter contending that the liability is "not acceptable"
which is neither here nor there since the Petitioner had already made the full payment of the tax
demanded.
9. The Petitioner has by his own conduct disabled himself from availing the remedy available to him
in law, if indeed the payment was made under protest.
Since, there is no material to support the contention of the Petitioner that he made payment of the
demanded tax under protest, the Court is not persuaded to accept such submission at this stage."
19. The comity of the judicial discipline demands the adherence of the decision of the coordinate
Bench and the only option left to the subsequent coordinate Bench in the event of any dissent to
refer the matter to the Chief Justice to constitute a Larger Bench. The subsequent coordinate Bench
must record a cogent reason for dissent and in the event, noticeable materials are not eminent and
evident, uniformity in a decision is the virtue.
20. In view of the discussions made hereinabove, we do not find that the instant case warrants
invocation of extraordinary powers conferred under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
21. The writ petition thus fails. No order as to costs. I agree.
(B.P. Routray) (Harish Tandon)
Judge Chief Justice
S.K. Guin/PA
Designation: Personal Assistant
Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Date: 15-May-2025 19:19:04
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 15
M/S. Viraj Steel & Energy Private Ltd vs Joint Commissioner Of State Tax .... ... on 15 May, 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188373405/ 16
