M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp.
... on 5 March, 2024
Author: B.R.Sarangi
Bench: B.R.Sarangi
ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
AFR W.P.(C) NO. 32512 OF 2023
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and
227 of the Constitution of India.
---------------
M/s. Swosti Powercon, Bargarh ..... Petitioner
-Versus-
State of Odisha and others ..... Opp. Parties For petitioner : M/s Ipsit Aurobindo Acharya, and C.K.
Rout, Advocates For opp. parties : Mr. P.P. Mohanty, Addl. Government Advocate [O.P. No.1] Mr.
Ashok Kumar Panigrahi and Ankita Panigrahi, Advocates [O.Ps. 2 & 3] P R E S E N T:
THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE DR. B.R.SARANGI AND THE HONOURABLE
MR. JUSTICE G. SATAPATHY Date of Hearing and Judgment :: 05.03.2024 DR.
B.R. SARANGI,J. M/s. Swosti Powercon, Bargarh, a proprietorship firm, represented
through its sole proprietor, has filed this writ petition seeking to quash the order
dated 19.09.2023 rejecting his bid // 2 // communicated through e-mail vide
Annexure-3 series, and to direct the opposite parties to consider the HT License
certificate along with the bid of the petitioner correctly as per website copy in https://
eiceletricityodisha.nic.in, as mentioned in the representation vide Annexure-5 series,
and also to allow the petitioner to participate in the bid and to issue LOA/Work
Order in its favour in the event of success in the bid.
2. The factual matrix of the case, in brief, is that the Executive Engineer, Sonepur Lift Irrigation
Division- opposite party no.3 issued tender call notice on 01.08.2023 in respect of 90 numbers of
packages for the work "Installation and Energisation of (Revival) River Lift Irrigation Projects with
Supply of all materials on Turnkey basis". The estimated cost for each package, EMD amount and
cost of bid documents were mentioned in the Detailed Tender Call Notice dated 01.08.2023. The
last date to submit the bids was fixed to 24.08.2023 and the date and time for opening of tender was
mentioned as 25.08.2023 at 11.00 AM. As per the conditions // 3 // stipulated in the tender call
notice, the petitioner, having the required eligibility criteria, applied for the same. The petitioner
was having the H.T. License bearing No. 3104, which was valid till 05.11.2023, i.e. for the period of
more than one month from 25.08.2023 (date of opening of tender). The petitioner submitted its
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 1
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
bids for 12 different numbers of packages under DTCN dated 01.08.2023 including the present
package. It had also entered into an agreement with another contractor for the civil work part under
the package, as allowed in terms of the DTCN dated 01.08.2023. The petitioner had submitted the
Electrical (HT) License-HT 3104 issued by the Electrical Licensing Board Odisha (ELBO)-opposite
party no.4 dated 13.12.2021, which was valid till 05.11.2023. As per the conditions stipulated in the
tender document, the petitioner applied for the work in question, but opposite party no.3 issued an
e-mail on 19.09.2023 stating that its bid has not been accepted. On 19.09.2023, rejection order was
uploaded on the portal wherein the reason for rejection of the bid of the // 4 // petitioner was
mentioned "Invalid HT License submitted". Hence, this writ petition.
3. Mr. I.A. Acharya, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner contended that the bid
identification no. OLIC-SNP 01/2023-24 dated 01.08.2023 clearly indicates the date and time for
opening of tender in the office of the Executive Engineer, L.I. Division, Subarnapur on 25.08.2023
at 11.00 Hrs. Clause-2.2 of the said bid identification prescribes eligibility that the contractor should
have valid civil license of requisite class as per the Tender Call Notice and valid H.T. license issued
by ELBO and validity of both the licenses should be for a period at least one month from the date of
the opening of the tender. It is contended that if the advertisement shows the date of opening of the
tender as 25.08.2023, the validity of the licenses should be till 25.09.2023. Learned counsel for the
petitioner brought to the notice of this Court with regard to the Electrical Contractor License
granted in favour of the petitioner, wherein the validity period has been prescribed as 05.11.2023.
Therefore, it is contended that by the time // 5 // the advertisement was issued, the petitioner had
valid H.T. license and, as such, it has been mentioned in N.B. of the said license that the contractor
license is treated to be valid if and only if certificates/permits of all the above staff are valid.
Thereby, it is contended that since the petitioner has possessed valid Electrical Contractor License,
rejection of the bid of the petitioner on the ground of submission of invalid H.T. License under
Annexure-3 series dated 19.09.2023 cannot be sustained in the eye of law. Learned counsel for the
petitioner contended that the Electrical Contractor License contains two notes, i.e. "(i) Contractor
License is treated to be valid if and only if certificates/ permits of all the above staff are valid and (ii)
This document is not valid unless it is checked/ verified with official website:
https://eiceletricityodisha.nic.in." Therefore, while considering the bid submitted by
the petitioner, the opposite parties should have taken into consideration the above
mentioned notes while examining the license granted in favour of the petitioner. But,
without taking the same into consideration, the impugned rejection // 6 // cannot be
sustained on the flimsy ground "Invalid HT License submitted". Thereby, there is
absolutely non-
application of mind by the tendering authority. It is thus contended that in exercise of
powers under judicial review, this Court can interfere with such arbitrary rejection of
the bid submitted by the petitioner, who compiled the terms and conditions in letter
and spirit, and allow the petitioner to participate in the bid process, so far as twelve
works are concerned for which the petitioner had submitted its bid.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 2
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
4. Mr. P.P. Mohanty, learned Additional Government Advocate appearing for the
State-opposite parties contended that since the tender inviting authority, i.e., Orissa
Lift Irrigation Corporation is a public sector undertaking of the State Odisha and an
independent body, and the impugned action having been taken by such organisation,
the State has no role to play, so far as tender in question is concerned.
5. Mr. A.K. Panigrahi, learned counsel appearing for opposite parties no.2 and 3
raised objection with // 7 // regard to maintainability of the writ petition stating inter
alia that the matters/disputes relating to the contract cannot be agitated nor the
alleged terms of the contract can be enforced through writ jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India. He contended that since the petitioner does not
possess valid license, as per the eligibility, the authority is well justified in rejecting
the bid of the petitioner. Under clause 3.10, it has been provided that conditional
tenders are liable for rejection.
Similarly, as per clause 3.13 in case of any discrepancies in the description of the items in the Tender
Call Notice, the same can only be resolved by the Executive Engineer/ Superintending Engineer,
OLIC, whose view is final, binding and conclusive for the purpose of the contract. Any incomplete
bid submitted is liable to be rejected as per clause 3.14 of the DTCN. As the bid of the petitioner has
been rejected on the ground that H.T. license submitted by the petitioner is invalid, any
representation filed to that extent cannot be sustained. Therefore, he prayed for dismissal of the writ
petition.
// 8 //
6. Though notice has been issued to opposite party no.4 and A.D. has returned after valid service, as
is evident from the office note dated 12.10.2023, but since nobody entered appearance on behalf of
opposite party no.4, this Court adjourned the matter. However, learned counsel appearing for both
the petitioner and opposite parties no.2 and 3 contended that since opposite party no.4 is the license
granting authority and there is no dispute with regard to the license granted by such authority, there
is no need for participation of opposite party no.4 in the proceeding itself. Thereby, with the consent
of learned counsel for the parties, the matter is taken up to be decided at the stage of admission.
7. This Court heard Mr. I.A. Acharya, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner; Mr. P.P.
Mohanty, learned Additional Government Advocate appearing for the State-opposite party no.1 and
Mr. A.K. Panigrahi, learned counsel appearing for opposite parties no. 2 and
3. With the consent of learned counsel for the parties, this writ petition is being disposed of finally at
the stage of admission.
// 9 //
8. Before delving into the merits of the case, for a just and proper adjudication of the case, the
relevant provisions of the tender document are quoted hereunder:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 3
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
"ODISHA LIFT IRRIGATION CORPORATION LTD. OFFICE OF THE EXECUTIVE
ENGINEER LIFT IRRIGATION DIVISION, SUBARNAPUR.
Procurem Bid Availability of Last date & Date & Time of
ent Identifi Tender On-Line for time of Opening of tender
Officer cation Bidding seeking in the office of the
No. tender Executive
clarification Engineer, L.I.
Division,
Subarnapur
Executive OLIC- 16-08-23 24-08- 23-08-23 at 25-08-23 at 11.00
Engineer, SNP- at 11.00 2023 17.00 Hrs. Hrs.
L.I. 01/20 Hrs at
Division, 23-24 17.00
subarnap Hrs
ur
"Section-II
IMPORTANT INFORMATION FOR CONTRACTOR 2.1 The Bid documents
consisting of plans, specification, schedule of quantities/rates and set of terms &
condition of contract and other necessary documents can be Seen in the website
www.tendersodisha.gov.in.
2.2 Eigibility: (1) The contractor should have valid Civil license of requisite class as
per the Tender call Notice and valid H.T. // 10 // license issued by ELBO and validity
of both the licenses should be for a period at least 1 month from the date of the
opening of the tender. (ii) In case the Contractor has only the Civil or Electrical
license, then he has to make joint venture agreement with other Contractor and the
joint venture agreement should be registered in any registration office only. However
the Electrical Contractor will hand over the Electrical installation to TPWODL. (iii) in
case of joint venture candidate no Price preference and other financial benefits
allowed to SC/ST contractor/Engineer Contractor/ Physical Handicapped
Contractor. (iv) The contractor should have valid GST Registration certificate and
PAN issued by I.T. Department.
2.3 No hard copy document be submitted to the undersigned.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 4
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
2.6 The last date seeking clarification towards "e" Procurement portal using his/her
DSC up to 17.00 Hrs of Dt. 23.08.2023. through e-challan"
"SECTION-IV GENERAL TERMS AND CONDITIONS 4.1 Method of submission of
tender documents Xxx xxx xxx The scanned copy of following documents should be
uploaded with a tender
(i) Xxx xxx xxx
(iv) Valid Electrical (H.T.) License issued by E.L.B.O."
"GOVERNMENT OF ODISHA ENERGY DEPRTMENT Electrical Licensing Board of
Odisha (ELBO), BHUBANESWAR FORM-D (Regulation 25-26-28) ELECTRICAL
CONTRACTOR LICENSE I do hereby certify that electrical contractor license granted
to SWOSTI POWERCON has been renewed on this day to carry out electrical work
upto specified voltage level in the State of Odisha under Electrical Licensing Board,
Regulation, Odisha 2014 for the purpose of Regulation 29(1) of the Central Electrical
Authority (Measuring Relating to Saftey & Electricity Authority (Measures Relating
to Safety & Electric Supply) Regulations,2010 (as amended).
Name of the Farm - SWOSTI POWERCON
// 11 //
Name of the Proprietor -DEVKANAN SAHU
Authorized Representative -
Business Address BARGARH, BARGARH,
BARGARH
Date of Birth 25/03/1989
Mobile No. 9438408911
Email Id -ceo@swostipowercon.com
Type of Contractor License HT
Contractor License No. 3104
In Operative Period 06.11.2021 to 29.11.2021
Date of Issue 13/12/2021
Validity Period 05/11/2023
Allowed to carry out electrical works upto 33KV S.NO Category SCC No. Name Valid
Till 1 Supervisor 281 PRAMOD 30/11/2023 EHT KUMAR PRADHAN Sl. No.
Category Permit Permit Name Valid Till CODES No.
1. Lineman BAR 1468 Muktendu 27/08/2022 MV Shekhar Dash
2. Wireman BOU 88 Ganapati 05/07/2024 MV Ray
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 5
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
3. Workman BAR 736 Bijaya 21/08/2024 HT Kumar Ghibela N.B: Contractor
License is treated to be valid if and only if certificates/ permits of all the above staffs
are valid.
N.B: Please Note: This document is not valid unless it is checked/ verified with
official webste: https://electricityodisha.nic.in"
List of BIDS Rejected against Tender Call Notice No. 01/23-24 dt 01.08.23 (Pacakage-57) L.I.
Div-Subarnapur Sl. No. Name of the Bidder Reason of Rejection // 12 // 1 SWOSTI Invalid HT
Licence POWERCON Submitted
9. In view of the aforesaid provisions, there is no doubt that pursuant to the conditions stipulated in
the tender documents, the date and time for opening of the tender documents was fixed to
25.08.2023 at 11.00 Hrs, provided the bid is submitted in terms of the conditions stipulated therein.
As per the eligibility criteria stipulated in clause 2.2 (i), the contractor should have valid civil license
of requisite class as per the tender call notice and valid H.T. license issued by ELBO and validity of
both the licenses should be for a period at least one month from the date of the opening of the
tender. Therefore, the date of opening of the tender being 25.08.2023, the period of validity of H.T.
license should have been at least till 25.09.2023. As per clause 2.3, no hard copy document was to be
submitted to the tendering authority. As per clause 4.1 under General Terms and Conditions, the
petitioner was to submit the scanned copy of the valid electrical (H.T.) license issued by ELBO. In
terms of such condition, the petitioner submitted the // 13 // scanned copy of the valid electrical
(H.T.) license issued by ELBO, as has been placed on record at page-76 of the brief, where the
validity period has been prescribed as 05.11.2023, which covers the period 25.09.2023, i.e., a period
of at least one month from the date of opening of the tender, i.e. 25.08.2023. Therefore, the
petitioner has got valid electrical (H.T.) license with him. As per the notes mentioned in the said
electrical contractor license, it has been mentioned that the contractor license is treated to be valid if
and only if certificates/ permits of all the above staff are valid. Similarly, second note specifies that
the said document is not valid unless it is checked/ verified with official website: https://
eiceletricityodisha.nic.in. Therefore, a bare reading of the license attached along with the bid
document clearly indicates that the HT License No. 3104 issued by the Electrical Licensing Board of
Odisha (ELBO) in the name of the petitioner- SWOSTI POWERCON is valid till 05.11.2023. On
further verification of the aforesaid website in respect of contractor's license HT-3104 issued by the
ELBO, it is found that the individual staff license // 14 // is valid at least till 30.11.2023. Therefore,
contractor's HT license is valid and it is eligible as per the provisions contained in the eligibility
criteria of the DTCN dated 01.08.2023.
10. The HT license of the petitioner is valid till 05.11.2023, which is much more than one month
period from the date of opening of the bid, i.e., 25.08.2023 and the said HT License was again
renewed on 30.10.2023 by the opposite party no.4 till 05.11.2026, which has been placed on record
as Annexure-6 at page-110 of the brief. Therefore, there is no question of breach of trust or
contractual belief, rather the present issue is one of incorrect reading of HT certificate by the
opposite parties no.2 and 3. Thereby, the opposite parties no.2 and 3 have acted arbitrarily and
unreasonable by misinterpreting the conditions stipulated in the tender documents, which violates
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 6
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
Articles 14 and 19 of the Constitution of India. As such, it is neither incomplete tender, nor
conditional tender, nor any discrepancy is there in the bid of the petitioner so as to contend "Invalid
HT License submitted".
// 15 //
11. It is clearly mentioned that HT License being No. 3104 issued by the Electrical Licensing Board
of Odisha in the name of the petitioner-SWOSTI Powercon was valid and the validity period was till
05.11.2023. The license further mentions the validity of individual staff, which has to be read along
with the contractor's license. On verification of website in respect of Contractor's License, i.e.
HT-3104 issued by ELBO, it is found that individual staff license was valid till 30.11.2023.
Therefore, the Contractor's HT License was valid and eligible as per the eligibility criteria fixed in
the DTCN dated 01.08.2023.
12. The contention raised by Mr. Panigrahi, learned counsel for opposite parties no.2 and 3 is that
the petitioner uploaded the license, which was valid till 05.11.2023, but the permit of Muketendu
Sekhar Dash, Lineman MV was not valid during that specific period (valid till 27.08.2022). So, as
per the criteria mentioned in the license, the uploaded license of the bidder considered as invalid
and accordingly rejected. Such contention has no leg to stand, because the opposite // 16 // parties
no.2 and 3 have only considered the 1st Note of the License and ignored the 2nd Note. Therefore,
the opposite parties should have taken note of conjointly both the notes mentioned in the license
and should have gone through the website to find out the correctness of the license submitted by the
petitioner.
13. In view of such position, there is no need to go for further clarification, since the documents
submitted by the petitioner were genuine and a bare reading of the same makes the petitioner
eligible in respect of the tender in question. Mere reading of one part and ignoring of other part of a
document, i.e., the license to the detriment of the petitioner cannot be sustained as it amounts to
arbitrary, unreasonable and irrational exercise of power by the opposite parties no.2 and 3.
14. In Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa, (2007) 14 SCC 517, at Paragraph-22, the apex Court
observed as follows:-
"Judicial review of administrative action is intended to prevent arbitrariness,
irrationality, unreasonableness, bias and malafides. Its purpose is to check whether
choice or decision is made 'lawfully' and not to check whether choice or // 17 //
decision is 'sound'. When the power of judicial review is invoked in matters relating
to tenders or award of contracts, certain special features should be borne in mind. A
contract is a commercial transaction. Evaluating tenders and awarding contracts are
essentially commercial functions. Principles of equity and natural justice stay at a
distance. If the decision relating to award of contract is bona fide and is in public
interest, courts will not, in exercise of power of judicial review, interfere even if a
procedural aberration or error in assessment or prejudice to a tenderer, is made out.
The power of judicial review will not be permitted to be invoked to protect private
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 7
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
interest at the cost of public interest, or to decide contractual disputes. The tenderer
or contractor with a grievance can always seek damages in a civil court. Attempts by
unsuccessful tenderers with imaginary grievances, wounded pride and business
rivalry, to make mountains out of molehills of some technical/procedural violation or
some prejudice to self, and persuade courts to interfere by exercising power of
judicial review, should be resisted. Such interferences, either interim or final, may
hold up public works for years, or delay relief and succour to thousands and millions
and may increase the project cost manifold."
15. In Union of India v. Dinesh Engineering Corporation, (2001) 8 SCC 491, the apex Court held that
in Contractual matter like the Government Contract, the Public Authority needs to be rational and
reasonable in their decision making process. At Paragraph-16, it has been held as follows:-
"16. But then as has been held by this Court in the very same judgment that a public authority even
in contractual matters should not have unfettered discretion and in contracts having commercial
element even though some extra discretion is to be // 18 // conceded in such authorities, they are
bound to follow the norms recognised by courts while dealing with public property. This
requirement is necessary to avoid unreasonable and arbitrary decisions being taken by public
authorities whose actions are amenable to judicial review. Therefore, merely because the authority
has certain elbow room available for use of discretion in accepting offer in contracts, the same will
have to be done within the four corners of the requirements of law especially Article 14 of the
Constitution. In the instant case, we have noticed that apart from rejecting the offer of the writ
petitioner arbitrarily, the writ petitioner has now been virtually debarred from competing with the
EDC in the supply of spare parts to be used in the governors by the Railways, ever since the year
1992, and during all this while we are told the Railways are making purchases without any tender on
a proprietary basis only from the EDC which, in our opinion, is in flagrant violation of the
constitutional mandate of Article 14. We are also of the opinion that the so-called policy of the Board
creating monopoly of EDC suffers from the vice of non- application of mind, hence, it has to be
quashed as has been done by the High Court."
16. In Ajay Kumar Jain v. State of Odisha, 2017 SCC OnLine Ori 473, the apex Court at
Paragraphs-23, 24, 25 and 26, observed as follows:-
"23. In the case of Union of India Vs. International Trading Co., reported in (2003) 5
SCC 437, Hon'ble Supreme Court at paragraph-23 has held as under:
"23. Reasonableness of restriction is to be determined in an objective manner and
from the standpoint of interests of the general public and not from the standpoint of
the interest of persons upon whom the restrictions have been imposed or upon
abstract consideration. A restriction cannot be said to be unreasonable merely
because in a given case, it operates harshly. In // 19 // determining whether there is
any unfairness involved; the nature of the right alleged to have been infringed the
underlying purpose of the restriction imposed, the extent and urgency of the evil
sought to be remedied thereby, the disproportion of the imposition, the prevailing
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 8
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
condition at the relevant time, enter into judicial verdict. The reasonableness of the
legitimate expectation has to be determined with respect to the circumstances
relating to the trade or business in question. Canalisation of a particular business in
favour of even a specified individual is reasonable where the interests of the country
are concerned or where the business affects the economy of the country..........."
(emphasis supplied)
24. In the case at hand, by the restriction imposed at the pre-bid stage, the right of
the potential bidders, who are otherwise eligible to participate in the tender process,
is being arbitrarily infringed. It certainly curtails the reasonable expectation of the
intending eligible bidders to participate in the bidding process.
25. In the case of Association of Registration Plates Vs. Union of India and others,
reported in (2005) 1 SCC 679, Hon'ble Supreme Court at paragraph-43 held as
under:
"43. Certain preconditions or qualifications for tenders have to be laid down to
ensure that the contractor has the capacity and the resources to successfully execute
the work, Article 14 of the Constitution prohibits the government from arbitrarily
choosing a contractor at its will and pleasure. It has to act reasonably, fairly and in
public interest in awarding contract. At the same time, no person can claim
fundamental right to carry on business with the government. All that he can claim is
that in competing for the contract, he should not be unfairly treated and
discriminated to the detriment of public interest. Undisputedly, the legal position
which has been firmly established from various decisions of this Court, cited at the //
20 // Bar (supra) is that government contracts are highly valuable assets and the
court should be prepared to enforce standards of fairness on government in its
dealings with tenderers and contractors. (emphasis supplied)
26. No purpose can certainly be served in nipping the contractors, who are otherwise
eligible, at the threshold. There cannot be any fair competition, as there would be
lesser participants, which is certainly detrimental to the public interest."
17. In Sterling Computer Limited v. M/s. M & N Publications Limited, (1993) 1 SCC 445, the apex
Court at Paragraphs 18 and 19 observed as follows:-
"18 While exercising the power of judicial review, in respect of contracts entered into on behalf of
the State, the Court is concerned primarily as to whether there has been any infirmity in the
"decision making process". In this connection reference may be made to the case of Chief Constable
of the North Wales Police v. Evans, [1982] 3 All ER 141, where it was said that 'The purpose of
judicial review- "... is to ensure that the individual receives fair treatment, and not to ensure that the
authority, after according fair treatment, reaches on a matter which it is authorized or enjoined by
law to decide for itself a conclusion which is correct in the eyes of the court."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 9
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
By way of judicial review the court cannot examine the details of the terms of the contract which
have been entered into by the public bodies or the state. Courts have inherent limitations on the
scope of any such enquiry. But at the same time as was said by the House of Lords in the aforesaid
case, Chief Constable of the North Wales Police v. Evans (supra), the Courts can certainly examine
whether 'decision making process" was reasonable, rational not arbitrary and violative of Article 14
of the Constitution.
19. If the contract has been entered into without ignoring the procedure which can be said to // 21 //
be basic in nature and after an objective consideration of different options available taking into
account the interest of the State and the public, then Court cannot act as an appellate authority by
substituting its opinion in respect of selection made for entering into such contract. But, once the
procedure adopted by an authority for purpose of entering into a contract is held to be against the
mandate of Article 14 of the Constitution, the Courts cannot ignore such action saying that the
authorities concerned must have some latitude or liberty in contractual matters and any interference
by court amounts to encroachment on the exclusive right of the executive to take such decision."
18. In Reliance Energy Limited v. Maharashtra State Road Development Corporation Limited,
(2007) 8 SCC 1, the apex Court at Paragraphs 36, 37, 38 and 39 observed as follows:-
"36. We find merit in this civil appeal. Standards applied by courts in judicial review
must be justified by constitutional principles which govern the proper exercise of
public power in a democracy. Article 14 of the Constitution embodies the principle of
"non-discrimination". However, it is not a free- standing provision. It has to be read
in conjunction with rights conferred by other articles like Article 21 of the
Constitution. The said Article 21 refers to "right to life". In includes "opportunity".
In our view, as held in the latest judgment of the Constitution Bench of nine-Judges in the case of
I.R. Coelho vs. State of Tamil Nadu (2007) 2 SCC 1, Article 21/14 is the heart of the chapter on
fundamental rights. It covers various aspects of life.
"Level playing field" is an important concept while construing Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution. It is this doctrine which is invoked by REL/HDEC in the present case.
When Article 19(1)(g) confers fundamental right to carry on business to a company, it
is entitled to invoke the said doctrine of "level playing field". We may clarify that this
doctrine is, however, subject to public interest. In the // 22 // world of globalization,
competition is an important factor to be kept in mind. The doctrine of "level playing
field" is an important doctrine which is embodied in Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution. This is because the said doctrine provides space within which
equally-placed competitors are allowed to bid so as to subserve the larger public
interest. "Globalization", in essence, is liberalization of trade. Today India has
dismantled licence-raj. The economic reforms introduced after 1992 have brought in
the concept of "globalization". Decisions or acts which results in unequal and
discriminatory treatment, would violate the doctrine of "level playing field" embodied
in Article 19(1)(g). Time has come, therefore, to say that Article 14 which refers to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 10
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
principle of "equality" should not be read as a stand alone item but it should be read
in conjunction with Article 21 which embodies several aspects of life. There is one
more aspect which needs to be mentioned in the matter of implementation of the
aforestated doctrine of "level playing field".
According to Lord Goldsmith - commitment to "rule of law" is the heart of parliamentary
democracy. One of the important elements of the "rule of law" is legal certainty. Article 14 applies to
government policies and if the policy or act of the government, even in contractual matters, fails to
satisfy the test of "reasonableness", then such an act or decision would be unconstitutional.
37. In Union of India and another vs. International Trading Co. and another - (2003) 5 SCC 437, the
Division Bench of this Court speaking through Pasayat, J. had held :
"14. It is trite law that Article 14 of the Constitution applies also to matters of
governmental policy and if the policy or any action of the Government, even in
contractual matters, fails to satisfy the test of reasonableness, it would be
unconstitutional.
15. While the discretion to change the policy in exercise of the executive power, when
not trammelled by any statute or rule is wide enough, what is imperative and implicit
in terms of Article 14 is that a change in policy must be made fairly and should not
give // 23 // impression that it was so done arbitrarily or by any ulterior criteria. The
wide sweep of Article 14 and the requirement of every State action qualifying for its
validity on this touchstone irrespective of the field of activity of the State is an
accepted tenet. The basic requirement of Article 14 is fairness in action by the state,
and non-arbitrariness in essence and substance is the heart beat of fair play. Actions
are amenable, in the panorama of judicial review only to the extent that the State
must act validly for a discernible reasons, not whimsically for any ulterior purpose.
The meaning and true import and concept of arbitrariness is more easily visualized
than precisely defined. A question whether the impugned action is arbitrary or not is
to be ultimately answered on the facts and circumstances of a given case. A basic and
obvious test to apply in such cases is to see whether there is any discernible principle
emerging from the impugned action and if so, does it really satisfy the test of
reasonableness."
38 When tenders are invited, the terms and conditions must indicate with legal certainty, norms and
benchmarks. This "legal certainty" is an important aspect of the rule of law. If there is vagueness or
subjectivity in the said norms it may result in unequal and discriminatory treatment. It may violate
doctrine of "level playing field".
39. In Reliance Airport Developers (P) Ltd. v. Airports Authority of India and others -(2006) 10 SCC
1, the Division Bench of this Court has held that in matters of judicial review the basic test is to see
whether there is any infirmity in the decision- making process and not in the decision itself. This
means that the decision-maker must understand correctly the law that regulates his decision-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 11
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
making power and he must give effect to it otherwise it may result in illegality. The principle of
"judicial review"
cannot be denied even in contractual matters or matters in which the Government
exercises its contractual powers, but judicial review is intended to prevent
arbitrariness and it must be exercised in larger public interest. Expression of
different views // 24 // and opinions in exercise of contractual powers may be there,
however, such difference of opinion must be based on specified norms. Those norms
may be legal norms or accounting norms. As long as the norms are clear and properly
understood by the decision-maker and the bidders and other stakeholders,
uncertainty and thereby breach of rule of law will not arise. The grounds upon which
administrative action is subjected to control by judicial review are classifiable broadly
under three heads, namely, illegality, irrationality and procedural impropriety. In the
said judgment it has been held that all errors of law are jurisdictional errors. One of
the important principles laid down in the aforesaid judgment is that whenever a
norm/benchmark is prescribed in the tender process in order to provide certainty
that norm/standard should be clear. As stated above "certainty" is an important
aspect of rule of law. In the case of Reliance Airport Developers (supra), the scoring
system formed part of the evaluation process. The object of that system was to
provide identification of factors, allocation of marks of each of the said factors and
giving of marks had different stages. Objectivity was thus provided."
19. In Chittaranjan Mishra v. State of Odisha, 2016 (II) OLR 735, in which one of us (Dr. Justice B.R.
Sarangi) was the Author of the Judgment, this Court, at Paragraph-16, observed as follows:-
"16. In S.S. Company mentioned supra, on which reliance has been placed so far as
locus standi of the petitioner is concerned, 'it has been held that if the tenderer did
not satisfy the eligibility criteria, even in terms of the unamended clause, and
consequently its tender was rejected thereunder, it could not assail the amendment
made in the relevant clause in terms whereof it again failed to qualify. But, this is not
a case where the petitioner had participated in the tender, rather by putting the
conditions by enhancing the EMD and solvency // 25 // amount, the petitioner has
been precluded from participating in the tender itself. So far as the previous years
tender conditions are concerned, such conditions were not there and, admittedly, in
respect of other distribution systems, namely, PDS and SMP, such stringent
conditions have not been put by the State authority and, consequentially, there was
fair participation of the bidders in view of the terms and conditions mentioned in the
previous years. But, by putting conditions, so far as EMD, solvency certificate and
security deposits are concerned, the petitioner being outstayed from the tender and
in order to favour group of persons such stipulations have been made, it amounts to
arbitrary and unreasonable exercise of powers. Consequentially, the petitioner has
been discriminated and malafidely the benefit has been extended to such people.
Thereby, the petitioner has got every locus to assail such terms and conditions.
Therefore, the judgment referred to supra has no application to the present case."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 12
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
In the said case, this Court, referring to Michigan Rubber (India) Limitd v. State of Karnataka and
others, (2012) 8 SCC 216, Tata Cellurar; Dinesh Engineering (supra), S.S. and Company v. Orissa
Mining Corporation Limited, (2008) 5 SCC 772 interfered with the Tender Call Notice dated
29.02.2016, so far as it relates to the conditions for enhancement of Security Deposits, EMD and
Solvency Certificate, being arbitrary, unreasonable, discriminatory and mala fide and, thereby,
quashed the same.
// 26 //
20. In Jagruti Welfare Organization v. State of Odisha, 2017 SCC OnLine Ori 485, this Court in
Paragraphs 28, 29 and 37 observed as follows:-
"28 Admittedly, pursuant to the notice inviting tender (for short 'NIT'), four bidders
had submitted their bids. Out of four bidders, two, namely, M/s. M.E. Infra Project
Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai and M/s. Jyoti Build Tech. Pvt. Ltd., Lucknow could not deposit
the EMD of Rs.60.00 lakh. Thus, the competition was reduced to two competitive
bidders, namely, M/s. Global Waste Management Cell Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai and M/s.
SRP Clean Enviro Engineers Pvt. Ltd., Banagalore. Both the aforesaid bidders have
quoted exorbitantly high price, which is more than double/triple of what is being paid
to RMKY at present. As has been discussed while answering Issue No. 2, CMC could
not satisfactorily explain the reasonable nexus between the escalation in financial
eligibility criteria and the object to be achieved, that is the scope of work.
29. Cumulative assessment of the discussions made above, it can safely be concluded
that the action of the CMC in escalating the financial eligibility criteria as per Clause
4.2 (a) of the tender call notice is nothing but to eliminate the potential bidders like
the petitioner. Participation of only two bidders suggests that there was no fair
competition at all. CMC has every right to incorporate stringent condition in the
tender call notice. But the same must have a reasonable nexus with the object to be
achieved and more importantly, it must allow a fair competition giving scope to the
potential bidders to compete. As observed by Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Ram
& Shyam Company (supra) at para-18, it has been held as follows:
"18. ............................And at any rate disposal of the state property in public interest
must be by such method as would grant an opportunity to the public at large to
participate in it, the State reserving to itself the right to // 27 // dispose it of as best
subserve the public weal."
37. On a cumulative assessment of the case law, it can be safely concluded that the Court does not
act as an appellate authority, but merely reviews the manner in which the administrative decision is
taken. The Court does not have expertise to correct the administrative decision because it will
amount to substituting its own decision without any necessary expertise which itself may be fallible.
The scope of interference/judicial review is very limited and can be made in the case where the
authorities have acted in a manner which is arbitrary, unreasonable, discriminatory and with mala
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 13
M/S. Swosti Powercon vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 5 March, 2024
fide intention to limit the scope of competition to a chosen few by eliminating the potential bidders
from arena of competition and/or the decision so taken is against the public interest."
21. Therefore, in view of the settled principles of law, as discussed above, there is absolutely no bar
to interfere with the tender process, unless it satisfies the tests of arbitrariness, unreasonableness,
discrimination, mala fide and bias, in exercise of power under Judicial Review under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India.
22. Considering the above facts and circumstances and in exercise of power of judicial review, the
communication made by the opposite parties, rejecting the bid of the petitioner on the ground that
"Invalid HT License submitted", cannot be sustained in the eye of law.
// 28 //
23. It is of relevance to mention here that due to the interim order passed by this Court, no further
progress has been made for settlement of bids in respect of 12 packages, in respect of which the
petitioner has submitted its applications. Therefore, this Court directs the opposite parties no. 2 and
3 to take into consideration the license submitted by the petitioner, being in order, and allow the
petitioner to participate in the bid by taking follow up action in conformity with the provisions of
law.
24. With the above observations and directions, the writ petition stands allowed. However, in the
facts and circumstances of the case, there shall be no order as to costs.
(DR. B.R. SARANGI)
JUDGE
G. SATAPATHY, J. I agree.
(G. SATAPATHY)
Designation: ADR-cum-Addl. Principal Secretary Orissa High Court, Cuttack Location: High Court
of Orissa, Cuttack Date: 07-Mar-2024 15:34:24 The 05th March, 2024, Arun
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/38342517/ 14
