M/S.The Kancheepuram Reading Room And vs The Director General Of Police on 23 December, 2021
M/S.The Kancheepuram Reading Room And vs The Director
General Of Police on 23 December, 2021
Author: S.M.Subramaniam
Bench: S.M.Subramaniam
WP No.30803 of 2012
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 23-12-2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM
WP No.30803 of 2012
And
MP No.1 of 2012
M/s.The Kancheepuram Reading Room and
Tennis Club, Represented by its Secretary,
K.Karunakaran,
No.71-A, Kamaraj Street (Taluk Office Campus),
Kanchipuram. .. Petitioner
vs.
1.The Director General of Police,
Police Head Quarters,
Post Box No.601,
Dr.Radhakrishnan Salai,
Mylapore,
Chennai-4.
2.Inspector General of Police,
North Zone,
Railway Station Road,
Alandhur,
Chennai – 600 016.
1/26
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80044981/ 1
M/S.The Kancheepuram Reading Room And vs The Director General Of Police on 23 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) WP No.30803 of 2012
3.The Superintendent of Police,
Kanchipuram.
4.The Deputy Superintendent of Police,
Kanchipuram.
5.The Inspector of Police,
B2, Vishnu Kanchi Police Station,
Kanchipuram.
6.The Inspector General of Registration,
Santhome High Road,
Mylapore,
Chennai – 600 004.
(R-6 suo motu impleaded vide order
of Court dated 23.12.2021 made
in WP 30803 of 2012) .. Respondents
Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
praying for the issuance of a Writ of Mandamus, forbearing the respondents
herein from harassing the petitioner-Club and its members by insisting the
petitioner-Club to obtain FL2 License from the State Government for
permitting its members to consume liquor brought from outside (purchased
from Government approved liquor shops) within the petitioner-Club premises.
For Petitioner : Mr.T.R.Rajagopalan,
Senior Counsel for
Mr.P.Dinesh Kumar.
For Respondents : Mr.M.Rajendiran,
Additional Government Pleader.
2/26
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) WP No.30803 of 2012
ORDER
The relief sought for in the present writ petition is to forbear the respondents from harassing the
petitioner-Club and its members by insisting the petitioner-Club to obtain FL2 License from the
State Government for permitting its members to consume liquor brought from outside (purchased
from Government approved liquor shops) within the petitioner-Club premises.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80044981/ 2
M/S.The Kancheepuram Reading Room And vs The Director General Of Police on 23 December, 2021
2. The petitioner is the 'Kancheepuram Reading Room and Tennis Club'. The petitioner-Club was
registered under the Societies Registration Act and the object of the Club is to promote Club's life
and recreational activities among its members by way of providing reading room, indoor games etc.
The petitioner-Club is a non-political and non-party organisation.
3. It is contended that the petitioner-Club includes men of high reputation, businessmen,
professionals in particular a good strength of Advocates and in view of the same, the petitioner-Club
is having wide recognition from all spheres. The petitioner-Club consists of 278 members,
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis including 22 life time members and 6 honorary members. It is
further contended that the infrastructure of the petitioner-Club includes Library having wide
collection of books, journals, newspapers and spacious reading air-conditioned room providing its
members a conducive atmosphere for relaxation and reading. It further provides its members an
air-conditioned and well equipped Gym and other indoor games facilities are also provided. A
separate Dining Area is provided, wherein the members alone are permitted to have their food.
4. The learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner mainly contended that the
petitioner is constrained to move the present writ petition on account of the fact that the
respondents are frequently harassing the petitioner-Club by conducting unnecessary inspections.
The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner is of an opinion that purchasing liquor from
Government approved shops and bringing the liquor bottle inside the petitioner-Club premises and
consumption of liquor by the members in the Club premises, cannot be objected by the Police
Authorities. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
5. It is an admitted fact that the members of the petitioner-Club are consuming liquor in the Club
premises and and they are not causing any nuisance or disturbance to the other members or the
public in general. Such activities of in-house consumption of liquor would not fall under the offence
of nuisance. Thus, the interference by the Police Authorities is highly unwarranted and therefore,
the respondents should be restrained from conducting any such unnecessary inspections in the
absence of any specific complaint or otherwise.
6. The learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioner-Club made a submission that the
petitioner-Club is not selling any liquor and they do not possess any license for selling liquor nor
apply for any such license with the Competent Authorities. The petitioner-Club has no intention to
get any such license and the members are consuming liquor inside the premises by purchasing the
liquor bottle from outside the premises of the petitioner- Club. Ten or twenty members of the Club
together purchasing liquor and consuming the same inside the premises of the petitioner-Club
cannot be construed as an offence. Thus, the actions of the respondents are not in
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis accordance with the provisions of law and therefore, the
petitioner-Club is entitled for the relief as such sought for in the present writ petition.
7. The learned Additional Government Pleader, appearing on behalf of the respondents, raised
serious objections with reference to the conduct of the petitioner-Club. The learned Additional
Government Pleader drew the attention of this Court with reference to the name of the petitioner-
Club and its objects. The name of the petitioner-Club itself is 'Kancheepuram Reading Room and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80044981/ 3
M/S.The Kancheepuram Reading Room And vs The Director General Of Police on 23 December, 2021
Tennis Club'. Their contention is that they will consume liquor inside the Club premises itself is not
in consonance with the purpose and object for which the Club was registered.
8. The Bye-Laws of the petitioner-Club reveals that the Club is permitting the sports activities and
maintaining reading room for the benefit of its members. The petitioner-Club admittedly not
holding any valid license to sell the liquor or to consume the same inside the Club, which is a public
place. Thus, the relief sought for in the present writ petition is liable to be rejected.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
9. The learned Additional Government Pleader made a submission that consuming liquor in the
public place is prohibited and the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act and the Rules unambiguously
stipulates that even for such consumption, license is to be obtained and in the absence of any such
license, possessing liquor and consuming the same in a public place is impermissible and the Police
Authorities are empowered to conduct inspections and initiate all appropriate actions.
10. The learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner-Club relied on the judgment of the Hon'ble
Division Bench of this Court in W.A.No.2287 of 2011 dated 22.03.2012, the Hon'ble Division Bench
of this Court with certain directions stating that the respondent-Association shall not indulge in any
activities, which are contrary to law and further it is stated that the Police Authorities shall not
disturb the respondent-Association frequently under the guise of the inspection without there being
any reliable information as to the illegal activities of the respondent-Association or its members or
the guests. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
11. The abovesaid general directions issued by the Hon'ble Division Bench of this Court is to be
considered with reference to the facts and circumstances. It is not as if that the directions in general
issued is to be applied in respect of all other cases where it is necessary to consider the facts
independently.
12. This Court is of the opinion that it would be beneficial to refer the provisions envisaged in Tamil
Nadu Prohibition Act, 1937, an Act introduced for prohibition of the manufacture, sale and
consumption of intoxicating liquors and drugs in the State of Tamil Nadu, which reads as under:-
“WHEREAS it is expedient as early as possible to bring about the prohibition, except
for medicinal scientific, industrial or such like purposes, of the production,
manufacture, possession, export, import, transport, purchase, sale and consumption
of intoxicating liquors and drugs in the State of Tamil Nadu.
AND WHEREAS it is desirable to give https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis effect to the
above mentioned policy by introducing it in certain selected areas in the said State
and utilizing the experience gained therein for extending it to the other areas
thereof;”
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80044981/ 4
M/S.The Kancheepuram Reading Room And vs The Director General Of Police on 23 December, 2021
13. Section 4 of Chapter II of the said Act provides prohibition of the manufacture of, traffic in,
consumption of liquor and intoxicating drugs, and on a reading of the provisions and objects set out
in the said Act, (as referred to supra) it is unambiguous that noble idea of prohibition was fixed as
an object. Various punishments are prescribed under Section 4, for violation of the conditions
stipulated therein, of course, with certain exemptions.
14. Section 4-A of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act enumerates “punishment for being found in a
state of intoxication”, whoever is found in a state of intoxication in any public place and whoever,
not having been permitted to consume any liquor or intoxicating drug in pursuance of this Act, is
found in a state of intoxication in any private place shall be punished with
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis imprisonment for a term which may extend to three months or
with fine, which may extend to one thousand rupees”. Therefore, consuming liquor in a public place
where there is no license or permission is granted and such person is in the state of intoxication,
then the Authorities Competent are empowered to prosecute those persons.
15. The learned Additional Government Pleader for the respondents drew the attention of this Court
with reference to the Tamil Nadu Liquor (Possession for Consumption) Rules, 1996 issued in
G.O.Ms.No.75, Prohibition and Excise, dated 16.04.1996. As per the above Rules, possession of
liquor for personal consumption is described and the quantity also specified in the corresponding
entries in the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act.
16. The question arises whether consumption of liquor in an Association, Club or in similar places,
whether permissible or not.
17. The learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner-Club strenuously contended
that consumption of liquor by the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis members of the Club or
Association inside the premises cannot be construed as an offence, as the members are not causing
any nuisance to the public.
18. In the present case, the members of the petitioner-Club are purchasing the liquor from
Government approved shops and consuming the same within the premises of the petitioner-Club.
Hence, the same cannot be an actionable conduct and thus, the interference by the police and
insisting the petitioner-Club to get license for such consumption of liquor are unnecessary.
19. This Court is of the considered opinion that the objects set out in the bye-laws of the Associations
or Clubs are relevant at the first instance. When an Association or Sports Club or similar
Organisations registered their Club, Association etc., under the Societies Registration Act and the
bye-laws are also registered under the provisions of the Act, then it is needless to state that the
objects and purpose set out in the bye-laws must be followed scrupulously. Even in respect of
violations of the bye-laws, the same would be actionable. Therefore, any Association, Club or
otherwise cannot go beyond the scope of its bye-laws and the Competent Authorities under the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Societies Registration Act are also empowered to initiate action
for violation of the bye-laws. If any Society involving in any act other than that of the acts permitted
under the Societies Registration Act, then such conduct are actionable for cancellation of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80044981/ 5
M/S.The Kancheepuram Reading Room And vs The Director General Of Police on 23 December, 2021
registration by invoking the provisions of the Societies Registration Act by the Competent
Authorities.
20. Therefore, it is not as if any Club or Association can register their Organisation under the Tamil
Nadu Societies Registration Act and carry on their activities in their own way or involving in
unconnected activities, which all are not approved under the bye-laws, which is registered under the
Societies Registration Act.
21. In the present case, the petitioner-Club is the Society registered under the Societies Registration
Act. The name of the petitioner- Club itself reveals that 'Kancheepuram Reading Room and Tennis
Club'. The bye-laws also indicates the objects in clear terms. Thus, the petitioner-Club is bound to
confine their activities with reference to the bye-laws registered under the Registration Act. In the
event of expansion of activities, then https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis license or permission are
required and even the bye-laws require amendment, which must be approved by the Competent
Authorities under the Societies Registration Act.
22. In this regard, it is relevant to consider Section 37 of the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act,
1975, which states the cancellation of registration and reads as under:-
“Cancellation of Registration.--When an inquiry has been held under section 36 of
registration, the registrar may, if he is satisfied—
(a) that the registered society has contravened any of the previsions of this Act or the
rules made there-
under; or
(b) that the registered society is insolvent, or must necessarily become so ; or
(c) that the business of any such registered society is conducted fraudulently or not in
accordance with the bye-laws or the objects specified in
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the memorandum filed with the Registrar under
section 6, after giving in such manner, as he thinks fit, previous notice in writing to
the registered society, specifying briefly the grounds of the proposed cancellation and
after giving an opportunity to the registered society to show cause why the
cancellation should not be made, cancel the registration of the registered society, and
communicate the order of cancellation forthwith to the registered society by
registered post.”
23. Section 38 of the Act contemplates 'cancellation of registration of society carrying on unlawful
activities'. Therefore, the Competent Authorities under the Societies Registration Act, are
empowered to conduct inspection and ascertain whether the Society is functioning in accordance
with the bye-laws or not and if there are violations or the business of the Society is conducted not in
accordance with the bye-laws or the objects specified in the memorandum filed with the Registrar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80044981/ 6
M/S.The Kancheepuram Reading Room And vs The Director General Of Police on 23 December, 2021
under Section 6, then all actions can be initiated for the purpose of cancellation of registration for
affording opportunity to the registered Society. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
24. The above provisions are unambiguous that every registered Society is bound to function in
accordance with the provisions of the Act and Rules and their activities must be in accordance with
the bye-laws of the Society, which is approved by the Competent Authorities under Section 6 of the
Registration Act. Therefore, it is not as if every such Club or Association shall expand their activities
or conduct other activities, which all are not stipulated in the bye-laws registered under the
Registration Act.
25. One of the point raised by the learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner-Club
is that the Police Authorities are insisting the petitioner to get license under the relevant Rules for
running a Bar Room or for consumption of liquor.
26. The Tamil Nadu Liquor (License and Permit) Rules, 1981, wherein Rule 5 states that “no person
or institution may possess any quantity of liquor or medicated wine or sacramental wine except
under and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a licence issued under these
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis rules”. Chapter IV deals with Rules relating to the grant of
licenses, which stipulates 'licenses for liquor used for consumption'. F.L.2 license is stipulated
'license for possession of liquor by a non-proprietary Club for supply to members'. Even for
consumption of liquor in a Club or Association, a license must be obtained for possession of liquor
and for supply to its members inside the premises. Further more, the Club or Association if
registered under the Societies Registration Act, then the bye-laws must permit for conduct of such
activities and such bye-laws must be approved under Section 6 of the Societies Registration Act.
27. This Court is of the considered opinion that the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act, more specifically,
Section 4 impose complete 'prohibition of the manufacture of, traffic in, and consumption of liquor
and intoxicating drugs'. Section 4(1)(j) enumerates that “consumes or buys.--
(i) any liquor other than such liquor as may be specified by the State Government, by
notification, in their behalf; or
(ii) any intoxicating drug.” https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Section 4(1)(k) states
that “whoever, allows any of the acts aforesaid upon premises to his immediate
possession, shall be punished”.
Therefore, buying and consumption itself is prohibited. It is an absolute prohibition imposed under
the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act, 1937 and the Tamil Nadu Liquor Retail Vending (in Shops and
Bars) Rules, 2003, regulates the liquor retail vending both in shops and bars, Tamil Nadu Liquor
(License and Permit) Rules, 1981 deals with grant of license and possession of liquor and licenses for
liquor used for consumption.
28. Therefore, the law imposes total prohibition. Thus, buying, selling, consumption and possession,
all are regulated under various Rules and Regulations. Thus the legal position is that the prohibition
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80044981/ 7
M/S.The Kancheepuram Reading Room And vs The Director General Of Police on 23 December, 2021
is the law and buying, selling, possession and consumption are regulated by the Rules in force.
Therefore, consumption of liquor when regulated under the Rules, then the consumption must be in
accordance with the provisions of the Act and Rules and it is not at the choice of the consumers of
liquor. When there is total prohibition imposed under law, usage of liquor is regulated through
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Rules, then the Rules should be scrupulously implemented for the
purpose of buying, selling, possession and consumption of liquor. Possession and consumption of
liquor in a Club or Association as per the Rules may be done only by obtaining license from the
Competent Authorities. In the absence of license, it is to be construed as an offence under the
Prohibition Act and under the Rules in force.
29. There is a growing trend of filing writ petitions before the High Court, seeking general relief in
the nature of an injunction. The general allegations made by the petitioner are that the Police
Authorities are frequently conducting inspections and disturbing the activities of these Clubs and
Associations registered under the Societies Registration Act. Conducting the act of an inspection by
the Competent Authorities at no circumstances be prevented. In the event of granting such general
relief, the Competent Authorities are prevented from performing their lawful exercise of powers
under law. Beyond this, the beneficiaries of such general orders are misusing it one way or the other
to threaten the Police and Public Authorities and contempt applications are also filed. Thus Courts
are expected to be cautious https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis in respect of such general reliefs
sought for in the writ petitions. In the event of establishing a definite cause of action regarding the
excess exercise of power by the police and public authorities, appropriate orders are to be passed by
the High Court. Mere statement by the Associations and Clubs that they are conducting only lawful
activities cannot be trusted upon. Mere statement in the affidavit cannot be a ground for granting
such general relief and the Authorities Competent empowered to conduct inspections must be
allowed to conduct inspections if they have any reasonable suspicion, reliable information or
complaint or otherwise. Thus Clubs and Associations registered under the Societies Registration
Act, are carrying on their activities beyond the objects set out in their respective bye-laws and there
are many such complaints in the public domain. Thus, Courts are expected to exercise restraint in
passing such general orders in the interest of public.
30. Scrupulous implementation of law is the duty mandated on the Executives. Thus, any prevention
from the other pillar of the Constitution i.e., Judiciary will no doubt cause prejudice for effective
implementation of law for maintenance of an orderly Society. Thus, in the absence of established
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis cause of action, no relief needs to be granted in respect of such
cases where people generally claim that they are always doing lawful activities. Presumption or mere
statement is insufficient. Beyond that actions are imminent for law enforcement. Thus, at no
circumstances, the lawful performance of public duties can be prevented by granting such general
directions to the Authorities. If such reliefs are granted, it is a threat to the democratic principles
with reference to the constitutional mandates, principles and philosophy. Thus, the lawful exercise
of power must always be allowed. Conducting inspections on suspicious circumstances, on
informations or complaints is the primary duty of the Public Authorities and Police Officials. Thus,
they are bound to conduct such inspections, so as to prevent any illegal activities in any such Clubs,
Associations, Spa, Massage Centre, Recreation Clubs etc. No doubt, largescale allegations against
these Spa, Clubs, Associations, Recreation Clubs etc., are in the public domain and such allegations
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80044981/ 8
M/S.The Kancheepuram Reading Room And vs The Director General Of Police on 23 December, 2021
are resulting in various consequences in the Society. It creates problems in the families and also in
the Society at large. Thus, it is duty mandated on the Executives to ensure that such illegal activities
are effectively controlled by initiating all appropriate actions in the manner
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis known to law.
31. The learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner made an attempt to justify the
actions of these Club members regarding consumption of liquor inside the Club by purchasing the
liquor bottles from the Government approved shops. As discussed above, such conduct violates the
bye-laws of the Club consequently violates the provisions of the Societies Registration Act and
further in violation of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act and the relevant Rules for the purpose of
buying, selling, possession and consumption of liquor. Thus, the law imposes complete prohibition
of liquor and the Rules grant permission for the purposes specified in the Rules. Accordingly,
buying, selling, possession and consumption of liquor all regulated under the Rules and any
violation in this Regard is an offence and the persons committing such illegalities are liable to be
prosecuted under the relevant Statutes and the Rules in force.
32. In view of the facts an circumstances, this Court is inclined to pass the following orders:-
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (1) The relief, as such, sought for in the present
petition stands rejected.
(2) The first respondent-Director General of Police is directed to constitute trained
Special Squads in each District and in Cities across the State of Tamil Nadu under the
leadership of the respective Superintendents of Police and the respective
Commissioners of Police for the purpose of conducting inspections in Social Clubs,
Associations, Spa, Recreation Clubs, Massage Centres etc., and initiate all
appropriate actions, in the event of identifying any commission of offence or
illegality.
(3) On initiation of any such action, against any such Organisations, Social Clubs,
Associations etc., the actions initiated shall be communicated to the Competent
Jurisdictional Authorities under the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act, along
with the details of allegations and action taken, enabling those Authorities to initiate
further actions under the provisions of the Tamil Nadu Societies Registration Act,
1975 and Rules or under the relevant provisions of law if the registration of
Associations and Clubs are done under different Statutes.
(4) The first respondent-Director General of Police is directed
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis to issue all necessary instructions/guidelines to the
Subordinate Police Authorities to develop an effective coordination with the
Registration Department and other connected Government Departments, so as to
ensure effective and efficient implementation of the Statutes for the purpose of
prosecuting the offenders dealing with the illegalities simultaneously under various
relevant Statutes.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80044981/ 9
M/S.The Kancheepuram Reading Room And vs The Director General Of Police on 23 December, 2021
(5) The first respondent-Director General of Police is directed to issue
circulars/instructions to all Police Officials across the State of Tamil Nadu and
communicate the copy of such circulars/instructions to the Registration Department
and other connected Government Departments and to the local bodies (Corporations,
Municipalities and Panchayats) for initiation of appropriate actions against the
licenses granted for such establishments by the local bodies as per the terms and
conditions and under the provisions of law.
(6) The abovesaid exercise of issuing circulars/instructions is directed to be done by
the first respondent-Director General of Police, within a period of four weeks from
the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
33. With the abovesaid directions, the writ petition stands disposed of. However, there shall be no
order as to costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is also dismissed.
The Registry is directed to post the matter before this Court under the caption 'For Reporting
Compliance' on 24.01.2022.
23-12-2021 Index : Yes/No. Internet : Yes/No. Speaking Order/Non-Speaking Order.
Svn To
1.The Director General of Police, Police Head Quarters, Post Box No.601, Dr.Radhakrishnan Salai,
Mylapore, Chennai-4.
2.Inspector General of Police, North Zone, Railway Station Road, Alandhur, Chennai – 600 016.
3.The Superintendent of Police, Kanchipuram.
4.The Deputy Superintendent of Police, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Kanchipuram.
5.The Inspector of Police, B2, Vishnu Kanchi Police Station, Kanchipuram.
6.The Inspector General of Registration, Santhome High Road, Mylapore, Chennai – 600 004.
S.M.SUBRAMANIAM, J.
Svn WP 30803 of 2012 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 23-12-2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80044981/ 10
