M/S.Mamtha Steels Corporation vs / on 20 December, 2024
M/S.Mamtha Steels Corporation vs / on 20 December, 2024
Cr.A.No.1222/2022
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 20.12.2024
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE SHAMIM AHMED
Crl.A.No.1222 of 2022
M/s.Mamtha Steels Corporation,
represented by its Proprietor
T.Vasanaram ... Appellant
/vs/
1. M/s.Yosmite Engineering Private Limited,
represented by its Director P.Ramesh
2. P.Ramesh,
Director of M/s.Yosmite Engineering
Private Limited
3. Selvi Ramesh
Director of M/s.Yosmite Engineering
Private Limited
All having previous office at:
No.5, New Street,
Balaji Industrial Estate,
Ambattur, Chennai 600 053
Present Office at D.No.3,
Thamarai Nagar, 3rd Street,
Ambattur, Chennai 600 062. ... Respondents
Prayer : Criminal Appeal filed under section 378(4) of Cr.P.C., praying to
call for the records in C.C.No.5897 of 2019 on the file of the Metropolitan
Magistrate, Fast Track Court – II, Allikulam, Chennai and set aside the
order passed on 15.07.2022.
For Appellant ... Mr.Ramesh Kumar Chopra
For Respondents ... Mr.Pradeep Jayaraman
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
1/15
(cid:12) Cr.A.No.1222/2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159970286/ 1
M/S.Mamtha Steels Corporation vs / on 20 December, 2024
JUDGMENT
Heard Mr. Ramesh Kumar Chopra, learned counsel for the appellant and Mr. Pradeep Jayaraman,
learned counsel appearing for the respondent.
2. This Criminal Appeal has been directed against the order passed by the learned Metropolitan
Magistrate, Fast Track Court – II, Allikulam, Chennai in C.C.No.5897 of 2019, dismissing the
complaint filed by the appellant under section 138 of Negotiable Instruments Act against the
Revision Petitioner / complainant for his being absent on the date of hearing. The said complaint
was dismissed by the trial court exercising power under section 256(1) of Cr.P.C. The impugned
order reads as under:
'Complainant absent. No representation.
Notice sent to the complainant. This case was
pending from 2017. Complainant was absent
continuously for several hearings. Hence, Notice was sent to complainant on 30.06.2022 in
D.No.426 of 2022. Sufficient opportunities given tot he complainant to make his appearance before
this court. Even today the complainant not appeared.
Considering all the above circumstances and the summary nature of this case, this complaint is
hereby dismissed u/s.256(1) of Cr.P.C. Accused acquitted.' https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
3. Learned counsel for the appellant submits that the 1st respondent is a private limited company
registered under the Companies Act represented by the 2nd and 3rd respondents as their Directors.
The 2nd and 3rd respondents are husband and wife and are in charge of the day to day affairs of the
1 st respondent company and they used to negotiate and place orders for supply of stainless steel
sheets, rods and pipes to the appellant. It was further argued by the learned counsel for the
appellant that on 30.07.2018, the respondent owed and liable to pay Rs.54,70,735/- excluding
interest for belated payment towards supply of the aforesaid materials. Thereafter, the respondent
No.2, on behalf of the respondent No.1 issued cheque drawn on Standard Chartered Bank, Anna
Nagar East, Chennai, bearing No.000013 dated 30.07.2018 for a sum of Rs.54,70,735/-. The
appellant presented the above cheque for collection through its Bankers namely Corporation Bank,
Anna Nagar, Chennai Branch on 30.07.2018, but the same has been dishonoured with an
endorsement 'Funds Insufficient'. Thereafter, again the cheque was presented and again it was
dishonoured as 'Funds Insufficient', When the Appellant informed about the legal action to be
taken, an assurance was given by the 2nd respondent that he will pay the said amount after some
time and the said information was recieved by the appellant on 20.10.2018.
4. It is further argued by the learned counsel for the appellant that the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 2nd respondent was playing fraud with the appellant and there
was no fund in his account and he was not intended to pay the same to him in lieu of the cheque
issued by him. Thereafter, a legal notice was issued by the appellant to the respondents to pay the
cheque amount. Since the respondents have not paid the cheque amount inspite of repeated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159970286/ 2
M/S.Mamtha Steels Corporation vs / on 20 December, 2024
requests and legal notice sent, left with no other alternative, the appellant filed complaint under
section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act. As the appellant was busy person and involved in his
business activities, he used to go to other places in respect of his business transactions, therefore he
engaged an Advocate Mr.Ravindra Kumar to look after the matter and the Advocate was regularly
appearing in the case, but unfortunately, on the date of the impugned order, i.e., on 15.07.2022, the
counsel appeared and asked for an adjournment as the appellant was in Jaipur regarding the
admission of his daughter and so he was not present at the time when the matter was called on
15.07.2023, but the learned trial court did not accept the request made by the learned counsel for
the appellant for adjourment of the case and exercising power under section 256(1) of Cr.P.C., he
dismissed the complaint without assigning any valid reason and without affording any opportunity
of hearing to the appellant. Thus, the learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the impugned
order dated 15.07.2022 passed by the learned trial court is non speaking order without application
of mind and the impugned order is an exparte order and the case has not been decided on
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis merits.
5. The appellant is an aggrieved person. Thus proper hearing of the case may be given to the
appellant before any final order is passed by the trial court. Thus he submits that the impugned
order being the exparte order being passed without assigning any reason may be set aside by this
court exerising revisional power and the matter may be remanded back to the trial court to decide
the issue on merits afresh. He also undertake before this court that in future hearings, neither the
appellant, nor his counsel would seek any further adjourment unless if there is any cogent reason.
6. Mr.Pradeep Jayaraman, learned counsel for the respondent whereas opposed the entire argument
as advanced by the learned counsel for the appelant and submits that the appellant as well as
counsel seeks a regular adjournment in the case and never intend to get the matter decided and the
said fact has also been reflected in the impugned order dated 15.07.2022, but he also did not dispute
the fact that the case was not decided on merits and only the trial court exercising power under
section 256(1) of Cr.P.C. dismised the said complaint. But any how, he submitted that the impguned
order has been rightly passed and prayed for dismissal of the present appeal.
7. After considering the entire arguments of both sides and after https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
perusal of the records as well as impugned order dated 15.07.2022, this Court is also of the view that
the impguned order is passed exparte without assigning any reason and only the trial court
exercising its power under section 256(1) Cr.P.C., dismissed the complaint of the appellant due to
non appearance of the counsel as well as the appellant. Thus, the impugned order appears to be non
speaking.
8. Even though in the grounds of appeal, it has been clearly stated that in paragraph 10 that the
appellant counsel Ravindra kumar appeared before the trial court on 15.07.2022 to dispense with
the presense of the appellant, as he was in Jaipur regarding the admission of his daughter, but the
trial court refused to accept the request made by the learned counsel for the appellant and dismissed
the complaint. He has also taken ground that due to lockdown and pandemic 19 Covid, it was
difficult for the appellant to appear for each and every date before the trial court as there was a
danger to his life and also attendance in the court is also very less due to the danger of Covid
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159970286/ 3
M/S.Mamtha Steels Corporation vs / on 20 December, 2024
Pandemic 19. This fact also has been stated in paragraph No.7 of the grounds of the appeal. Thus,
the learned counsel submitted that the reason for non appearance has been justified before the trial
court and as the appellant was not present before the court on the date fixed i.e., on 15.07.2022 as
he was busy in admisson of his daughter at Jaipur and requested his counsel Mr.Ravindrakumar to
sought adjournment in the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis case, but the trial court without
considering the request made by the learned counsel for the appellant, dismissed the complaint
which caused injustice to the appellant as the case was not decided on merits. There appears force in
the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant.
9. The expression "sufficient cause" and satisfactory explanation has been held to receive a liberal
construction so as to advance substantial justice and generally a delay in preferring appeal/revision
may be condoned in interest of justice where no gross negligence or deliberate inaction or lack of
bona fide is imputable to parties, seeking condonation. In Collector, Land Acquisition Vs. Katiji,
1987(2) SCC 107, the Court said, that, when substantial justice and technical considerations are
taken against each other, cause of substantial justice deserves to be preferred, for, the other side
cannot claim to have vested right in injustice being done because of a non deliberate delay. The
Court further said that judiciary is respected not on account of its power to legalise injustice on
technical grounds but because it is capable of removing injustice and is expected to do so.
10. In P.K. Ramachandran Vs. State of Kerala, AIR 1998 SC 2276 the Court said:
"Law of limitation may harshly affect a particular party but it has to be applied with
all its rigour when the statute so prescribe and the Courts have no power to extend
the period of limitation on equitable grounds."
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
11. The Rules of limitation are not meant to destroy rights of parties. They virtually take away the
remedy. They are meant with the objective that parties should not resort to dilatory tactics and sleep
over their rights. They must seek remedy promptly. The object of providing a legal remedy is to
repair the damage caused by reason of legal injury. The statute relating to limitation determines a
life span for such legal remedy for redress of the legal injury, one has suffered. Time is precious and
the wasted time would never revisit. During efflux of time, newer causes would come up,
necessitating newer persons to seek legal remedy by approaching the courts. So a life span must be
fixed for each remedy. Unending period for launching the remedy may lead to unending uncertainty
and consequential anarchy. The statute providing limitation is founded on public policy. It is
enshrined in the maxim Interest reipublicae up sit finis litium (it is for the general welfare that a
period be put to litigation). It is for this reason that when an action becomes barred by time, the
Court should be slow to ignore delay for the reason that once limitation expires, other party matures
his rights on the subject with attainment of finality. Though it cannot be doubted that refusal to
condone delay would result in foreclosing the suiter from putting forth his cause but simultaneously
the party on the other hand is also entitled to sit and feel carefree after a particular length of time,
getting relieved from persistent and continued litigation. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159970286/ 4
M/S.Mamtha Steels Corporation vs / on 20 December, 2024
12. There is no presumption that delay in approaching the court is always deliberate. No person
gains from deliberate delaying a matter by not resorting to take appropriate legal remedy within
time but then the words "sufficient cause" show that delay, if any, occurred, should not be
deliberate, negligent and due to casual approach of concerned litigant, but, it should be bona fide,
and, for the reasons beyond his control, and, in any case should not lack bona fide. If the
explanation does not smack of lack of bona fide, the Court should show due consideration to the
suiter, but, when there is apparent casual approach on the part of suiter, the approach of Court is
also bound to change. Lapse on the part of litigant in approaching Court within time is
understandable but a total inaction for long period of delay without any explanation whatsoever and
that too in absence of showing any sincere attempt on the part of suiter, would add to his negligence,
and would be relevant factor going against him.
13. I need not to burden this judgment with a catena of decisions explaining and laying down as to
what should be the approach of Court on construing "sufficient cause" and it would be suffice to
refer a very few of them besides those already referred.
14. In Pundlik Jalam Patil (dead) by LRS. Vs. Executive Engineer, Jalgaon Medium Project and
Anr.(2008) 17 SCC 448, in para 17 of the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis judgment, the Court said
:
"...The evidence on record suggests neglect of its own right for long time in preferring
appeals. The court cannot enquire into belated and state claims on the ground of
equity. Delay defeats equity. The court helps those who are vigilant and "do not
slumber over their rights."
15. In Maniben Devraj Shah Vs. Municipal Corporation of Brihan Mumbai, 2012 (5) SCC 157, in para
18 of the judgment, the Court said as under:
"What needs to be emphasized is that even though a liberal and justice oriented
approach is required to be adopted in the exercise of power under Section 5 of the
Limitation Act and other similar statutes, the Courts can neither become oblivious of
the fact that the successful litigant has acquired certain rights on the basis of the
judgment under challenge and a lot of time is consumed at various stages of litigation
apart from the cost. What colour the expression 'sufficient cause' would get in the
factual matrix of a given case would largely depend on bona fide nature of the
explanation. If the Court finds that there has been no negligence on the part of the
applicant and the cause shown for the delay does not lack bonafides, then it may
condone the delay. If, on the other hand, the explanation given by the applicant is
found to be concocted or he is thoroughly negligent in prosecuting his cause, then it
would be a legitimate exercise of discretion not to condone the delay. In cases
involving the State and its agencies/instrumentalities, the Court can take note of the
fact that sufficient time is taken in the decision making process but no premium can
be given for total lethargy or utter negligence on the part of the officers of the State
and / or its agencies/instrumentalities and the applications filed by them for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159970286/ 5
M/S.Mamtha Steels Corporation vs / on 20 December, 2024
condonation of delay cannot be allowed as a matter of course by accepting the plea
that dismissal of the matter on the ground of bar of limitation will cause injury to the
public interest."
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
16. In Shakuntala Devi Jain Vs. Kuntal Kumari, AIR 1969 SC 575 a three Judge Bench of the Court
said, that, unless want of bona fide of such inaction or negligence as would deprive a party of the
protection, the application must not be thrown out or any delay cannot be refused to be condoned.
17. The Privy Council in Brij Indar Singh Vs. Kanshi Ram ILR (1918) 45 Cal 94 observed that true
guide for a court to exercise the discretion is whether the appellant acted with reasonable diligence
in prosecuting the appeal. This principle still holds good inasmuch as the aforesaid decision of Privy
Council as repeatedly been referred to, and, recently in State of Nagaland Vs. Lipok AO and others,
AIR 2005 SC 2191.
18. Even though from a bare perusal of the impguned order, which find place at page 18 of the paper
book, the impugned order is totally non speaking and only a recital has been made that the
complainant was absent on that day when the matter was fixed for hearing. Whereas, from the
perusal of paragraph No.10 of the ground, it has been clearly stated by the appellant that the
appellant counsel Mr.Ravindra Kumar appeared before the trial court on 15.07.2022 with the
reqeust to dispense with the presence https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of the appellant as he was in
Jaipur. But the trial court refused to accept the request made by the learned counsel for the
appellant and dismissed the complaint. This fact has also not been considered by the trial court
when the appellant was in Jaipur regarding admission of her daughter. Even though a clear cut
recital has been made in the grounds of appeal that due to lockdown and Pandemic 19 Covid, it was
not possible for the appellant t o appear in the case on each and every date before the trial court as
there was a danger to the life and during that period also, the attendance in the court is also very less
due to covid 19 Pandemic. This fact has also been stated in paragraph 7 of the grounds of appeal.
Thus, the court must have considered the reason with open heart and should not have been
dismissed the case only for non appearance of the appellant or his counsel. Thus, the impugned
order suffer from gross irregularity and was passed without application of mind.
19. In my view, the impguned order is totally non speaking without assigning any reason and is
against the principles of natural justice. Thus, this court is of the view that the impugned order is
liable to be set aside and the matter be remanded to trial court to decide the matter afresh after
giving opportunity to the parties and after considering the entire evidence adduced by the parties
concerned.
20. Accordingly, the impugned order dated 15.07.20221 passed by https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
the learned Metropolitan Magistrate, Fast Track Court-II, Allikulam, Chennai in C.C.No.5897 of
2019 is hereby set aside and reversed. The appeal is Allowed. The matter is hereby remanded back to
the trial court to decide afresh within a period of four months from the date of receipt of certified
copy of this order, after giving opportunity to both the parties to adduce the entire evidnce.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159970286/ 6
M/S.Mamtha Steels Corporation vs / on 20 December, 2024
21. It is made clear that the parties shall not seek any adjorument and shall appear on the dates fixed
by the trial court for hearing to argue the case, unless there is any cogent reason and they shall
cooperate for the trial and disposal of the case.
22. With the above direction, the Criminal Appeal is allowed.
20.12.2024 msr Index:yes Internet: yes 'Reported' To The Metropolitan Magistrate, Fast Track
Court – II, Allikulam, Chennai https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis SHAMIM AHMED, J.
msr https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 20.12.2024 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/159970286/ 7
