M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party
... on 11 April, 2025
Author: S.K. Panigrahi
Bench: S.K. Panigrahi
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed
Signed by: BHABAGRAHI JHANKAR
Reason: Authentication
Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
Date: 15-Apr-2025 16:40:34
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.31692 of 2024
(In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India, 1950).
M/S Paltronics Allied .... Petitioner (s)
Industries Pvt. Ltd. & Anr.
-versus-
Union of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party (s)
Advocates appeared in the case through Hybrid Mode:
For Petitioner(s) : Mr. Manoj Kumar Mishra, Sr. Adv.
along with
Mr. Tanmay Mishra, Adv.
Mr. Subir Palit, Sr. Adv.
along with associate
For Opposite Party (s) : Mr. B.S. Rayaguru, CGC
Mr. Saswat Das, AGA
for O.Ps.3 & 4
CORAM:
DR. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI
DATE OF HEARING:-19.03.2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT: -11.04.2025
Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J.
1. The Petitioners, in this Writ Petition, seek a direction from this Court to the Opposite Parties to
update the details in respect of the demised Property so as to reflect the takeover of the demised
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 1
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
Property by the Petitioner No.1 Company. The Petitioners further seek direction to the Location:
ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Opposite Parties to recognize compromise decree and give effect
to the takeover agreement by making necessary changes in their records.
2. One Mr. Tejpal Singh, is said to be the sole proprietor of one `M/s Paltronics Allied Industries'
(hereinafter referred to as "Erstwhile Entity"), which was duly registered as a Small-Scale Industry.
The Erstwhile Entity, entered into a duly registered Lease Deed dated December 13, 1979
(hereinafter referred to as "Lease Deed") with the Governor of the State of Orissa, in terms of which
the Erstwhile Entity became the lessee of the Landed Property Situated in Mouza Mouza - Patia,
bearing Plot No. 309/1694, under Khata No. 474/5, Area - Ac. 5.000 Dec. (hereinafter referred to as
"Subject Property").
3. Under the terms of the Lease Deed, the Erstwhile Proprietor was put into possession of the
Subject Property 1979 onwards and has continued as such. On 18.03.1994, the Petitioner No. 1
Company i.e. a private limited company, was incorporated under the provisions of the Companies
Act, 1956. The Memorandum of Association of the Company (hereinafter referred to as "MOA")
states that one of the main objects of the Company is "to take over the business including lease
rights of Paltronics Allied Industries, Bhubaneshwar" i.e. the Erstwhile Entity. The subscribers to
the MOA include the Erstwhile Proprietor i.e. the Petitioner No. 2 herein.
4. The entire object and purpose of incorporating the Company, as is borne out from inter alia the
MOA, was to take over the assets, liabilities, and business of the Erstwhile Entity, including the
leasehold rights in the Subject Property under the Lease Deed. The agenda/ minutes of the Location:
ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK first meeting of the Board of Directors of Paltronics Allied
Industries Private Limited held on 19.03.1994 have been relied upon to show that the same was the
first agenda item which was taken up by the board of directors.
5. It is stated that to this end, the Company and the Erstwhile Proprietor also entered into an
"Agreement for Take-Over of Business of Paltronics Allied Industries by Paltronics Allied Industries
Pvt. Ltd." dated 14.04.1994 (hereinafter referred to as "Takeover Agreement"). The Takeover
Agreement in its recitals provides for the transfer of the business of the Erstwhile Entity along with
its land, building, and other ancillary equipment which includes the leasehold right in the subject
property under the lease deed from the Erstwhile Proprietor to the Company on the terms as set out
in the Takeover Agreement.
6. According to Clause 4 of the MOA and AOA of Petitioner No. 1 Company, the above noted subject
Property which was initially owned by Tejpal Singh, Proprietor of M/s Paltronics Allied Industries
has been taken over by the Petitioner No. 1 Company and as such on account of this takeover, this
Company is treated to be the absolute owner of the demised Property for all legal purposes.
7. A Certificate of Amendment of the Constitution of the Unit from proprietorship to Private Limited
Company was issued by the Directorate of Industries, Government of Odisha on 26.08.2006.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 2
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
8. Pursuant to the Takeover Agreement, certain disputes and differences arose between the
Petitioner No. 1 Company on the one hand, and the Erstwhile Proprietor i.e. the Petitioner No.2
herein, on the other hand.
Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Contrary to their inter se understanding, the
Petitioner No. 2 claimed that the Subject Property continued to belong to the Erstwhile Entity / the
Erstwhile Proprietor, and that the same did not vest in the Petitioner No. 1 Company, owing to
certain monetary claims made by the Erstwhile Entity / the Erstwhile Proprietor.
9. As a result of the above, the Petitioner No. 1 Company filed a Civil Suit being C.S. No. 493 of 2013
before the Ld. Additional Senior Civil Judge, Bhubaneswar against the Petitioner No.2 seeking, inter
alia, a declaratory relief that the Subject Property belongs to and vests in the Petitioner No. 1
Company..
10.During the pendency of the 2013 Suit, the Petitioner No. 1 Company and the Petitioner No. 2
reconsidered their positions, and an amicable settlement was arrived at in terms of which both
parties admitted and accepted inter alia that:
a. The rights in the Subject Property under the Lease Deed originally vested in the
Erstwhile Entity.
b. The Erstwhile Proprietor, together with others, incorporated the Company.
c. The Erstwhile Entity ceased to exist upon the incorporation of the Petitioner No. 1
Company.
d. The Subject Property has, pursuant to the takeover agreement between the parties
vested free of any legal encumbrance in the Petitioner No. 1 Company
11.Accordingly, the Petitioner No.1 Company and the Petitioner No.2 entered into a compromise and
filed an application under Order 23 Rule Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK 3 of the CPC,
which was filed before the Ld. Additional Senior Civil Judge, Bhubaneswar in the 2013 Suit on
16.07.2024 which remained pending since.
12. With the aforesaid backdrop the Petitioners herein have approached this Court seeking a writ of
mandamus directing the Opposite Parties to take necessary steps in pursuance of the Takeover
Agreement and corresponding changes being made in the MOA and AOA. I. PETITIONERS'
SUBMISSIONS:
13. Ld. Sr. Counsels appearing for the Petitioners have jointly submitted that the Property vests in
and belongs to the Company, and not the Erstwhile Proprietor and that the State is also ad idem as
is evident from the Certificate of Amendment of the Constitution issued by it. It has also been
submitted that the state cannot approbate and reprobate in the same breath and must
unquestionably recognise the legal position of the petitioners herein.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 3
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
14. It is further submitted that by refusing to update the governmental Records in this regard, the
opposite parties are in effect, depriving the Company of its assets an provided in the agreement,
which cannot be effectively enjoyed by the Company and the same is in violation of under Articles
19(1)(g) and 300-A of the Constitution of India.
15. The Ld. Sr. Counsels appearing for the Petitioners have strenuously relied upon the Certificate of
Amendment of the Constitution, issued by the State as well as the terms of the original lease deed to
buttress the point that the same is permitted thereunder as well. It has been Location: ORISSA
HIGH COURT, CUTTACK submitted that once the State has recognized that the Subject Property
vests in and belongs to the Petitioner No. 1 Company, the Opposite Party No. 2 and 3 are left with
only a formal task of updating the official records to reflect the same appropriately.
16. It has been urged by the Ld. Counsels for the Petitioner that the takeover of the Subject Property
by the Petitioner No. 1 Company is under the provisions of the 1956 Act by virtue of the
incorporation of the Company as recorded in the MOA, as also the Takeover Agreement, as
subsequently recorded in the Certificate of Amendment of the Constitution. It has been contended
that the Opposite Parties are in dereliction of their duty and power.
17. Ld. Sr. Counsels for the Petitioners have contended although a compromise had been arrived at
between the Petitioners herein the Ld. Court below has not passed any decree to that effect. In this
regard they submit that that the suit was ill-advised and that they be permitted to urge the present
petition having finally elected the appropriate remedy in law. Additionally, the Ld. Sr. Counsels for
the Petitioners have relied upon certain judicial pronouncements which shall be dealt with
hereunder.
II. SUBMISSIONS BY OPPOSITE PARTIES:
18. It has been contended by the learned counsel for the Opposite Parties that the present petition
should not be allowed on the ground that various proceedings under different statutes have been
initiated with regard to the property in question for a variety of reasons. It has been submitted that a
resumption case bearing Resumption Case No.1/2024 Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
arising out of Lease Case No.1019/1979 has been instituted by the Tahasildar, Bhubaneswar in terms
of the provisions of the under Section 3B of the OGLS Act, 1962 and accordingly notice has been
issued to the Petitioner No.2 herein on 19.10.2024.
19. It is further submitted that a OLR 8 (A) Appeal Case No.15/2024 under Section 58-A of OLR Act
has been instituted in the Court of Addl. District Magistrate Bhubaneswar challenging the order
dated 30.04.2022 passed in Mutation Case No.7114 of 2022 by the Additional Tahasildar. And
accordingly, notice has been issued in the said appeal case to the Petitioner No.2, Sri Tejpal Singh,
Proprietor, Platronics Allied Industries vide Notice No.6367 on 30.10.2024.
20. Strenuous reliance has been placed on Clause 4(ii) of the lease deed which provides that "That
upon breach or non-observation of any condition of lease wherein granted, the lessor may declare
the lease has been determined and the Collector or any officer or person appointed on that behalf by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 4
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
the Lessor shall be entitled to re-enter and take possession of the demised land and buildings and
other structure erected thereon and the material thereof as well as stores and stock" It is submitted
that a field verification by the RI, Kalarahanga reported that the land is no more used for the
purpose for which the lease was sanctioned and presently a multi-storied building is under
construction.
21. It is further contended that the land which was granted for industrial purpose was converted to
Kisam `Gharabari' status and the same has been utilised for construction of residential complex
which was contrary to the conditions of lease and the said matter is Location: ORISSA HIGH
COURT, CUTTACK under enquiry by the Member, Board of Revenue. In the meantime, Board of
Revenue vide Letter No. 174 dt.04.02.2025 has requested to allow another period of two months to
complete the enquiry as the Member, BOR has taken charges on 29.01.2025.
22. Lastly, it was submitted that in the suit for declaration between the Petitioner Nos.1 & 2 is
pending before the court of Civil Judge (Sr. Div.) Bhubaneswar in C.S. No.493/2013 and no decree
much less any compromise decree has been passed therein thus the present petition is not
maintainable.
IV. ISSUES FOR CONSIDERATION:
23.In view of the aforesaid discussion this Court proceeds to formulate the following sole issue that
falls for consideration. (A) WHETHER OR NOT THE PRESENT PETITIONERS HAVE A LEGAL
RIGHT IN THE FACTS AND CIRCUMSTANCES OF THE CASE WHICH OUGHT TO BE
RECOGNIZED AND CONSEQUENTLY WHETHER OR NOT THE PRESENT PETITION BE
ALLOWED.
V. ANALYSIS AND REASONING BY THIS COURT:
24. The grievance of the petitioners is that despite the aforesaid legal backdrop and the steps as
contemplated in law having been taken by them, the records of rights continue to erroneously reflect
the name of Tejpal Singh in place of Petitioner No.1 Company. The petitioners have thus approached
this Court to direct the opposite parties to update/ make necessary changes in their respective
records with regard to the status of the subject property in terms of the takeover that has taken
place.
Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
25. It has been strenuously submitted that the takeover agreement dated 14.04.1994 itself creates a
legal right in the petitioners qua the opposite parties herein. The opposite parties are within the
meaning of "State" as envisaged under Article 12 of the constitution.
26. It has been urged by the Ld. Sr. Counsels that the Petitioners have been pursuing their legal
remedies as such are protected under the Limitation Act and that the petition does not suffer from
delay and latches whatsoever.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 5
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
27. It has been submitted that the petitioner had elected a remedy which caused the suit being filed
before the Ld. Trial Court at the first instance. Be that as it may, it is contended that this court under
its extraordinary jurisdiction has ample powers to recognise the legal right that flows from the
takeover agreement and creates rights and duties, inter se the petitioner and opposite parties herein.
28. The takeover agreement forms the bedrock of the transaction which by itself provides the
grounding in law of a concluded contract. The right of the parties are determined and are set in
stone on the basis of the sanctity of the said agreement. The fact that such a situation has been
envisaged by the original lease deed itself can be traced to the recitals which, in fact, categorically
provide for such a situation. The Petitioner No. 1 Company is said to have taken over the entire
business, assets, and liabilities of the Erstwhile Entity pursuant to the takeover agreement, the same
is traced to the recital contained in the Lease Deed.
29. The subject land in question appears to have been allotted on an application being made by one
Tejpal Singh who is said to represent Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK one M/s
Paltronics Manufacturing Company which was registered as a small scale industry. The said
recommendation was made by the District Industries Centre, Puri on 15.9.1979. It appears pursuant
to the recommendation dated 15.1979 a Lease Deed was entered into between the then Collector of
Puri and the aforesaid Tejpal Singh who is said to be the sole proprietor of Paltronics Allied
Industries vide a Lease Deed dated 13.12.1979. A perusal of the Lease Deed dated 13.12.1979,
especially the proviso to Clause 2 provides that "provided that in case of reconstruction of the lessee
or amalgamation of the lessee with any new company or corporation formed to take over the lease
this covenant permits transfer of the demised land to such reconstructed or new company or
corporation".
30. In view of such an unequivocal proviso, it is clear that the lessor and the lessee therein where
both cognizant of the fact that the lessee therein, could in the future undergo any reorganization of
business. In order to meet such a situation the proviso specially carves out this provision to state
that the covenant will permit the transfer of the subject land to the new entity that would be formed
in the future or to a new entity which would take over the lease of the lessee therein. In view of such
an unequivocal and clear recital in the original Lease Deed there would be no impediment in law for
the lessee therein (Petitioner No.2 herein) to enter into any "takeover" as provided or contemplated
under the original Lease Deed. That being the case, as the sequence that have unfolded and the
subsequent transactions that have been entered into are in consonance with the terms of the original
Lease Deed itself.
Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
31. It appears while the matters stood thus, a new company by the name of Paltronics Allied
Industries Pvt Limited was incorporated and a certificate of incorporation for the same was issued
on 18.3.1994 by the Registrar of Companies, Orissa. Further, a perusal of the Memorandum of
Association of the aforesaid company reveals that under the objects to be pursued by the company
on its incorporation clause 4 of the memorandum of association provides that "to take over the
business including lease rights of Paltronics Allied Industries, Bhubaneswar". Interestingly, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 6
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
aforesaid Tejpal Singh has been described as one of the founding promoters of the new company
with substantial number of equity shares having been subscribed by him right at the beginning of
the formation of the company. The said shareholding of Tejpal Singh has also been reflected in the
Articles of Association of the company. Both the Memorandum of Association of the company as
well as the Articles of Association of the company have been executed on 25.2.1994.
32. A perusal of the minutes of the first meeting of the Board of Directors of Paltronics Allied
Industries Private Limited on 19.3.1994 shows that Tejpal Singh remained present for the same. The
agenda item for the constitution of the board resolved that Tejpal Singh was inducted into the Board
of Directors. Further, one of the other Directors proposed the name of the Tejpal Singh for the post
of Managing Director and it was resolved that Tejpal Singh be appointed as the Managing Director
of the company for a term of 5 years. Most importantly, an agenda item was drawn up for taking
over of business of Paltronics Allied Industries. Under the same, Tejpal Singh impressed upon the
members that the Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK company was formed with the view
to convert Paltronics Allied Industries at Patia, Bhubaneswar a proprietorship concern to a private
limited company for expansion and to widen the area of activities. The latest balance sheet of the
concern was placed before the meeting. The Directors, accordingly, decided to take over the
business for a consideration of 3000 numbers of equity shares of the company of Rs. 100 each to be
allotted in due course to Sri Tejpal Singh and (cid:128)20,000 to be payable to Tejpal Singh, proprietor of
Paltronics Allied Industries and pass the following resolution.
"Resolved that consent of the board of directors be and is hereby given for the
acquisition of business of Paltronics Allied Industries, Bhubaneswar as per Clause 4
of the memorandum of association of the company for a consideration of Rs. 20,000
and allotment of 3000 numbers of equity shares of (cid:128)100 each of the company
amounting to Rs. 3,00,000."
33. An agreement dated 14.04.1994 which has been described as an agreement for takeover of
business of Paltronics Allied Industries by Paltronics Allied Industries Private Limited was executed
by the transferor i.e. Tejpal Singh described as Proprietor of Paltronics Allied Industries and
Petitioner No. 1 company through its Director described as the transferee. It is stated therein that
the transferee has offered to take over the business of the transfer to which the transfer has agreed
on the terms as reproduced as hereunder;
"That the Transfer as the sole proprietor of Paltronics Allied Industries will transfer
the same along with its land building and other ancillary equipments in favour of the
Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Transferee at a consideration of Rs.
3,20,000 comprising of Rs. 20,000 towards cost of land, Rs. 2,10,000 towards cost
of compound wall and existing building and Rs. 90,000 towards cost of electronic
testing equipments and furnitures. The said business will continue under the name
and style of Paltronics Allied Industries Private Limited where in the transfer is a
Promoter Director."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 7
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
34. On 26.8.2006 a Certificate of Amendment of the Constitution of the unit in question from
proprietorship to private limited company has been issued by the General Manager of the
Directorate of Industries, District Industries Centre which comes within the purview of the opposite
parties herein. The Ld. Sr. Counsels have vehemently contended that, this in fact reflects the correct
legal position which already stands recorded in the records of the opposite parties and there should
have been no dispute with regard to the same. That being the case there is a clear admission and it is
in admitted position that the conversion of the proprietorship to the private limited company has in
fact been recognised by the opposite parties. This certificate demonstrates that the Petitioner No.1
Company is nothing but the new avatar of the Erstwhile Entity, having taken over all its assets and
liabilities as contemplated by the Erstwhile Entity.This submission seems to have some merit. The
Opposite Parties themselves have acknowledge the same cannot now be permitted to blow hot and
cold.
35. The objections raised by the Opposite Parties herein involve issues which admittedly according
to themselves are subject matter of challenge in various proceedings under different provisions of
land Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK laws. This court in the present petition is not
concerned with any of the issues or objections that were raised during the course of hearing. Rather,
the only question that falls for determination in the present case has been framed as an "Issue A"
[supra]. That apart no other challenge has been raised by the Opp. Parties to the issue at hand in the
present petition.
36. One last factual aspect of the matter is that on 16.7.2024 the Petitioners herein is stated to have
entered into a compromise and filed an application under Order 23 Rule 3 of the Code of Civil
Procedure. The said application is said to have remained pending since and no compromise decree
has been passed pursuant to the same.
37. Such being the factual backdrop of the case the legal position relating to the subject matter needs
to be adverted to. In the case of Vinayak Purshottam Dube v. Jayashree Padamkar Bhat1 the Hon'ble
Apex Court dealt with the concept of a proprietorship form as hereunder;
"22. In this regard, it is necessary to discuss the jurisprudential status of a
proprietary concern. In a report of the Insolvency Law Committee submitted in
February 2020, the definition of "proprietorship firms" reads as under:
"2. Definition of "Proprietorship Firms"
*** 2.2. Proprietorship firms are businesses that are owned, managed and controlled by one person.
They are the most common form of businesses in India and are based in unlimited liability of the
owner. Legally, a proprietorship is not a separate legal entity and is merely the name under (2024) 9
SCC 398 : 2024 SCC OnLine SC 212 Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK which a
proprietor carries on business.
[Raghu Lakshminarayanan v. Fine Tubes [Raghu Lakshminarayanan v. Fine Tubes, (2007) 5 SCC
103 :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 8
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
(2007) 2 SCC (Cri) 455] .] Due to this, proprietorships are usually not defined in
statutes. Though some statutes define proprietorships, such definition is limited to
the context of the statute. For example, Section 2(haa) of the Chartered Accountants
Act, 1949 defined a "sole proprietorship" as "an individual who engages himself in
practice of accountancy or engages in services...". Notably, "proprietorship firms"
have also not been statutorily defined in many other jurisdictions."
(emphasis in original) [Source : Report of the Insolvency Law Committee, pp. 117- 118, Government
of India (Ministry of Corporate Affairs, February, 2020).]"
38. The Supreme Court in the case of Raghu Lakshminarayanan v. Fine Tubes2,
while distinguishing a juristic person such as a company, a partnership or an
association of persons from a proprietary concern, it was observed that a person who
carries on business in the name of a business concern, but he being a proprietor
thereof, would be solely responsible for conduct of its affairs. A proprietary concern is
not a company. Further, a proprietary concern is only the business name in which the
proprietor of the business carries on the business.
39. The proposition laid down hereinabove is important to bear in mind for the
simple fact that in the present case the lease has been allotted to one Mr Tejpal Singh
who is the sole proprietor of a sole proprietorship (2007) 5 SCC 103 : (2007) 2 SCC
(Cri) 455] Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK firm. The aforesaid
discussion makes it amply clear that it was the individual who, in fact, was the lessee
and that a sole proprietorship is interchangeable in legal status with the status of the
proprietor himself.
It is this proprietor who has subsequently joined the subsequent new company as a promoter
director and taking shareholding in the newly formed company. The board resolution as well as the
takeover agreement both make it clear that the sole proprietorship firm was no longer in existence
and that the company took over the assets and liabilities of the sole proprietorship firm. It is also
interesting to note that the first board meeting itself makes it clear that the intention to form the
company has been stated to "convert" the sole proprietorship firm into a company.
40. The fact that business is needed to reorganise themselves from time to time by forming and
extinguishing entities has been recognised and discussed by the Gauhati High Court in the case of
G.R. Engineering Works Ltd. v. Oil India Ltd.3 the relevant portion of which is hereunder;
"17. It may, now, be pointed out that when the owner of a proprietary concern
decides, in order to expand his business, to form a partnership firm with some others,
strictly speaking, a new entity is born in the form of a firm. The firm, which may be so
born, could not have had any experience in its own name. This does not mean that a
businessman would not take into consideration the earlier experience of one of the
partners of such a firm for the purpose of determining the capability of the firm to
execute (2007) 3 Gau LR 899 Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK a contract
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 9
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
if allotted to them. Similarly, a firm may consist of two persons as partners and in
order to expand their business, they may bring in some new partners and a new firm,
in a new name, may be organised and formed. Though the newly born firm may not
have any experience in its own name, would the experience of those, who had been
carrying on the business of the type, which the newly bom firm is required to do, not
be counted by a prudent businessman for determining the technical experience of the
newly born firm to do the business ? It is not uncommon that a company, on account
of merger or amalgamation, undergoes a re-
organization and a tender may be submitted in the name of such a reorganized company. Shall the
experience of the company, which has merged into re-organized company, not be taken into
consideration, because the tender has not been submitted in the name of the company, which has
merged, but has been submitted in the name of a re-organized company, which has no experience,
in its own name ? Similarly, there may be a split in a company and the persons, who had been
looking after a particular field of the business of the company, may form a new company after
leaving the earlier company. The new company, though have persons with experience in the field,
may not have experience in its own name; while the original company would have experience in its
own name, but it would lack persons with experience, who had done work in the field. The
requirements, regarding experience, cannot mean that the offer of the originaL company must be
considered, because it has experience, in its name, though it does not have any experienced person
with it to carry on the work and ignore the offer of the new company on the ground that it has no
experience in its own name, though it has persons having experience in the field and also capability
to undertake and execute the work. A tender process, in such a case, is nothing, but a commercial
transaction; The terms and conditions of the bidding documents have to be, therefore, construed,
from the standpoint of a prudent Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK businessman. When
a businessman enters into a contract, whereunder some work is required to be performed, he would
seek to assure himself about the credentials of the person whom he has to choose for the purpose of
performance of the work. If such credentials are to be examined from a commercial point of view, it
logically means that if the contract is to be entered into, a company, as a prudent person in business,
will look into the background of the entity, be it a company or firm, and the persons, who are in
control of the same and capable to execute the work. A businessman would not go by the name of
the company alone, but by the persons behind it, who have experience to do the work. Similar has to
be approach of the State and its instrumentalities, while considering the eligibility of a tenderer, as
is the case at hand, for the purpose of awarding the contract......."
41.These aspects of law have also been dealt with and succinctly explained in New Horizon Ltd. v.
Union of India4, , wherein the Apex Court observed and laid down as under:--
"23. Even if it be assumed that the requirement regarding experience as set out in the
advertisement dated 22.4.1993 inviting tenders is a condition about eligibility/or
consideration of the tender, though we find no basis for the same, the said
requirement regarding experience cannot be construed to mean that the said,
experience should be of the tenderer in his name only. It is, possible to visualize a
situation where a person having past experience has entered, into a partnership and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 10
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
the tender has been submitted in the name of the partnership firm which may not
have any past experience in its own name. That does not mean that the earlier
experience of one of the partners of the firm cannot be taken into consideration.
Similarly, a company incorporated under the Companies Act having past experience
may (1995) 1 SCC 478 Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK undergo
reorganization as a result, of merger or amalgamation with another company which
may have no such past experience and the tender is submitted in the name of the
reorganized company. It could not be the purport of the requirement about
experience that the experience of the company which has merged into the
reorganized company cannot be taken into consideration because the tender has not
been submitted in its name and has been submitted, in the name of the reorganized
company which does not have experience in its name. Conversely there may be a split
in a company and persons looking after a particular field of the business of the
company form a new company after leaving it. The new company, though having
persons with experience in the field, has no experience in its name while the original
company having experience in its name lacks persons with experience. The
requirement regarding experience does not mean that the offer of the original
company must be considered because it has experience in its name though it does not
have experienced persons with it and ignore the offer of the new company because it
does not have experience in its name though it has persons having experience in the
field. While considering the requirement regarding experience it has to be borne in
mind that the said requirement is contained in a document inviting offers for a
commercial transaction. The terms and conditions of such a document have to be
construed from the standpoint of a prudent businessman. When a businessman
enters into a contract where under some work is to be performed he seeks to assure
himself about the credentials of the person who is to be entrusted with the
performance of the work. Such credentials are to be examined from a commercial
point of view which means that if the contract is to be entered with a company he will
look into the background of the company and the persons who are in control of the
same and their capacity to execute the work.
He would go not by the name of the company but by the persons behind the company. While
keeping in view the past Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK experience he would also take
note of the present state of affairs and the equipment and resources at the disposal of the company.
The same has to be the approach of the authorities while considering a tender received in response
to the advertisement issued on 22.4.1993. This would require that first the terms of the offer must be
examined and if they are found satisfactory the next step would be to consider the credentials of the
tenderer and his ability to perform the work to be entrusted. For judging the credentials past
experience will have to be considered along with the present state of equipment and resources
available with the tenderer. Past experience may not be of much help if the machinery and
equipment is outdated. Conversely lack of experience may be made good by improved, technology
and better equipment."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 11
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
42.In the case of SRSC Infra Private Ltd V S National Highway Authority of India5 which while
approving the principle of law laid therein only distinguished the same on facts, as in that case the
Business Transfer Agreement would not concluded and thus was incapable of being enforced. It was
held therein as hereunder;
"58. In G.R. Engineering Works Ltd. v. Oil India Ltd. (Supra), the business of the
partnership was duly taken over by the private limited company. All the assets,
liabilities, and dues became assets, liabilities and dues of the private limited
company. The partnership firm was dissolved, the works order of the partnership
firm were modified as the works order with the private limited company. In the
present case, as already found in paras above, the transactions required to fully
effectuate the BTA dated 03.08.2019 are yet to be completed."
2021 SCC OnLine Del 3640 Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
43.The High Court of Bombay in the case of Commissioner of Income- Tax v. Texspin Engg. &
Mfg.6, while dealing with a case where partnership firm was being treated as a company under the
statutory provisions of the Companies Act, held that when a firm is treated as a company, there is no
conveyance of the property executable in favour of the Limited Company. The vesting of property of
firm in the Limited Company was not incidental to a transfer, but statutory. Of course the primary
question there being whether the transaction would be amenable to capital gains tax. It would be
profitable to reproduce the relevant part judgment hereinbelow;
"6...... Now, in the present case, it is argued on behalf of the department before the
Tribunal, for the first time, that in this case, on vesting of the properties of the
erstwhile Firm in the Limited Company, there was a transfer of capital assets and,
therefore, it was chargeable to income-tax under the head "Capital gains" as, on such
vesting, there was extinguishment of all right, title and interest in the capital assets
qua the Firm. We do not find any merit in this argument. In the present case, we are
concerned with a Partnership Firm being treated as a company under the statutory
provisions of Part IX of the Companies Act. In such cases, the Company succeeds the
Firm. Generally, in the case of a transfer of a capital asset, two important ingredients
are : existence of a party and a counterparty and, secondly, incoming consideration
qua the transferor. In our view, when a Firm is treated as a Company, the said two
conditions are not attracted. There is no conveyance of the property executable in
favour of the Limited Company. It is no doubt true that all properties of the Firm
vests in the Limited Company on the Firm being treated as a Company (2003) 180
CTR 497 Bom Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK under Part IX of the
Companies Act, but that vesting is not consequent or incidental to a transfer. It is a
statutory vesting of properties in the Company as the Firm is treated as a Limited
Company. On vesting of all the properties statutorily in the Company, the cloak given
to the Firm is replaced by a different cloak and the same Firm is now treated as a
Company, after a given date. In the circumstances, in our view, there is no transfer of
a capital asset as contemplated by Section 45(1) of the Act. Even assuming for the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 12
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
sake of argument that there is a transfer of a capital asset under Section 45(1) because
of the definition of the word "transfer" in Section 2(47)(iii), even then we are of the
view that liability to pay capital gains would not arise because Section 45(1) is
required to be read with Section 48, which provides for mode of computation........"
44.Similar issue came up before the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in Vali Pattabhirama Rao v. Sri
Ramanuja Ginning and Rice Factory (P.) Ltd. 7 wherein the court was considering a situation where
a previous firm was converted into company under the provisions of Companies Act. The Court held
that there was statutory vesting of title of all the property of the previous firm in the newly
incorporated company, therefore, there was no need for any separate conveyance. It was held that a
partnership which was treated as a company for the purposes of the Companies Act can be
registered under Part 8 of the previous Act (Part 9 of the present Act) and the vesting is provided by
Section 263 of the 1913 Act (Section 575 of the present Act). The provision is mandatory and there
will be statutory vesting in the corporation so incorporated under the provisions of the Companies
Act. The Registrar AIR 1984 AP 176 Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK is bound to give a
certificate of registration under Section 262 (present Section 574) which is a conclusive proof of
incorporation, vide Section 35 of the present Act that corresponds to Section 24 of the previous Act.
Hence, it is clear that no conveyance is necessary when a partnership is converted and registered as
a company. However, it is not possible to acquire such title statutorily under this section if the
previous firm purports to convey title to the company in which event a separate deed of conveyance
is necessary. The Court therefore held that if the constitution of the partnership firm is changed into
that of a company by registering it under Part 9 of the present Act (Part 8 of the previous Act), there
shall be statutory vesting of title of all the property of the previous firm in the newly incorporated
company without any need for a separate conveyance.
45.The above judgment was quoted with approval by the Supreme Court in Jai Narain
Parasrampuria (Dead) v. Pushpa Devi Saraf8 , in following manner:-
"26. The said decision has been followed by a Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh
High Court in Vali Pattabhirama Rao v. Sri Ramanuja Ginning & Rice Factory (P)
Ltd. wherein it was held : (AIR pp. 184-85) "Thus we hold that if the constitution of
the partnership firm is changed into that of a company by registering it under Part 9
of present Act (Part 8 of previous Act), there shall be statutory vesting of title of all
the property of the previous firm in the newly incorporated company without any
need for a separate conveyance."
(2006) 7 SCC 756 Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
46.The Supreme Court while considering the effect of conversion of partnership firm into a company
under Part IX of the Companies Act in Commissioner of Income Tax, Udaipur v. Chetak Enterprises
Pvt. Ltd9. , held that on statutory vesting all properties of the firm, in law, vest in the company and
the firm is succeeded by the company. The relevant portion is reproduced hereunder:--
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 13
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
"7. The question is : what is the effect of conversion of partnership firm into a
company under Part IX of the Companies Act? That can be discerned from Section
575 of the Companies Act, which reads thus:
"575. Vesting of property on registration. All property, movable and immovable
(including actionable claims), belonging to or vested in a company at the date of its
registration in pursuance of this Part, shall, on such registration, pass to and vest in
the company as incorporated under this Act for all the estate and interest of the
company therein."
It is manifest that all properties, movable and immovable (including actionable claims) belonging to
or vested in a company at the date of its registration would vest in the company as incorporated
under the Act. In other words, the property acquired by a promoter can be claimed by the company
after its incorporation without any need for conveyance on account of statutory vesting. On such
statutory vesting, all the properties of the firm, in law, vest in the company and the firm is succeeded
by the company. The firm ceases to exist and assumes the status of a company after its registration
as a company."
AIR 2020 SC 4305 Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
47.The High Court of Himachal Pradesh in Sozin Flora Pharma LLP v. State of Himachal Pradesh10
while placing reliance on various judgments has categorically held in the judgment supra that upon
conversion of a registered partnership firm to an LLP under the provisions of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act, all movable and immovable properties of erstwhile registered partnership firm are
automatically vest in the converted LLP by operation of Section 58(4)(b) of the Limited Liability
Partnership Act. However, while making aforesaid observations, Division Bench has further held
that transfer of assets of a firm to the LLP is by operation of law. Being statutory transfer, no
separate conveyance/instrument is required to be executed for transfer of assets. If it is so, no stamp
duty can be charged merely on account of change of the name of the company. Having dealt with the
issues therein the Court came the conclusion as hereinunder;
"5. Conclusion : -From the above discussion, following conclusions are drawn:--
5(a). Upon conversion of a registered partnership firm to an LLP under the
provisions of the Limited Liability Partnership Act, all movable and immovable
properties of erstwhile registered partnership firm, automatically vest in the
converted LLP by operation of Section 58(4)(b) of the Limited Liability Partnership
Act.
5(b). The transfer of assets of firm to the LLP is by operation of law. Being statutory
transfer, no separate conveyance/instrument is required to be executed for transfer
of assets.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 14
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
2021 SCC OnLine HP 4961 : AIR 2021 HP Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT,
CUTTACK 5(c). Since there is no instrument of transfer of assets of the erstwhile
partnership firm to the limited liability partnership, the question of payment of
stamp duty and registration charges does not arise as these are chargeable only on
the instruments indicated in Section 3 of the Indian Stamp Act and Section 17 of the
Indian Registration Act. 5(d). Partnership firm's legal entity after conversion to
limited liability partnership does not change. Only the identity of the firm as a legal
entity changes. Such conversion or change in the name does not amount to change in
the constitution of partnership firm. 5(e). Stamp duty and registration fee cannot be
levied upon conversion of a partnership firm to LLP. Therefore, permission under
Section 118 of the H.P. Tenancy and Land Reforms Act for recording such change of
name in the revenue documents, i.e. M/s Sozin Flora Pharma to M/s Sozin Flora
Pharma LLP cannot be made dependent upon deposit of stamp duty and registration
fee. For the foregoing discussion, we allow the instant writ petition. The impugned
Annexures P-8, dated 28.08.2017 and P-10 dated 23.08.2019, insofar they direct the
petitioner to deposit the stamp duty and registration fee consequent upon change of
its name from M/s Sozin Flora Pharma to M/s Sozin Flora Pharma LLP, are quashed
and set aside. The respondents are directed to enter the name of the petitioner as
'M/s Sozin Flora Pharma LLP' in the revenue record within a period of four weeks
from today."
48.The same view has echoed forth in the case of INOX Air Product Pvt. Ltd Vs State of Himachal
Pradesh and others11; JSTI Transformers Pvt.
2022 SCC OnLine HP 6502 Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Ltd. vs. State of Himachal
Pradesh12 and Security Product Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of Himachal Pradesh and others13.
49. From a combined reading and collective conspectus of the legal propositions discussed herein
above two things emerge. Firstly, that in case of a "conversion" the transfer of assets i.e. all movable
and immovable properties of erstwhile firm, automatically vest in the converted LLP/ company by
operation of law. No separate documents have be executed for the same. Secondly, in cases like the
present one where there is no automatic operation of law, where the "takeover" of a firm take place
by a company the same will be governed by the documents existed executed by the parties. Both the
types of transfer are similar conceptually the only difference being that in one case there is no
requirement to execute any formal documents whereas in the other necessary documents have to be
executed. In the present case the Petitioner No.1 Company as borne out from the records of the case
was clearly formed to take over the assets and liabilities of the sole proprietorship firm in question.
As discussed hereinabove, a sole proprietorship is nothing but the proprietor himself acting in
another name. There is no legal distinction between a sole proprietor and the proprietorship firm.
The lease in question in the present case was given to one Tejpal Singh. The said person has been
taken on board as one of the promoter directors in the newly formed Petitioner No.1 Company. The
first board meeting also shows the shareholding of the said person in 2022 SCC OnLine HP 2043
2024 SCC OnLine HP 3808 Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK the Petitioner No.1
Company. The Articles of Association and the Memorandum of Association of the Petitioner No.1
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 15
M/S Paltronics Allied vs Union Of India & Ors. .... Opposite Party ... on 11 April, 2025
Company state therein that one of the main objects of the formation of the company is to "takeover"
the sole proprietorship firm. The same has been ratified in the very first board meeting itself.
Pursuant to the same a takeover agreement has been executed between the parties. Most
importantly, the District Industries Centre has issued a Certificate of Amendment of the
Constitution of the unit which really in effect recognises the amended position pursuant to the
various transactions referred to hereinabove.
50. In view of the above discussion, the Writ Petition deserves to be allowed. Consequently, the
Opposite Parties herein are directed to update /make necessary amends in their records and give
full effect to the takeover agreement by making necessary changes in their respective records to
reflect the name of the Petitioner No.1 Company herein indicating the details of subject property.
The said exercise shall be carried out expeditiously within a period of 2 weeks.
51. Ordered accordingly. No order as to costs.
(Dr. S.K. Panigrahi) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack, Dated the 11th April, 2025/
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/93564753/ 16
