M/S. Hindustan Lever Limited vs Sri A. Nayak on 13 January, 2021
M/S. Hindustan Lever Limited vs Sri A. Nayak on 13 January,
2021
Author: S.Pujahari
Bench: S.Pujahari
CORAM : HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE S.PUJAHARI
CRLMC No.2001 of 2006
M/s. Hindustan Lever Limited... Petitioner
- Versus -
Sri A. Nayak, Food Inspector,
Rourkela Municipality,
At/P.O.-Rourkela,
Dist.-Sundargarh & Another. ... Opp. Parties
ORDER
24. 13.01.2021 In the wake of the pandemic Covid-19, the case was taken up through V.C.
2. This application under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. has been filed by the petitioner-company to quash
the order of cognizance dated 09.01.2006 passed by the learned S.D.J.M., Panposh, Rourkela in
2(c)C.C. No.18 of 2006 so also the entire prosecution launched against it, its C&F Agent and its
Nominee, inasmuch as the continuance of the proceeding against the petitioner- company, its C&F
Agent and its Nominee shall be an abuse of the process of Court.
3. I have already heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the State
through V.C.
4. The prosecution allegation is that the opposite party no.1-Food Inspector, Rourkela Municipality,
Rourkela along with his staff inspected the premises of Mangal Trading Company located in
plantsite Road, Rourkela-1, of which, one Shiv Shankar Mangal (A-1 in the complaint), the sole
proprietor. The aforesaid firm is wholesale distributor dealing with edible oils, iodized salt, tea,
Dalda Vanaspati, Jam & Jelly etc. During his inspection, he found the said proprietor was there in
his premises and selling different types of food articles. As such, giving his identity, he inspected the
physical condition of different types of food articles stored and kept exposed in the said premises.
During such inspection, as he suspected the stock of flora refined sunflower oil contained in 1 litre
poly pouch and stock of Dalda Vanaspati contained in 500 ml. poly pouch, both with self-life six
months from the date of package, to be adulterated, he purchased sunflower oil, which was stated to
have been manufactured by M/s. Shree Sidhivinayak Agro Extraction Pvt. Ltd., Survey No.74/2,
Part D-N-6-56, Village-Alipur, Mandal Zaheerabad, Medal-500220(A) and marketed by Bunge
India Pvt. Ltd. NH-12, P.O.-Ramgani Balaji, Dist.- Bundi-323001, Rajasthan and also Dalda
Vanaspati stated to have been manufactured by Mihijam Vanaspati Ltd., P.O.-Mihijam-815354,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186219827/ 1
M/S. Hindustan Lever Limited vs Sri A. Nayak on 13 January, 2021
Dist.-Jamtara, Jharkhand and marketed by Bunge India Pvt. Ltd. NH- 12, P.O.-Ramgani Balaji,
Dist.-Bundi-323001, Rajasthan. On further inquiry, he came to know from the disclosure of the
proprietor that the mentioned stocks, i.e., flora refined sunflower oil and Dalda Vanaspati had been
purchased by him from the carrying and forwarding agent of the present petitioner registered
LOC-Add-Mahanadi Clearing House, N.H.-5, Gopalpur, Cuttack-753011 (A-3 in the complaint).
Thereafter, he expressing his intention to send the same for analysis under the P.F.A. Act and Rules
made packing and sealing of the samples collected as required under the P.F.A. Act and Rules and
labelled the same in presence of the proprietor and put his brass seal impression as required and
sent one of the sealed sample packets of each of the above mentioned articles to the Public Analyst
to Government of Orissa, Bhubaneswar by Registered Parcel on 24.09.2005 under intimation to the
L.H.A. & C.D.M.O., Sundargarh, and also sent the respective copies of the Memorandums and
specimen impressions of the seal used to seal the above food samples, in separate sealed packets to
the said Public Analyst and kept the remaining two parts of the samples of each of the items with
respective two copies of the Memorandum in separate sealed packets with the L.H.A. & C.D.M.O.,
Sundargarh. On 26.09.2005, notice in Form-VI was given to the C&F Agent of the company in
Odisha with intimation to the petitioner as required under P.F.A. Act and Rules. On 14.10.2005, the
Assistant Legal Manager of Hindustan Lever Limited, Kolkata Office intimated the opposite party
no.1 vide his letter dated 22.11.2005 that the concerned stock of Flora refined sunflower oil and
Dalda Vanaspati out of which the above mentioned samples were drawn were received by its
Clearing & Forwarding Agent (C&F) at Cuttack, Orissa from Bunge India Pvt. Ltd. vide its stock
transfer notes and later on the same were dispatched to their distributors at different places, without
any bill/invoice/cash memo or purchase challan. In response to such letter, even if the opposite
party no.1 demanded in writing to furnish the bill/invoice/cash memo or purchase challan in
support of the claim of the petitioner, but the same was not responded to. As such, notice in
Form-VI of P.F.A. Act and Rules was not sent to Bunge India Pvt. Ltd., Mumbai-400051, as required
under the provision of P.F.A. Act and Rules. On 28.11.2005, however, report having been received
from the Public Analyst indicating that the Dalda Vanaspati was of prescribed standard, but the
Flora refined sunflower oil was found to be adulterated. In such premises, prosecution was launched
by the opposite party no.1-Food Inspector against Sri Shiv Shankar Mangal of the Mangal Trading
Company (A-1 in the complaint), the wholesale distributor, the Nominee and Regional Sales
Manager of the petitioner- company (A-2 in the complaint) and its LOC-Add- Mahanadi Clearing
House, Gopalpur, Cuttack (A-3 in the complaint) and petitioner-company, Hindustan Lever Limited
(A-4 in the complaint) for selling adulterated Flora refined sunflower oil on 23.09.2005. Pursuant to
such complaint, cognizance of the offence under Section 16(1)(a)(i) of the P.F.A. Act for
contravention of Section-7(1) read with Section 2(ia)(m) and para-A-17-22, A-17-154 of Appendix-'B'
of P.F.A. Act & Rules is taken by the learned S.D.J.M., Panposh, Rourkela and the petitioner and
other accused are being proceeded with by the learned S.D.J.M., Panposh, Rourkela vide the order
impugned in this case.
5. The petitioner has challenged the same in this case denying the prosecution allegation that the
food to be adulterated and also on the ground that the prosecution is incompetent in the absence of
the manufacturer and the marketeer, particularly when the petitioner has intimated the opposite
party no.1-Food Inspector regarding the stock transfer. Further, it has also been pleaded that since
the petitioner was given warranty by the marketeer about the quality of the products and there was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186219827/ 2
M/S. Hindustan Lever Limited vs Sri A. Nayak on 13 January, 2021
an agreement of agency, the petitioner and all other accused persons are thus covered under Section
19(2) of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act. Hence, the prosecution against the petitioner and
its C&F Agent as well as its Regional Sales Manager is misconceived. Furthermore, it has also been
pleaded that the methodology, i.e., DGHS having not been prescribed by the Government of India
till then for analysis of the sample by the Public Analyst, such analyst report could not have been
used against the petitioner.
6. Pleading the aforesaid, the petitioner-company has sought for quashment of the proceeding
initiated against it and its C&F Agent so also its Nominee.
7. During the course of hearing, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner placed reliance on a
decision of the Apex Court rendered in the case of Pepsico India Holdings Private Limited v. Food
Inspector and Another, reported in (2011) 1 SCC 176 wherein it has been held that samples declared
adulterated by adopting standards prescribed by Director General of Health Services in the absence
of parameters which ought to have been defined by Central Government, i.e., the laboratories where
samples of articles of food or adulterants may be analysed by public analysts under the Act as well as
the methods of analysis as contemplated under Section 23(1-A)(ee) and (hh) and Rule-65(2), could
not be considered as adulterated, particularly when content of pesticide residue was within tolerable
limits prescribed subsequently vide Notice dated 17.06.2009.
Furthermore, reliance has also been placed on a decision of this Court in the case of Ashok Kumar
Khandelwal v. Pramananda Singh and another, reported in 2018 (2) FAC 215 wherein relying on the
aforesaid decision, this Court has also held the aforesaid. To persuade this Court, learned counsel
for the petitioner has also placed reliance on different decisions of Kerela High Court, Bombay High
Court, Madhya Pradesh High Court and Punjab & Haryana High Court wherein similar view has
been taken. The decisions relied on are as follows:-
(i) 2016 (1) FAC 211 : K.N. Sadanandan
v. Food Inspector and others
(ii) 2016 (1) FAC 213 : Benjamin Chandy
and another v. The Chief Food
Inspector and another
(iii) 2016 (1) FAC 216 : N. Sreedharan
Nair, Quality Supervisor, White Field Diary (P) Ltd. and another v. Food Inspector, Municipal Office
and another
(iv) 2016 (1) FAC 370 : V. Prasanth and another v. Food Inspector and another
(v) 2016 (1) FAC 372 : M.V. Thomas v.
Food Inspector and another
(vi) 2016 (1) FAC 374 : Pushpangadhan
T.D. v. The Food Inspector and
another
(vii) 2016 (1) FAC 385 : P.P. Ajith Kumar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186219827/ 3
M/S. Hindustan Lever Limited vs Sri A. Nayak on 13 January, 2021
and another v. Food Inspector and
another
(viii) 2016 (1) FAC 386 : S. Pradeep Kumar v. Food Inspector and another
(ix) 2016 (1) FAC 388 : Ganesh Pandurang Jadhao and others v. The State of Maharashtra and
others
(x) 2016 (1) FAC 497 : R. Gopalakrishnan v. The Food Inspector and others
(xi) 2016 (1) FAC 502 : S. Pathak v. State of M.P.
(xii) 2016 (1) FAC 512 : A.V. Lohidakshan and others v. Food Inspector and others
(xiii) 2016 (1) FAC 513 : Subhash Ch.
Samantray v. State of Punjab and
another
(xiv) 2018 (1) FAC 282 : Rehna Beegum &
others v. State of Kerala
(xv) 2018 (1) FAC 283 : Jaison T.J. &
another v. State of Kerala & another
(xvi) 2018 (1) FAC 284 : K. Sudhakaran &
others v. State of Kerala & others
(xvii) 2018 (1) FAC 286 : Tata Coffee
Limited v. Food Safety Officer and
another
(xviii) 2018 (1) FAC 287 : K. Durai Murugan v. Food Inspector (xix) 2019 (1) FAC 42 : Rajeev v. Food
Inspector and anr.
(xx) 2019 (1) FAC 282 : P.R. Santhosh Kumar v. Food Inspector (xxi) 2019 (1) FAC 285 : Mahesh
Chander @ Mahesh Chand v. State of Haryana
8. The petitioner has also sought for quashment of the cognizance and the proceeding against it as
well as its nominee and its C&F Agent with the averment that since it is a commission agent and act
as a distributor of the marketeer of the adulterated products, i.e., M/s. Bunge India Pvt. Ltd. and the
commission agency agreement with the said M/s. Bunge India Pvt. Ltd. with regard to the standard
and quality of the product manufactured guaranteed on the date of transfer of the same to the
distributor, they are protected under Section 19(2) of the P.F.A. Act, especially when the adulterated
product was not seized from their possession. So also it has been argued that since the Public
Analyst Report suggests that the product is adulterated due to increase in acidic value which can be
attributed to the manufacturer or delay in analysis of the food for which the petitioner merely the
carrying and forwarding agent could not be made responsible.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186219827/ 4
M/S. Hindustan Lever Limited vs Sri A. Nayak on 13 January, 2021
9. Per contra, learned counsel for the State submits that in the absence of the warranty agreement
entered between the distributor company and the manufacturer, the distributor dealer company,
who had sold the stock to the wholesaler, cannot wriggle out of the prosecution on the ground of
existence of agency agreement with the manufacturer, that too when the same was not also
produced. So far as the dispute to the examination by DGHS method is concerned, it has also been
submitted that the contention raised in the absence of any prescribed standard by any Rules framed
under Section-23(1A) (hh) of the P.F.A. Act, the analysis of the adulterated articles by the Public
Analyst requires to be accepted. In this regard, reliance has been placed in a decision of the Apex
Court in the case of Ranbir Arya v. The State (U.T. of Chandigarh) (MANU/SC/1195/2015), wherein
the Apex Court has upheld the conviction basing on the report of the Public Analyst rejecting such a
contention of the counsel for the appellant therein. So also, reliance has been placed in the case of
Mithilesh v. State of NCT, Delhi (MANU/SC/0515/2014) wherein the Apex Court also confirmed the
conviction basing on the report of the Public Analyst discarding the contention made with regard to
non-prescription method of any analysis of the food item. Placing reliance on the same, learned
counsel for the State submits that the contention advanced for quashment of the prosecution is
without any substance.
10. It is not in dispute that the warranty agreement was not produced before the complainant so also
there is no agency agreement with the accused- company. In the absence of the same, the
prosecution, therefore, was launched against them. Since the accused persons did not fulfill the
criteria as provided under Section 19(2) of the P.F.A. Act and Rule-12-A of the P.F.A. Rules, the
contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner challenging the prosecution on the said
ground is without any substance.
11. Now, coming to the contention that since in the case of Pepsico India Holdings Private Limited
(supra), it has been held that in the absence of any prescription made by the Central Government
regarding the laboratories for analysis of the food items and method of analysis under Section
23(1A)(ee) and (hh) of the P.F.A. Act, the prosecution launched basing on the Public Analyst report
using DGHS standards cannot be sustained.
12. In the case of Pepsico India Holdings Private Limited (supra), the Apex Court framed, inter alia,
one issue for consideration before the Court was whether in the absence of any prescribed and
validated method of analysis under Section 23(1A)(hh) of P.F.A. Act, could a prosecution have been
launched against the appellants based on a report submitted by the Public Analyst using the method
of the Directorate General of Health Services (DGHS)?
13. The Apex Court answered the said issue as follows:-
"41. The High Court summarised its view into several grounds of challenge. Grounds
1 and 2 relate to the non-framing of Rules under Section 23(1A)(ee) and (hh) of the
1954 Act.....
42. As far as Grounds 1 and 2 are concerned, the High Court was not convinced with
the submission made on behalf of the Appellants that in the absence of any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186219827/ 5
M/S. Hindustan Lever Limited vs Sri A. Nayak on 13 January, 2021
prescribed and validated method of analysis under Section 23(1A)(ee) and (hh) of the
1954 Act, the report of the Public Analyst, who had used the DGHS method, could not
be relied upon, especially when even the Laboratories, where the test for detection of
insecticides and pesticides in an article of food could be undertaken, had not been
specified.
43. The observation of the Division Bench of the High Court that if the submissions
made on behalf of the Appellants herein were to be accepted, the mechanism of the
Act and the Rules framed thereunder would come to a grinding halt, is not acceptable
to us, since the same could lead to a pick- and-choose method to suit the
prosecution.....
44. The High Court also misconstrued the provisions of Section 23(1A)(ee) and (hh)
in holding that the same were basically enabling provisions and were not mandatory
and could, in any event, be solved by the Central Government by framing the Rules
thereunder, by which specified tests to be held in designated Laboratories could be
spelt out. Consequently, the High Court also erred in holding that the
non-formulation of Rules under the aforesaid provisions of the 1954 Act could not be
said to be fatal for the prosecution.
xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx
47. Both the questions regarding the failure of the Central Government to frame
Rules to define the Laboratories, where samples of food could be analysed by the
Public Analyst, or to define the validated methods of analysis and the liability of the
Directors, who are the Appellants before us, are of great importance for the purpose
of bringing home a charge against the accused for violation of the provisions of Rule
65 of the 1955 Rules and Section 2(i-a)(h) of the 1954 Act and for holding that the
Sweetened Carbonated Water manufactured by the Appellants was adulterated in
terms of the said Rules.......The High Court does not appear to have considered the
implications of the failure of the Central Government to frame Rules for the aforesaid
purpose....."
14. Learned counsel for the State has submitted that subsequent to the decision of Pepsico India
Holdings Private Limited (supra), the Apex Court in the cases of Ranbir Arya and Mithilesh (supra)
did not accept the submission regarding absence of prescription of method of analysis under Section
23(1A)(hh) of the P.F.A. Act to be a ground for acquittal of the appellants therein.
15. However, in the case of Ranbir Arya as well as Mithilesh (supra), the aforesaid contention of
non- compliance of Section 23(1A)(ee) and (hh) of the P.F.A. Act was neither specifically raised nor
the case of Pepsico India Holdings Private Limited (supra) was taken note of.
16. In such premises, when the prosecution for non-compliance of Section 23(1A)(ee) and (hh) of
the P.F.A. Act has been held to be fatal to prosecution case in the Pepsico India Holdings Private
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186219827/ 6
M/S. Hindustan Lever Limited vs Sri A. Nayak on 13 January, 2021
Limited (supra) by the Apex Court which has also been followed by this Court in the case of Ashok
Kumar Khandelwal (supra) as well as in the different cases cited hereinbefore by Kerala High Court,
Bombay High Court, Madhya Pradesh High Court and also Punjab & Haryana High Court, I am of
the view that the prosecution launched against the petitioner, its C&F Agent, its Nominee and the
dealer basing on the report of the Public Analyst that the edible flora refined sunflower oil to be
adulterated as per the DGHS method, cannot be sustained and as such, liable to be quashed for
non-prescription of the method of analysis under Section 23(1A)(hh) of the P.F.A. Act.
17. Hence, taking note of the aforesaid facts and circumstances of this case and the law laid down in
this regard in the case of Pepsico India Holdings Private Limited (supra), this Court is of the view
that the criminal prosecution against the accused persons is required to be quashed, as otherwise
the same would be an abuse of the process of court.
18. Accordingly, the Criminal Misc. Case is allowed. Consequently, the prosecution launched in
2(c)C.C. No.18 of 2006 against the petitioner and all other accused persons, who are
non-petitioners, stands quashed.
The parties may utilize the copy of this order as per the High Court's Notice No.4587 dated
25.03.2020.
.......................
S.Pujahari, J.
DA/MRS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186219827/ 7
