M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India
Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
[1]
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
SHOUGRAKPA Digitally signed by
SHOUGRAKPAM
M DEVANANDA DEVANANDA SINGH AT IMPHAL
Date: 2024.08.28 14:11:36
SINGH +05'30'
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024
1. M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. having its head office at
201 Royal Arcade, Dr. B. Baruah Road, Ulubari, P.O. &
P.S. Ulubari, Guwahati-781007.
2. M/S GKC Projects Limited (Joint Venture) having its
office at Sy. No. 9 (P). CII-Green Building Lane, HITEC
City, Kondapur, Hyderabad - 500084, Telangana, India
respectively.
The petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 are represented by the authorised
Signatory namely Shri Ningombam Ibochouba Singh,
aged about 52 years, S.O. Late N. Nabakumar Singh of
Chingamakha Phura Makhong, P.O. & P.S. Singjamei, Imphal
West District, Manipur - 795008.
... Petitioners
-Versus-
1. The Union of India through the Secretary, Ministry of Road
Transport & Highways, Transport Bhawan, 1, Parliament
Street, New Delhi - 110001.
2. The State of Manipur represented by the Commissioner
(Works), Govt. of Manipur, Old Secretariat Complex,
Babupara, Imphal West, Manipur - 795001.
3. The Project Director-cum-Chief Engineer, Externally Aided
Projects (EAP), Public Works Department (PWD), Manipur
having its office at PWD Complex, Khuyathong, P.O. & P.S.
Imphal, Imphal West District, Manipur.
... Official Respondents
With
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 1
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with
Contd.../-
WP(C) No. 521 of 2024
[2]
WP(C) No. 521 of 2024
1. M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Represented by its Director
Mr. Ramawatar Bhartia having office at 201, Royal Arcade,
Dr. B. Baruah Road Ulubari, Guwahati - 781007, Assam.
2. M/S GKC - BIPL (JV) represented by Mr. Ramawatar Bhartia
Authoritsed Signatory having office at 201, Royal Arcade,
Dr. B. Baruah Road, Ulubari, Guwahati - 781007, Assam.
The petitioner Nos. 1 and 2 are represented by the authorised
Signatory namely Shri Ningombam Ibochouba Singh, aged
about 54 years, S/o N. Nabakumar Singh of Chingamakha
Phura Makhong, P.O. & P.S. Singjamei, Imphal West District,
Manipur - 795008.
... Petitioners
-Versus-
1. The Union of India through the Secretary, Ministry of Road
Transport & Highways, Transport Bhawan, 1, Parliament
Street, New Delhi - 110001.
2. The State of Manipur represented by the Secretary/
Commissioner (Works), Govt. of Manipur, Old Secretariat
Complex, Babupara, Imphal West, Manipur - 795001.
3. The Project Director-cum-Chief Engineer, Programme
Implementation Unit (PIU) Externally Aided Projects (EAP),
Public Works Department (PWD), Manipur having its office
at PWD Complex, Khuyathong, P.O. & P.S. Imphal, Imphal
West District, Manipur.
4. AMRIL-IRCON Jont Venture, Saikrupa, D. No. 8-3-833,
Plot: 37 & 38, Phase-1, Kamalpuri Colony, Hyderabad,
Telangana-500073.
... Respondents
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with
Contd.../-
WP(C) No. 521 of 2024
[3]
B E F O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
For the petitioners :: Mr. H.S. Paonam, Sr. Advocate asstd. by
Mr. Yumnam Shushruta, Advocate
For the respondents :: Mr. S. Vijayanand Sharma, Sr. Panel
Counsel;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 2
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
Mr. M. Devananda, Addl. AG asstd. by Ms.
Naorem Jyotsana, Advocate.
Date of hearing :: 07-08-2024
Date of judgment :: 28-08-2024
J U D G M E N T
[1] Heard Mr. H.S. Paonam, learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. Yumnan Sushruta, learned
counsel appearing for the petitioners; Mr. S. Vijayanand Sharma, learned senior panel counsel
appearing for the respondents No. 1 and Mr. M. Devananda, learned Additional AG assisted by Ms.
Naorem Jyotsana, learned counsel appearing for the respondents No. 2 and 3. None appeared for
the respondent No. 4, despite service of notice.
The present two writ petitions have been filed primarily challenging the rejection of the Technical
Bids submitted by the petitioners in connection with the NIT dated 15-03-2024 in respect of a
contract work for construction of Rigid Pavement and Lined Drain of Selected Roads under
Highway South Division - Package - 4 (total road length of 111.182 km.) coupled with the prayer for
directing the respondents No. 2 and 3 to open the Financial Bids submitted by the petitioners in
connection with the said contract work. As the two writ petitions filed by the same petitioners
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
rises common question of facts and law, the same were heard jointly and being disposed of by this
common judgment.
[2] There is no dispute with regard to the facts of the present two writ petitions. The Project
Director-cum-Chief Engineer, EAP, PWD, Manipur, respondent No. 3 herein, issued a Notice
Inviting Tender (NIT) dated 15-03-2024 inviting e-tender bids from interested and eligible
tenderers in connection with the following contract works:-
IOCT No. / Package Name Completion Time Tender Security Package No. (Months)
(INR) MN/PWED/EAP/ Construction of Rigid Execution = 36 17.80 crore using the
MURDAMIP/PRO Pavement and Lined Post construction instruments specified
C-W/2024/01 Drain of Selected Roads Mandatory in Instructions to under Imphal
West Tenderers 19.3 Maintenance = 60 Division - Package 1: (Tender Data Sheet)
MUR-CW-01 Total Road Length -
172.858 km.
MN/PWD/EAP/M Construction of Rigid Execution = 36 13.85 crore URDAMIP/PROC Pavement
and Lined Post construction Using the
-W/2024/02 Drain of Selected Roads Mandatory instruments specified under Imphal West in
Instructions to maintenance = 60 Division - Package 1: Tenderers 19.3 MUR-CW-02 Total Road
Length - (Tender Data Sheet) 172.858 km.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 3
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
MN/PWD/EAP/M Construction of Rigid Execution = 36 12.20 crore
URDAMIP/PROC Pavement and Lined Post construction Using the
-W/2024/03 Drain of Selected Roads Mandatory instruments specified
under Imphal East in Instructions to
maintenance = 60
Division (ED-2) - Tenderers 19.3
MUR-CW-03
Package 3: Total Road (Tender Data Sheet)
Length - 122.209 km.
MN/PWD/EAP/M Construction of Rigid Execution = 36 11.10 crore
URDAMIP/PROC Pavement and Lined Post construction Using the
-W/2024/04 Drain of Selected Mandatory instruments specified
Roads under Highway in Instructions to
maintenance = 60
South Division - Tenderers 19.3
MUR-CW-04
Package 4: Total Road (Tender Data Sheet)
Length - 111.182 km.
[3] The tender document consist of three parts. Part 1 relates to
tendering procedure consisting of six Sections, i.e., Section I to VI, WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with
Contd.../-
Part 2 relates to works' requirements consisting of one Section, i.e., Section VII and Part 3 relates to
conditions of contract and contract forms consisting of three sections, i.e., Sections VIII to X.
Section I relates to instructions to tenderers and under Clause 11 of Section I, it is, inter alia,
provided as under:-
"11.1. The Tender shall comprise two Parts, namely Technical Part and the Financial
Part. These two Parts shall be submitted simultaneously in two separate sealed
envelopes (two- envelope tendering process). One envelope shall contain only
information relating to the Technical Bid and the other only information relating to
the Financial Part. These two envelopes shall be enclosed in a separate sealed outer
envelope marked "ORIGINAL TENDER."
[4] Under Clause 16 and 17 of Section I, it is provided as under:
"16.1. The tenderer shall furnish a technical proposal in the Technical Part of the
Tender including the statement of work methods, equipment, personnel, schedules
and any other information as stipulated in Section IV, Tender Forms, in sufficient
detail to demonstrate the adequacy of the tenderer's proposal to meet the works'
requirements and the completion time."
"17.1 To establish Tenderer's eligibility in accordance with ITT 4. Tenderers shall
complete the Letter of Tender - Technical Part, included in Section IV, Tender
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 4
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
Forms."
"17.2 In accordance with Section III, Evaluation and Qualification Criteria, to
establish its qualifications to perform the Contract, the Tenderer shall provide the
information requested in the corresponding information sheets included in Section
IV, Tender Forms."
"17.3 If provisions for development of domestic industry (such as a margin of
domestic preference) apply as specified in accordance with ITT 38.1, domestic
Tenderers, individually or in joint ventures, applying for eligibility for domestic
preference shall supply all information required to satisfy the criteria for eligibility
specified in accordance with ITT 38.1."
[5] Under Clause 27 and 30 of Section I, it is, inter alia, provided as under:-
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
"27.1 To assist in the examination, evaluation and comparison of the Tenders, and
qualification of the Tenderers, the Employer may, at its discretion, ask any Tenderer
for a clarification of its Tender, allowing a reasonable time for response. Any
clarification submitted by a Tenderer that is not in response to a request by the
Employer shall not be considered. The Employer's request for clarification and the
response shall be in writing. No change, including any voluntary increase or decrease,
in the prices or substance of the Tender shall be sought, offered or permitted, except
to confirm the correction of arithmetic errors discovered by the Employer in the
evaluation of the Tenders, in accordance with ITT 36."
"30.1 In evaluating the Technical Parts of each Tender, the Employer shall use the
criteria and methodologies listed in this ITT and Section III, Evaluation and
Qualification Criteria. No other evaluation criteria or methodologies shall be
permitted."
[6] Under Clause 31 and 32 of Section I, it is provided as under:-
"31.1 The Employer's determination of a Tender's responsiveness is to be based on
the contents of the Tender itself, as defined in ITT 11."
"31.2 A substantially responsive Tender is one that meets the requirements of the
Tender Document without material deviation, reservation or omission. A material
deviation, reservation or omission is one that:
(a) if accepted, would:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 5
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
(i) affect in any substantial way the scope, quality or performance of the Works
specified in the Contract; or
(ii) limit in any substantial way, inconsistent with the Tender Document, the
Employer's rights or the Tenderer's obligations under the proposed Contract, or
(b) if rectified, would unfairly affect the competitive position of other Tenderers
presenting substantially responsive Tenders.
"31.3 The Employer shall examine the technical aspects of the Tender submitted in
accordance with ITT 16, in particular, to confirm that all requirements of Section VII,
Works' Requirements have been met without any material deviation, reservation or
omission."
"31.4 If a Tender is not substantially responsive to the requirements of the Tender
Document, it shall be rejected by the Employer and may not subsequently be made
responsive by correction of the material deviation, reservation or omission."
"32.1 The Employer shall determine to its satisfaction whether the eligible Tenderers
that have submitted substantially responsive Tender -
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
Technical Parts meet the qualifying criteria specified in Section III, Evaluation and
Qualification Criteria."
"32.2 The determination shall be based upon an examination of the documentary
evidence of the Tenderer's qualifications submitted by the Tenderer, pursuant to ITT
17. The determination shall not take into consideration the qualifications of other
firms such as the Tenderer's subsidiaries, parent entities, affiliates, subcontractors
(other than Specialized Subcontractors if permitted in ITT 33.3) or any other firm(s)
different from the Tenderer."
"32.3 If a Tenderer does not meet the qualifying criteria specified in Section III,
Evaluation and Qualification Criteria, its Tender shall be rejected by the Employer
and may not subsequently be made responsive by correction of the material
deviation, reservation or omission."
"32.4 Only Tenders that are both substantially responsive to the Tender Document
and meet all Qualification Criteria shall have their envelopes marked "FINANCIAL
PART™ opened at the second public opening."
[7] Section III of Part 1 relates to Evaluation and Qualification Criteria and Clause 3 of Section III
deals with Qualification Criteria. Under Clause 3.2 of Section III, it is provided as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 6
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
Historical Contract Non-Performance Eligibility and Qualification Criteria
Compliance Requirements Documentation No Subject Requirement Single Joint
Venture (existing or intended) Submission Entity All Members Each One
Requirements Combined Member Member 3.2 History of Nonperformance Must
meet Must meet Must meet N/A Form CON-2 Nonperforming of a contract did
requirement requirement requirement Contracts not occur as a result of contractor
default since January 1, 2019
1. Nonperformance as decided by the Employer, shall include all contracts where (a)
non-
performance was not challenged by the contractor, including through referral to the dispute
resolution mechanism under the respective contract, (b) contracts that were so challenged but
where the dispute resolution mechanism/ court of Law has not overturned /stayed the decision of
the Employer* and (c) contracts that were so challenged but fully settled against the contractor.
Nonperformance shall not include contracts where decision of the Employer* was overruled by the
dispute resolution mechanism. Nonperformance must be based on all information on fully settled
disputes or litigation, i.e., dispute or litigation that has been resolved in accordance with the dispute
resolution mechanism under the respective contract and where all appeal instances available to the
Tenderer have been exhausted.
* Refers to the competent authority who had awarded/ terminated the Contract.
2. This requirement also applies to contracts executed by the Tenderer as JV member.
3. The Tenderer shall provide accurate information on the related Tender Form about any litigation
or arbitration resulting from contracts completed or ongoing under its execution WP(C) No. 477 of
2024 with Contd.../-
over the last five years. A consistent history of awards against the Tenderer or any member of a joint
venture may result in failure of the Tender . [8] In response to the aforesaid NIT, the petitioners
submitted their bid for Package No. MUR-CW-04 for construction of Rigid Pavement and Lined
Drain of Selected Roads under Highway South Division-Package-4 (total road length of 111.182 km.)
The Technical Bids submitted by the tenderers, including the present petitioners, in connection with
the four contract works notified in the aforesaid NIT, were opened on 24-05-2024 in the office of
the respondent No. 3. The information submitted by the petitioners in connection with their
historical contract non-performance, pending litigation and litigation history in Form CON - 2 as
required under clause 3.2 of Section-III of Part-1 of the bidding documents are as under:-
Non performed Contracts in accordance with Section III, Evaluation and
Qualification Criteria Year Non-performed Contact Identification Total Contract
portion of contract Amount (INR) 2022 Amount - Contract Identification -
CON/J-1/2612 dated Rs. 150,66,92,915.20 Rs. 53,50,76,967.79 12.03.2020 Name of
Employer - Chief Engineer/ CON-VII Percentage - 35% Address of Employer = N.F.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 7
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
Railway, Maligaon, Guwahati-11 Reasons(s) for nonperformance - There was total
ban on quarrying/ borrowing of Earth in the State of Manipur due to which
earthwork was hampered badly.
2014 Amount - Contract Identification - CON/BVU-NLP/1267 Rs. 15,87,07,142.00
Rs. 2,94,10,109.00 dated 10.07.2009
Name of Employer - General Manager/ CON/
Percentage - 18% N.F Railway
Address of Employer - Maligaon, Guwahati-11
Reasons(s) for nonperformance - Unilaterial
Closure of CA by Department
2014 Amount - Contract Identification - CON/BVU-NLP/1272 Rs. 18,16,94,706.00
Rs. 1,99,57,089.00 dated 15.09.2009
Name of Employer - General Manager/CON/
Percentage - 10% N.F Railway
Address of Employer - Maligaon, Guwahati-11
Reason(s) for nonperformance - Unilateral
Closure of CA by Department
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with
Contd.../-
[9] On coming to know about the information submitted by the
petitioners in connection with their historical contract non-performance, the
respondent No. 3 wrote a letter dated 28-05-2024 to the Deputy Chief Engineer,
CON-4, North East Frontier Railway (Construction), Imphal, requesting the latter to
provide an update on the status of the historical contract non-performance of the
petitioners. In response to the said letter, the Deputy Chief Engineer, CON-4, NF
Railway, Imphal, wrote a letter dated 12-06-2024 furnishing the following
information:-
"1. Bhartiya Infra Project Ltd.:
• The contract agreement No-.CON/J-1/2612 dated 12.03.2020 with M/s Bhartiya
I n f r a P r o j e c t L t d . w a s t e r m i n a t e d v i d e l e t t e r N o .
W/60/CON/J-1/EMB/2019/RT-1/2612 dated 26.09.2022. Despite the termination
of the aforementioned contract, M/s Bhartiya Infra Project Ltd. has several other
ongoing contracts with the railway which are under progress as per schedule.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 8
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
• A legal case concerning this termination is currently ongoing, and the court has not
given any ruling in this regard."
[10] The Technical Bids submitted by the petitioners were evaluated by the duly constituted Bid
Evaluation Committee and the Committee recommended that the Technical Bids/ tenders
submitted by the petitioners were substantially non-responsive to the technical requirements
specified in Section III: Evaluation and Qualification Criteria of the tender document. Thereafter,
the said Evaluation Report was submitted to the investment bank by the respondent No. 3 under a
letter dated 12-07-2024 for obtaining No-objection and approval for opening Financial Part of the
tender for the technically responsive tenderers. The operative portion of the said report are
reproduced hereunder for ready reference.
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
"3.1.6. Historical Contract Non-Performance (1) GKC-BIPL JV The Lead Member of
the joint venture has submitted a completed Form CON-2, asserting that no instances
of contract non-performance have occurred since January 1, 2019, as specified in
Section III, Evaluation and Qualification Criteria, Sub-Factor 3.2.1.
However, the JV partner, BIPL, has submitted a completed Form CON-2 listing a project that
experienced non-performance, as detailed below:
Year Non-Performed Contract Identification Total Contract portion of Contract
Amount 2022 Amount - Contract Identification - CON/J- Rs. 150,66,92,915.20 Rs.
53,50,76,967.79 1/2612 dated 12.03.2020 Name of Employer - Chief Engineer/
Percentage - 35% CON-VII Address of Employer - N.F. Railway, Maligaon, Guwahati
- 11 Reason(s) for nonperformance -
There was total ban on quarrying/ borrowing of Earth in the State of Manipur due to
which earth work was hampered badly This office vide its letter
No.22/PD/PIU/MUR/PROC-CW/2024/8726 dated 28/05/2024 had requested the
Deputy Chief Engineer, CON-4, North East Frontier Railway (Construction). Imphal
to confirm any declaration as Non-Performer of all the Tenderers who submitted the
tender for all 4 (four) contract packages of the Project during the last 5 (five) years
since 1" Jan 2019. It was also requested to provide an update on the status of
termination of the work - "Earthwork, Construction of Major or Minor Bridges and
Protection works between Ch 115.930 to 124.660 in connection with
Jiribam-Tupul-Imphal new BG Railway Line Project". This project was originally
awarded to Bhartia Infra Projects Limited under North East Frontier Railway's
Agreement no. CON/J-1/2612 dated 12.03.2020. It was subsequently terminated as
per North East Frontier Railway's letter no.
W/60/CON/J-I/EMP/2019/08/RT-1/2612 dated 26.09.2022, and as of the latest available
information on 17.11.2023, the termination remains in effect. Further it was also requested to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 9
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
furnish details whether the Hon'ble Court has given any ruling regarding the challenge made by the
Contractor in the court of law. The Northeast Frontier Railway, in its letter
W/60/CON/J-I/EMB/2019/RT-1/2612/ 0522 dated 12.06.2024, informed that a legal case
concerning the termination of the above-mentioned contract is ongoing, and the court has not given
any ruling in this regard."
In accordance with Section III, Evaluation and Qualification Criteria, under the History of
Nonperforming Contracts:- "Nonperformance, as WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
decided by the Employer, shall include all contracts that were so challenged but where the dispute
resolution mechanism/court of law has not overturned/stayed the decision of the Employer".
Though BIPL had challenged its employer (the authority who awarded/terminated the contract) in
court against the termination of the contract due to nonperformance, the court has not
overturned/stayed the decision of the Employer, hence it will be considered as Non-Performing
Contracts. Therefore, the JV Member BIPL doesn't meet the requirement under this criterion. Since
all members combined must meet the requirement under Section III, Evaluation and Qualification
Criteria, under the History of Nonperforming Contracts, the Tenderer GKC-BIPL JV does not meet
the requirement under this criterion.
"5. Conclusion and Recommendations:
The evaluation has been carried out against the requirements of the Tender
Documents for the completed tenders offered by GKC-BIPL JV and AMRIL-IRCON
Joint Venture. Observation based on the documents made available by the Tenderer
are summarized below
(i) GKC-BIPL JV The Tenderer meets the aggregate requirements regarding
Completeness of the tender.
The Tenderer satisfies the requirements under Clause 3.3: Financial Situation and Performance,
Clause 3.4: Experience (including General Experience and Specific Construction Experience), and
the Declaration of Environmental, Social, Health, and Safety (ESHS) as outlined in Section 3:
Qualification Criteria. However, the Tenderer fails to meet the requirements under Historical
Contract Non-Performance. Specifically, the JV Partner, Bhartia Infra Projects Limited (BIPL), has
a record of contract non-performance. Although BIPL challenged the employer (the authority who
awarded or terminated the contract) in court, the court has not overturned or stayed the employer's
decision. Therefore, the Evaluation Committee concludes that the Technical Tender submitted by
the GKC-BIPL JV is substantially non-responsive to the Technical requirements specified in Section
III: Evaluation and Qualification Criteria of the Tender Document." [11] The status about the
rejection of the Technical Bids submitted by the petitioners on ground of non-responsiveness was
updated on the WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
Website and the petitioners having been aggrieved filed the present writ petitions for redressing
their grievances.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 10
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
[12] Mr. H.S. Paonam, learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners submitted that the
Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (S&R Zone), Government of India, issued a Circular
dated 06-10-2021 laying down the Standard Operating Procedure to debar/ penalise/ declare the
Contractor/ Concessionaire as non-performer in National Highways and other Centrally Sponsored
Road Projects. In para. 5 of the said Circular, it is provided that before deciding the Contractor/
Concessionaire as non-performer or debarring/ penalising it, the concerned authority shall issue a
notice to the Contractor/ Concessionaire by giving 15 days' time to furnish its return reply and
allowed personal hearing, if so desired by the Contractor/ Concessionaire, before the competent
authority or any person designated for the purpose and that such a notice shall not be issued
without approval of an Officer below the rank of Chief Engineer/ CGM/ ED. In case of projects
where public safety is endangered by the behaviour/ conduct/ action of the Consultant/ Contractor/
Concessionaire, the authority may temporarily suspend the concerned Contractor/ Concessionaire
from participating in ongoing future bidding upto one month period during which the regular
process of debarment shall be concluded.
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
[13] The learned senior counsel submitted that declaring a Contractor non-performer/ debarring/
blacklisting being a serious adverse action against the Contractor, the accepted norm in this regard
is providing a show cause and giving an opportunity of being heard is a precondition requirement. It
has been submitted that in the present case, there has never been an instance where the petitioners
have been subjected to such procedures as mentioned above leave alone issuance of a letter or order
declaring the petitioners as non-performers. The learned senior counsel further submitted that
without ascertaining such obligated formality and without any material and by just relying on the
correct information provided by the petitioners as regards their having a history of termination of
contract on 26-09-2022 along with the portion of the non-performed work, the authorities arrived
at a conclusion that the petitioners are non-performers and rejected the Technical Bids submitted by
them. According to the senior counsel, such action of the authorities is highly misconceived/
arbitrary and without any legal basis and as such, it would be just and proper to direct the
authorities to evaluate the Technical Bids submitted by the petitioners and to allow them to compete
with other qualified bidders in the Financial Bids so that the most suitable bidder can be identified
and award the contract.
[14] The learned senior counsel forcefully submitted that the petitioners have never been declared as
a non-performer and that this factum is supported by the letter of the Deputy Chief Engineer,
CON-4, WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
NF Railway, Imphal, dated 17-07-2024 addressed to the Project Director, EAP, Public Works
Department, Manipur (respondent No. 3) wherein it has been specifically certified that the agency,
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Limited is not declared "Non-performer" by the Railway. [15] It has
further been submitted that as the petitioners were not declared as non-performer, the Railway
Authority and other authorities in other States allowed the petitioners to participate in many tender
process after 26-09-2022 on which date, the earlier contract work executed by the petitioners was
terminated by the Railway Authority and having been found successful, the petitioners have been
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 11
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
awarded Letter of Acceptance of high value contracts and as such, the rejection of the Technical Bids
submitted by the petitioners only on the basis of the information furnished by the petitioners
relating to historical contract non-performance is not warranted and such action of the authorities
are highly arbitrary and have been done in colourable exercise of power. [16] The last point
submitted by the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioners is that before taking a decision
to reject the Technical Bids submitted by the petitioners, the authorities did not issue any notice or
show cause to the petitioners or gave an opportunity of being heard and that the decision to reject
the Technical Bids of the petitioners have been taken in complete violation of the principle of
natural justice and on this count alone, the decision for rejecting the WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with
Contd.../-
Technical Bids is liable to be quash and set aside. In support of his contention, the learned senior
counsel cited the following case laws:
1. "Prakash Ratan Sinha Vs. State of Bihar & ors." reported in (2009) 14 SCC 690
wherein it has been held as under:-
"12. The argument of the learned counsel for the appellant, basically is that, the
administrative decision taken by the respondents is unfair, unreasonable and in
breach of the principles of natural justice. The administrative decision taken by the
respondents is within the realm of public law and therefore, the decision ought to
have been taken in a fair and reasonable manner. This was more necessary because
the action cancelling the promotion of the appellant had civil consequences in the
sense that it not only puts an end to the right of the appellant and also his further
career prospects. Therefore, the respondents are under an obligation to take all
decisions in a fair and lawful manner by adhering to the rules of natural justice."
"13. The law in this regard has been settled by several decisions of this Court. The
principle that emerge from the decisions of this Court is that, if there is a power to
decide and decide detrimentally to the prejudice of a person, duty to act judicially is
implicit in exercise of such a power and that the rule of natural justice operates in
areas not covered by any law validly made."
"14. Corollary principles emanating from these cases are as to what particular rule of
natural justice should apply to a given case must depend to an extent on the facts and
circumstances of that case and that it is only where there is nothing in the statute to
actually prohibit the giving of an opportunity of being heard and on the other hand,
the nature of the statutory duty imposed on the decision maker itself implies an
obligation to hear before deciding. These cases have also observed, whenever an
action of public body results in civil consequences for the person against whom the
action is directed, the duty to act fairly can be presumed and in such a case, the
administrative authority must give a proper opportunity of hearing to the affected
person."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 12
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
2. "Gorkha Security Services Vs. Government (NCT of Delhi) & ors." reported in (2014) 9 SCC 105
wherein it has been held as under:-
"16. It is a common case of the parties that the blacklisting has to be preceded by a
show-cause notice. Law in this regard is firmly grounded and does not even demand
much amplification. The necessity of compliance with the principles of natural justice
by giving the opportunity to the person against whom action of blacklisting is sought
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
to be taken has a valid and solid rationale behind it. With blacklisting, many civil
and/or evil consequences follow. It is described as "civil death" of a person who is
foisted with the order of blacklisting. Such an order is stigmatic in nature and debars
such a person from participating in government tenders which means precluding him
from the award of government contracts.
"17. Way back in the year 1975, this Court in Erusian Equipment & Chemicals Ltd. v.
State of W.B.4, highlighted the necessity of giving an opportunity to such a person by
serving a show-cause notice thereby giving him opportunity to meet the allegations
which were in the mind of the authority contemplating blacklisting of such a person.
This is clear from the reading of paras 12 and 20 of the said judgment. Necessitating
this requirement, the Court observed thus: (SCC pp. 74-
75) "12. Under Article 298 of the Constitution the executive power of the Union and
the State shall extend to the carrying on of any trade and to the acquisition, holding
and disposal of property and the making of contracts for any purpose. The State can
carry on executive function by making a law or without making a law. The exercise of
such powers and functions in trade by the State is subject to Part III of the
Constitution. Article 14 speaks of equality before the law and equal protection of the
laws. Equality of opportunity should apply to matters of public contracts. The State
has the right to trade. The State has there the duty to observe equality. An ordinary
individual can choose not to deal with any person. The Government cannot choose to
exclude persons by discrimination. The order of blacklisting has the effect of
depriving a person of equality of opportunity in the matter of public contract. A
person who is on the approved list is unable to enter into advantageous relations with
the Government because of the order of blacklisting. A person who has been dealing
with the Government in the matter of sale and purchase of materials has a legitimate
interest or expectation. When the State acts to the prejudice of a person it has to be
supported by legality.
"20. Blacklisting has the effect of preventing a person from the privilege and
advantage of entering into lawful relationship with the Government for purposes of
gains. The fact that a disability is created by the order of blacklisting indicates that
the relevant authority is to have an objective satisfaction. Fundamentals of fair play
require that the person concerned should be given an opportunity to represent his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 13
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
case before he is put on the blacklist."
"20. Thus, there is no dispute about the requirement of serving show-cause notice.
We may also hasten to add that once the show-cause notice is given an opportunity to
reply to the show-cause notice is afforded, it is not even necessary to give an oral
hearing. The High Court has rightly repudiated the appellant's attempt in finding foul
with the impugned WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
order on this ground. Such a contention was specifically repelled in Patel Engg."
"29. No doubt, rules of natural justice are not embodied rules nor can they be lifted to
the position of fundamental rights. However, their aim is to secure justice and to
prevent miscarriage of justice. It is now well- established proposition of law that
unless a statutory provision either specifically or by necessary implication excludes
the application of any rules of natural justice, in exercise of power prejudicially
affecting another must be in conformity with the rules of natural justice."
"31. When it comes to the action of blacklisting which is termed as "civil death" it
would be difficult to accept the proposition that without even putting the noticee to
such a contemplated action and giving him a chance to show cause as to why such an
action be not taken, final order can be passed blacklisting such a person only on the
premise that this is one of the actions so stated in the provisions of NIT."
"34. For the aforesaid reasons, we are of the view that the impugned judgment of the
High Court does not decide the issue in the correct perspective. The impugned Order
dated 11-9-2013 passed by the respondents blacklisting the appellant without giving
the appellant notice thereto, is contrary to the principles of natural justice as it was
not specifically proposed and, therefore, there was no show-cause notice given to this
effect before taking action of blacklisting against the appellant. We, therefore, set
aside and quash the impugned action of blacklisting the appellant. The appeals are
allowed to this extent. However, we make it clear that it would be open to the
respondents to take any action in this behalf after complying with the necessary
procedural formalities delineated above. No costs."
[17] Mr. M. Devananda, learned Addl. AG appearing for the respondents No. 2 and 3 submitted that
by a letter dated 26-09-2022 of the Chief Engineer/CON-VII, NF Railway, Maligaon addressed to
the petitioner No. 1, the contract work of "Earthwork, construction of Major of minor bridges and
protection works between Ch. 115930 to 124660 in connection with the construction of
Jiribam-Tupul-Imphal new BG Railway Line project" awarded to the petitioner No. 1 was rescinded
on the ground of non-performance and the petitioner No.1 was penalized by debarring it from
participating in the tender for executing the balance WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
work and by forfeiting the security deposit and encashing the Performance Guarantee.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 14
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
It has been submitted that while submitting the Technical Bids, the petitioners voluntarily declared
their earlier historical contract non-performance in the Form CON-2 submitted by them as required
under Clause 3.2 of Section III of Part 1 of the bidding documents and one of such non-performance
occurred in the year 2022. [18] It has also been submitted that under Clause 3.2 of Section III, one
of the eligibility and qualification criteria to be fulfilled by a bidder is that non-performance of a
contract did not occurred as a result of Contractor default since January, 1, 2019 and that under
Clause 32.3 of Section I, it is provided that if a tenderer does not meet the qualifying criteria
specified in Section III, its tender shall be rejected by the employer and may not subsequently be
made responsive by correction of the material deviation, reservation or omission.
Mr. M. Devananda, learned Addl. AG submitted that as the petitioners have voluntarily declared
that they have a history of contract non-performance in 2022, the Bid Evaluation Committee
recommended that the Technical Bids/ tenders submitted by the petitioners was substantially
non-responsive to the technical requirements specified in Section III and on the basis of such
recommendation, the Technical Bids submitted by the petitioners were rejected as non-responsive.
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
[19] The learned Addl. AG submitted that the tender bidding documents lays down in detailed the
procedure to be followed for each stage of the bidding process, such as, issuance of invitation for
bids, issuance of notices, corrigendum, opening of bids, evaluation of bids, approval of bids, etc.,
with detailed instructions to bidders that is obligatory for each bidder to follow including the
requirements to be fulfilled while bidding. It has also been submitted that the employer diligently
followed and complied with the laid down procedure, all the approved instruction to tenderers and
the guidelines laid down in the bidding documents. It has further been submitted that the Technical
Evaluation of all the bids for all the packages including that of the petitioners were carried out as per
the procedure laid down in the tender bidding documents and in complete compliance of the
guidelines of the bank of procurement for works. According to the learned Additional AG, the
authorities have acted fairly and strictly in conformity with the laid down norms and procedure
while evaluating the Technical Bids submitted by the tenderers and there is no question of
arbitrariness or mala fide action on the part of the authorities. The learned senior counsel,
accordingly, submitted that there is no merit in the present writ petitions and the same deserves to
be rejected outright. [20] I have heard at length and considered the rival submissions advanced by
the learned counsel appearing for the parties. I have also carefully examined all the materials
available on record including the WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
connected Government file produced by the learned Additional AG. The only issue that needs to be
considered and decided in the present two writ petitions is whether the petitioners, more
particularly the petitioner No. 1 is a non-performing contractor or not.
It is an admitted position of fact that by a letter dated 26-09-2022 of the Chief Engineer, CON-VII,
NF Railway, Maligaon addressed to the petitioner No. 1, the contract work in connection with
"Earthwork, construction of Major of minor bridges and protection works between Ch. 115930 to
124660 in connection with the construction of Jiribam-Tupul-Imphal new BG Railway Line Project"
awarded to the petitioner No. 1 was rescinded on ground of non-performance and the petitioner No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 15
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
1 was penalised by debarring it from participation in the tender for executing the balance work and
by forfeiting the security deposit and encashing the Performance Guarantee. On examination of the
said letter, it can be clearly seen that the said termination order was issued after giving two prior
notices to the petitioner No. 1 and by following the procedure laid down in Clause 62 of the Standard
General Conditions of contract and the petitioners have admitted such factual position. It is also an
admitted position of fact that the said termination order still stands without any interference from
any court or competent authority. In the present case, the petitioners have also voluntarily disclosed
about their historical contract non-performances in Form CON-2 as required under Clause 3.2 of
Section III of Part 1 of the bidding WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
documents. In fact, the petitioners have never denied the fact that the petitioner No. 1 has a history
of non-performance including one in 2022.
Taking into consideration such admitted factual positions, this court is of the considered view that
the petitioners, more particularly the petitioner No. 1 has a history of non-performance and this
court did not find any merit and substance in the submission advanced by the learned senior
counsel appearing for the petitioners that the petitioners have never been declared as
non-performers.
[21] In the present case, the petitioners voluntarily disclosed the information about their historical
contract non-performance including one of 2022 in the Form CON-2 submitted by them along with
their bidding documents. On coming to know about such historical non-performance of the
petitioners, the respondent No. 3 wrote a letter to the authorities of the Railway to confirm about
the veracity of the disclosure made by the petitioners and only after obtaining confirmation from the
concerned authorities of the Railway, the Technical Bids of the petitioners were evaluated by the Bid
Evaluation Committee and after careful and detail consideration, the Bid Evaluation Committee
recommended that the Technical Bids/ tenders submitted by the petitioners was substantially
non-responsive to the technical requirements specified in Section III of Part 1. On the basis of such
recommendation, the Technical Bids submitted by the petitioners were rejected as non-responsive.
Taking into consideration such undisputed factual positions, this court is of the WP(C) No. 477 of
2024 with Contd.../-
considered view that there is no question of arbitrariness or mala fide or colourable exercise of
power on the part of the authorities in rejecting the Technical Bids submitted by the petitioners and
this court did not find any ground or reason for interfering with such decisions. [22] It has been
submitted on behalf of the petitioners that the Deputy Chief Engineer, CON-4, Imphal NF Railway
has specifically certified in his letter dated 17-07-2024 that the petitioner No. 1 was not declared as
non-performer by the Railway and that the respondent No. 3 did not take into consideration the said
letter while rejecting the Technical Bids of the petitioners. This court did not find any merit and
substance in the said submission for the following two reasons:-
Firstly, the said letter dated 17-07-2024 was issued only after the evaluation of the
Technical Bids of the petitioners by the Bid Evaluation Committee had been
completed and the evaluation report had been submitted by the respondent No. 3 to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 16
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
the investment bank on 12-07-2024 for conveying No-Objection and approval for
opening of the Financial Bids. As such, there was no question of ignoring or not
considering the said letter at the time of evaluation of the Technical Bids of the
petitioners.
Secondly, under Clause 32.3 of Section I of the bidding documents, it is provided that
if a tenderer does not meet the qualifying criteria specified in Section III, Evaluation
and Qualification Criteria, WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
its tender shall be rejected by the employer and may not subsequently be made
responsive by correction of the material deviation, reservation or omission. In view of
the said provisions, the information or declaration made by the petitioners about
their historical contract non-performance in Form CON-2 cannot be corrected and
the Technical Bids of the petitioners cannot be subsequently made responsive.
[23] In the case of "Jagdish Mandal Vs. State of Orissa & ors."
reported in (2007) 14 SCC 517, the Hon'ble Apex Court in para. 22 of the judgment
held as under:-
"22. Judicial review of administrative action is intended to prevent arbitrariness,
irrationality, unreasonableness, bias and mala fides. Its purpose is to check whether
choice or decision is made "lawfully" and not to check whether choice or decision is
"sound". When the power of judicial review is invoked in matters relating to tenders
or award of contracts, certain special features should be borne in mind. A contract is
a commercial transaction. Evaluating tenders and awarding contracts are essentially
commercial functions. Principles of equity and natural justice stay at a distance. If the
decision relating to award of contract is bona fide and is in public interest, courts will
not, in exercise of power of judicial review, interfere even if a procedural aberration
or error in assessment or prejudice to a tenderer, is made out. The power of judicial
review will not be permitted to be invoked to protect private interest at the cost of
public interest, or to decide contractual disputes. The tenderer or contractor with a
grievance can always seek damages in a civil court. Attempts by unsuccessful
tenderers with imaginary grievances, wounded pride and business rivalry, to make
mountains out of molehills of some technical/ procedural violation or some prejudice
to self and persuade courts to interfere by exercising power of judicial review, should
be resisted. Such interferences, either interim or final, may hold up public works for
years, or delay relief and succour to thousands and millions and may increase the
project cost manifold. Therefore, a court before interfering in tender or contractual
matters in exercise of power of judicial review, should pose to itself the following
questions:
WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 17
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
(i) Whether the process adopted or decision made by the authority is mala fide or
intended to favour someone;
OR Whether the process adopted or decision made is so arbitrary and irrational that the court can
say: "the decision is such that no responsible authority acting reasonably and in accordance with
relevant law could have reached";
(ii) Whether public interest is affected.
If the answers are in the negative, there should be no interference under Article 226. Cases involving
blacklisting or imposition of penal consequences on a tenderer/contractor or distribution of State
largesse (allotment of sites/shops, grant of licences, dealerships and franchises) stand on a different
footing as they may require a higher degree of fairness in action."
[24] In the case of "N.G. Projects Ltd. Vs. Vinod Kumar Jain & ors." reported in (2022) 6 SCC 127,
the Hon'ble Apex Court in para. 22 and 23 of the judgment held as under:-
"22. The satisfaction whether a bidder satisfies the tender condition is primarily upon
the authority inviting the bids. Such authority is aware of expectations from the
tenderers while evaluating the consequences of non-performance. In the tender in
question, there were 15 bidders. Bids of 13 tenderers were found to be unresponsive
i.e. not satisfying the tender conditions. The writ petitioner was one of them. It is not
the case of the writ petitioner that action of the Technical Evaluation Committee was
actuated by extraneous considerations or was mala fide. Therefore, on the same set of
facts, different conclusions can be arrived at in a bona fide manner by the Technical
Evaluation Committee. Since the view of the Technical Evaluation Committee was
not to the liking of the writ petitioner, such decision does not warrant for interference
in a grant of contract to a successful bidder. "23. In view of the above judgments of
this Court, the writ court should refrain itself from imposing its decision over the
decision of the employer as to whether or not to accept the bid of a tenderer. The
Court does not have the expertise to examine the terms and conditions of the present
day economic activities of the State and this limitation should be kept in view. Courts
should be even more reluctant in interfering with contracts involving technical issues
as there is a requirement of the necessary expertise to adjudicate upon such issues.
The approach of the Court should be not to find fault with magnifying glass in its
hands, rather the Court should examine as to whether the decision making process is
after complying with the procedure contemplated by WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with
Contd.../-
the tender conditions. If the Court finds that there is total arbitrariness or that the
tender has been granted in a mala fide manner, still the Court should refrain from
interfering in the grant of tender but instead relegate the parties to seek damages for
the wrongful exclusion rather than to injunct the execution of the contract. The
injunction or interference in the tender leads to additional costs on the State and is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 18
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
also against public interest. Therefore, the State and its citizens suffer twice, firstly by
paying escalation costs and secondly, by being deprived of the infrastructure for
which the present day Governments are expected to work."
[25] In the case of "Tata Motors Limited Vs. Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply & Transport
Undertaking (BEST) & ors." reported in 2023 SCC Online SC 671, the Hon'ble Apex Court in para.
48 and 52 to 54 held as under:-
"48. This Court being the guardian of fundamental rights is duty-bound to interfere
when there is arbitrariness, irrationality, mala fides and bias. However, this Court
has cautioned time and again that courts should exercise a lot of restraint while
exercising their powers of judicial review in contractual or commercial matters. This
Court is normally loathe to interfere in contractual matters unless a clear-cut case of
arbitrariness or mala fides or bias or irrationality is made out. One must remember
that today many public sector undertakings compete with the private industry. The
contracts entered into between private parties are not subject to scrutiny under writ
jurisdiction. No doubt, the bodies which are State within the meaning of Article 12 of
the Constitution are bound to act fairly and are amenable to the writ jurisdiction of
superior courts but this discretionary power must be exercised with a great deal of
restraint and caution. The courts must realise their limitations and the havoc which
needless interference in commercial matters can cause. In contracts involving
technical issues the courts should be even more reluctant because most of us in
Judges' robes do not have the necessary expertise to adjudicate upon technical issues
beyond our domain. The courts should not use a magnifying glass while scanning the
tenders and make every small mistake appear like a big blunder. In fact, the courts
must give "fair play in the joints" to the government and public sector undertakings
in matters of contract. Courts must also not interfere where such interference will
cause unnecessary loss to the public exchequer. (See: Silppi Constructions
Contractors v. Union of India, (2020) 16 SCC 489)"
"52. Ordinarily, a writ court should refrain itself from imposing its decision over the
decision of the employer as to whether or not to accept the bid of a tenderer unless
something very gross or palpable is pointed out. The court ordinarily should not
interfere in matters relating to tender or WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
contract. To set at naught the entire tender process at the stage when the contract is
well underway, would not be in public interest. Initiating a fresh tender process at
this stage may consume lot of time and also loss to the public exchequer to the tune
of crores of rupees. The financial burden/implications on the public exchequer that
the State may have to meet with if the Court directs issue of a fresh tender notice,
should be one of the guiding factors that the Court should keep in mind. This is
evident from a three-Judge Bench decision of this Court in Association of
Registration Plates v. Union of India, reported in (2005) 1 SCC 679."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 19
M/S Bhartia Infra Project Ltd. Having ... vs The Union Of India Through The Secretary on 28 August, 2024
"53. The law relating to award of contract by the State and public sector corporations
was reviewed in Air India Ltd. v. Cochin International Airport Ltd., reported in
(2000) 2 SCC 617 and it was held that the award of a contract, whether by a private
party or by a State, is essentially a commercial transaction. It can choose its own
method to arrive at a decision and it is free to grant any relaxation for bona fide
reasons, if the tender conditions permit such a relaxation. It was further held that the
State, its corporations, instrumentalities and agencies have the public duty to be fair
to all concerned. Even when some defect is found in the decision-making process, the
court must exercise its discretionary powers under Article 226 with great caution and
should exercise it only in furtherance of public interest and not merely on the making
out of a legal point. The court should always keep the larger public interest in mind in
order to decide whether its intervention is called for or not. Only when it comes to a
conclusion that overwhelming public interest requires interference, the court should
interfere."
"54. As observed by this Court in Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa, reported in
(2007) 14 SCC 517, that while invoking power of judicial review in matters as to
tenders or award of contracts, certain special features should be borne in mind that
evaluations of tenders and awarding of contracts are essentially commercial functions
and principles of equity and natural justice stay at a distance in such matters. If the
decision relating to award of contract is bona fide and is in public interest, courts will
not interfere by exercising powers of judicial review even if a procedural aberration or
error in assessment or prejudice to a tenderer, is made out. Power of judicial review
will not be invoked to protect private interest at the cost of public interest, or to
decide contractual disputes."
[26] I have carefully perused the judgments cited on behalf of the petitioners and this court is of the
considered view that the ratio laid down in the said judgments are not applicable in the facts and
circumstances WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
of the present case and accordingly, the said judgments are of no help to the case of the petitioners.
[27] In view of the facts and circumstances of the present cases and for the reasons and findings
given hereinabove and the ratio laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Jagdish Mandal
(supra), N.G. Projects Ltd. (supra) and Tata Motors Limited (supra), this court did not find any
ground or reason for interfering with the decision taken by the authorities for rejecting the
Technical Bids submitted by the petitioners. Accordingly, the present writ petitions are hereby
dismissed and the interim order passed earlier stands vacated. There will be no order as to cost.
JUDGE FR / NFR Devananda WP(C) No. 477 of 2024 with Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/174065899/ 20
