M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority
Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
STR No. 03/2022
STR No. 04/2022
STR No. 05/2022
STR No. 06/2022
STR No. 07/2022
STR No. 08/2022
Reserved on 11.04.2023
Pronounced on 28. 04.2023.
M/S Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd.
..... applicant (s)
Through :- Mr.Subash C Dutta Advocate
Mr. Sachin Sharma Advocate
V/s
Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D .....Respondent(s)
Jammu
Through :- Mr.K.D.S.Kotwal Dy.AG
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Sanjeev Kumar, 'J' 1 In terms of these references made by the Jammu and Kashmir Sales Tax
(Appellate) Tribunal, Jammu [„the Tribunal(cid:129)] under Section 12-D of the Jammu and Kashmir
General Sales Tax Act, 1962 [„the GST Act(cid:129)], following questions have been referred to this Court
for determination:
(i) Whether, on the facts and circumstances of the case, the applicant has supplied
the „goods(cid:129) defined under Section 2(h) (iii) [should have been sub-clause (ii)] and
2(h) (iv) of the GST Act which shall be deemed to be a sale before 15.05.1997 under
Section 2 (L) and is a dealer under the Act amenable to tax ?
(ii) Whether the Tribunal was bound by its earlier orders in the cases of applicant itself as they have
attained finality and, on the principle of „consistency(cid:129), the Tribunal should not hold otherwise than
what has been settled by its earlier Benches?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 1
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
2 As would be seen from the reading of references, the aforesaid questions have arisen for
determination of this Court in the background and context of following facts:
M/S Power Grid Corporation of India Ltd. [„the assessee(cid:129)] is a Government of India
undertaking engaged, inter alia, in establishing its own grid stations and laying wires
for transmission of electricity. It is in the execution of its aforesaid works, the
assessee purchased some goods, material and machinery etc. from outside the State.
The assessee has taken registration under the Central Sales Tax, 1956 [„the CST
Act(cid:129)]. The modus operandi adopted by the assessee for construction of its grid
stations and laying wires etc. for transmission of electricity indicates that it first buys
goods, material and requisite machinery from outside the State and thereafter hands
over the same to the contractors for consumption, fixation and laying out in the
works of the assessee. As is claimed, the ownership and possession of the property
used in execution of the works of the assessee remains with it and the contractors are
only engaged to execute the work on payment of labour charges. It is the specific case
of the assessee that since no property in goods is transferred to the contractors, as
such, no payment against such material handed over to the contractors, to be used in
the execution of works of the assessee, is charged. It is, thus, claimed that since the
assessee was not making any local sales under the GST Act, as such, was not initially
registered under the Act. However, in compliance to the notice, the assessee
appeared before the Assessing Authority and on the advice of the later, it filed the
returns with nil turnover. The Assessing Authority, however, did not accept the
contentions of the assessee and held that as the assessee had taken registration under
the CST Act to import goods from outside the State against C-Forms, was therefore, a
„dealer(cid:129). It was the plea taken by the Assessing Authority that only a dealer, who is
registered as such under CST Act can use C-Forms to purchase goods for personal
use. It was, thus, concluded by the Assessing Authority that the transactions made by
the assessee were liable to tax. Consequently, the Assessing Authority also imposed
interest and penalty under the GST Act.
Against the orders passed by the Assessing Authority for the accounting years
1996-97, 1997-98, 1998-1999, 1999-2000, 2000-01 & 2001-02 demanding tax,
interest and penalty from the assessee, PGCI filed statutory appeals before the
Appellate Authority. The appeals filed by the assessee in respect of all the accounting
years except the accounting year 1998-99 were disposed of with the assessee getting
partial relief of reduction of 20% of taxable turnover.
Feeling aggrieved and dissatisfied with the orders passed by the Appellate Authority,
the assessee filed six different appeals before the Tribunal. The impugned orders
passed by the Assessing Authority were assailed primarily on the ground that the
observations made by the Appellate Authority that the goods imported by the
assessee from outside the State on the strength of C-Forms were supplied to the
contractors for execution of work contracts and there was, thus, transfer of property
in goods to the contractors was erroneous and legally unsustainable. It was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 2
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
contended by the assessee that the goods owned by it were only handed over to the
contractors for use and fixation and, therefore, their possession and ownership
always remained with the assessee. It was, thus, argued that there was no transfer of
property in goods and that no project was completed by the contractors during the
year when the material/goods were supplied. It was the contention of the assessee
that since the goods and material were used in self works or the works of the
Corporation, as such, there was no question of executing any works contract by the
Contractors. It was urged that there could be no sale of any goods or material to itself.
The Tribunal considered these appeals and the grounds of challenge urged on behalf
of the assessee in extenso and, after analyzing the rival contentions, came to the
opinion that, in view of the admitted facts that the assessee had purchased goods
from outside the State against C-Forms and handed over the same to the contractors
for using them in the works contract, it was a foregone conclusion that the goods had
been utilized by the assessee through its contractors in works contract. The pivotal
question which had arisen for consideration before the Tribunal was, whether the
material purchased by the assessee and handed over to the contractors for using the
same in the works contract for the projects of the assessee was taxable under GST Act
?.
Referring to the definitions of "Dealer", "Goods" and "Sale", contained in Section 2 of
the GST Act till 15.05.1997, it was concluded by the Tribunal that the Assessee was a
dealer supplying goods defined under Section 2(h)(ii) and 2(h)(iv) of the GST Act
upto 15.05.1997 and after 15.05.1997, the works contract, whether divisible or
indivisible, involving transfer of property or not, would be deemed to be a sale by the
assessee in terms of Section 2(g)(i-b). It was further opined by the Tribunal that
before 15.05.1997, the term „sale(cid:129) under Section 2(L) included goods involved in the
execution of the contract. Post 15.05.1997, the position is much clear i.e "transfer of
right to use goods etc. was also held to be a sale" as defined in Section 2(L) (v). The
Tribunal, however, set aside the orders of the Assessing Authority to the extent and
insofar as these pertain to imposition of penalty and levy of interest. The appeals
were, thus, partly allowed.
3 The assessee was still not satisfied and, therefore, moved an application before the Tribunal under
Section 12-D of the GST Act and sought reference of as many as eight questions of law.
4 Reference application was opposed by the respondents on the ground that no substantial question
of law requiring reference to the High Court was involved in the matter. The Tribunal considered the
reference application made in respect of all the six accounting years and by a common order dated
06.09.2022, framed and referred two questions of law which we have reproduced hereinabove.
5 Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, it is necessary to
first notice few material facts which are not disputed. The assessee, which is a Public Sector
Undertaking, is engaged in transmission of electricity from one place to another and for that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 3
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
purpose, is erecting, establishing and maintaining its sub-stations, grid stations and transmission
lines. For laying out the construction and maintenance of transmission lines, sub-stations and grid
stations etc. the assessee, during the period in question, imported materials/goods from outside the
State. The said material was purchased by the assessee against the C-Forms. The registration
certificate of the assessee granted under the CST Act clearly refers to the nature of business as
"works contract". Under column (A) of the said certificate of registration, the assessee is registered
for import of tower material, conductors, sub-station material, steel, cement etc. for use in laying
transmission lines and construction of sub-stations and other allied works. It has also come on
record and which fact is neither denied by the assessee, nor any contrary material has been placed
on record by the revenue that, on execution of the works involving use of aforesaid material, all the
works, assets, along with material used therein would ensure to the benefit of State/utilities or
organizations for valuable consideration viz. transmission charges. It is thus evident that the works
contracts executed by the assessee through sub-contractors are meant for and transferred to other
utilities or organizations. It is, thus, the case of the respondents that the goods involved in the
execution of the works contract get transferred to State/utilities or organizations for which these
works are executed by the assessee. The entire transaction of the assessee which has been made
amenable to GST Act, in the words of Assessing Authority, involves following steps:
(i) purchase of material;
(ii) handing over the material to the contractors for construction
purposes;
(iii) contractors hand over the possession of the works to the assessee after its due execution; and,
(iv) the entire work including equipments and assets after completion get transferred to the State or
other utilities/organizations.
6 It is, thus, held by the Assessing Authority that the transaction i.e transfer of equipments/assets
erected and established by the assessee either itself or through sub-contractors is tantamount to
execution of works contract by the assessee and, therefore, by the definitions of „Sale(cid:129), „Goods and
„Dealer given in the GST Act, the transfer of goods or property in goods utilized in the execution of
works contract is a sale exigible to tax under the GST Act. This finding of fact and the conclusion
drawn on the basis of the definitions of „Sale, „Goods(cid:129) and „Dealer(cid:129) given in the GST Act has been
upheld by the Appellate Authority as well as the Tribunal.
7 Once the questions of law framed by the Tribunal are appreciated in the aforesaid backdrop, it
would clearly transpire that, having regard to the definitions of „Goods, „Dealer(cid:129) and „Sale(cid:129) given
in the GST Act, the services provides in the shape of works contract, whether divisible or indivisible
involving transfer of property or not, fall in the definition of the term „goods(cid:129) and any such
transaction shall be deemed to be a sale by the person making the same. To understand the
controversy in a better manner, it is necessary to set out the definitions of aforesaid terms given in
the GST Act as amended from time to time.
8 At the relevant point of time, i.e in respect of the accounting year 1996-97, the definition of
„Goods(cid:129) as amended vide the Amending Act No. X of 1984 w.e.f 01.05.1984 till 14.05.1997 was as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 4
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
under:
"Goods" means all kinds of movable property (not being auctionable claim
newspapers, stocks, shares and securities) and includes-
(i) food or any articles of food or other eatables or any drink (Whether or not
intoxicating) supplied or served by way of or as part of any service or in any manner
whatsoever with or without any amenity in a hotel, restaurant or any other place of
eating by whatever name called;
Provided that where a composite charge is payable in respect of residential accommodation, food
and drink, the sale price of food and drink included therein shall be determined in such manner as
may be notified by the Government notification in the Government gazettee;
(ii) All materials, articles and commodities, whether or not to be used in construction, fitting out,
improvement or repair of movable or immovable property;
(iii) Growing crops, grass, trees, plants including the produce thereof and other thing attacked to, or
forming part of the land which are agreed to be served before sale or under contract of sale; and,
(iv) Right to use any goods for any purpose, whether or not, for a specific period".
9 The definition of „sale(cid:129) as it existed during the accounting year 1996-97 after it was amended by
the Act No. XX of 1981 was as under:
"Sale(cid:129) with all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means any
transfer of property in goods (otherwise than by mortgage, hypothecation, charge or
pledge) by any person for cash with or deferred payment or for any other valuable
consideration and includes a transfer of property in goods or in some other form:
(i)involved in the execution of works contract;
(ii) being eatables including food or any drink (whether or not intoxicating) way of or
as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever with or without any other
amenity;
(iii) on hire purchase or any system of payment by installments notwithstanding that
the seller retains the title to any goods as security for payment of price;
(iv) in the course of supplies or distribution by a society or a club or any association
or any other body of persons, whether or not incorporated; and,
(v) transfer of the right to use any goods, for any purpose (whether or not for a
specified period), and the word 'purchase' shall be construed accordingly.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 5
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
Explanation 1.
A transfer of property in goods for cash or deferred payment or other valuable consideration,
whether on licence, permit or otherwise shall notwithstanding that such goods are controlled goods
be deemed to be a sale.
Explanation 2.
(a) The sale of goods shall be deemed, for the purpose of this Act to have taken place in the State,
wherever the contract of sale might have been made, if the goods are within the State:
(i) In the case of specific or ascertained goods, at the time the contract of sale is
made; and
(ii) in the case of unascertained or future goods, at the time of their appropriation to
the contract of sale by the seller, whether the assent of the other party is prior or
subsequence to such appropriations;
(b) where there is a single contract of sale of goods situated at more places than one,
the provisions of clause(a) shall apply as if there were separate contracts in respect of
the goods at each of such places.
10 From a conjoint reading of the definitions of „Goods(cid:129) and „Sale(cid:129) as it was during the relevant
period i.e the accounting year 1996-97, what comes to fore in the context of controversy can be put
in the following words:
"(a) all materials, articles and commodities, whether or not to be used in
construction, fitting out, improvement or repair of movable or immovable property
and the right to use any goods for any purpose, whether or not, for a specific period
were, inter alia, goods within the meaning of Section 2(h)(ii) and 2 h(iv) and the
transfer of property in such goods (otherwise than by mortgage, hypothecation,
charge or pledge) by any person for cash or deferred payment or for any other
valuable consideration was a sale within the meaning of term as given in Section 2(L)
of the GST Act. Even the transfer of property in goods or in some other form for cash
or deferred payment or for any other valuable consideration involved in execution of
works contract had also been brought within the purview of term „sale(cid:129).
11 In light of the above, when we examine the case of the assessee in respect of the accounting year
1996-97, we clearly find that, handing over of the goods and material to the contractors for
construction and laying of power grids, sub-stations and transmission lines of the assessee did not
involve the transfer of right to use goods. Not only the ownership and dominion over the goods
handed over to the contractors remained vested with the assessee, but the transfer or handing over
of the goods and material to the contractors was without any consideration. It can, thus, be safely
concluded that the transaction between the assessee and its contractor involving transfer of goods
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 6
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
was not supported by any valuable consideration and, therefore, cannot be construed as a transfer of
right to use goods so as to bring it within the purview of term „sale(cid:129) as defined under Section 2(L) of
the GST Act. So far so good, but an important question that arises here for consideration is, whether
goods purchased by the assesseee from outside the State against C-forms and in its capacity as a
registered dealer under CST Act have been used in the execution of works contract. Indisputably, the
goods and the material purchased by the assessee against C-forms from outside the State by way of
inter-State sale has been used in the construction and laying of power grids, sub-stations and
transmission lines of the assessee. It is, however, not clear from the record as to whether the works
contract executed by the assessee through its sub- contractors is actually handed over to the State or
other utilities/undertakings. From deep scrutiny, we could only find that the assessee, after erecting
grid stations, sub-stations and transmission lines, provides facility of transmission of electric energy
to the State and other utilities/undertakings by levying transmission charges. Whether the works
executed by the assessee through its sub-contractors involving the use of goods and material are
executed for and handed over to the States, other utilities or undertakings, is not clear from the
record. As a matter of fact, this aspect has not been considered either by the Assessing Authority or
the two Appellate Forums under the GST Act which have heard and decided the appeals. Absent
such material on record, it is difficult for us to make any comment, lest the parties or either of them
may be prejudiced.
12 On the basis of material before us and having limited scope of the reference, we are of the
considered view that, in respect of assessing year 1996-97, there was no transfer of right to use
goods from assessee to the contractors who constructed, set up and laid power grids, sub-stations
and transmission lines for the assessee by utilizing the goods and material provided to them by the
assessee itself without any consideration. 13 So far as the accounting years 1997-98 to 2001-2002
are concerned, we have to approach the controversy in a slightly different manner, in that, by the
Amending Act No. X of 1997, the definition of „goods(cid:129) as well as the definition of „sale(cid:129) had
underwent substantial change. The definition of Goods w.e.f 15.05.1997 was as under:
"Goods" means all kinds of movable property (not being actionable claim,
newspapers, stock, shares, securities) and includes-
[(1) food or any articles of food or other eatables or any drink (Whether or not
intoxicating) supplied or served by way of or as part of any service or in any manner
whatsoever, with or without any amenity (in a hotel, restaurant or any other place of
eating by whatever name called);
Provided that where a composite charge is payable in respect of residential
accommodation food and drink, the sale price of food and drink included therein
shall be determined in such manner as may be notified by the Government
notification in the Government gazette;] [(i-a) services in the form of lodging
facilities provided by hotels, services provided by beauty saloons, private nursing
homes, services provided by photographers and advertisers rendered by way of or as
part of any contract or in any other manner whatsoever involving skill and labour and
such transaction shall be deemed to be a sale by the persons making the same].
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 7
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
(i-b) services provided in the shape of works contract, whether divisible or indivisible
involving the transfer of property or not and such transaction shall be deemed to be
the sale by the person making the same.
(ii) all materials, articles and commodities, whether or not to be used in construction,
fitting out, improvement or repair of movable or immovable property;
(iii) growing crops, grass, trees, plants including the produce thereof and other things
attached to or forming part of the land which are agreed to be served before sale or
under contract of sale; and
(iv) right to use any goods for any purpose, whether or not, for a specific period.
14 Similarly the definition of „Sale(cid:129) during the period w.e.f 15.05.1997 to 08.11.2004 was as under:
"„Sale(cid:129) with all its grammatical variations and cognate expressions means any
transfer of property in goods (otherwise than by mortgage, hypothecation, charge or
pledge) by any person for cash with or deferred payment or for any other valuable
consideration and includes a transfer of property in goods or in some other form:
(i) xxxxxxx
(ii) being eatables including food or any drink (whether or not intoxicating) way of or
as part of any service or in any other manner whatsoever with or without any other
amenity.
(iii) on hire purchase or any system of payment by installments notwithstanding that
the seller retains the title to any goods as security for payment of price.
(iv) in the course of supplies or distribution by a society or a club or any association
or any other body of persons, whether or not incorporated; and
(v) transfer of the right to use any goods, for any purpose (whether or not for a
specified period), and the word 'purchase' shall be construed accordingly.
Explanation1.
A transfer of property in goods for cash or deferred payment or other valuable consideration,
whether on licence, permit or otherwise shall notwithstanding that such goods are controlled goods
be deemed to be a sale.
Explanation 2.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 8
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
(a)The sale of goods shall be deemed, for the purpose of this Act to have taken place in the State,
wherever the contract of sale might have been made, if the goods are within the State:
(i) In the case of specific or ascertained goods, at the time the contract of sale is
made; and
(ii) in the case of unascertained or future goods, at the time of their appropriation to
the contract of sale by the seller, whether the assent of the other party is prior or
subsequence to such appropriations;
(b) where there is a single contract of sale of goods situated at more places than one,
the provisions of clause(a) shall apply as if there were separate contracts in respect of
the goods at each of such places] 15 When we examine the controversy at hand in the
light of amended definitions of „goods(cid:129) and „sale(cid:129), we find that, from 15.05.1997, the
services provided in the shape of works contract, whether divisible or indivisible,
involving transfer of property or not, were brought within the definition of „goods(cid:129)
and such transaction deemed to be a „sale(cid:129) by the person making the same. The right
to use any goods for any purpose, whether or not, for a specific period which was
earlier also existing in the definition of „goods(cid:129) remained unchanged.
16 So far as the definition of „sale(cid:129) is concerned, the transfer of property in goods
involved in execution of works contract came to be deleted.
There was no other substantial change in the definition of „sale(cid:129) so far as our purpose is concerned.
17 By the conjoint reading of amended dentitions of „goods(cid:129) and „sale(cid:129), we can safely say that w.e.f
15.05.1997, the services provided in the shape of works contract were also brought within the
definition of „goods(cid:129) and the transaction involving providing of such services, a deemed sale by the
person making it.
18 In the instant case, as have already noted, we are not sure, whether the works executed by the
assessee through subcontractors were meant for some third person like the State,
utilities/organizations. Anyway, this transaction between the assessee and the Government or
organization for which the works are constructed/erected by the assessee, is not subject matter of
adjudication before us. The transaction between the contractors and the assessee is, of course, in the
nature of services provided by the contractors to the assessee in the shape of works contract which
transaction shall be deemed to be a sale by the contractor.
19 Viewed thus, it shall be the contractor, who shall be accountable for paying the sales tax on the
services provided to the assessee in the shape of works contact. Such is also not the case set up by
the revenue before the Forums below or even before us. This will leave us with only the transfer of
right to use goods by the assessee to the contractors. We have already rendered our opinion
hereinabove and reiterate that, in the given facts and circumstances, we find no transfer of right to
use the goods provided by the assessee to the contractors for constructing, erecting or laying out the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 9
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
power grids, sub-stations and transmission lines for the assessee. We fully concur with the findings
of fact recorded by the Tribunal.
20 From the definition of „sale(cid:129) as it existed up to 15.05.1997, it is abundantly clear that transfer of
property in goods or in some other form involved in the execution of works contract was „sale(cid:129)
within the meaning of Section 2(L) of the GST Act and therefore, exigible to tax. Similarly the
transfer of the right to use any goods for any purpose (whether or not for a specified period) also
falls within the purview of definition of „sale(cid:129) given in the GST Act. After 1997 and till 08.11.2004,
clause (i) of Section 2(L) was deleted. However, the transfer of property in goods and the transfer of
right to use any goods for any purpose, whether or not for a specific period, was retained as a part of
definition of "Sale". However, the transfer of property in works contract came to be excluded from
the dentition of "Sale". 21 When we view the entire controversy raised in light of the definitions of
„Goods(cid:129) and „Sale(cid:129) as were prevalent at the relevant point of time, it clearly transpires that the
transfer of property in goods or some other form involved in the execution of works contract was a
sale only up to 15.05.1997. The position, however, changed by deletion of clause (i) of Section 2(L)
by the Act No. X of 1997 w.e.f 15.05.1997. The accounting years in question are from 1996-97 to
2001-02 and, therefore, except for the month of April and 15 days of May of the accounting year
1996-97, the transfer of property in goods involved in the execution of works contract was not a sale
within the meaning of the term used in the GST Act and therefore, not exigible to sales tax under the
Act. That would clearly mean that what is being taxed by the respondents is the transaction between
the assessee and the contractors. 22 Indisputably, the goods in question were purchased by the
assessee from outside the State against C-forms for which it had necessary registration under the
CST Act. These goods which on purchase had vested in the assessee were handed over/delivered or
conveyed to the contractors engaged by the assessee for erecting and establishing transmission
lines, sub- stations and grid stations etc. Notwithstanding the handing over of the goods and
material to the contractors, there was no transfer of property in goods from the assessee to the
contractors, nor was there any consideration, either in cash or in form of some other valuable
consideration. It can also be not said that by handing over the goods to the contractors for erection
of aforesaid utilities for the assesssee, there was, in essence, any transfer of right to use any goods
for any purpose supported by some consideration. Needless to point out that transfer of the right to
use any goods for any purpose whether or not for a specific period must also be for a consideration
paid or deferred to qualify it to be a „sale(cid:129) within the meaning of Section 2(L). Mere transfer of right
to use any goods or even transfer of goods to be used in works or not shall not be a „sale(cid:129) unless it is
supported by consideration.
23 In the instant case, the ownership and dominion over the goods purchased by the assessee from
outside the State always remained with the assessee and the goods were never transferred to the
contractors against any valuable consideration. As a matter of fact, the goods and materials
purchased by the assessee from outside the State were utilized by the contractors as per the
directions of the assessee in raising the construction of various transmission lines, power grids and
sub-stations etc. 24 We may agree with the assessing authority as also the Appellate Authority that
these works after completion were to vest in the State or in some other utilities or organizations and,
therefore, there was a transfer in property to such utilities/organizations or State for consideration
and the transaction was exigible to sales tax, but, in the instant case, we find from the definition of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 10
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
sale as amended vide Act No. X of 1997 w.e.f 15.05.1997, the transfer of property in goods or in some
other forms involved in the execution of works contract has been deleted.
25 An argument was raised on behalf of the revenue that since the assessee is a registered dealer
under the CST Act and has affected the inter-State purchases against C-forms, as such, cannot
escape its liability to pay tax on the goods/material used by it in works contract. Indisputably, the
assessee is a dealer engaged in inter-State sale and purchases and registered under Section 7 of the
CST Act.
26 Form a reading of Section 7 of the CST Act, it becomes abundantly clear that every dealer liable
to pay tax would require mandatory registration under the Act. A person, who is registered under
Section 7 of the CST Act, is necessarily a dealer liable to pay tax under the Act. A dealer, in terms of
Section 2(b) of the CST Act, is a person who carries on business of buying, selling, supplying or
distributing goods, directly or indirectly, for cash, or for deferred payment, or commission,
remuneration or any other valuable consideration. In terms of Section 8 of the CST Act, every
dealer, who in the course of inter-State trade or commerce, sells to a registered dealer goods of the
description referred to in sub-section 3, which would include goods used in the generation or
distribution of electricity or any other form of generation, shall be liable to pay tax under the CST
Act which shall be 3%/4% of his turn over or at the rate applicable to the sale or purchase of such
goods inside the appropriate State under the sales tax law of that State, whichever is lower. Section
8(4) clearly provides that such concessional rate of tax would be available to the dealer who
furnishes to the prescribing authority in a prescribed manner a declaration duly filled and signed by
him. The C-form is a prescribed form for furnishing such declaration.
27 The argument that the assessee is not a dealer under the CST Act is, thus, not available in view of
the fact that the assessee is not only a registered dealer in terms of Section 7 of the GST Act, but has
also availed the benefit of concessional rate of tax in the inter-State purchases made by him of the
goods and material used in construction and laying of power grids, sub- stations and transmission
lines etc. 28 As already noted, had it been a case of the revenue that the assessee had utilized the
goods imported from outside the State against C-forms in the works contract, entirely different
consideration would have prevailed. What is sought to be taxed by the revenue is the transaction of
transferring/conveying/handing over of the goods and material purchased by it to the contractors
engaged for constructing and laying of utilities like power grids, sub-stations and transmission lines.
We, however, find the mechanism adopted by the assessee to defeat the provisions of the GST Act
and to cause loss to the public exchequer, a figment of ingenuity of the assessee. The contractor, who
is entrusted the job of constructing and laying power grid stations and transmission lines is a
supplier also. The assessee has cleverly split a single works contract into two i.e labour contract and
supply contract, whereas the fact remains that the labour contractor and the supplier is one and the
same entity. The assessee, by virtue of a supply agreement, purchases the goods and material from
the contractor to be used by the same contractor in the construction and laying of power grids,
sub-stations and transmission lines etc of the assessee. Ordinarily, the contractor was to raise power
grids, sub-stations and transmission lines as a whole and hand them over to the assessee for
consideration. The consideration was to include the price of material utilized in these works. Had
the assessee followed this usual mechanism, it would have rendered the contractor liable to pay tax
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 11
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
under the GST Act. To avoid this liability of the contractor, the assessee, in terms of a supply
contract separately executed, purchased the goods and material from the contractor from outside
the State and delivered the same to the self-same contractor to be used in different works of the
assessee. Mr. Subash Dutt calls it a tax planning, but we see it as a shrewd move on the part of the
assessee to defeat the provisions of the GST Act.
29 We are aware that the aforesaid observations of ours may not directly impact the outcome of the
references, but we are sure that if the Authorities under the GST Act lift the veil, they would
certainly find that the two agreements styled as labour contract and supply contract are, in essence,
a single composite contract to execute the works of the assessee by the contractor. If that exercise is
done by the Authorities under the GST Act, the contractor, who has executed the works contract of
the assessee, may fall in the GST net. In that eventuality, even the assessee, who is supposed to
deduct the tax at source while making payments to the contractors could also be held liable. Be that
as it may, with the aforesaid observations, we leave it to the Tax Authorities to act in the matter in
appropriate manner. 30 Mr. Subash Dutt, learned counsel appearing for the assessee has placed
before us voluminous case law to substantiate his submissions that none of the transactions entered
into by the assessee is exigible to sales tax under the GST. We, however, do not find it necessary to
advert to and discuss all these judgments for the reason that we are clear from the reading of
definition of „sale(cid:129) and „goods(cid:129) as it existed at the relevant point of time that the transaction of
handing over the material/goods by the assessee to the contractors is not a transaction of sale in any
manner calling for imposition of liability of sales tax interest or penalty. We also find force in the
argument of Mr Subash Dutt that, for the sake of maintaining consistency and discipline, the
Assessing Authorities as well as the statutory appellate authorities must follow the law laid down by
the Tribunal which stood at the apex of hierarchy of the quasi judicial forums created under the GST
Act. As is brought to our notice that on the earlier occasions also, the similar question had arisen
before the Tribunal and the Tribunal after analyzing the entire legal position had held the
transaction between the assessee and its contractors not a „sale(cid:129) exigible to tax under the GST Act.
This order of the Tribunal should have been followed faithfully by all the Forums subordinate to it.
We, however, find that the Assessing Authorities had been passing the same orders time and again
ignoring the mandate of law laid down by the Tribunal. We can understand that the Assessing
Authority may pass a different order than the one passed by the Tribunal on a question of law, in a
case where there is change of law or variation in fact situation. In that eventuality, it is expected of
Assessing Authorities/Appellate Authorities to give reasons for deviating from settled position of
law. If the Assessing Authority and the statutory appellate Authorities under the GST Act are
permitted to ignore the legal position determined and laid down by the Tribunal, it would create not
only judicial indiscipline, but would make the law totally uncertain. The assessees, who feel bound
by the law declared by the Tribunal, unless it is modified or set aside by the Higher Forum, and
regulate their conduct and transactions accordingly, would be in a state of quandary and many a
times may be misled. This will put them to a lot of inconvenience and unsavoury adverse
consequences. 31 In view of the discussion made above, we answer the reference in the following
manner:
(i) Answer to question No.1:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 12
M/S Power Grid Corporation Of India Ltd vs Assessing Authority Sales Tax Circle D on 28 April, 2023
That the transaction between the assessee and the contractors whereunder the assessee has supplied
the goods and material purchased by it from outside the State against C-Forms for the purpose of
erecting/establishing transmission lines, sub-stations and power grids for itself did not amount to
„sale(cid:129) as it was defined under Section 2(L) of the GST Act during the relevant period and, therefore,
not exigible to sales tax under the GST Act. As a necessary corollary, the assessee may not be a
dealer liable to pay tax under the GST Act in respect of aforesaid transaction.
(ii) Answer to question No.2:
That not only the Tribunal but all the Authorities subordinate to it are bound to
follow and comply with the law laid down by the Tribunal. This is necessary to
maintain judicial discipline and avoid uncertainty in law. The Tribunal may, in
appropriate cases, take a view different from the one taken by it earlier if there is
change in law or the fact situation in the context whereof the law was declared by it
earlier. The Assessing Authorities or the Statutory Appellate Authorities under the
GST Act cannot and should not take a view on question of law contrary to the view
taken by the Tribunal. Such conduct of the Authorities shall be gross impropriety and
indiscipline which may call for initiation of appropriate departmental action.
29 We, however, make it clear that change in law and facts situation in context
whereof a particular law is laid down by the Tribunal may be a good reason or
justification for such Authorities to take a different view, but in that eventuality also,
reasons justifying deviation must be spelt out. We, accordingly, answer the references
in the aforesaid terms.
Registry to send a copy of this judgment to the Tribunal who shall proceed in the matter in
accordance with law.
(RAJESH SEKHRI) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
JAMMU
28 .04.2023
Sanjeev
whether order is reportable:Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/138211308/ 13
