M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan
Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
Author: P. B. Bajanthri
Bench: Alok Kumar Sinha, P. B. Bajanthri
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.14030 of 2025
======================================================
M/s Frontline (NCR) Business Solutions Pvt. Ltd. through its Authorised
representative Anand Ashesh, Male, aged about 35 years, S/o Surendra Singh,
Assistant Manager having its office at 301, 3rd Floor, Super Market Building,
Frazer Road, Patna- 800001, R/o - Naya Kendriya Revenue Quarter, South
Mandiri, P.O. GPO and P.S.- Kotwali, Patna, Bihar- 800001.
... ... Petitioner/s
Versus
1. Lalit Narayan Mithila University through its Registrar, Rameshwar Nagar,
Darbhanga, Bihar- 846008.
2. Vice-Chancellor, Lalit Narayan Mithila University through its Registrar,
Rameshwar Nagar, Darbhanga, Bihar- 846008.
3. Registrar, Lalit Narayan Mithila University Rameshwar Nagar, Darbhanga,
Bihar- 846008.
4. Samanta Security and Services Pvt. Ltd. having its office at Shashi
Complex, Road No. 205, Second Floor, Exhibition Road, Patna- 800001.
... ... Respondent/s
======================================================
Appearance :
For the Petitioner/s : Mr. Umesh Prasad Singh, Sr. Advocate
: Mr. Vaibhava Veer Shanker, Advocate
: Mr. Kumar Gaurav, Advocate
For the Respondent/s : Mr. Bindhyachal Rai, Adv.
For the LNMU : Mr. Md. Nadim Seraj, Advocate
: Mr. Shaileshh Kumar, Advocate
For Respondent No. 4 : Mr. Siddhartha Prasad, Advocate
: Mr. Om Prakash Kumar, Advocate
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
and
HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALOK KUMAR SINHA
CAV JUDGMENT
(Per: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE ALOK KUMAR SINHA) Date : 24-09-2025 Heard the parties
2. The petitioner in the present writ application has prayed for following reliefs:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 1
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
"(i) To issue a rule NISI in the nature of writ of mandamus commanding the
respondents Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 to disclose all
the relevant documents including the bid documents submitted by respondent no. 4
being one of the bidder who has been declared successful bidder after opening of the
price bid as 'L1' in violation of the terms and conditions of the tender documents/
Notice Inviting Tender (NIT).
(ii) To issue a rule NISI in the nature of writ of mandamus directing the respondents
to disclose the decision of the tender committee declaring the respondent no. 4 after
opening of the financial bid as 'L1'
(iii) To issue a rule NISI in the nature of writ of certiorari to quash and cancel the
decision of the tender committee dated 06.08.2025 by which the respondent no. 4
has been declared as 'L1'
(iv) To issue a writ of mandamus directing the respondents to consider the matter
afresh and be further pleased to direct that the work should be awarded to the bidder
who has submitted the bid complying all the provisions of NIT."
3. Learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the petitioner is a company incorporated under
the provisions of the Companies Act and has approached this Hon'ble Court under Article 226 of the
Constitution, being aggrieved by the decision of the Tender Evaluation Committee dated
06.08.2025, whereby respondent no. 4 has been declared as the successful bidder (L1) in Patna
High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 complete violation of the mandatory terms and
conditions of the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT). It is contended that the tender in question was
issued by respondent no. 2 and respondent no. 3 vide advertisement no. EST/01/25 for "Hiring of
agency for providing Security and Housekeeping service for the L.N. Mithila University,
Darbhanga." The learned counsel points out that the said tender invited as per section III Special
Conditions of Contract, the intending bidders were required to comply besides other terms and
conditions of the NIT, one of the terms & conditions which forms part of Section no. III of the
Special Conditions of Contract (Relevant clauses of NIT- Annexure-P/1 AND Format of the
Financial Bid- Annexure-P/2), the relevant clause (iii) reads thus:-
"The applying firm will quotes the ESL, EPF, Bonus, Uniform, Uniform washing and
HRA rate in the column Daily Wages Rate on the current rate as per the Govt. Norms
as quoted in the Part A of the Financial Bid (Statutory wages and deduction should be
as per norms). Bidders not quoting rates in accordance with the prescribed format
will be outrightly rejected."
[Emphasis Supplied]
4. The petitioner's counsel submits that three bidders, including the petitioner and respondent no.
4, were found technically qualified and, accordingly, their financial bids were opened on
06.08.2025. However, despite the categorical stipulation in the tender conditions, respondent no. 4
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 2
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
quoted less Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 than the minimum rate
prescribed for EPF and, more significantly, quoted "NIL" in the Bonus column. The petitioner, on
the other hand, quoted Bonus @ 8.33% and EPF @ 13% in strict compliance with the prescribed
format. It is further contended that, had respondent no. 4 quoted the statutory minimums as
mandated, it would have stood relegated to the position of 'L3' and could not have been declared
successful.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner therefore submitted that the quotation of 'NIL' in respect of
statutory dues such as EPF and Bonus cannot be regarded as a clerical error but amounts to a
material non-compliance of the tender conditions as well as a breach of statutory obligations under
the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, the Payment of Bonus Act,
1965, and the Minimum Wages Act. It is urged that the acceptance of such a non-compliant bid by
the respondents has resulted in conferring an unfair advantage upon respondent no. 4, thereby
violating the doctrine of level playing field in public procurement, which flows from Article 14 of the
Constitution.
6. The learned counsel further submits that immediately upon declaration of the result on
06.08.2025, the petitioner submitted a detailed representation on 06.08.2025 (Annexure: P/3)
before respondent no. 3 highlighting the illegality and arbitrariness Patna High Court CWJC
No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 in the decision of the Tender Committee. Another technically
qualified bidder, namely Elitefalcons Pvt. Ltd., also lodged a representation on 07.08.2025
(Annexure: P/3) raising identical grievances. However, both representations were neither
considered nor replied to, thereby demonstrating clear bias and favoritism extended to respondent
no. 4. The inaction of the respondents in not responding to the objections filed by the unsuccessful
bidders is asserted to be violative of the principles of natural justice, particularly the right to a fair
hearing.
7. It is also submitted that the present tender, unlike in the past eight years where the engagement of
security services was initially for two years extendable for one more year, has now been awarded for
a period of four years, extendable for two further years on satisfactory performance. Such a
departure from past practice, according to the learned counsel, reinforces the suspicion that the
impugned tender has been tailored to favour respondent no. 4 and to secure its engagement for an
unusually long term of six years, thereby excluding fair competition for a significant duration.
8. The learned counsel for the petitioner, therefore, argues that the impugned action of the
respondents in awarding the contract to respondent no. 4, despite its non-compliance with Patna
High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 mandatory statutory requirements, is arbitrary,
unreasonable, and malafide, and is liable to be interfered with by this Hon'ble Court in the exercise
of its writ jurisdiction. It is urged that the action of the respondents not only undermines the
statutory labour law protections available to the workmen who are to be engaged under the contract
but also has serious financial implications involving public funds.
9. Learned counsel for the respondent No.4, on the other hand, has opposed the writ petition and
submits that the Lalit Narayan Mithila University, Darbhanga, had issued Tender Notice vide
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 3
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
Advertisement No. Est./01/2025 inviting bids for hiring of an agency to provide Security and
Housekeeping Services at the University premises. Pursuant thereto, the last date for submission of
bids was duly fixed as 31.07.2025. It is contended that both the petitioner as well as respondent no.
4, namely M/s Samanta Security & Intelligence Service Pvt. Ltd., along with other bidders, duly
participated in the tender process by submitting their bids within the prescribed time and format. It
is further submitted that the provisions contained in the Special Conditions of Contract (Section III)
were made applicable, which clearly stipulated that the intending bidders were required to quote
statutory contributions such as ESI, EPF, Bonus, Uniform, Uniform washing Patna High Court
CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 and HRA strictly in accordance with the prescribed norms.
Learned counsel states that respondent no. 4 duly submitted its financial bid before the competent
authority of the University in conformity with the said stipulations, and upon evaluation, was found
to be the lowest bidder (L-1). Consequently, after scrutiny of the financial bids, the petitioner was
placed in the category of L-3, whereas respondent no. 4 was declared successful.
10. Learned counsel for the respondents further submits that thereafter, the University, being
satisfied with the compliance of all requisite conditions, executed an agreement with respondent no.
4 on 30.08.2025 (Annexure:R/B), thereby binding both parties to the terms and conditions of the
contract. It is urged that only after the declaration of the result did the petitioner, out of malafide
intention and with ulterior motive, approach this Court alleging violation of tender conditions.
In so far as the grievance regarding quotation of "NIL" in the Bonus column is concerned, learned
counsel explains that the same was quoted only in respect of the category of Security Supervisor
(Ex-Man) and Security Guard with arms (Ex-Man). Reliance is placed on the Payment of Bonus Act,
1965, as amended by the Payment of Bonus (Amendment) Act, 2015, whereby employees whose
monthly wages exceed (cid:128)21,000/- are Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 not
entitled to statutory bonus. It is submitted that the Security Supervisor (Ex-Man) is paid a basic
wage of (cid:128)26,280/- per month and the Security Guard with arms (Ex-Man) to be is to be paid
(cid:128)23,218/- per month, both of which are above the statutory ceiling of (cid:128)21,000/-. Accordingly,
respondent no. 4 rightly filled "NIL" in the bonus column for these categories, whereas for
employees entitled to bonus, the statutory rates would be applicable. It is submitted that this action
is in strict compliance with the provisions of Section 2(13) read with Section 10 of the Payment of
Bonus Act, 1965, and cannot be treated as a breach of tender conditions.
With regard to the Employees' State Insurance (ESI), learned counsel points out that under the
Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, as amended in 2016, the wage ceiling for coverage was
enhanced to (cid:128)21,000/- per month, and the statutory contribution rate was revised to 3.25% of
wages payable by the employer. Respondent no. 4, while submitting its financial bid, has strictly
adhered to this mandate and quoted the contribution rate accordingly. It is thus contended that no
illegality can be attributed to respondent no. 4 in respect of the ESI component.
As regards the Employees' Provident Fund (EPF), learned counsel for the respondents submits that
under the Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 Employees' Provident Funds
and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, contributions are payable only on the prescribed wage
ceiling of (cid:128)15,000/- per month. Employees whose monthly wages exceed (cid:128)15,000/- fall within the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 4
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
definition of "excluded employees" under Para 2(f) of the EPF Scheme, 1952. Accordingly, the
contribution quoted by respondent no. 4 was restricted to the statutory ceiling, and a fixed
contribution amount was mentioned in respect of the categories of Security Supervisors and
Security Guards whose wages exceed the ceiling. It is thus contended that the quotation of EPF
contribution by respondent no. 4 is also in consonance with statutory requirements, and no
deviation or irregularity can be alleged.
11. Learned counsel for the respondent further submits that the writ petition is vague and
speculative, filed without supporting documents, and is based on mere conjectures and surmises. It
is pointed out that after execution of the agreement dated 30.08.2025, respondent no. 4 has already
commenced work in accordance with the terms of the contract, and since the commencement of
services, no complaint has been received by the Registrar of the University. On the contrary, the
work of respondent no. 4 has been found to be satisfactory and efficient. Patna High Court CWJC
No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 It is also urged that respondent no. 4 has participated in several
other tenders floated by different institutions, including in the State of Jharkhand, where similar
rates and terms were quoted and duly accepted by the competent authorities without any objection.
This, according to learned counsel, demonstrates that the bid submitted by respondent no. 4 is
strictly in conformity with law and industry practice, and the objections raised by the petitioner are
unfounded and motivated. In view of the above, learned counsel for the respondents submits that
the writ petition deserves to be dismissed as misconceived and lacking in merit, as the petitioner has
failed to establish any arbitrariness, illegality, or violation of statutory provisions in the award of the
tender to respondent no. 4.
ISSUES IN QUESTION:
1. Whether the present writ petition can be entertained, particularly when it has been
instituted after the declaration of the result of the financial bid?
2. Whether respondent no. 4 has complied with the mandatory tender conditions in
relation to statutory contributions towards Bonus, Employees' State Insurance (ESI),
House Rent Allowance (HRA), and other allied Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of
2025 dt.24-09-2025 components, or whether such deviations, if any, would entail
disqualification?
3. Whether Condition No. 3 of the Special Provisions, which mandates that statutory
wages and deductions should be quoted strictly as per norms, is required to be
interpreted in consonance with the governing legislations such as the Payment of
Bonus Act, 1965, the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, and the Employees'
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952?
4. Whether the decision of the University in declaring respondent no. 4 as the lowest
bidder (L-1) and awarding the contract in its favour suffers from arbitrariness, mala
fides, or violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of India, thereby warranting
interference by this Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 5
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
FINDINGS:
Issue 1: Whether the present writ petition can be entertained, particularly when it has
been instituted after the declaration of the result of the financial bid?
At the very outset, it is necessary to test the maintainability of the present writ
petition in the backdrop of well- settled principles of law governing judicial review in
contractual Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 and tender
matters. The facts are not in dispute that the financial bids were opened, respondent
no. 4 was declared as the lowest bidder (L-1), and thereafter a formal agreement was
executed between the University and respondent no. 4 on 30.08.2025. It is further
borne from the record that respondent no. 4 has already commenced the work and is
discharging its obligations under the terms of the contract.
In such circumstances, the present petition, filed after the culmination of the tender
process, seeks to unsettle a concluded contract.
The law is well settled that writ jurisdiction under Article 226 is primarily preventive
and not curative in matters relating to tenders. Where the tender process has already
reached its logical conclusion and contractual rights have crystallised, courts have
consistently exercised restraint in entertaining belated challenges. It is by now trite
law that once the tender process has culminated into a concluded contract, ordinarily
no writ would lie to annul the same, except in cases where the action of the State or
its instrumentalities is shown to be vitiated by mala fides, arbitrariness, or violation
of statutory/constitutional provisions.
In Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa reported in (2007) 14 SCC 517, the Court
emphasized that post-contract interference Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of
2025 dt.24-09-2025 is impermissible except in cases of patent illegality or mala fides,
which must be specifically pleaded and proved. Mere dissatisfaction of an
unsuccessful bidder is no ground to disturb a concluded contract. Equally instructive
is the judgment in State of U.P. v. Sudhir Kumar Singh reported in (2020) 10 SCC
492, where the Hon'ble Supreme Court reiterated that a concluded contract cannot
be lightly disturbed by writ proceedings unless prejudice caused by a patent illegality
is clearly established.
Applying the above test to the present case, it is manifest that the petitioner has not demonstrated
any mala fide, arbitrariness, or violation of statutory norms in the tender process. The grievance of
the petitioner arises only after respondent no. 4 was declared successful. The challenge, therefore,
appears to be an afterthought, lacking any substantive legal foundation.
In the present case, the petitioner has approached this Court only after the declaration of the
financial results and the contract has already been executed, by which stage a vested right has
accrued in favour of respondent no. 4 and corresponding obligations have arisen on the part of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 6
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
University. Interference at this juncture would not only unsettle a concluded contract but also cause
administrative chaos and financial loss to the public exchequer.
Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 In view of the above discussion, this
Court is of the opinion that the writ petition, having been instituted after the declaration of the
financial bid and there is a subsequent execution of agreement dated 30.08.2025, and thus, cannot
be entertained at this stage. The challenge is belated, seeks to unsettle a concluded contract, and
does not warrant interference.
Issue 2: Whether respondent no. 4 has complied with the mandatory tender conditions in relation to
statutory contributions towards Bonus, Employees' State Insurance (ESI), House Rent Allowance
(HRA), and other allied components, or whether such deviations, if any, would entail
disqualification?
The principal objection raised by the petitioner is that respondent no. 4 quoted "nil" or lesser figures
in certain columns of the financial bid, particularly in relation to Bonus and EPF, and thereby
rendered its bid non-compliant with the mandatory requirements of the tender. It is contended that
such a deviation ought to have led to outright rejection of the bid.
Having considered the material placed on record, this Court is of the view that the allegation of
non-compliance is not substantiated. The Special Condition No. 3 of the tender required that "the
applying firm will quote the ESI, EPF, Bonus, Uniform, Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025
dt.24-09-2025 Uniform washing and HRA rate in the column Daily Wages Rate on the current rate
as per the Government norms quoted in Part A of the financial bid (Statutory wages and deductions
should be as per norms)" The operative phrase here is "as per norms." Thus, the requirement was
not of an arbitrary quotation but of adherence to statutory prescriptions.
From the material placed on record, however, it emerges that the quotation of "NIL" Bonus was
confined only to those categories of employees whose wages exceeded the statutory ceiling of
(cid:128)21,000/- per month, namely Security Supervisor (Ex- Man) and Security Guard with arms
(Ex-Man). Section 2(13) read with Section 10 of the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965 makes it clear that
employees drawing wages beyond the notified ceiling are outside the purview of the Act and are not
statutorily entitled to bonus. In that view, the entry of "NIL" against such categories cannot be said
to be contrary to law or to the tender stipulations, since the requirement was to quote statutory
contributions as per law and not beyond.
Similarly, under the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, as amended, coverage extends only to
employees drawing wages up to (cid:128)21,000/- per month. Respondent no. 4 has quoted the prescribed
contribution at the notified rate of 3.25% in respect of Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025
dt.24-09-2025 eligible employees. There is no material to show that contribution was omitted where
statutorily applicable.
With regard to the Employees' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952, Para 2(f) of
the EPF Scheme defines "excluded employee" to include an employee whose monthly wage exceeds
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 7
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
(cid:128)15,000/-. The stand of respondent no. 4 is that contributions were quoted in respect of eligible
employees, while those drawing above the ceiling were restricted to statutory ceiling. This Court
finds merit in the said explanation, for the tender condition did not require bidders to assume
liabilities not mandated by law.
As to HRA, Uniform and Uniform Washing, no specific deviation has been alleged by the petitioner.
The bid of respondent no. 4, on its face, reflects the inclusion of these heads in terms of the tender
requirements. It is settled law that where tender conditions require compliance with statutory
obligations, the test of conformity must be applied with reference to the governing law and not by
insisting on contributions beyond the statute.
The records indicate that respondent no. 4's financial bid, when read as a whole, reflected
compliance with the statutory minima under the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, the
Employees' Provident Fund and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of
2025 dt.24-09-2025 1952, and the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965. No specific statutory provision has
been demonstrated by the petitioner that stands violated by respondent no. 4. The contention that
"nil" or "lesser" figures were quoted does not, ipso facto, establish illegality. What is relevant is
whether the bid, in substance, ensured payment of the prescribed statutory dues to workmen, and
there is no material to suggest otherwise.
It is also pertinent that the concerned authorities, comprising subject-matter experts, after
scrutinizing all bids, declared respondent no. 4 as 'L1'. The Committee was satisfied that the figures
quoted by respondent no. 4 conformed to statutory norms and did not result in any dilution of
labour welfare obligations. The petitioner has not been able to place on record any cogent evidence
that workers would be denied statutory entitlements if the contract were executed as per respondent
no. 4's bid.
In view of the foregoing discussion, this Court finds that respondent no. 4 has complied with the
mandatory tender requirements concerning Bonus, ESI, EPF, and allied components. The
deviations alleged by the petitioner are either immaterial or misconceived, and do not warrant
disqualification and the objection raised by the petitioner is without merit. Patna High Court CWJC
No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 Issue: 3. Whether Condition No. 3 of the Special Provisions, which
mandates that statutory wages and deductions should be quoted strictly as per norms, is required to
be interpreted in consonance with the governing legislations such as the Payment of Bonus Act,
1965, the Employees' State Insurance Act, 1948, and the Employees' Provident Funds and
Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952?
The Court has examined Condition No. (iii) of the Special Conditions of The Contract which requires
bidders to quote statutory elements--ESI, EPF, Bonus, Uniform, Uniform washing, HRA--"on the
current rate as per the Government norms" and further provides that "Bidders not quoting rates in
accordance with the prescribed format will be outrightly rejected." The condition, read as a whole,
operates with two complementary mandates: (i) the statutory components must be quantified in
conformity with the governing statutes (i.e. "as per norms"); and (ii) the prescribed format of the
tender must be followed so that the evaluation can be carried out on an even and comparable basis.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 8
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
Both mandates are capable of harmonious application and must be read together. Upon careful
scrutiny, it is apparent that these entries are fully consistent with the applicable Patna High Court
CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 statutory provisions and do not constitute a deviation
warranting disqualification.
The Court is of the considered view that this requirement must be interpreted harmoniously with
the governing central legislations, namely, the Payment of Bonus Act, 1965, the Employees' State
Insurance Act, 1948, and the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.
These statutes lay down thresholds and ceilings expressed in terms of monthly wages (per mensem),
whereas the tender format required entries in terms of daily wage rates. Such apparent divergence
does not create inconsistency but can be reconciled by arithmetical translation of monthly ceilings
into daily equivalents on the basis of working days. A frequent practical difficulty arises where the
statute speaks in terms of wages per mensem while the NIT asks for rates on a per-day basis. The
two formulations are not in conflict; they are convertible. The proper method is to translate the
statutory per-mensem ceiling into an equivalent per-day figure consistent with the tender's
convention for calculating daily. To illustrate, using 26 working days:
Monthly ceiling under the Bonus Act / ESI: (cid:128)21,000 per mensem.
Calculation: (cid:128)21,000 ÷ 26 = (cid:128)807.6923076923 ≈ (cid:128)807.69 per day.
Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 EPF scheme ceiling:
(cid:128)15,000 per mensem.
Calculation: (cid:128)15,000 ÷ 26 = (cid:128)576.9230769231 ≈ (cid:128)576.92 per day.
The tender's requirement that bids be submitted in a prescribed format is procedural
and designed to ensure comparability. It does not, however, envisage or require
bidders to ignore or contradict the central legislations. To interpret Condition No.
(iii) otherwise -- i.e. to insist that a bidder must, for the sake of form, mechanically
insert an amount contrary to statutory law
-- would place the tendering authority in a position to compel unlawful contractual
undertakings. The prescribed format and the statutory command must therefore be
given a harmonious construction: bidders must use the prescribed format to disclose
the statutory components, and the values entered must be those that flow from the
central legislations in the matters of ceiling, rates, exemptions, etc. If a particular
statutory head is inapplicable to a category for example, bonus where monthly wage
exceeds the statutory ceiling, entering "NIL" or showing non-applicability in the
prescribed column is an accurate and faithful use of the format
-- not a deviation from it. This interpretation preserves both the integrity of the
evaluation exercise and the supremacy of statutory law. The principle that essential
conditions must be complied with Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 9
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
dt.24-09-2025 while immaterial/formal variances should not defeat substantial
compliance has been authoritatively recognized by the courts.
This Court observes that converting statutory monthly ceilings into daily wage
equivalents for the purpose of completing the tender format is a permissible and
accepted practice. This conversion does not alter the substantive statutory obligation;
it merely ensures compatibility with the bid evaluation process. Entries such as "NIL"
for bonus or capped contributions for EPF and ESI are entirely consistent with
statutory laws and the tender's prescribed format.
In conclusion, the Court finds that respondent no. 4's financial bid fully complies
with Condition No. (iii) of the Special Provisions. The entries correctly reflect
statutory requirements under the Bonus Act, ESI Act, and EPF Act while adhering to
the prescribed format for evaluation purposes. No deviation or non- compliance
arises, and consequently, the bid of respondent no. 4 cannot be disqualified on this
ground.
Issue 4: Whether the decision of the University in declaring respondent no. 4 as the
lowest bidder (L-1) and awarding the contract in its favour suffers from arbitrariness,
mala fides, or violation of Article 14 of the Constitution of Patna High Court CWJC
No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 India, thereby warranting interference by this
Court in exercise of its writ jurisdiction?
Upon analysis of the arguments raised and careful perusal of the materials on record,
it can be observd that the University has conducted the tender process in strict
compliance with the Notice Inviting Tender (NIT), the Special Conditions of
Contract, and the governing statutory provisions. Respondent no. 4 was declared the
lowest bidder (L-1) after a proper comparative assessment of the bids, in which the
statutory ceilings under Bonus, ESI, and EPF were duly accounted for in accordance
with law.
It is well settled that the exercise of discretion by a tendering authority must be free
from arbitrariness, mala fides, or discrimination. However, arbitrariness implies
capricious, whimsical, or unjustifiable action, and mala fide requires clear evidence of
dishonest or corrupt intent. In the present case, there is no evidence whatsoever to
suggest that the University acted dishonestly, whimsically, or in a manner that
favoured any particular bidder. On the contrary, the bid evaluation process was
conducted in accordance with statutory and tender requirements, and the declaration
of respondent no. 4 as 'L-1' is based on objective financial comparison.
Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 The Supreme Court has
consistently held that mere disagreement with the decision of a tendering authority
does not amount to a violation of Article 14 of the Constitution or justify interference
by the Court under Article 226 . The Tendering Authority, being the best judge of its
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 10
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
requirements, is entitled to construe and apply its own conditions, and in the absence
of any demonstrable perversity or illegality, the Court would not sit in appeal over
such administrative decisions.
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Tata Cellular v. Union of India, (1994) 6 SCC 651, laid
down that judicial review in tender matters is limited to examining the
decision-making process and not the merits of the decision itself. Similarly in the
case of Central Coalfieds Limited vs Sll-Sml (Joint Venture Consortium) CIVIL
APPEAL NO. 8004 OF 2016 has reiterated the above observation, relevant paras of
whose are enclosed herein:
"43. ..............One of the more significant cases on the subject is the three- judge
decision in Tata Cellular v. Union of India which gave importance to the lawfulness of
a decision and not its soundness. If an administrative decision, such as a deviation in
the terms of the NIT is not arbitrary, irrational, unreasonable, mala fide or biased,
Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 the Courts will not
judicially review the decision taken. Similarly, the Courts will not countenance
interference with the decision at the behest of an unsuccessful bidder in respect of a
technical or procedural violation. This was quite clearly stated by this Court
(following Tata Cellular) in Jagdish Mandal v. State of Orissa in the following words:
"Judicial review of administrative action is intended to prevent arbitrariness,
irrationality, unreasonableness, bias and mala fides. Its purpose is to check whether
choice or decision is made "lawfully" and not to check whether choice or decision is
"sound". When the power of judicial review is invoked in matters relating to tenders
or award of contracts, certain special features should be borne in mind. A contract is
a commercial transaction. Evaluating tenders and awarding contracts are essentially
commercial functions. Principles of equity and natural justice stay at a distance. If the
decision relating to award of contract is bona fide and is in public interest, courts will
not, in exercise of power of judicial review, interfere even if a procedural aberration
or error in assessment or prejudice to a tenderer, is made out. The power of judicial
review will not be permitted to be invoked to protect private interest at the cost of
public interest, or to decide contractual Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025
dt.24-09-2025 disputes. The tenderer or contractor with a grievance can always seek
damages in a civil court. Attempts by unsuccessful tenderers with imaginary
grievances, wounded pride and business rivalry, to make mountains out of molehills
of some technical/procedural violation or some prejudice to self, and persuade courts
to interfere by exercising power of judicial review, should be resisted. Such
interferences, either interim or final, may hold up public works for years, or delay
relief and (2007) 14 SCC 517 succour to thousands and millions and may increase the
project cost manifold." This Court then laid down the questions that ought to be
asked in such a situation. It was said:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 11
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
"Therefore, a court before interfering in tender or contractual matters in exercise of
power of judicial review, should pose to itself the following questions:
(i) Whether the process adopted or decision made by the authority is mala fide or
intended to favour someone;
OR Whether the process adopted or decision made is so arbitrary and irrational that the court can
say: "the decision is such that no responsible authority acting reasonably and in accordance with
relevant law could have reached";
Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025
(ii) Whether public interest is affected.
If the answers are in the negative, there should be no interference under Article
226."
It can be inferred that unless arbitrariness, mala fide, or violation of statutory provisions is
established, the Court ought not to interfere. Similarly, in Afcons Infrastructure Ltd. v. Nagpur
Metro Rail Corporation Ltd. reported in (2016) 16 SCC 818, it was reiterated that the terms of
invitation to tender are in the contractual domain, and the employer's interpretation is to be
accorded deference unless it is patently unreasonable.
It is pertinent to note that respondent no. 4's bid was in strict compliance with statutory norms, and
the entries made in the prescribed financial format (including per-day calculations for statutory
ceilings) were entirely proper. There is no evidence of manipulation or intentional
misrepresentation. Furthermore, the subsequent execution of the agreement on 30.08.2025 and the
smooth commencement of work by respondent no. 4, without complaint or objection from the
University, reinforce the absence of any arbitrary or mala fide conduct.
In view of the above, the Court finds that the University's decision in declaring respondent no. 4 as
the lowest Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of 2025 dt.24-09-2025 bidder and awarding the
contract in its favour is neither arbitrary nor mala fide. The decision is rational, legally sustainable,
and in accordance with both the terms of the NIT and the statutory framework governing the
statutory components of the bid. Consequently, no interference under Article 226 of the
Constitution is warranted on this ground.
12. In view of the above discussion and the perusal of materials on record, this Court is of the
considered opinion that the petitioner has failed to establish any arbitrariness, illegality, or mala
fide in the tender process culminating in the award of contract to respondent no. 4. The record
reveals that the tender was conducted in a fair and transparent manner, all eligible bidders were
duly considered, and respondent no. 4 emerged as the lowest bidder in accordance with the
evaluation criteria prescribed under the NIT. The allegations of non-compliance with statutory
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 12
M/S Frontline (Ncr) Business Solutions ... vs Lalit Narayan Mithila University on 24 September, 2025
obligations are unfounded, as respondent no. 4 has quoted the statutory rates in conformity with the
permissible limits stipulated by relevant Laws. It is reiterated that the scope of judicial review in
contractual and tender matters is limited to examining the decision-making process and not to
re-appreciate the merits of the decision. In absence of any demonstrable illegality, perversity, or
mala fide, this Court finds no reason to interfere with the Patna High Court CWJC No.14030 of
2025 dt.24-09-2025 administrative discretion exercised by the competent authority. Accordingly,
the writ petition, being devoid of merit, is liable to be dismissed.
13. Accordingly, this writ application is dismissed. All IAs, if any pending, shall stand disposed of.
There shall be no order as to costs.
(P. B. Bajanthri, CJ)
( Alok Kumar Sinha, J)
Prakash Narayan
AFR/NAFR AFR
CAV DATE 16.09.2025
Uploading Date 24.09.2025
Transmission Date NA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/8362605/ 13
