M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12
October, 2017
Equivalent citations: AIR 2018 MADHYA PRADESH 106, (2018) 1 MPLJ 402
Bench: Hemant Gupta, H.P. Singh, Rajeev Kumar Dubey, Vijay Kumar Shukla,
Subodh Abhyankar
W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017
1
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH : JABALPUR
(LARGER BENCH)
W.P. No. 7798/2017
M/s Pankaj Kumar Rai .....Petitioner
Versus
State of Madhya Pradesh & Others ....Respondents
WITH
W.P. No. 11608/2017
M/s Gurmail Singh .....Petitioner
Versus
State of Madhya Pradesh & Others ....Respondents
======================================================
Coram:
Hon'ble Shri Justice Hemant Gupta, Chief Justice
Hon'ble Shri Justice H.P. Singh, J.
Hon'ble Shri Justice Rajeev Kumar Dubey, J.
Hon'ble Shri Justice Vijay Kumar Shukla, J.
Hon'ble Shri Justice Subodh Abhyankar, J.
======================================================
Shri Vivek Dalal, Shri Mukesh Kumar Agarwal, Shri Shekhar Sharma,
Shri Utkarsh Agrawal and Shri Amit Singh, Advocates for the petitioners.
Shri P.K. Kaurav, Advocate General with Shri Amit Seth, Government
Advocate for the respondents/State.
======================================================
Whether approved for reporting: Yes
======================================================
Law Laid down:
In the light of series of decisions of the Supreme Court, it is well
settled that the provisos of the Statutes have to be read as a whole by giving
harmonious construction to all the provisions of the law so that none of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 1
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
provision is rendered redundant. Keeping in view the principle of
harmonious construction, the third proviso to Rule 68(1) of M.P. Minor
Mineral Rules, 1996 is additional relaxation to Rule 4 and 68(1) of the said
Rules.
W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017
2
Further, in the light of scheme of Statute and the purpose of M.P.
Minor Mineral Rules, 1996 that there should not be any illegal extraction of
minerals and all minerals should be royalty paid, we find that third proviso to
Rule 68(1) is neither illegal nor enlarges the scope of proviso to than that of
Rule 68 or any other provision of the Rules.
The Order of a Full Bench of this Court in WP No.4547/2016 (M/s
Phaloudi Constructions vs. State of M.P.) passed on 10.5.2016 is overruled.
Significant Paragraphs: 12, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 & 24 to 29
======================================================
Reserved On : 05.10.2017
ORDER
(Passed on this 12th day of October, 2017) Per: Hemant Gupta, Chief Justice:
The present Writ Petition No.7798/2017 was earlier referred to larger Bench vide
order dated 16.8.2017 whereby a Division Bench of this Court prima facie found that
the view taken by the Full Bench of this Court in W.P. No.4547/2016 (M/s Phaloudi
Constructions and Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd.
vs. State of Madhya Pradesh) and other connected matters decided on 10.5.2016
requires reconsideration. Thus, following two questions were referred for
consideration to the Larger Bench:-
(i) Whether the purchase of minor minerals from open market in terms of 3rd
proviso to rule 68(1) excludes the obtaining of "No Mining Dues" certificate from
Mining Department as the open market may include illegally extracted minor
minerals as well?
(ii) Whether the judgment in Phaloudi Constructions and Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. lays
down good law, in view of the fact that the amendment carried out in Rules on 23 rd
March, 2013 and later on 2.7.2013 was not brought to the notice of the Bench, when
the Rule 68(1) was substituted?
W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017
2. Later, a Full Bench of three Judges hearing the petition found that the second question does not
arise for consideration, but, finding that the view in Phaloudi Constructions and Infrastructure Pvt.
Ltd.'s case (supra) does not seem to be correct, therefore, the petition was ordered to be placed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 2
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
before the larger Bench. It is how; this Bench is seized of the petition.
3. The brief facts leading the abovesaid question, in short, are that the petitioner herein is a
registered contractor with Public Works Department and has been awarded work order for
construction work. In terms of the agreement, the petitioner is being paid periodically but in every
bill deduction of royalty amount is made in spite of submitting purchase bills of the minor minerals
of the authorized dealers. The grievance of the petitioners is that deductions of amount of royalty
are being made without issuing any notice to the petitioners and the entire payments are not being
paid to the petitioners. It is pointed out that there is no express provision of law to pay royalty to the
Department of Mines as the royalty is to be paid by the contractor, who undertakes mining
operation. The material is purchased by the petitioners from the trader who pays royalty as the
payment of royalty is mentioned in the invoices raised and given to the petitioners. The petitioners
seek support from the Full Bench judgment of this Court reported as 2016 (2) MPLJ 704 (Phaloudi
Constructions and Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of M.P.) wherein the Court has concluded as
under:-
"25. Thus, whether it is under clause (i) or clause (ii) of sub-rule (1) of Rule 68 of
1996 Rules, the fact remains that the same relates to contractor engaged in
Government work of the nature stipulated therein and are given permission for
extraction, removal W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 and transportation of
any minor mineral and not the contractors who though engaged in the work of any
department and undertaking but purchases the minor mineral from open market.
This aspect gets clarified from the definition of "Contractor" as contained under clause (xvi-b) of
Rule 2 of 1996 Rules, which means a person who holds a "trade quarry". Accordingly, quarry permit
holder/contractor engaged in construction as find mention in Third Proviso is the contractor, who
has been so permitted under clause (i) and (ii), as the case may be. Though this proviso contains an
expression "or used by purchasing from open market"; however, since no such class of contractor
engaged in work of any department and undertaking, who is not authorised under clause (i) or (ii) of
sub-rule (1) of Rule 68, completes such work by purchasing minor mineral from open market, is
created under these clauses, we decline to accept the contentions on behalf of the respondent that
Third Proviso creates a substantive class of contractors engaged in works of Govt. department and
undertaking. In view whereof, the regime of M/s Tomar Construction Company (supra) and M/s
Chandrama Construction Company (supra) does not get obliterated, even with insertion of Third
Proviso to sub rule (1) of Rule 68 of 1996 Rules.
26. Even if for the sake of argument if the contentions of State Government Counsel is accepted that
the contractor, which find mentions in Third Proviso, would include the contractor engaged in work
of Government department and undertaking who purchase minor minerals from open market to
complete such work, no provision in the Act of 1956 or the Rules and Regulations made thereunder
including the Rules of 1996 and 2006 has been commended at, having control over such retails
traders operating in open market. There being no such provision regulating open market it is
beyond comprehension that, the Mining Officer/ Officer-in-Charge, Mining Sector will have any
document available with him for verification. On the contrary, the discretion given to the Competent
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 3
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
Authority vide orders in M/s Tomar W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 Constructions
(supra), M/s Chandrama Construction, Prashant Singh Bhadoriya (supra) and M/s Trishul
Construction (supra) to shift the onus on the contractor engaged in the works of the Government
and undertaking who claims refund of royalty on the ground of having purchased from the open
market to establish the source. In case, if he fails, the Government not only can deny the refund;
simultaneously, can take action against such contractor under law, as in such cases, it can legally be
inferred that the minor mineral is obtained through illegal source. These powers would be in
addition to the statutory powers."
4. Before this Bench, the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners is that the third proviso
to Rule 68(1) of the M.P. Minor Mineral Rules, 1996 (in short "the Rules") does not include the
purchase of the minerals from the traders. The construction work undertaken by the petitioners is
excluded from the scope and preview of the third proviso. A contractor, as defined under the Rules
alone is required to obtain 'No Mining Dues' certificate and/or a quarry permit holder and not the
contractor who is executing separate construction contract on behalf of the State. Therefore, 'No
Mining Dues' certificate is not required to be submitted by the petitioners as the petitioners in the
writ petitions are the purchasers of the mineral from the open market. It is argued that keeping in
view the law of interpretation, this Court will not add any words to the Statute, therefore, in view the
plain language of the third proviso, the petitioner is not liable to furnish 'No Mining Dues' certificate
for use of mineral in the construction work being undertaken by the petitioner. It is argued that the
judgment in Phaloudi Constructions (supra) does not require reconsideration as the same has
considered various aspects of the provisions and the law applicable W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No.
11608/2017 thereto.
5. Some of the learned counsel for the petitioners have submitted that 'No Mining Dues' certificate is
not issued for years together, therefore, the requirement of 'No Mining Dues' certificate interferes
with the right of business run by the petitioners. It is also argued that the invoices through which the
petitioners purchase the minor mineral have the endorsement of payment of royalty. It is for the
State to verify whether the royalty has been paid or not but the petitioners, the petty contractors
engaged in construction work, cannot ensure that the traders from whom they have purchased the
minor mineral on the basis of invoices raised to verify as to whether the royalty has been paid or not.
Therefore, the third proviso which mandates the petitioners to obtain 'No Mining Dues' certificate is
not applicable to the petitioners and, in any case, it is not practically possible.
6. Shri Vivek Dalal, learned counsel for the petitioners relies upon the decision of the Supreme Court
reported as (1976) 1 SCC 128 (Dwarka Prasad vs. Dwarka Das Saraf) to contend that if the principal
provision is clear, a proviso cannot expand or limit the substantive provision. It is argued that the
interpretation being given by the State enlarges the scope of proviso which is not permissible.
Reliance has also been placed upon the Supreme Court decision reported as (1996) 4 SCC 596 (S.
Gopal Reddy vs. State of Andhra Pradesh).
7. Shri Shekhar Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner in W.P. No.11608/2017 relies
upon the Supreme Court judgment reported as W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 (2004) 6
SCC 672 (Maulavi Hussein Haji Abraham Umarji vs. State of Gujarat and another) to contend that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 4
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
the Court cannot read anything in a statutory provision when the language is plain and
unambiguous. Shri Amit Singh, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners in some cases argued
that royalty payable is different from no mining dues being claimed from the petitioners. Royalty is
payable as per Form X, XI and XII appended with the Rules for which monthly, half-yearly and
annual return is to be filed whereas the petitioners are being called upon to obtain 'No Mining Dues'
certificate which is not dealt with in the Rules.
8. On the other hand, learned Advocate General submitted that the words "contractor engaged in
construction work" appearing in the proviso to Rule 68(1) of the Rules, is not a "Contractor" as
defined in Rule 2(xvi-b) of the Rules. It is also submitted that the "Quarry permit" holder as
mentioned in third proviso is defined in Clause 2(xxiii) of the Rules, which is different from the
"Quarry lease" defined in Rule 2(xxv) of the Rules. It is argued that Rule 4 prohibits mining
operation without the trade quarry or a quarry permit or a quarry lease. The Rule 6 deals with the
grant of quarry lease whereas Rule 7 deals with trade quarry that is the lease by auction only in
respect of quarries of minerals specified in Serial No.5 of Schedule-I and Serial No.1 and 3 of
Schedule-II of the Rules. As such there is absolute prohibition of the extraction of mineral without
allotment or auction, therefore, Rule 68 is an exception to Rule 4. Rule 68 grants permission for
extraction, removal and transportation of any minor mineral from any specified quarry, if it is
required for the works of any department and undertaking of Central or the W P No. 7798/2017 &
WP No. 11608/2017 State Government. Said permission can be granted to the concerned
Departmental Authorities or its authorized contractor on furnishing proof of award of contract as
envisaged in Rule 68(1)(i) of the Rules. Clause (ii) of Rule 68(1) permits the Executive Engineer to
permit the use of murrum and ordinary clay for construction of roads under the Public Sector
Authority, Board or local body.
9. It is argued that "Quarry permit" holder as mentioned in third proviso, defined in Rule 2(xxiii), is
a permission granted to extract and remove any minor mineral for any specified period. Thus, the
quarry permit is different and given for a limited period as against "Trade quarry" as defined in Rule
2(xvi-a) or "'Quarry lease" as defined in Rule 2(xxv) of the Rules. Therefore, proviso is an exception
to prohibition of extraction of minor mineral other than by allotment or auction to a person who is
granted quarry permit. Such quarry permit holder is to deposit advance royalty in terms of Sub-Rule
(3) whereas in respect of contractor engaged in construction work, such contractor has to produce
'No Mining Dues' certificate to ensure that only legally extracted minor minerals are used in
construction activity rather than illegally extracted minerals without payment of royalty. Reliance is
placed upon the Supreme Court judgment reported as 2016 (6) SCC 120 (State of Rajasthan and
another vs. Deep Jyoti Company and another).
10. It is argued that in the judgment in Phaloudi Construction (supra), the expression "contractor
engaged in construction work" has been misinterpreted to mean "Contractor" as defined in Rule
2(xvi-b) of the Rules whereas such proviso is applicable to a contractor who has been granted W P
No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 Trade quarry.
11. The M.P. Minor Mineral Rules, 1996 have been framed under Section 15 of the Mines and
Minerals (Regulation and Development) Act, 1957 (No.67 of 1957) (hereinafter referred to in short
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 5
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
as "the Act"). Section 15 of the Act empowers the State Government to frame Rules to provide for all
or any of the following matters, namely, "(a) the person by whom and the manner in which,
applications for quarry leases, mining leases or other mineral concessions may be made and the fees
to be paid therefor;
xxx xxx xxx"
12. In terms of such statutory provision, the Rules have been framed and the relevant extract of the
Rules is reproduced as under:-
"2. Definitions. - In these rules, unless the context otherwise requires, -
xxx xxx xxx (xvi-a) "Trade quarry" means a quarry for which the right to work is
auctioned:
(xvi-b) "Contractor" means a person who holds a "trade quarry".
xxx xxx xxx (xxiii) "Quarry permit" means a permission granted under these rules to
extract and remove any minor mineral in any specified period;
(xxv) "Quarry Lease" means a mining lease for minor minerals as mentioned in
Section 15 of the Act;"
xxx xxx xxx
4. Prohibition of mining operation without a trade quarry or quarry permit or quarry
lease- (1) No person shall undertake any mining operation in any area except under
and in accordance with the terms and conditions of a trade quarry or quarry lease
granted W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 under these rules:
Provided that nothing in this sub-rule shall affect any mining or quarrying operation
undertaken in any area in accordance with the terms and conditions of permit, a
quarry lease, trade quarry or royalty quarry granted before the commencement of
these rules which is in force at the time of such commencement. (2) No trade quarry
or quarry lease shall be granted other than in accordance with the provisions of these
rules.
xxx xxx xxx
6. Powers to grant quarry lease. - Quarry lease in respect of minerals specified in
Schedule-I and II shall be granted and renewed by the authority mentioned in
column (2) for the minerals specified in column (3) subject to the extent as specified
in the corresponding entry in column (4) thereof of the Table below:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 6
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
xxx xxx xxx
7. Power to grant trade quarry. - (1) The quarries of Minerals, specified in serial
number 5 of Schedule I and serial numbers 1, 3 of Schedule II, situated in
government land, shall be allotted only by auction:
Provided that quarry lease of minerals specified in serial number 1 of Schedule II may
be granted in favour of the Madhya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Limited
(Government of Madhya Pradesh Undertaking).
(2) The period of quarry of minerals specified in serial number 5 of schedule I and
mineral specified in serial number 1 and 3 of schedule II shall be upto the end of fifth
financial year from the financial year, fixed for auction:
xxx xxx xxx
9. Application for quarry lease. - An application for the grant or renewal of a quarry
lease shall be made in Form I in triplicate for the minerals specified in Schedule I and
II. The application shall be affixed with a court fee stamp of the value of five rupees
and shall W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 contain the following particulars
together with documents in support of the statements made therein:-
xxx xxx xxx
18. Disposal of applications for the grant or renewal of quarry lease. - (1) On receipt
of an application for the grant or renewal of a quarry lease, its details shall be first
circulated for display on the notice board of the Zila Panchayat, Janpad Panchayat
and Gram Sabha concerned of the district and collectorate of the district concerned.
(1-A) Addition to in sub-rule (1), the details of quarry lease application, received for any area shall be
published in leading daily Hindi newspaper in the form of notice for general information within
fifteen days from the date of receipt of application.
xxx xxx xxx
36. Auction of quarries. - (1) The quarries of minerals, specified in serial number 5 of Schedule I and
minerals specified in serial number 1 and 3 of Schedule II situated in Government land, shall be
allotted only by auction:
Provided that quarry lease of mineral specified in serial number 1 of Schedule II may
be granted in favour of the Mahdya Pradesh State Mining Corporation Limited
(Government of Madhya Pradesh Undertaking).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 7
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
(2) Notice of auction shall be published in Form XV atleast 15 days before the auction at the notice
board or any conspicuous place by way of fixing the copy of such notice thereon in the office of the
concerned Gram Panchayat, Janpad Panchayat, Zila Panchayat, Development Block, Tahsil and
Collectorate and the village where the quarries are situated:
Provided that auction of the quarry shall also be made by the process of e-auction as
per the conditions prescribed. (3) Every bidder shall execute an agreement in Form
XVI before he/she participates in the auction.
W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017
68. Quarry permit and transport permit for renewal of minor minerals.- (1) (i) The concerning
Officer Incharge, Mining Section shall grant permission for extraction, removal and transportation
of any minor mineral from any specified quarry or land which may be required for the works of any
department and undertaking of the Central Government or State Government. Such permission
shall only be granted to either the concerned departmental authority or its authorized contractor on
furnishing proof of award of contract.
(ii) Notwithstanding anything contained in clause (i) above, in case of roads under construction or
to be constructed under the public sector, authority, board, local body of State Government or
Government department of the State, the permits of murrum and ordinary clay shall be given by the
Executive Engineer or officer equivalent to Executive Engineer of the concerned public sector,
authority, board local body of State Government or Government department of the State to the
authorised contractor and prior to issuing of such permit no objection from Mining, Revenue and
Forest Department shall be obtained by them and copy of the permit issued shall be endorsed to
these departments. The Executive Engineer or officer equivalent to Executive Engineer of concerned
public sector, authority, board, local body of State Government or Government departments of the
State shall obtain Transit Pass Book in advance from office of the Collector and he shall issue the
transit pass to contractors and quantity of the minor mineral excavated shall be informed, in every
three months, to the concerned Collector.] Provided that information of in-principle sanction of
permit shall be given to the applicant. Applicant shall furnish permission from the District level
environment committee, within one month maximum, from the date of receipt of such information:
Provided further that if in-principle sanction is for five hectare or more area, then
applicant from the date of receipt of such information, shall submit environment
permission obtained under notification dated 14.09.2006 of Ministry of Environment
and Forest within period of six months. After completion of all W P No. 7798/2017 &
WP No. 11608/2017 formalities sanctioning authority shall issue sanction order of
quarry permit. Sanctioning authority may permit to enhance the time period, if all
formalities are not completed in prescribed time period, on the basis of satisfactory
reasons:
Provided also that quarry permit holder/contractor engaged in construction work
shall obtain certificate of no mining dues to ensure payment of royalty for the mineral
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 8
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
used in construction work, for the mineral excavated from quarry permit area or used
by purchasing from open market. Certificate of no mining dues shall be issued by
Mining officer/officer in-charge mining section, after verification of documents
submitted by contractor/quarry permit holder engaged in construction work. (2)
Such permission shall not exceed the quantity of minerals required for construction
work and the period shall not exceed the period of construction work.
(3) Such permission shall only be granted on payment in advance of royalty
calculated at the rates specified in Schedule III.
The transit pass in Form IX then shall be issued.
Provided that royalty on ordinary clay and murrum shall not be payable for all construction works
carried out or to be carried out under public sector, authority, board, local body of the State
Government or Government department of the State.
(4) The permit shall be governed by the following conditions:-
(a) The permit holder shall maintain complete and correct account of the mineral
removed and transported from the area.
(b) The permit holder shall allow any officer authorised by the Zila/ Janpad/Gram
Panchayat in respect of the permission given by the Collector/Additional Collector to
the Collector/Additional Collector/Deputy Director/Mining Officer/Assistant Mining
Officer/Mining Inspector, to inspect quarrying operations and verify the accounts.
(c) No sooner the permitted quantity is transported within the time period of
Construction work or earlier, duplicates of all transit pass, such unused transit passes
together with a complete statement of the quantities duly certified by the W P No.
7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 Officer of the concerned department shall be
furnished to the Sanctioning Authority.]"
[emphasis supplied] The third proviso as reproduced above cannot be said to be
satisfactory translation of the authorized notification published in Hindi in Madhya
Pradesh Gazette (Extraordinary) dated 23.03.2013. The Gazette Notification
containing third proviso, in Hindi, read as under:-
"ijUrq ;g Hkh fd mR[kuu vuqKk/kkjh@Bsdsnkj tks fuekZ.k dk;Z esa yxs gks] fuekZ.k
dk;Z esa mi;ksx esa yk, x, [kfut mR[kuu vuqKk {ks= ls fudkys x;s [kfut vFkok [kqys
cktkj ls dz; fd, tkdj mi;ksx esa yk, x, [kfut ds fy, jk;YVh ds Hkqxrku dks lqfuf'pr djus
ds fy, uks ekbfuax M~;wt vfHkizkIr djsaxs- uks ekbfuax M~;wt izek.k&i=] [kfu
vf/kdkjh@izHkkjh vf/kdkjh [kuu 'kk[kk }kjk fuekZ.k dk;Z esa yxs gq,
Bsdsnkj@mR[kuu vuqKk/kkjh }kjk izLrqr fd, x, nLrkostksa dk lR;kiu djus ds Ik'pkr~
tkjh fd;k tk,xk*- "
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 9
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
13. We have heard learned counsel for the parties and find that the "Quarry Permit" mentioned in
Rule 68 third proviso is distinct from a "Trade quarry" granted under Rule 7 read with Rule 36 or a
"Quarry lease" granted under Rule 6 read with Rule 18 of the Rules. The grant of "Quarry permit"
as defined in Rule 2 (xxiii) of the Rules is dealt with only in third proviso of Rule 68
as a permit to extract minor mineral for a specified period of the contract. Such a
specified period of contract is granted on payment of advance royalty in terms of
Sub-Rule (3) of Rule 68 of the Rules as against the royalty in case of quarry lease or a
trade quarry, which is payable after the extraction of mineral in certain situations.
For the purpose of Quarry permit, Rule 68 is the complete Code; specifying the
period, payment of royalty and the conditions attached to it. The "Contractor" has
been defined to mean the person who holds the trade quarry. The "trade quarry" is
the one W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 for which right to work is
auctioned in terms of Rule 7 read with Rule 36 as contained in Chapter VI of the
Rules. The quarry lease is allotted under Rule
6. Thus, the quarry lease is granted by allotment whereas the trade quarry is allotted
by auction whereas the quarry permit is granted for a specified period for the
purposes of specific contract in terms of third proviso to Rule
68. The "Contractor" defined under Rule 2(xvi-b) of the Rules is a person who holds a
trade quarry. The third proviso to Rule 68 is not applicable to a contractor who has
been given a trade quarry but a contractor who is engaged in construction work. The
definitions given in Rule 2 are "unless the context otherwise requires". Since the
expression "Contractor" in third proviso is followed by the expression "engaged in
construction work"
therefore, the contractor in third proviso is not a contractor, who has been given a trade quarry but a
contractor engaged in construction work of the Central or the State Government.
14. In Phaloudi Construction (supra), the Full Bench examining the definition of a "Contractor"
under Clause (xvi-b) of Rule 2 held that the contractors engaged in the work of any Department and
Undertaking to purchase the minor mineral from open market are not covered by the said
definition. The Court held that there is no such contractor engaged in work of the department or
undertaking who purchases from open market, therefore, it does not create a substantive class of the
contractor engaged in works of Government department and Undertaking. We find that the
conclusions drawn by the Full Bench are not in tune with the statutory provision, which deals
separately with trade quarry or quarry lease and W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 quarry
permit. The third proviso deals with quarry permit holder as provided under Rule 4 in contradiction
to allotment of quarry lease and auction of trade quarry. Such definitions have not been examined
properly by the Full Bench in Phaloudi Construction (supra).
15. We are unable to agree with the argument of the learned counsel for the petitioners that the
proviso is enlarging the scope of Rule 68 of the Rules. In fact, Rule 68 itself is proviso to Rules 4, 6
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 10
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
and 7 of the Rules. Rule 6 deals with grant of quarry lease by allotment and trade quarry by auction.
Rule 68 confers power on the State or the Central Government to extract remove or transport any
minor mineral from a specified quarry in terms of sub-clause
(i) of Rule 68(1) of the Rules without trade quarry or quarry lease. In fact, third proviso deals with
two situations i.e. (1) extraction of minor mineral by a quarry permit holder, who is required to pay
royalty in advance and (2) a contractor engaged in construction work who has to obtain certificate of
'No Mining Dues' to ensure payment of royalty for the mineral used in construction work. We find
that the translation of third proviso is shoddy but since the issue being examined is: purchase of
minor minerals by the contractor engaged in construction work, therefore, if the proviso is read by
striking of the words quarry permit, the provision would read as under:-
"Provided also that quarry permit holder/contractor engaged in construction work
shall obtain certificate of no mining dues to ensure payment of royalty for the mineral
used in construction work, for the mineral excavated from quarry permit area or used
by purchasing from open market. Certificate of no mining dues shall be issued by
Mining officer/officer in-charge mining section, after W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No.
11608/2017 verification of documents submitted by contractor/quarry permit holder
engaged in construction work."
16. In fact, the argument raised by the learned counsel for the petitioners that proviso is enlarging
the main substantive provision, is wholly misplaced. Firstly, the proviso is a part of the Rule, which
itself is a proviso to Rule 4, which prohibits that no person shall undertake any mining operation in
any area except by way of trade quarry or a quarry lease. Rule 68 deals with neither a trade quarry
or a quarry lease but it deals with a situation where the Central or the State Government or a
contractor engaged by it are given permission for extraction, removal and transportation of any
minor mineral from any specified quarry. Third proviso is a further exception to Sub-clause (1) of
Rule 68 when a quarry permit holder or a contractor engaged in construction work are permitted to
use the excavated mineral on payment of royalty or on payment of proof of royalty. Therefore, third
proviso is not an enlargement of Sub-Rule (1) of Rule 68 but is an additional exception to Rule 4
containing absolute prohibition.
17. In Dwarka Prasad's case (supra), the Supreme Court held that the golden rule of interpretation is
to read the whole section inclusive of proviso in such manner that they mutually throw light and
result in harmonious construction. Relevant extracts from the said decision read as under-
"18. ............. If the rule of construction is that prima facie a proviso should be limited in its
operation to the subject matter of the enacting clause, the stand we have taken is sound. To expand
the enacting clause, inflated by the proviso, sins against the fundamental rule of construction that a
proviso must be considered W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 in relation to the principal
matter to which it stands as a proviso. A proviso ordinarily is but a proviso, although the golden rule
is to read the whole section, inclusive of the proviso, in such manner that they mutually throw light
on each other and result in a harmonious construction.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 11
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
The proper course is to apply the broad general rule of construction which is that a section or
enactment must be construed as a whole each portion throwing light if need be on the rest.
The true principle undoubtedly is, that the sound interpretation and meaning of the statute, on a
view of the enacting clause, saving clause, and proviso, taken and construed together is to prevail.
(Maxwell on Interpretation of Statutes 10th Edn. P. 162)
19. We now move on to `dominant intent' as the governing rule. In our view, the dominant intent is
found in leading decision of this Court. Indeed, some State Legislatures, accepting the position that
where the dominant intention of the lease is the enjoyment of a cinema, as distinguished from the
building, have deliberately amended the definition by suitable changes (e.g. Kerala and Andhra
Pradesh) while other Legislatures, on the opposite policy decision, have expressly excluded the rent
control enactment (e.g., the later Act)."
18. Shri Vivek Dalal, learned counsel for the petitioners relied upon the judgment reported as
(2000) 2 SCC 451 (Special Officer & Competent Authority, Urban Land Ceilings, Hyderabad and
another vs. P.S. Rao) to contend that the word contractor cannot be given any other meaning than
one as defined under the Rules, is again not tenable. Opening line of the Rule 2 is "Unless the
context otherwise requires". Contractor as defined in Rule 2(xvi-b) is a contractor who is granted
trade quarry. The petitioners are not the one who have been granted trade quarry. In fact, the
petitioners are the W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 contractors engaged in Government
contracts and that the expression contractor in third proviso is clarified by the words "engaged in
construction work". The words "contractor engaged in construction work" have to be read together
and not disjunctively and therefore, the judgment in Special Officers & Competent Authority's case
(supra) is not applicable to the facts of the present case as the context in which contractor has been
defined is materially different than the expression contractor engaged in execution of the contract
appearing in third proviso.
19. In AIR 1985 SC 582 (S. Sundaram Pillai etc. vs. V.R. Pattabiraman) the Court culled down four
different purposes which a proviso serves. The relevant extract from the said judgment is
reproduced as under:-
"42. We need not multiply authorities after authorities on this point because the legal
position seems to be clearly and manifestly well established. To sum up, a proviso
may serve four different purposes:
(1) qualifying or excepting certain provisions from the main enactment;
(2) it may entirely change the very concept of the intendment of the enactment by
insisting on certain mandatory conditions to be fulfilled in order to make the
enactment workable; (3) it may be so embedded in the Act itself as to become an
integral part of the enactment and thus acquire the tenor and colour of the
substantive enactment itself; and (4) it may be used merely to act as an optional
addenda to the enactment with the sole object of explaining the real intendment of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 12
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
the statutory provision."
20. In Maulavi Hussein Haji Abraham (supra), the Supreme Court has W P No. 7798/2017 & WP
No. 11608/2017 held that the Court cannot read anything into a statutory provision which is plain
and unambiguous statute. The language employed in a statute is the determinative factor of
legislative intent. The question is not what may be supposed and has been intended but what has
been said. The relevant paras from the said decision read as under:-
"18. The question is not what may be supposed and has been intended but what has
been said. "Statutes should be construed, not as theorems of Euclid", Judge Learned
Hand said, "but words must be construed with some imagination of the purposes
which lie behind them". (See Lenigh Valley Coal Co. v. Yensavage, 218 FR
547). The view was reiterated in Union of India v. Filip Tiago De Gama of Vedem
Vasco De Gama, (1990) 1 SCC 277 (SCC p. 284, para 16).
19. In Dr. R. Venkatchalam v. Dy. Transport Commissioner, (1977) 2 SC 273, it was
observed that Courts must avoid the danger of a priori determination of the meaning
of a provision based on their own preconceived notions of ideological structure or
scheme into which the provision to be interpreted is somewhat fitted. They are not
entitled to usurp legislative function under the disguise of interpretation.
20. While interpreting a provision the Court only interprets the law and cannot
legislate it. If a provision of law is misused and subjected to the abuse of process of
law, it is for the legislature to amend, modify or repeal it, if deemed necessary. (See
CST v.
Popular Trading Co., (2000) 5 SCC 511. The legislative casus omissus cannot be supplied by judicial
interpretative process.
21. Two principles of construction - one relating to casus omissus and the other in regard to reading
the statute as a whole - appear to be well settled. Under the first principle a casus omissus cannot be
supplied by the Court except in the case of clear necessity and when reason for it is found in the four
corners of the statute itself but at the same time a casus omissus should not be readily W P No.
7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 inferred and for that purpose all the parts of a statute or section
must be construed together and every clause of a section should be construed with reference to the
context and other clauses thereof so that the construction to be put on a particular provision makes
a consistent enactment of the whole statute. This would be more so if literal construction of a
particular clause leads to manifestly absurd or anomalous results which could not have been
intended by the Legislature. "An intention to produce an unreasonable result", said Danackwerts,
L.J. in Artemiou v. Procopiou, [1966] 1 QB 878, "is not to be imputed to a statute if there is some
other construction available". Where to apply words literally would "defeat the obvious intention of
the legislature and produce a wholly unreasonable result", we must "do some violence to the words"
and so achieve that obvious intention and produce a rational construction. (Per Lord Reid in Luke v.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 13
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
IRC, 1963 AC 557 where at p. 577 he also observed: (All ER p. 664 I) "This is not a new problem,
though our standard of drafting is such that it rarely emerges.")."
21. The Supreme Court while examining the Karnataka Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1969 in a
judgment reported as Premium Granites and another vs. State of T.N. and others, (1994) 2 SCC 691,
held that for bringing harmonious construction, reading down a provision in the statute, is an
accepted principle. The Court said as under:-
"55. In various statutes, the provision of relaxation or exemption finds place and it
has been indicated that such provisions of relaxation and exemption have been
noticed and upheld by this Court in some of the statutes. In the MMRD Act itself,
there is such provision for relaxation, being Section 31. Such provision of relaxation
in Karnataka Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 1969 is contained in Rule 66. It has
been rightly contended that where in respect of prohibited categories, the law carves
out restriction or relaxation, the purpose is to take out certain exceptions from the W
P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 prohibited area and keeping certain
categories outside the purview of restrictions imposed under other provisions in the
statute. In such circumstances, it will not be appropriate to hold that the exception
militates with other provisions and hence should not be permitted. In our view, in
interpreting the validity of a provision containing relaxation or exemption of another
provision of a statute, the purpose of such relaxation and the scope and the effect of
the same in the context of the purpose of the statute should be taken into
consideration and if it appears that such exemption or relaxation basically and
intrinsically does not violate the purpose of the statute rendering it unworkable but it
is consistent with the purpose of the statute, there will be no occasion to hold that
such provision of relaxation or exemption is illegal or the same ultra vires other
provisions of the statute. The question of exemption or relaxation ex hypothesi
indicates the existence of some provisions in the statute in respect of which
exemption or relaxation is intended for some obvious purpose.
56. There is no manner of doubt that for bringing harmonious construction, reading
down a provision in the statute, is an accepted principle and such exercise has been
made by this Court in a number of decisions, reference to which has already been
made. But we do not think that in the facts and circumstances of the case, and the
purpose sought to be achieved by Rule 39, such reading down is necessary so as to
limit the application of Rule 39 only for varying some terms and conditions of a lease.
If the State Government has an authority to follow a particular policy in the matter of
quarrying of granite and it can change the provisions in the Mineral Concession Rules
from time to time either by incorporating a particular rule or amending the same
according to its perception of the exigencies, it will not be correct to hold that on each
and every occasion when such perception requires a change in the matter of policy of
quarrying a minor mineral in the State, particular provision of the Mineral
Concession Rules has got to be amended. On the contrary, if a suitable provision
empowering exemption or relaxation of other provisions in the Mineral Concession
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 14
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
Rules is W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 made by confining its exercise in
an objective manner consistent with the MMRD Act and in furtherance of the cause
of mineral development and in public interest, by giving proper guidelines, such
provision containing relaxation or exemption cannot be held to be unjustified or
untenable on the score of violating the other provisions of the Mineral Concession
Rules."
22. In another Judgment reported as Kailash Chandra and another vs. Mukundi Lal and others,
(2002) 2 SCC 678, the Court held that a provision in the statute is not to be read in isolation. It has
to be read with other related provisions in the Act itself, more particularly, when the subject- matter
dealt with in different sections or parts of the same statute is the same or similar in nature. The
relevant extract from the Judgment read as under:-
"11. A provision in the statute is not to be read in isolation. It has to be read with
other related provisions in the Act itself, more particularly, when the subject-matter
dealt with in different sections or parts of the same statute is the same or similar in
nature. As in the case in hand, we find that the matter relates to liability of the tenant
to pay rent to the landlord and the consequences on failure to do so as provided
under Section 20(2)(a) of the Act. Sub-section (4) of Section 20 deals with payment
of arrears of rent etc. at the first hearing of the suit which in that event provides
protection from eviction. Section 30 deals with the two circumstances in which for
one reason or the other, the rent is deposited in the court instead of payment to the
landlord. As noted earlier the effect of deposit of rent is provided under sub-section
(6) of Section 30. Therefore, all the related provisions have to be read together for the
purposes of proper and harmonious construction. It is not only permissible but much
desirable for proper understanding of the contents and meaning of the provisions
under consideration. In R.S. Raghunath v. State of Karnataka (1992) 1 SCC 335 it has
been observed: "No part of a statute and no word of a statute can be construed in W P
No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 isolation. Statutes have to be construed so that
every word has a place and everything is in its place." In M. Pentiah v. Muddala
Veeramallappa AIR 1961 SC 1107, a reference was made to the observations made by
Lord Davey in Canada Sugar Refining Co. v. R. 1898 AC 735, it reads as follows:
"Every clause of a statute should be construed with reference to the context and the
other clauses of the Act, so as, as far as possible, to make a consistent enactment of
the whole statute or series of statutes relating to the subject-matter."
23. In another judgment reported as State of Andhra Pradesh through Inspector General, National
Investigation Agency vs. Mohd. Hussain alias Saleem, (2014) 1 SCC 258, the Court held that it is a
well-settled canon of interpretation that when it comes to construction of a section, it is to be read in
its entirety, and its sub-sections are to be read in relation to each other, and not disjunctively.
Besides, the text of a section has to be read in the context of the statute. The Court held as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 15
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
"19. We cannot ignore that it is a well-settled canon of interpretation that when it
comes to construction of a section, it is to be read in its entirety, and its sub-sections
are to be read in relation to each other, and not disjunctively. Besides, the text of a
section has to be read in the context of the statute. A few sub-sections of a section
cannot be separated from other sub-sections, and read to convey something
altogether different from the theme underlying the entire section. That is how a
section is required to be read purposively and meaningfully."
24. Thus, in view of the principle of statutory interpretation that no word in statute is superfluous
and each word has its meaning, the provisos of the statute have to be read as a whole by giving
harmonious construction to all the provisions of the law so that none of the provision is rendered
redundant. Keeping in view the principle of harmonious construction, the third proviso W P No.
7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 is additional relaxation to Rule 4 of the Rules and 68(1) of the
Rules. Therefore, third proviso cannot be said to be illegal in any manner.
25. Thus, from the plain language of Rule 68; Scheme of Statute and the purpose of Rules that there
should not be any illegal extraction of minerals and all minerals should be royalty paid, therefore,
we find that third proviso is neither illegal nor enlarges the scope of proviso to than that of Rule 68
or any other provision of the Rules.
26. Apart from the plain meaning of the statute, the Supreme Court in the case of Deep Jyoti
Company (supra) was examining somewhat similar situation in Rajasthan whereby short term
permit was being granted to a contractor engaged in the government construction work. The present
is a case of contractor who is purchasing mineral from an open market and using the same in the
Government works. The Supreme Court held that the purpose of the Statute is to ensure that no
mineral is excavated and used without payment of royalty. The proviso ensures that the material is
purchased by the contractor from the market which is a legal mined and the objective is to see that
illegal minor mineral is not purchased by the contractor and used in the construction work which is
awarded by the Government. The Supreme Court held, thus:-
"10. Insofar as the contention that in terms of the circular there is compulsion to
obtain short term permit, in our view, as such there is no such compulsion. It is only
to ensure that no mineral is excavated and used without payment of royalty. The
purpose of short-term permit is to ensure that the material and minerals etc. used by
the contractor in the construction work are royalty paid. It only means W P No.
7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 that such material is purchased by the contractor
from the market which is legally mined and on which due royalty is paid. In other
words, the objective is to see that illegally mined mineral/material is not purchased
by the contractor and used in the construction work which is awarded by the
Government. Not only it is a laudable object, such a stipulation is inserted in order to
check illegal mining which unfortunately has assumed serious proportions in the
recent past. Otherwise, the respondents herein do not stand to loose anything
inasmuch as the moment evidence is produced to the effect that royalty was paid on
the minerals by the leaseholder which was used in the construction, the construction
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 16
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
contractor like the respondents would be refunded the royalty so paid by it in terms
of circular dated 06.10.2008. In terms of clauses (5) and (7) of the said circular, the
contractor has to pay royalty at the rates specified in the circular depending upon the
nature of work and on production of bills showing payment of royalty, the contractor
can get refund of royalty. There is, thus, no financial burden on the respondents of
any nature. The purpose which is sought to be achieved, viz., non- royalty paid
mineral (which would naturally be illegally mined mineral) is not used in the
execution of the Government work and it cannot be treated as unreasonable or
arbitrary. In our view, there is a complete justification for providing such a provision.
11. The minor minerals removed from the quarries, admittedly are the property of the
government and the same cannot be removed and used without payment of royalty.
It is therefore the duty of the government to ensure that only royalty paid minerals
are used in the work and the purpose of issuing such circular was to avoid
pilferage/leakage of revenue because royalty can be very conveniently evaded by the
contractors either by not purchasing the material from the mining leaseholders or
obtaining it from unauthorized excavators. In case, if the contractor purchases the
material from unauthorized person who has not paid royalty, there would be loss to
the public exchequer and the circular was issued to check evasion or loss to the public
exchequer. Such condition W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 cannot be said
to be unreasonable and arbitrary and therefore no prejudice could be said to have
been caused to the contractors."
27. Since minor mineral vests in the State and there is absolute prohibition in extraction of mineral
other than by a quarry lease or a trade quarry or permit quarry, therefore, contractor who is engaged
in construction work is required to prove that such mineral is royalty paid. For such condition, if the
State Government insists on 'No Mining Dues' certificate, the same cannot be said to be illegal as it
is to ensure that all minor minerals used in the construction activity are royalty paid material.
28. An affidavit has been filed on behalf of the State Government that the following documents are
required in terms of third proviso:-
(i) Copy of the transit passes issued for transportation of total quantity of minerals
used in the government construction work.
(ii) Copy of the bills of total quantity of minerals used in the government construction
work.
(iii) Copy of the 'work completion certificate' issued by the Government
department/Government functionary in respect of work, in which minor minerals
have been used.
(iv) Copy of the valid mineral dealer license for use of mineral in government
construction work as per Rule 3(2)(iii) of M.P. Mineral (Prevention of Illegal Mining,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 17
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
Transportation and Storage) Rules 2006.
The affidavit further states that no specific time period for issuing of 'No Mining Dues' certificate is
contemplated in the Rules, but, looking to the nature of work, minimum two months time is
required by the Mining Officer for completion of said exercise for taking appropriate decision/
passing W P No. 7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 appropriate orders.
29. We find that the condition No. (iii) that 'No Mining Dues' certificate shall be issued on
furnishing of copy of work completion certificate is not reasonable. The contractor, who is engaged
in construction work, purchases minor mineral required for construction work. Such running bills
require periodical payments as well. The periodical bills raised quarterly, are required to be verified
so that the contractor is not deprived of his lawful dues, therefore, instead of obtaining 'No Mining
Dues' certificate by the contractor after completion of the work, the Mining Officer shall give 'No
Mining Dues' certificate at least quarterly on the basis of running bills submitted by the contractor
engaged in the construction work.
30. The third proviso to Rule 68(1) of the Rules provides for issuance of 'No Mining Dues' certificate
after verification of the documents submitted by the contractor engaged in construction work. Such
documents although are not the part of the Rules but they have been supplemented in the affidavit
dated 07.10.2017. The affidavit further states that verification of purchase of mineral from other
Districts takes some time, therefore, the State has sought minimum two months time to verify and
issue 'No Mining Dues' certificate. We find that to ensure transparency and the digital infrastructure
available, the State would be well advised to develop a software, which will give on- line information
of extraction of the minerals by the contractors holding trade quarry or quarry lease or quarry
permit. Once that data is available, the Mining Officer of the State can verify how a quantity of
extracted minor mineral has been disposed of by each of the category of permit holders. It W P No.
7798/2017 & WP No. 11608/2017 will create a transparent and also efficient mechanism for issuing
certificate of 'No Mining Dues'.
31. In view of the above, we find that the judgment in Phaloudi Construction (supra) is not correct
enunciation of law and the same is thus, overruled. The contractors who are engaged in construction
work are required to obtain 'No Mining Dues' certificate on production of the documents in terms of
this order. Such 'No Mining Dues' certificate shall be issued expeditiously in a time frame of two
months till such time alternative mechanism is developed for the issuance of online 'No Mining
Dues' certificates.
32. The principle of law having been settled, the writ petitions be posted for hearing as per Roster on
23.10.2017.
(Hemant Gupta) (H.P. Singh) (Rajeev Kumar Dubey)
Chief Justice Judge Judge
(Vijay Kumar Shukla) (Subodh Abhyankar)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 18
M/S Gurmail Singh vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 October, 2017
Judge Judge
S/
SACHIN CHAUDHARY
2017.10.13 17:59:22 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/188609402/ 19
