M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10 December, 2021
M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10
December, 2021
Author: P.T. Asha
Bench: P.T. Asha
C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
RESERVED ON : 27.04.2022
PRONOUNCED ON: 12.05.2022
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE Ms. JUSTICE P.T. ASHA
C.MA.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 and
C.M.P.Nos.5956 & 6108 of 2022
M/s.Sales Service Company
186, Thambu Chetty Street
Chennai-600001.
Rep. by Rajesh Malhotra
Managing Partner ...Appellant/Petitioner
[Common in both the CMAs]
Vs.
The Deputy Director
The Employees's State Insurance Corporation,
Regional Office (Tamil Nadu)
143, Sterling Road
Chennai-600034.
...Respondent/Respondent
[Common in both the CMAs]
1/25
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166330017/ 1
M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10 December, 2021
PRAYER in CMA.No.833 of 2022: Appeal is filed under Section 82
of the Employees' State Insurance Act, to set aside order and decree of
Employees State Insurance Court (Principal Labour, Court, Chennai)
in EIOP.No.59 of 2015 dated 10.12.2021.
PRAYER in CMA.No.843 of 2022: Appeal is filed under Section
82(2) of the Employees' State Insurance Act, to allow the appeal and
set aside order and decree of Employees State Insurance Court
(Principal Labour Court, Chennai) in EIOP No.26 of 2005 dated
23.11.2021.
For Appellant : Mr.Anand Gopalan
for M/s Gopalan & Co.
For Respondent : Mr.S.P.Srinivasan
[Standing Counsel]
2/25
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022
COMMON JUDGMENT
Aggrieved by the dismissal of their petitions in EIOP Nos.59 of 2015 and 26 of 2015 by the
Employees Insurance Court (Principal Labour Court) Chennai, the appellant is before this Court by
filing CMA Nos.833 of 2022 and 843 of 2022. The brief facts are as follows:
2. Facts of the case:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166330017/ 2
M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10 December, 2021
i). The facts are common for both the appeals excepts that there are two orders which
are challenged in the above two appeals. The appellant is an establishment which
according to them did not engage more than 20 workmen at a given point of time
who would qualify to be covered under the provisions of the Employees State
Insurance Act, hereinafter, for the sake of brevity referred to as the ESI Act.. While
so, on 17.03.2004 drawing strength from a Government order extending the
provisions of the ESI Act to Establishments, the respondent/Corporation had issued
a coverage notice treating the petitioner as provisionally covered under the ESI Act.
The appellant has responded by contending that the establishment has never
employed more than 20 coverable employees on their premises. The
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 appellant, to prove
the above had provided the attendance register, salary register etc., for the scrutiny of
the respondent.
ii). The appellant had engaged the services of M/s. Skilled Security Services for
providing security to their premises. The said security service was an independent
establishment under the cover of the ESI Act. The said Skilled Security Services has
deployed four of their workmen as a security guards in the appellant premises. The
Insurance Inspector had inspected the premises of the appellant and he had treated
these four security guards as employees of the Appellant/ Establishment and held
that the provisions of the ESI Act would apply to the Appellant/Establishment.
iii). Thereafter, a C-18 notice dated 16.08.2004 was issued on the basis of assumed
wages for 22 employees at the rate of Rs.3,557/- per month. The appellant had
submitted their objections vide letter dated 17.01.2005. They had contended that
their employees were always less than 20 in number and these security guards cannot
be treated as their employees for the purpose of coverage under the Act. However, the
respondent proceeded to pass orders under Section 45(A) of the ESI Act, rejecting the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 contentions of the
appellant. The appellant was therefore, constrained to file EIOP No.26 of 2005 before
the Employees State Insurance Court (Principal Labour Court) Chennai. By an order
dated 23.11.2021 the ESI Court had dismissed the said petition. Aggrieved by which
the appellant establishment is before this Court in C.M.A.No.843 of 2022. While the
proceedings in EIOP No.26 of 2005 was pending a C-18 notice was issued once again
on the basis that the appellant/establishment had on its rolls 22 coverable employees
and contribution was calculated at the rate of Rs.8,250/- per month. The
representatives of the employer namely, the appellant herein attended the hearing
and brought to the notice of the Authority that the total number of coverable
employees was less than 20.
iv). Despite receiving the said explanation the authority proceeded to pass an order under Section
45(A) of the ESI Act, rejecting the contentions of the appellant that the four security officers cannot
be treated as the employees of the Appellant. Challenging the said order the appellant had filed the
petition before the Employees State Insurance Court ( Principal Labour Court, Chennai) in EIOP
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166330017/ 3
M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10 December, 2021
No.59 of 2015. However, by order dated 10.12.2021 the ESI, Court rejected the contention put
forward by the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 appellant and
dismissed the petition. Aggrieved over which the appellant is before this Court by filing
CMA.No.833 of 2022.
v). The primary ground of challenge in the above appeals to the impugned demand is that the
authority has committed an error in counting the four Security Guards as employees of the
appellant. These four employees are assessed under the ESI Act in their establishment namely, M/s.
Skilled Security Services. The contention of the appellant is that they have only 18 coverable
employees and therefore the provisions of the ESI Act would not be attracted. The appellant would
also state that the judgment reported in (2010) 11 SCC page 553 - Saraswath Films Vs. Regional
Director, Employees State Insurance Corporation, Trichur which was relied upon by the
Respondent/Corporation would not apply to the facts of the present case, since the question as to
whether the contract workmen who are already covered under the scheme under their immediate
employer would still be reckoned for the purpose of coverage of principal employer was not the
matter in issue in the said case.
3. From a perusal of the two appeals the following substantial https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 questions of law which arise for the consideration of the Court were
framed:
i) Whether the four security guards could be treated as employees as defined under
Section 2(9)(iii) of the ESI Act, in order to appreciate the establishment within the
coverage of the ESI Act.
ii) Whether the four security guards whose contributions to the ESI is already been
done through their immediate employer namely, skill security services. They could be
treated as employees of the appellant for the sake of contribution.
4. Submissions:
i). Mr. Anand Gopalan appearing on behalf of the appellant in both the appeals would
submit that Section 38 of the ESI Act proposes that all the employees who are
coverable in a factory/establishment should be insured in the manner provided by
the ESI Act. Section 39 talks about all the contributions payable under the ESI Act.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022
ii). He would draw the Court's attention to the judgments of this Court reported in 2011 SCC Online
Mad 1350 - The Madurai District Central Cooperative bank Ltd, Vs. Employees' Provident Fund
Organisation and Another, where the Court has observed that the employees of a contractor by no
stretch of imagination can be treated as employees of the principal employer. However, the Court
held that the liabilities of an unregistered contractor falls on a petitioner therein who was the
principal employer. The issue in the said writ petition related to the payments of contributions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166330017/ 4
M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10 December, 2021
iii). He would also rely upon the judgment reported in 2015 SCC Online Mad 2944 - M/s.Brakes
India Ltd. Vs. The Employees Provident Fund Organisation. The arguments advanced therein, on
the side of the principal employer was that the contractor has been allotted a separate PF code and
therefore, the principal employer would not be liable to pay the contribution. The learned Judge
relying upon the judgment in The Madurai District Central Cooperative bank Ltd cited supra held
that applying the ratio of this Judgment the contractor had to be treated as an independent
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 employer and therefore, the
recovery proceedings initiated against the petitioner company therein was not maintainable. The
learned counsel would submit that the very same analogy has to be applied to the case on hand and
the four security guards should therefore, be held to be the employees of the Security Service and
cannot be considered for coverage of the ESI Act to the appellant/establishment.
iv). Per contra, Mr.S.P.Srinivasan appearing on behalf of the corporation would contend that the
security guards were taken into consideration for the sake of bringing the appellant/establishment
within the ambit of the ESI Act and not for collecting contributions. He would argue that the very
object of the Act is to ensure coverage for all the workmen who are coverable and therefore, this
intent is sought to be achieved by considering the definition of the word employee as provided under
Section 2(9) of the ESI Act. He would rely upon the judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court
reported in (1998) 8 SCC page 111 – Employees’ State Insurance Corporation Vs. M M.Suri &
Associates (P) Ltd., wherein the Hon’ble Supreme Court relying upon an earlier judgment reported
in ESI Corporation Vs. Apex Engineering Pvt. Ltd. reported in 1997 (77) F.L.R.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 878 = (1998) 1 SCC 86 had
extracted the characteristics laid down to consider a person to be an employee qua the service
condition. The Hon’ble Supreme Court had set out six conditions/characteristics. Mr.S.P.Srinivasan
would rely upon characteristic no.4 therein to contend that the four security guards have to
definitely be treated only as employees of the appellant/establishment. He would also rely upon the
judgment reported in (2010) 11 SCC page 553 - Saraswath Films Vs. Regional Director, Employees’
State Insurance Corporation, Trichur. In the above case before the Hon’ble Supreme Court, the issue
was whether the two security guards working in the premises could be considered as the employee
of the Principal employer therein. The Hon’ble Supreme court after referring to the Act and the
earlier judgments in this regard had held that the work of the security guards was directly and
intrinsically a part of the work of the establishment and therefore, they had to be considered as the
employees of the Principal employer therein. He would submit that the ratio laid down in the above
judgment would squarely apply to the facts on hand and therefore, the order passed by the learned
Principal Labour Court, Chennai does not require to be set aside.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022
v). Heard the learned counsel on either side.
5. Discussion:
i). The Employee State Insurance Act was first enacted in the year 1948 and the
object of the Act was to provide a scheme of health Insurance for Industrial Workers.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166330017/ 5
M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10 December, 2021
The scheme envisaged was one of compulsory State Insurance providing for certain
benefits in the event of sickness, maternity and employment injury to workmen
employed in or in connection with the work in the factories other than seasonal
factories. The war time had brought about the necessity for such scheme. The Act has
been amended over six times thereafter and the last of the amendments was in the
year 2010 vide the amendment Act 18 of 2010. If the statement and objects of this Act
with its various amendments are taken into consideration, it can be seen that the
underlying object was to bring within the umbrella of the Act more number of
employees. The object is evident from a reading of Section 38 of the ESI Act which
reads as follows:
" Section 38 - All employees to be insured - Subject to the provisions of this Act, all
employees in factories or https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of
2022 establishments to which this Act applies shall be insured in the manner
provided by this Act.
ii). This is further reiterated while reading Section 1(6) of the Act.
Section 1(6) states that the Act would apply notwithstanding that with the reduction in number of
persons employed and employees who are retained fall below the limit specified in the Act or where
the manufacturing process ceases to be carried on. Therefore, it is evident that the legislature had
envisaged that once the establishment gets covered it will continue to be covered even if, the number
of employees fall short of the statutory number or where the manufacturing process has also ceased.
Therefore, a reading of these provisions and the objectives would make it clear that the aim of the
legislature is to bring within the cover of the Act more number of employees and also to continue to
provide the cover to the employees who have once been covered. It is for this reason that the earlier
amendments had increased the wage limit for employees to be covered under the ESI Act so as to
enable a larger section of employees to avail the benefit of the Act. Section 2(9) defines an
employees as follows:
Section - 2(9) “ employee ” means any person https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 employed for wages in or in connection with the work
of a factory or establishment to which this Act applies and —
(i) who is directly employed by the principal employer on any work of, or incidental
or preliminary to or connected with the work of, the factory or establishment,
whether such work is done by the employee in the factory or establishment or
elsewhere ; or
(ii) who is employed by or through an immediate employer on the premises of the
factory or establishment or under the supervision of the principal employer or his
agent on work which is ordinarily part of the work of the factory or establishment or
which is preliminary to the work carried on in or incidental to the purpose of the
factory or establishment ; or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166330017/ 6
M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10 December, 2021
(iii) whose services are temporarily lent or let on hire to the principal employer by the
person with whom the person whose services are so lent or let on hire has entered
into a contract of service ;
[and includes any person employed for wages on any work connected with the administration of the
factory or establishment or any part, department or branch thereof
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 or with the purchase of raw
materials for, or the distribution or sale of the products of, the factory or establishment ; [or any
person engaged as an apprentice, not being an apprentice engaged under the Apprentices Act, 1961
(52 of 1961), [and includes such person engaged as apprentice whose training period is extended to
any length of time] but does not include] — ]
(a) any member of 3 [the Indian] naval, military or air forces ; or [(b) any person so employed whose
wages (excluding remuneration for overtime work) exceed 5 [such wages as may be prescribed by
the Central Government] :
Provided that an employee whose wages (excluding remuneration for overtime work)
exceed [such wages as may be prescribed by the Central Government] at any time
after (and not before) the beginning of the contribution period, shall continue to be
an employee until the end of that period;]
iii). If the Section is analysed the following categories of employees are sought to be
covered by the Act:-
a) Those directly employed by the principal employer.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022
b) Employed by or through the immediate employer under the supervision of the principal employer
or his agent.
c) Employed through a contract of service which is temporarily lent or let on hire to the principal
employer.
iv). Therefore, from the facts that have been culled out the four security guards will come within the
3rd category. The issue for consideration is whether the four security guards can be counted as
employees of the appellant/establishment for the purpose of extending the coverage of the Act and
whether the appellant/establishment can be asked to pay contribution for the four security guards
along with the employees of the appellant/establishment by extending the coverage of the Act
although they are already covered by the ESI Act as employees of M/s. Skilled Security Services.
v). The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the Judgment reported in Saraswath Films Vs. Regional Director,
Employees’ State Insurance Corporation, Trichur – (2010) 11 SCC 553, which arose with reference to
the dispute as to whether the two security guards could be considered as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166330017/ 7
M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 employees of the appellant had
answered in favour of the respondent/corporation. The Hon’ble Supreme Court had extracted the
core question for consideration in para nos.4 and 5 of the judgment as follows:
“4. The core question that arises for consideration is whether the establishment of the
appellant comes within the purview of the Act. The answer to the question in the
context of the case of the parties, depends on determination of the question whether
the security guards are employees within the meaning of Section 2(9) of the Act.
Section 2(9) of the Act reads as follows:
“2.(9). “ employee ” means any person employed for wages in or in connection with
the work of a factory or establishment to which this Act applies and —
(i) who is directly employed by the principal employer on any work of, or incidental
or preliminary to or connected with the work of, the factory or establishment,
whether such work is done by the employee in the factory or establishment or
elsewhere ; or https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022
(ii) who is employed by or through an immediate employer on the premises of the
factory or establishment or under the supervision of the principal employer or his
agent on work which is ordinarily part of the work of the factory or establishment or
which is preliminary to the work carried on in or incidental to the purpose of the
factory or establishment ; or
(iii) whose services are temporarily lent or let on hire to the principal employer by the
person with whom the person whose services are so lent or let on hire has entered
into a contract of service ;
“5. In this connection the definitions of the expressions “immediate employer” under Section 2(13)
and “principal employer” under Section 2(17) are also relevant. They are quoted below:
“2.(13). “ immediate employer ” in relation to employees employed by or through
him, means a person who has undertaken the execution on the premises of a
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 factory or an
establishment to which this Act applies or under the supervision of the principal
employer or his agent, of the whole or any part of any work which is ordinarily part of
the work of the factory or establishment of the principal employer or is preliminary to
the work carried on in, or incidental to the purpose of, any such factory or
establishment and includes a person by whom the services of an employee who has
entered into a contract of service with him are temporarily lent or let on hire to the
principal employer and includes a contractor.
(15) 'occupier' of the factory shall have the meaning assigned to it in the Factories Act,
1948 (63 of 1948) (17) “ principal employer ” means —
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166330017/ 8
M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10 December, 2021
(i) in a factory, the owner or occupier of the factory and includes the managing agent
of such owner or occupier, the legal representative of a deceased owner or occupier,
and where a person has been named as the manager of the factory under the
Factories Act, 1948 (63 of 1948), the person so named ;
(ii) in any establishment under the control of any department of any Government in
India, the authority https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022
appointed by such Government in this behalf or where no authority is so appointed,
the head of the department ;
(iii) in any other establishment, any person responsible for the supervision and
control of the establishment ;
vi). The learned Judges thereafter went on to hold that the provisions in Section 2(9)
is wide and of a comprehensive nature where persons who are lent temporarily are
also considered to be an employee of the establishment particularly when the work
carried out is incidental to the process of the establishment. The learned Judges
ultimately held that the security guards would come within the purview of the
expression employee of the establishment as defined under Section 2(9) of the ESI
Act.
6. Conclusion
i) Bearing in mind the object of the Act and the ratio laid down in the judgments supra it naturally
follows that the four security guards have to be treated as the employees of the
Appellant/Establishment. Once they are so treated, the number of coverable employees of the
appellant/establishment https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 would
stand increased from 18 to 22 thereby making the ESI Act applicable to the
Appellant/Establishment. We cannot loose sight of the fact that an unscrupulous employer who
wants to avoid coming within the net of the ESI Act would take on their rolls employees who would
be coverable under the ESI Act just short of the mandatory number. They would then engage the
services of an contractor to do the other works that are intrinsically related to the main/core work of
the establishment. By doing so the employees who fall within the cover of the ESI Act of such
establishments are deprived of the benefit. It is to overcome such devious methods that Section 2(a)
(iii) defines an employee to include contract workmen. Therefore, considering the fact that the four
security guards fall within the definition of the word 'employee' they have to be treated as the
employees of the Appellant/Establishment. Consequently, the 1st question of law has to be answered
in favour of the respondent.
ii) The next question that falls for consideration is whether the Appellant/establishment is duty
bound to pay the contribution of these contract workmen particularly when their immediate
employer is already covered under the Act and is paying the contribution. The counsel for the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 appellant had produced a circular
of the Employees State Insurance bearing No.P-12-(11)-11/83/05-Rev.II dated October, 2007. This
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166330017/ 9
M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10 December, 2021
circular has been issued pursuant to the representations received from different Associations of
Employees, Expert Bodies of Employees and Individual Employees from various regions expressing
the difficulties faced by them in covering the employees engaged by them through immediate
employers/contractors on jobs outsourced. The respondent/corporation taking into consideration
the judgments of the High Court of Madras, Madhya Pradesh and Karnataka had deputed personnel
to undertake a field study and after perusing the data collected by them had issued guidelines to
handle different categories of cases. The 1st of such category is the one that is relevant to the case on
hand which reads as follows:
"2(A). The Jobwork done inside the
factory/establishment premises through
Contractors/immediate Employers having independent Code Nos:
Under this category, the contribution is not to be claimed from the Principal
Employer in respect of the employees of the Job Contractors/Immediate Employers
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 who are
independently covered. In this category the supervision is implied. However, at the
time of inspection, the Insurance Inspector should verify the records of the Principal
Employer in respect of Contractors/Immediate Employers required to be maintained
by the Principal Employers, according to the provisions of Section 41(1A) and
Regulation 32 (1) (a). The Revenue Branch Officers should keep this aspect in view
while passing 45-A order." This clearly provides that where an employee of an
Immediate Employer is independently covered, contribution cannot be claimed from
the Principal Employer.
iii) Therefore, taking into consideration the above circular it is clear that the
appellant cannot be called upon to pay the contribution for the four security guards
who are already covered under their immediate employer M/s. Skilled Security
Services. The finding of the Principal Labour Court, Chennai is therefore erroneous in
this regard.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022
iv) Therefore, on a conspectus of the above discussion it is held that:-
a) The four security guards shall be treated as employees of the
appellant/corporation for the purpose of bringing the appellant/establishment under
the cover of the ESI Act.
b) The appellant/establishment cannot be made to pay the contribution for the four
security guards who are already assessed under their immediate employer M/s.
Skilled Security Services. Therefore, the Substantial Question of Law No.1 is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166330017/ 10
M/S.Sales Service Company vs The Deputy Director on 10 December, 2021
answered against the appellant and the Substantial Question of Law No.2 is answered
in favour of the appellant.
v) The above Civil Miscellaneous Appeals therefore stands partly allowed. No costs.
Consequently, the connected Miscellaneous Petitions are closed.
12.05.2022 Index : Yes/No Internet : Yes/No shr https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833
& 843 of 2022 To
1.Employees State Insurance Court (Principal Labour, Court) Chennai.
2.The Deputy Director The Employees's State Insurance Corporation, Regional Office (Tamil Nadu)
143, Sterling Road Chennai-600034.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C.M.A.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 P.T. ASHA, J, shr Pre-Delivery
Judgment in C.MA.Nos.833 & 843 of 2022 and C.M.P.Nos.5956 & 6108 of 2022 12.05.2022
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166330017/ 11
