M/S Sb Enterprises vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 31 January, 2025
M/S Sb Enterprises vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 31 January,
2025
Author: Vipin Chandra Dixit
Bench: Vipin Chandra Dixit
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:14544-DB
Court No. - 40
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 1249 of 2025
Petitioner :- M/S Sb Enterprises
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Anand Kumar Pandey
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Chetan Chatterjee
Hon'ble Shekhar B. Saraf,J.
Hon'ble Vipin Chandra Dixit,J.
1. Heard Sri Anand Kumar Pandey, learned counsel for the petitioner and Sri Chetan Chaterjee,
learned counsel for the Electricity Corporation.
2. Learned counsel for the petitioner is permitted to implead the Director (Finance) Electricity
Corporation as respondent no.5 in the array of the parties during course of the day.
3. The petitioner claims to have performed certain works in Purvanchal Electricity Distribution
Corporation, Varanasi. It is asserted that a sum of Rs.1,70,10,756/- is due and payable but such
amount has not been disbursed to the petitioner without any justification.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175824991/ 1
M/S Sb Enterprises vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 31 January, 2025
4. Learned counsel for the Electricity Corporation submits that such claim of the petitioner can be
accorded consideration by the Director (Finance) Electricity Corporation - respondent no.5.
5. In the circumstances, we permit the petitioner to approach the newly impleaded respondent no.5
by furnishing all documents in support of his claim for release of the admitted contractual dues. The
petitioner's claim would be accorded consideration in terms of contract by passing necessary orders
within a period of two months from the date of presentation of a certified copy of this order before
it. The amount which is found due and payable shall be released within further period of six weeks.
The claim of the petitioner with regard to interest in terms of the applicable contract and statute
shall also be accorded consideration within the same period.
6. However, we may clarify that we have not adjudicated upon claim of the petitioner on merits and
all issues relating to amount being due and payable is left open for examination at the level of the
competent authority, at the first instance.
7. Accordingly, the instant writ petition is disposed of.
Order Date :- 31.1.2025 P.P. (Vipin Chandra Dixit, J.) (Shekhar B. Saraf, J.)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175824991/ 2
