M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Rahul Bharti
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
...
OWP No. 137/2011
Reserved on: 31.08.2023
Pronounced on:04.10.2023
M/S A. M. Industries,
A proprietorship concern, Phase-II, SIDCO
Industrial Complex, Bari Brahmana, Jammu,
Through Proprietor Smt. Rashmi Singalb aged 40 years
W/O Sh. Rakesh Singal R/O
183/1 Trikuta Nagar, Jammu.
......Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Manik Dutt, Advocate.
Vs.
1. Union of India, through
Ministry of Finance, Government of India,
New Delhi.
2. Assistant Commissioner,
Central Excise Division, Jammu,
OB-32, Rail Head Complex,
Jammu.
.....Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Jagpaul Singh, Advocate.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE RAHUL BHARTI, JUDGE.
JUDGEMENT
Sanjeev Kumar-J 1 Though a short but an interesting question of seminal importance arises in this
writ petition for determination:-
"Whether an unspent amount lying in the current account (PLA) of an assessee is
merely an advance amount for payment of excise duty or is actually or shall be
deemed to be „Excise Duty(cid:129) for the purpose of claim of refund and interest under
Section 11B and 11BB of the Central Excise Act 1944 [ „the Act(cid:129)]."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 1
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
2 Before we embark upon the discussion, we deem it appropriate to notice few facts as are germane
to the decision of the question and disposal of the writ petition.
Factual matrix:
3 The petitioner is a registered concern under the Act vide Registration No. AGLPS0219axm001.
The petitioner is engaged in manufacture of coffee and tea premixes and was paying the central
excise duty. However, the petitioner was availing exemption by way of refund of excise duty in terms
of Notification No. 56/2002-CE dated 14.11.2002 as amended.
4 The said exemption notification had laid down a mechanism for availing the benefit of exemption
by providing that the manufacturer shall first deposit the excise duty from available CENVAT Credit
and in case thise remains some balance to be paid, the same shall be paid by debit from Current
Account (PLA). After payment of duty as aforesaid, the manufacturer/assessee shall file refund
claim and the same would be paid to it through cheque.
5 Indisputably, the excise duty on the subject goods manufactured by the petitioner came to be
withdrawn with effect from 01-03-2008 and on this date, an amount of Rs. 75,01,664/- was lying in
Current Account (PLA) of the assessee-petitioner.
6 Since no amount was anymore required to be kept in the Current Account due to withdrawal of
excise duty of the goods manufactured by the petitioner, as such the petitioner on 04.04.2008 had
filed an application for refund of unspent amount lying in Current Account. 7 As is the stand of the
revenue, the payment of unspent amount in PLA was subject to determination of previous self credit
refund claims of the petitioner which were running in dispute. It was only on 06-05- 2010, the
jurisdictional Commissioner determined the disputed self credit refund claims and as a result
refund of unspent amount in PLA was sanctioned in favour of the petitioner vide order dated 27-07-
2010.
8 Since, admittedly, the refund was sanctioned beyond period of three months from the date of
application, as such, the petitioner lodged a claim for payment of interest envisaged under Section
11BB of the Act.
9 The Assistant Commissioner Central Excise Division Jammu i.e. Respondent No.2, rejected the
claim on the ground that the refund contemplated under Notification No. 56/2002-CE is not on
account of excess payment of duty by the manufacturer but designed only to give effect to
exemption. Relying on a decision of CESTAT Mumbai in the case of M/S Navdeep Packaging
Industries vs. Commissioner of Central Excise, Ahmadabad-II, 2007 (210) E.L.T.417 (Tri. Mumbai),
it was held by the respondent No.2 that unspent amount lying in Account Current (PLA) is not
„duty(cid:129) and refund thiseof is covered by Rule 9(1A) and 173G (1A) of the Central Excise Rules, 1944
[„the Rules(cid:129)], and that the provisions of Section 11B and Section 11BB are not applicable.
10 Feeling dissatisfied and aggrieved, the petitioner directly approached this Court invoking its
extraordinary writ jurisdiction vested by Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 2
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
11 The respondents have taken the plea of an alternative remedy under the Act. We, however, are
inclined to reject the plea of an exhaustion of alternate remedy for the reason that there are already
judgments of various Tribunals in support of the view taken by respondent No.2 and the appeal, if
any, filed by the petitioner is not likely to entail a different view on the subject. Having regard to the
question raised and availability of view of the CESTAT, we have decided to entertain this petition,
the availability of alternate remedy notwithstanding. 12 Heard learned counsel for the parties and
perused the material on record.
Submissions of learned counsel for the petitioner: 13 Short and crisp is the argument of learned
counsel for the petitioner that unspent amount lying in PLA is in the nature of „advance duty(cid:129) paid,
which, of course, is liable to be appropriated towards actual duty payable at the time of removal of
exciseable goods. He, thisefore, urges that unspent amount in PLA is nothing but excise duty paid in
advance and, thus, its refund would be governed by Sections 11B and 11BB of the Act.
14 Attention of this Court is also invited to the proviso to Section 11B (2) to steer clear the stand of
the respondents. Learned counsel urges us to take a holistic view of the matter and hold the
petitioner entitled to interest under Section 11BB by declaring „unspent amount in PLA(cid:129) as duty of
excise for the purpose of refund under Section 11B of the Act. Submissions on behalf of the
respondents:
15 Per contra, Mr. Jagpaul Singh, the learned counsel for the Revenue argues that the refund
envisaged under Notification No. 56/2002-CE is not on account of any excess payment of duty by
the manufacturer/assessee but is basically designed to operationalise exemption. He submits that
unspent amount lying in Current Account (PLA) is an amount belonging to the manufacturer, kept
in PLA only to pay the excise duty as and when due without any hassles. He vehemently urges this
Court to draw a distinction between „the amount for payment of duty(cid:129) and „the amount of duty
actually paid(cid:129) on the removal of excise goods from manufacturing unit. He submits that such
amount lying in the PLA belongs to the manufacturer whise as „duty of excise(cid:129) goes to the coffers of
the Excise Department. He concludes his arguments by reiterating his submission that refund claim
in respect of unspent amount in PLA was not covered under Section 11B and Section 11BB of the Act
and, thisefore, respondent No.2 was perfectly justified to reject the claim of the petitioner for
interest under Section 11BB of the Act. He places reliance on the following judgments:-
(i) 2007 (210) E.L.T 417 M/S Navdeep Packaging Industries v.
Commissioner of Central Excise, Ahmadabad-II, (CESTAT- Mumbai).
(ii) Excise Appeal No. 60112/2022M/S Reckitt Benckiser Healthcare India v. Commissioner of
Central Goods & Excise (CESTAT-Chandigarh)
(iii) Excise Appeal No. 88127/2019 M/S Hariwansh Packing Products v. Commissioner of CGST &
Central Excise (CESTAT-Mumbai).
(iv) 2016(340) E.L.T.79 (P&H) Shreewood Products Pvt. Ltd. V. Commissioner of Central Excise.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 3
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
Discussion and analysis:
16 Having given our thoughtful consideration, we deem it necessary to set out relevant provision of
the Act (now repealed) to understand the scheme of levy, payment and refund of excise duty and
also the significance and purpose of putting money in advance in Account Current to meet future
demands of excise duty.
17 Levy and collection of excise duty is dealt with in Chapter II of the Act, Section 3 whiseof
(relevant extract only) reads thus:-
"3. Duty specified in the First Schedule to be levied--
(1) Thise shall be levied and collected in such manner as may be prescribed:
(a) duty of excise to be called the Central Value Added Tax (CENVAT) on all excisable
goods (excluding goods produced or manufactured in special economic zones) which
are produced or manufactured in India as, and at the rates, set forth in the First
Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986);
(b) a special duty of excise, in addition to the duty of excise specified in clause (a)
above, on excisable goods [excluding goods produced or manufactured in specific
economic zones] specified in the Second Schedule to the Central Excise Tariff Act,
1985 (5 of 1986) which are produced or manufactured in India, as, and at the rates,
set forth in the said Second Schedule;
Provided that the duty of excise which shall be levied and collected on any excisable goods which are
produced or manufactured by a hundred per cent export oriented undertaking and brought to any
othis place in India, shall be an amount equal to the aggregate of the duties of customs which would
be leviable under the Customs Act, 1962 (52 of 1962) or any othis law for the time being in force, on
like goods produced or manufactured outside India if imported into India, and whise the said duties
of customs are chargeable by reference to their value, the value of such excisable goods shall,
notwithstanding anything contained in any othis provision of this Act, be determined in accordance
with the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 and the Customs Tariff Act, 1975 (51 of 1975).
...................................................................". 18 As is evident from bare reading of Section 3, in
particular sub-section 1 thiseof, duty of excise is leviable on all excisable goods which are produced
or manufactured in India in the manner prescribed and at the rates set forth in Fourth Schedule. It
is, thus, crystal clear that event of levy and collection of duty of excise is the production and
manufacture of the excisable goods though, as prescribed, the duty is actually paid by the
manufacturer at the stage of removal of excisable goods from the manufacturing unit or production
house as the case may be. Relevant extract of Rule 9 of the Central Excise Rules, 1944, [ „the Rules
of 1944(cid:129) for short] substantiates this position and is thus reproduced hiseunder:-
"9. Time and manner of payment of duty :-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 4
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
(1) No excisable goods shall be removed from any place whise they are produced,
cured or manufactured or any premises appurtenant thiseto, which may be specified
by the Commissioner in this behalf, whethis for consumption, export or manufacture
of any othis commodity in or outside such place, until the excise duty leviable thiseon
is determined and indicated on each application in the proper form or on each gate
pass, as the case may be, presented to the proper officer at such place and in such
manner as is prescribed in these rules or as the Commissioner may require, and
except on presentation of an application in the proper form and on obtaining the
permission of the proper officer in the form;
Provided that such goods may be deposited without payment of duty in a store-room or othis place
of storage approved by the Commissioner under rule 27 or rule 47 or in a warehouse appointed or
registered under rule 140 or may be exported under bond as provided in rule 13:
Provided furthis that the molasses produced in a khandsari sugar factory may be
removed without payment of duty leviable thiseon and the duty of excise leviable on
such molasses shall be paid by the procurer, as if such molasses has been
manufactured by such procurer, on the date of receipt of such molasses in his factory:
Provided also that the goods falling under Chapter 62 of the First Schedule to Central
Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) produced or manufactured by a job worker may be
removed without payment of duty leviable thiseon and the duty of excise leviable on
such goods shall be paid by the person referred to in rule 7AA, as if such goods have
been produced or manufactured by him, on the date of removal of such goods from
h i s p r e m i s e s r e g i s t e r e d u n d e r r u l e 1 7 4 :
......................................................................................."
19 From careful reading and understanding of the Rule, it clearly comes out that
excise duty must be paid by manufacturer latest when he removes excisable goods
from manufacturing or production Unit. It is, in this context, we need to examine and
analyze Rule 173-F and 173-G, which for facility of reference is set out below:-.
"173-F. Assessee to determine the duty due on the goods and to remove them on
payment thiseof :-
Whise the assessee has complied with the provisions of rules 173B,173D, and, whise
applicable, 173C, he shall himself assess the duty due on the excisable goods intended
to be removed and shall not, except as othiswise expressly provided in these rules,
remove such goods unless he has paid the duty so determined.
173-G. Procedure to be followed by the assessee-
(1) Every assessee shall keep an account current with the Collector separately for each
excisable goods falling under different [Chapters of the Schedule to the Central
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 5
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
Excise Tariff Act, 1985 (5 of 1986) in such form and manner as the Collector may
require, of the duties payable on the excisable goods and in particular such account (
and also the account in Form R.G.23, if the assessee is availing of the procedure
prescribed in rule 173-K) shall be maintained in triplicate by using indelible pencil
and double-sided carbon, and the assessee shall periodically make credit in such
account current, by cash payment into the treasury, [so as to keep the balance, in
such account current] sufficient to cover the duty due on duty determined by him for
each consignment by debit to such account-current before removal of the goods:
Provided that-
(i) the duty due on the goods consumed within the factory in a continuous process
may be so paid at the end of the factory day, except that in the case of cellulosic spun
yarn and cotton yarn in respect of which duty is payable in accordance with
provisions of Sub-rule (1) of rule 49A, the duty due may be paid by the manufacturer
in accordance with the provisions of the said rule;
(ii) the proper officer may allow an assessee, who removed more than 3,000
consignments in the previous calendar year, to make a consolidated debit in the
account-current at the end of the day towards payment of the duty;
(iia) the proper officer may allow an assessee who manufactures one or more of the
declared excisable goods, irrespective of the number of consignments removed by
him in the previous calendar year, to make consolidated debit in the account-current
at the end of the day towards payment of duty;
(iii) in respect of clearances of any excisable goods as samples in such small
quantities as the Commissioner may approve in respect of any commodity and clearly
marked as such on the invoice, the assessee may pay the duty on all such samples
cleared during a month by a single debit to his account-current on the last working
day of the month;
(iv) the Collector may, in circumstances of an exceptional nature, by an order in
writing, require an assessee or class of assessees manufacturing or warehousing
goods to which provisions of Chapter VIIA have been made applicable, to determine
the duty and debit the account-current in such manner as may be specified by him in
such order.
.....................................................................................................
....................................................................................................."
20. As is manifestly clear from Rule 173F, an assessee is supposed to self determine his/its liability
for the excise duty due on the excisable goods manufactured or produced by his/it and shall remove
such goods only after paying the duty so determined. In short, the assessee is obliged to pay self
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 6
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
determined duty of excise payable on the excisable goods manufactured by his/it and the stage of
payment of such duty is the removal of such goods from the manufacturing premises.
21. So far as Rule 173-G is concerned, suffice it to point out that it is mandatory of each assessee to
keep current account also called PLA (Personal Ledger Account) with Collector of Excise in respect
of each excisable good in which an assessee shall periodically make credit by cash payment into the
treasury so as to keep balance sufficient to cover the duty due on the goods intended to be removed.
22 Each time, an assessee removes a consignment of excisable goods, he shall pay the duty as self
determined by his in terms of Rule 173-F by debit to such current account (PLA). The amount lying
in the current account is meant to be utilized only for payment of duty so as to enable the assessee to
remove excisable goods in a hassle free process. He may not be required to deposit excise duty in
bank to get a challan each time he has to remove a consignment of excisable goods.
23 As we find further from clause (1-A) of the Rule, the amount lying in PLA is subject to the control
and under the dominion of Collector and shall be released in favour of the assessee only on an
application moved by him and after recording reasons for permitting withdrawal requested by the
assessee. Such is the nature of the current account where the amount lying belongs to the assessee
but control and dominion is exercised by the Collector.
24 Viewed thus, it becomes abundantly clear that amount credited into the current account (PLA) by
an assessee is, in a way, prospective excise duty to be utilized by the assessee at the stage of removal
of excisable goods from his manufacturing unit from time to time.
25 Contextually, when we appreciate the controversy in the light of the discussion made above, it
becomes clear to us that the unspent amount lying in the current account (PLA) of the assessee is
„duty of excise(cid:129) for the purpose of Section 11B and Section 11BB of the Act. To appreciate the issue
better, we reproduce Section 11B and Section 11BB hiseunder:-
"11B. Claim for refund of 2 [duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty.--
(1) Any person claiming refund of any [duty of excise and interest, if any, paid on
such duty] may make an application for refund of such [duty and interest, if any, paid
on such duty] to the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or Deputy
Commissioner of Central Excise before the expiry of [one year] from the relevant date
in such form and manner as may be prescribed and the application shall be
accompanied by such documentary or othis evidence (including the documents
referred to in Section 12-A) as the applicant may furnish to establish that the amount
of duty of excise and interest, if any, paid on such duty in relation to which such
refund is claimed was collected from, or paid by, him and the incidence of such [duty
and interest, if any, paid on such duty] had not been passed on by him to any othis
person:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 7
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
Provided that whise an application for refund has been made before the
commencement of the Central Excises and Customs Laws (Amendment) Act, 1991,
such application shall be deemed to have been made under this sub-section as
amended by the said Act and the same shall be dealt with in accordance with the
provisions of sub- section (2) as substituted by that Act:
Provided furthis that the limitation of [one year] shall not apply whise any [duty and
interest, if any, paid on such duty] has been paid under protest. If, on receipt of any
such application, the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or Deputy
Commissioner of Central Excise is satisfied that the whole or any part of the [duty of
excise and interest, if any, paid on such duty] paid by the applicant is refundable, he
may make an order accordingly and the amount so determined shall be credited to
the Fund:
Provided that the amount of [duty of excise and interest, if any, paid on such duty] as
determined by the Assistant Commissioner of Central Excise or Deputy
Commissioner of Central Excise under the foregoing provisions of this sub-section
shall, instead of being credited to the Fund, be paid to the applicant, if such amount
is relatable to--
(a) rebate of duty of excise on excisable goods exported out of India or on excisable
materials used in the manufacture of goods which are exported out of India;
(b) unspent advance deposits lying in balance in the applicant's account current
maintained with the Commissioner of Central Excise
(c) refund of credit of duty paid on excisable goods used as inputs in accordance with
the rules made, or any notification issued, under this Act;
(d) the [duty of excise and interest, if any paid on such duty] paid by the
manufacturer, if he had not passed on the incidence of such [duty and interest, if any,
paid on such duty] to any othis person;
(e) the [duty of excise and interest, if any paid on such duty] borne by the buyer, if he
had not passed on the incidence of such [duty and interest, if any, paid on such duty]
to any othis person;
(f) the [duty of excise and interest, if any paid on such duty] borne by any othis such
class of applicants as the Central Government may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, specify:
Provided furthis that no notification under clause (f) of the first proviso shall be
issued unless in the opinion of the Central Government the incidence of [duty and
interest, if any, paid on such duty] has not been passed on by the persons concerned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 8
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
to any othis person. (3) Notwithstanding anything to the contrary contained in any
judgment, decree, order or direction of the Appellate Tribunal or any Court or in any
othis provision of this Act or the rules made thiseunder or any othis law for the time
being in force, no refund shall be made except as provided in sub-section (2).
(4) Every notification under clause (f) of the first proviso to sub-
section (2) shall be laid before each House of Parliament, if it is sitting, as soon as may be after the
issue of the notification, and, if it is not sitting, within seven days of its reassembly, and the Central
Government shall seek the approval of Parliament to the notification by a resolution moved within a
period of fifteen days beginning with the day on which the notification is so laid before the House of
the People and if Parliament makes any modification in the notification or directs that the
notification should cease to have effect, the notification shall thiseafter have effect only in such
modified form or be of no effect, as the case may be, but without prejudice to the validity of anything
previously done thiseunder.
(5) For the removal of doubts, it is hiseby declared that any notification issued under clause (f) of
the first proviso to sub-section (2), including any such notification approved or modified under
sub-section (4), may be rescinded by the Central Government at any time by notification in the
Official Gazette.
11BB. Interest on delayed refunds.-- If any duty ordered to be refunded under sub-section (2) of
Section 11-B to any applicant is not refunded within three months from the date of receipt of
application under sub-section (1) of that section, thise shall be paid to that applicant interest at such
rate, [not below five per cent and not exceeding thirty per cent per annum as is for the time being
fixed [by the Central Government, by notification in the Official Gazette,] on such duty from the date
immediately after the expiry of three months from the date of receipt of such application till the date
of refund of such duty:
Provided that whise any duty ordered to be refunded under sub-section (2) of Section
11-B in respect of an application under sub-section (1) of that section made before the
date on which the Finance Bill, 1995 receives the assent of the President, is not
refunded within three months from such date, thise shall be paid to the applicant
interest under this section from the date immediately after three months from such
date, till the date of refund of such duty."
26. Indisputably, Section 11B deals with claim for refund of duty of excise and interest, if any, paid
on such duty. As we have already explained that the amount kept in current account (PLA) by an
assessee is tentatively determined duty payable on the manufactured excisable goods to be paid at
the stage of the excisable goods(cid:129) removal from the Unit, as such, any amount remaining unspent in
the current account is nothing short of „duty of excise(cid:129) deposited or kept with Collector in advance.
It is because of this understanding the Legislature introduced proviso to sub-section 2 of Section
11B.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 9
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
27. From careful perusal of sub-Section 2 along with proviso thereof, it clearly comes out that the
refund of duty of excise claimed by an assessee may be credited to the welfare fund except when
such refund is relatable inter alia to unspent advance deposits lying in balance in applicant(cid:129)s
current account maintained with the Principal Commissioner of Central Excise or Commissioner of
Central Excise.
28 The term „unspent advance deposit(cid:129) would mean, "unspent advance deposit of excise duty"
refund whereof can be claimed by an assessee under Section 11B read with Rule 173G, both
reproduced above. Such refund in terms of proviso to Section 11B (2) is required to be made by
tendering payment directly to the applicant-assessee.
29. The judgments relied upon by learned counsel for the Revenue are all passed by CESTAT,
without adverting to and considering the provisions of proviso to Section 11B (2). The view we have
taken is fortified by the judgment of Supreme Court in Commissioner of Income Tax-II vs. Modipon
Limited, (2018) 13 SCC 426.
30 In the above matter, the issue before the Apex Court was, "whether an asseessee is entitled to
claim deduction under S.43-B of the Income Tax Act 1961 in respect of excise duty paid in advance
in the personal ledger account ( „PLA(cid:129) for short).
31. Before we look for the answer given in the judgment, we would like to extract Section 43-B of the
Income Tax Act, 1961:
43B. Certain deductions to be only on actual payment.-- Notwithstanding anything
contained in any othis provision of this Act, a deduction othiswise allowable under
this Act in respect of--
(a) any sum payable by the assessee by way of tax, duty, cess or fee, by whatever
name called, under any law for the time being in force, or
(b) any sum payable by the assessee as an employer by way of contribution to any
provident fund or superannuation fund or gratuity fund or any othis fund for the
welfare of employees,
(c) any sum referred to in clause (ii) of sub-section (1) of section 36.
(d) any sum payable by the assessee as interest on any loan or borrowing from any
public financial institution 6 [or a State financial corporation or a State industrial
investment corporation], in accordance with the terms and conditions of the
agreement
(e) any sum payable by the assessee as interest on any 9 [loan or advances] from a
scheduled bank 10[or a co-operative bank othis than a primary agricultural credit
society or a primary co-operative agricultural and rural development bank] in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 10
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
accordance with the terms and conditions of the agreement governing 11[such loan or
advances], 12[or] 12[
(f) any sum payable by the assessee as an employer in lieu of any leave at the credit of
his 13[employee, or]] 14[
(g) any sum payable by the assessee to the Indian Railways for the use of railway
assets,] 1. 243 shall be allowed (irrespective of the previous year in which the liability
to pay such sum was incurred by the assessee according to the method of accounting
regularly employed by him) only in computing the income referred to in section 28 of
that previous year in which such sum is actually paid by him: 1 [Provided that
nothing contained in this section shall apply in relation to any sum 2 *** which is
actually paid by the assessee on or before the due date applicable in his case for
furnishing the return of income under sub-section (1) of section 139 in respect of the
previous year in whichthe liability to pay such sum was incurred as aforesaid and the
evidence of such payment is furnished by the assessee along with such return.
Explanation [1].--For the removal of doubts, it is hiseby declared that whise a deduction in respect
of any sum referred to in clause (a) or clause (b) of this section is allowed in computing the income
referred to in section 28 of the previous year (being a previous year relevant to the assessment year
commencing on the 1st day of April, 1983, or any earlier assessment year) in which the liability to
pay such sum was incurred by the assessee, the assessee shall not be entitled to any deduction under
this section in respect of such sum in computing the income of the previous year in which the sum is
actually paid by him:] [Explanation 2.--For the purposes of clause (a), as in force at all material
times, "any sum payable" means a sum for which the assessee incurred liability in the previous year
even though such sum might not have been payable within that year under the relevant law.]
32. As can be seen from the provisions of Section 43-B, in particular explanation-2 added thiseto,
the requirement of applicability of the provision is that an assessee must have actually paid the
amount as well as incurred liability in the previous year for the payment even though such sum
might not have been payable within that year under the relevant law. It is, thus, not correct that it is
only on removal of goods that amount credited to the PLA could be claimed as deductible under
Section 43-B of the Income Tax Act. This question was first considered by Delhi High Court in CIT
vs. Maruti Suzuki Ltd. 2012 SCC Online Del 6240. Para 14 and 15 of the judgment are relevant on
the issue in hand and are thus reproduced hereunder:-
"14. In the present case, the assessee had no option, but to keep the account, in
respect of each excisable product (evident from the mandate in Rule 173G that it
"shall keep an account current"). The latter part of the main rule makes it clear
beyond any doubt that the assessee has no choice in the obligation, and cannot
remove the goods manufactured by it, unless sufficient amounts are kept in credit:
...and the assessee shall periodically made credit in such account- current, by cash
payment into the treasury, so as to keep the balances, in such account-current
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 11
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
sufficient to cover the duly due on the goods intended to be removed at any time, and
every such assessee shall pay the duty determined by him for consignment by debit to
such account-current before removal of the goods The revenue's contention that the
amounts in credit also relate to goods not manufactured, and thisefore not relatable
to any "liability incurred" is, in the opinion of this Court, without any basis. The
arrangement prescribed by the rule is both a collection mechanism - dictated by
convenience, as well as mandatory. It is convenient, for the reason that if the assessee
were to be asked to pay the exact amount, through some othis method, by deposit, as
a precondition for clearance, that would have been cumbersome to it as well as the
revenue; it would also have led to problems of storage of goods, and slow down their
supply and distribution. The Rule makers pragmatically directed that "sufficient"
amounts ought to be maintained in the account, to cover the removals. Thisefore, at
any given point of time, thise had to be an excess in the account, if the assessee were
to remove the goods. Each clearance mentions the quantum of goods, and the duty
amount, which is apparently reconciled at the end of the period, and shortfalls if any
are appropriated from the account. The excess credit is likewise adjusted for the next
day's clearances. The point to be underlined is that thise is no choice, and the
amounts relate to the assessee's duty liability, falling within the description under
Section 43B. The consequence of not allowing the amounts as deductions, are vividly
brought out in the decision of the Allahabad High Court in C.L. Gupta (supra), whise
it was held that:
10. In the case in hand, admittedly, the amount of customs duty of Rs. 3,56,451 was
paid by the assessee in March, 1987, and, thisefore, in terms of Section 43B it is
deductible only in the year in which it is actually paid, i.e., for the assessment year
1987-88, irrespective of the year in which the assessee incurred the liability on the
basis of the method of accounting regularly adopted by him and, thisefore, in view of
the clear provisions of law, the deduction cannot be allowed in the assessment year
1988-89. In our view, both the learned Income Tax Appellate Tribunal as well as the
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals) fell in error in holding that since the
assessee-firm debited the cost of goods imported including the duty paid on delivery
of goods in the trading account in April, 1987, and before the actual delivery of the
goods, the value of the goods and customs duty paid thiseon was shown in the
balance-sheet as document in hands, thisefore, the deduction should be allowed in
the assessment year 1988-89, is contrary to the prescription of law. Section 43B in
clear terms provides that the deduction claimed by the assessee in respect of any sum
paid by way of tax, duty, cess or fee, shall be allowed only in computing the income
referred to in Section 28 of that previous year in which it was actually paid,
irrespective of the previous year in which the liability was incurred for the payment of
such sum as per the method of accounting regularly employed by the assessee. For
the purpose of claiming benefit of deduction of the sum paid against the liability of
tax, duty, cess, fee, etc., the year of payment is relevant and is only to be taken into
account.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 12
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
The year in which the assessee incurred the liability to pay such tax, duty, etc., has no relevance and
cannot be linked with the matter of giving benefit of deduction under Section 43B of the Act. In this
view of the matter, the appeal deserves to be allowed.
15. This court also notices that the Supreme Court has upheld the view which allows assessee's to
claim credits, such as Modvat, etc, falling within the description of liability paid, to escape the
mischief of Section 43B. (CA 6721/2012 : CIT Vs. Shri Ram Honda Power Equipment Corporation,
decided on 19.09.2012).
As a result of the above discussion, the first question is answered in favour of the assessee, and
against the revenue.
(underlined by me)
33. Hon(cid:129)ble the Supreme Court in Modipon Limited (supra), while answering the question in
affirmative, in para 10 held thus:-
"10. Deposit of Central Excise Duty in the PLA is a statutory requirement. The
Central Excise Rules, 1944, specify a distinct procedure for payment of excise duty
leviable on manufactured goods. It is a procedure designed to bring in orderly
conduct in the matter of levy and collection of excise duty when both manufacture
and clearances are a continuous process. Debits against the advance deposit in the
PLA have to be made of amounts of excise duty payable on excisable goods cleared
during the previous fortnight. The deposit once made is adjusted against the duty
payable on removal and the balance is kept in the account for future
clearances/removal. No withdrawal from the account is permissible except on an
application to be filed before the Commissioner who is required to record reasons for
permitting an assessee to withdraw any amount from the PLA. Sub-rules (3), (4), (5)
and (6) of Rule 173G indicates a strict and vigorous scrutiny to be exercised by the
central excise authorities with regard to manufacture and removal of excisable goods
by an assessee. The self removal scheme and payment of duty under the Act and the
Rules clearly shows that upon deposit in the PLA the amount of such deposit stands
credited to the Revenue with the assessee having no domain over the amount(s)
deposited."
34. We are aware that Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in the case of „Modipon (supra)(cid:129) answered the
question in the context of provisions of Section 43-B of the Income Tax Act, nonetheless, what was
held qua the amount lying in PLA is binding on us.
35 From the judgment of Supreme Court in supra case, it is now beyond any pale of discussion or
debate that the amount credited by the asseessee in the account current is „duty of excise(cid:129) paid in
advance in respect of excisable goods manufactured to be paid by debit to such account at the stage
of actual removal of excisable goods from the manufacturing unit. We reiterate and make it clear
that under Section 3 of the Act, the duty of excise becomes payable immediately on manufacture or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 13
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
production of good though actual payment thereof is deferred to the stage of actual removal of such
manufactured or produced excisable goods from the manufacturing or production unit.
36 When we clearly understand the raison d(cid:129)etre for mandatory keeping of current account with the
Collector in the manner it has been explained by Delhi High Court and Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in
cases (supra), we are left with no manner of doubt that the money lying in the current account (PLA)
represents duty qua the excisable goods manufactured by an assessee and the said amount is to be
actually paid by an assessee by debit to PLA on removal of each consignment of goods from his/its
unit. It is, because of such understanding, the legislature has provided, by engrafting proviso to
Section 11B(2) of the Act, that such amount of duty excise which is relatable to the unspent amount
in PLA is to be paid to the asseessee. In such a matter, thise would be no question of passing on of
the duty to the consumer that may attract the doctrine of unjust enrichment. We hope that we have
unequivocally answered the question formulated.
37. Once we hold that the unspent amount in „PLA(cid:129) is duty of excise, a fortiori Section 11B and
Section 11BB would be attracted. If the refund claimed on account of unspent amount in PLA is not
paid within three months, it shall become payable with interest till it is actually paid..
38. The judgments relied upon by Mr. Jagpaul are contrary to the view taken by Hon(cid:129)ble the
Supreme Court in Modipon case (supra). CESTAT Benches in the cases relied upon have not
adverted to proviso to Section 11B(2) and the Rule 174-G have erroneously come to a conclusion that
unspent amount lying in PLA is money belonging to assessee kept in advance for payment of „duty
of excise(cid:129) and not the „excise duty(cid:129) actually paid and, thisefore, outside the preview of Section 11B.
39. We also see no good reason to subscribe to the view that current account was created to give
effect to exemption under Notification No. 56/2002-CE. The Notification only provided incentive to
the manufacturing units set up in the specified areas by providing refund of excise duty actually paid
on clearance/removal of excisable goods from their industrial units and was not intended to
supplant the provisions of Excise Act and Rules framed there under. The plea that unspent amount
lying in PLA was payable subject to determination by competent authority, which took almost two
years to do so, is also without substance. When Section 11B gives three months time to make refund,
any time spent beyond three months is at the peril of the Revenue and has to be accounted for.
Conclusion:
40. For the foregoing discussion and reasons assigned hereinabove, we allow this writ petition and
direct the respondents to pay to the petitioner interest at the rate of 6% per annum from the date of
application till the order of refund within a period of two months from today.
( Rahul Bharti) (Sanjeev Kumar)
Judge Judge
JAMMU:
04.10.2023
Anil Raina, Addl. Registrar/Secy
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 14
M/S A. M. Industries vs Union Of India on 4 October, 2023
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/162098985/ 15
