M/S.Simplex Infrastructures Ltd vs The Union Of India on 2 September, 2020
M/S.Simplex Infrastructures Ltd vs The Union Of India on 2
September, 2020
Author: M.S. Ramesh
Bench: M.S. Ramesh
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE OF MADRAS
RESERVED ON : 18.08.2020
PRONOUNCED ON : 02.09.2020
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE M.S. RAMESH
W.P.Nos.21689 to 21696 of 2016
& WMP.Nos.18539 to 18541 of 2016
In W.P.No.21689 of 2016
M/s.Simplex Infrastructures Ltd.,
(Formerly Simplex Concrete Piles (India) Ltd.,)
rep. by its Authorised Signatory
Mr.Sandip Baran Das,
Simplex Infrastructures Ltd., Simplex House,
27, Shakespeare Sarani, Kolkata-700 017
and having branch office at:
21, Casa Major Road,
Egmore, Chennai. ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Union of India
through Secretary,
Ministry of Commerce,
Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi.
2.The Joint Director General of Foreign Trade,
4th Floor, Shastri Bhavan,
Annex, 26 Haddows Road,
Chennai-600 006.
3.Policy Interpretation Committee,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79542501/ 1
M/S.Simplex Infrastructures Ltd vs The Union Of India on 2 September, 2020
DGFT, Udyog Bhawan,
New Delhi. ... Respondents
http://www.judis.nic.in
(cid:12) 2
PRAYER: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, praying to issue a Writ of Certiorari, calling for the records of
the respondent in the impugned notice vide
F.No.04/21/21/00002/AM 03/1918 dated 26.02.2016 and to quash
the same as arbitrary and illegal.
For Petitioner : Mr.Sujit Ghosh,
for Mr.Arun Karthik Mohan
For Respondents :Mr.G.Karthikeyan,
Additional Solicitor General
COMMON ORDER
With the consent of both the parties, the present Writ Petitions are heard through Video
Conferencing on 18.08.2020.
2. In all these Writ Petitions, the petitioner is an Export Promotion and Capital Goods (hereinafter
referred to as “EPCG”) licence holder, who had imported various capital goods on concessional rate
of 5% of customs duty. The goods were utilised by the petitioner for the manufacture of various
export items. After fulfillment of the export obligation, the petitioner applied for the redemption of
EPCG licence and in view of the fulfillment obligation, the second respondent had granted the
Export Obligation Discharge Certificate (EOD) on various dates between 02.03.2006 and
27.08.2008 for each of the eight applications. After lapse of many http://www.judis.nic.inyears
from the EOD certificate, the present impugned notices have been sent, seeking to regularise the
case and recover the customs duty along with interest.
3. Mr.Sujit Ghosh, learned counsel for the petitioner, predominantly raised two grounds challenging
the impugned notices. Firstly, the second respondent herein has no jurisdiction to review his own
order, in the absence of any explicit provision under the statute. Even otherwise, Section 16 of the
Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 (hereinafter referred to as “FTDR Act”)
empowers the Director General of Foreign Trade to review the orders made by the Joint Director
General of Foreign Trade and as such, the impugned notices by the second respondent is without
any authority of law.
4. Secondly, he submitted that the impugned notices have been issued after about 10 years from the
issuance of the EOD Certificate which is contrary to the limitation prescribed under the proviso to
Section 16 of the Act, which prescribes a period of two years for such a power to review.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79542501/ 2
M/S.Simplex Infrastructures Ltd vs The Union Of India on 2 September, 2020
5. Mr.G.Karthikeyan, learned Additional Solicitor General opposed the above said submissions
stating that the limitations of two years under Section 16 will commence from the date of demand
http://www.judis.nic.in notice and not from the issuance of EOD Certificate. With regard to the
authority of the second respondent to review his own order under Section 16 is concerned, no
counter statements have been made in the common counter affidavit filed by the respondents. He
also submitted that the petitioner had given a representation seeking for personal hearing and
without availing such hearing, had filed the present Writ Petitions and therefore, the Writ Petitions
deserves to be rejected.
6. Section 16 of the Foreign Trade (Development and Regulation) Act, 1992 reads as follows:-
16. Review.- The Central Government, in the case of any decision or order, not being
a decision or order made in an appeal, made by the Director General, or the Director
General in the case of any decision or order made by any officer subordinate to him,
may on its or his own motion or otherwise, call for and examine the records of any
proceeding in which a decision or an order imposing a penalty or redemption charges
or adjudicating confiscation has been made and against which no appeal has been
preferred, for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself, as the case may be, as to the
correctness, legality or propriety of such decision or order and make such orders
thereon as may be deemed fit:
http://www.judis.nic.in Provided that no decision or order shall be varied under this
section so as to prejudicially affect any person unless such person -
(a) has, within a period of two years from the date of such decision or order, received
a notice to show cause why such decision or order shall not be varied, and
(b) has been given a reasonable opportunity of making representation and, if he so
desires, of being heard in his defence.”
7. As rightly pointed out by the learned counsel for the petitioner, Section 16 of the FTDR Act
empowers the Director General to review any decision or order made by the Joint Director of
Foreign Trade. The power of review of any decision or order is only under Section 16.
8. As and when the second respondent had issued the EPCG licence and the Export Obligation
Discharge Certificate, he becomes “functus officio” and if at all, such an order of the second
respondent is to be reviewed, the same can be done only by the Director General, as provided under
Section 16. Apparently, the impugned notice issued by the second respondent itself is without any
jurisdiction and contrary to the statutory provisions.
9. The learned counsel for the petitioner relied upon the http://www.judis.nic.in decision of the
Gujarat High Court in the case of Alstom India Ltd., Vs. Union of India reported in 2014 (301) E.L.T.
446 (Guj.) on this proposition. The relevant portion of the order reads as follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79542501/ 3
M/S.Simplex Infrastructures Ltd vs The Union Of India on 2 September, 2020
“31. On going through the provisions of the FTDR Act, we find that those do not grant
power to the Respondent No.2 or its subordinates to re- determine or re-verify the
deemed export benefits if such benefits have been approved or granted as per the
provisions of the FTDR Act except by way of review as provided in Section
16. In the absence of any power under FDR Act, the Respondent No.2 or its
subordinates cannot assume quasi-judicial power for instance, the power to
re-determine or re-verify under the administrative guidelines i.e. Para 7 of the ANF-8
Form. Therefore, by virtue of Para 7 of the ANF-
8, the Respondent No.2 is deriving the quasi- judicial power which is beyond the provisions of FTDR
Act. We have already pointed out that according to Section 6 of the FTDR Act, the Respondent No.2
or the officer subordinate to him cannot usurp the power under Sections 3, 5, 15 and 19 of the FtDR
Act. According to Section 3, it is for the Central Government which may, by Order published in the
Official Gazette, make provision for the development and regulation of foreign trade by facilitating
imports and increasing exports.
http://www.judis.nic.in ...
32.1 Section 16. on the other hand,
authorizes the Central Government, in the case of any decision or order made by the Director
General, or the Director General in the case of any decision or order made by any officer subordinate
W.P.(C)4455/2013 Page 7 to him, to act on its own motion or otherwise, by calling for and
examining the records of any proceeding for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself, as the case
may be, as to the correctness, legality or propriety of such decision or order and make such orders
thereon as may be deemed fit. The proviso. however, says that no decision or order shall be varied
under section 16 so as to prejudicially affect any person unless such person has, within a period of
two years from the date of such decision or order, received a notice to show cause why such decision
or order shall not be varied and has been given a reasonable opportunity of making representation,
and, if he so desires, of being heard in defence.
...
33.We, thus, find that although specifically prohibited under Section 6 of the Act, the DGFT has
been illegally vested with the power to intervene in the subject matters coming within the purview of
Sections 3, 5, 15, 16 and 19 in clear violation of sub section(3) of Section 6 of the FTDR Act. In other
words, what is specifically http://www.judis.nic.in prohibited by the FTDR Act, by taking aid of the
HOP, the D.G.F.T has assumed such power in colourable exercise of the power conferred upon it.”
10. Following the aforesaid decision in Alstom India Limited, a Division Bench of the Delhi High
Court in Simplex Infrastructure Ltd., Vs. Union of India & others in WP.(c) No.4455 of 2013 had
held that Joint DGFT has no powers to review his own orders in view of Section 16 of the FTDR Act.
The relevant portion of the order reads as follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79542501/ 4
M/S.Simplex Infrastructures Ltd vs The Union Of India on 2 September, 2020
“4. ... Further, it is argued that the power to review an order under the policy is
granted to the DGFT under Section 16 of the Act, which in this case was
impermissibly exercised by the Deputy DGFT.
..
..
8. In this case, the impugned order-in-
original, which acted upon the decision taken by the PIC, is of the Joint DGFT, dated 30 th March,
2012. Clearly, in terms of the decision in Alstom (supra), with which this Court concurs, there can be
no review of an earlier refund except in accordance with the provision of Section 16 of the FTDR Act,
which only permits the DGFT or the Central Government (in case the original
http://www.judis.nic.in order was by the DGFT) to exercise the power of review.”
11. The respondents have not come forward with any counter arguments to substantive this ground
and thus, the impugned notices itself is liable to be strucked down on this ground.
12. Insofar as the ground of limitation raised by the petitioner is concerned, Section 16 empowers
the Director General to review the order, within a period of two years from the date of the decision
or the order passed. Apparently, all the impugned notices in the aforesaid Writ Petitions are beyond
the period of two years. As a matter of fact, the notices are after a long delay between 8 to 10 years
and there is absolutely no explanation for this inordinate delay in the proposal to review the order.
The only ground raised by the learned Additional Solicitor General, is that, the two years period
prescribed under Section 16 would commence from the date of the demand notices. I am unable to
contemplate as to how such date of reckoning could be construed from the proviso to Section 16,
when it is unambiguously provided that two years period will commence from the date of decision or
order which is sought to be revised.
http://www.judis.nic.in
13. The learned Additional Solicitor General also submitted that since the petitioner had requested
for an opportunity of personal hearing, pursuant to the impugned notices, the option of filing the
Writ Petitions instead of availing the personal hearing, requires dismissal of the Writ Petitions on
the ground of non availment of the alternate remedy. I am not in agreement with such a submission.
It is a settled proposition of law, that when a notice is issued without jurisdiction and against the
authority of law, this Court may be justified in exercising its powers under Article 226 of the
constitution of India and interfere with such a notice. Even otherwise, a mere option expressed to
raise objections to the impugned notices will not disentitle or be a bar to the petitioner to avail the
powers under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. Thus the petitioner would be entitled to
succeed on the second ground of limitation also.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79542501/ 5
M/S.Simplex Infrastructures Ltd vs The Union Of India on 2 September, 2020
14. For all the foregoing reasons, the impugned notices dated 26.02.2016 passed by the second
respondent herein are hereby quashed. Consequently, connected Miscellaneous Petition is closed.
The Writ Petitions stand allowed. No costs.
02.09.2020 Index:Yes http://www.judis.nic.in Order: Speaking DP To
1.The Union of India through Secretary, Ministry of Commerce, Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi.
2.The Joint Director General of Foreign Trade, 4th Floor, Shastri Bhavan, Annex, 26 Haddows
Road, Chennai-600 006.
3.Policy Interpretation Committee, DGFT, Udyog Bhawan, New Delhi.
http://www.judis.nic.in M.S.RAMESH.J, DP ORDER MADE IN W.P.Nos.21689 to 21696 of 2016 &
WMP.Nos.18539 to 18541 of 2016 02.09.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/79542501/ 6
