M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of ....
Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
ARBP No.25 of 2007, ARBP No.89 of 2023,
ARBP No.01 of 2022 & ARBP No.50 of 2023
ARBP No. 25 of 2007 .... Petitioner
M/s. Dredging & Desiltation
Co. Pvt. Ltd., Kolkata
-versus-
The Board of Trustees of .... Opposite Party
Paradip Port Trust,
Jagatsinghpur
ARBP No.89 of 2023 .... Petitioner
Larsen & Toubro Limited
-versus-
Odisha Power Generation .... Opposite Party
Corporation Limited
ARBP No.01 of 2022 .... Petitioner
M/s. Tirupati Enterprises
-versus-
M/s. S. A. Plywood Industry .... Opposite Party
(P) Ltd., Kolkotta
ARBP No.50 of 2023 .... Petitioner
National Aluminium Co.
Limited, Bhubaneswar
-versus-
HCL Comnet Limited, New .... Opposite Party
Delhi
Advocates appeared in these cases:
For Petitioners : Mr. Saswat Kumar Acharya, Advocate
(In ARBP No. 25 of 2007)
ARBP Nos.25 of 2007, 89 of 2023, 01 of 2022 & 50 of 2023 Page 1 of 27
Mr. Naresh Thacker, Advocate
(In ARBP No.89 of 2023)
Mr. S. K. Sarangi, Senior Advocate
(In ARBP No.01 of 2022)
Ms. Pami Rath, Senior Advocate
(In ARBP No.50 of 2023)
For Opposite Parties : M/s. S.P. Sarangi and associates,
Advocates
(In ARBP No. 25 of 2007)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 1
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
Mr. S. S. Mohanty, Advocate
(In ARBP No.89 of 2023)
M/s. M. R. Mishra and associates,
Advocates
(In ARBP No.01 of 2022)
M/s. A. K. Mohanty and associates,
Advocates
(In ARBP No.50 of 2023)
CORAM:
THE CHIEF JUSTICE
JUDGMENT
12.04.2024 Chakradhari Sharan Singh, CJ.
I.A. No.02 of 2024 arising out of ARBP No.25 of 2007, ARBP No.89 of 2023, I.A. No.06 of 2024
arising out of ARBP No.01 of 2022 and
1. Since all these matters involve a common question of law concerning the interpretation of the
word "Court" under Section 29-A of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 („the Act(cid:129) in short),
they have been heard together with the consent of the parties.
2. The interpretation of the said expression is at the core of the issue to address a question of
seminal significance i.e.: "Whether in a case of domestic arbitration, the power of extension of the
period referred to Sub- Section (4) of Section 29-A of the Act can exclusively be exercised by High
Court even in such cases where the High Court does not have ordinary original civil jurisdiction?"
3. I have heard Mr. Saswat Kumar Acharya learned counsel, Mr. Naresh Thacker, learned counsel,
Mr. S. K. Sarangi, learned Senior Counsel and Ms. Pami Rath, learned Senior Counsel for the
respective petitioners and M/s. S.P. Sarangi and associates, learned counsel, Mr. S. S. Mohanty,
learned counsel, M/s. M. R. Mishra and associates, learned counsel and M/s. A. K. Mohanty and
associates, learned counsel appearing for the respective opposite parties.
4. By way of illustration, to appreciate the controversy involved, the facts leading to the institution of
I.A. No.02 of 2024 in ARBP No.25 of 2007 are being noticed. The facts are that concerning a dispute
between the petitioner and the opposite party, late Justice D. P. Mohapatra, a retired Judge of the
Supreme Court, was appointed to act as the Presiding Arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act and
constitute the Arbitral Tribunal. Unfortunately, at the advanced stage of the arbitration proceedings,
the learned Presiding Arbitrator passed away which led to the filing of an application vide I.A. No.28
of 2022 to appoint a new Presiding Arbitrator to complete arbitration proceedings in a time-bound
manner. This High Court, by an order dated 09.12.2022, appointed Dr. A. K. Rath, as the Presiding
Arbitrator. It has been stated in this application that after the appointment of Justice A. K. Rath as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 2
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
the Presiding Arbitrator, on 25.01.2023 the Arbitration Centre was directed to depute an officer to
collect the case records from the residence of late Justice D. P. Mohapatra. In the next sitting on
10.02.2023, the learned Presiding Arbitrator convened the sitting and each of the parties nominated
the other two Arbitrators, whereafter, the Arbitral Tribunal was reconstituted. The Arbitration
Centre was asked to calculate the Arbitrators(cid:129) fees and Administrative costs. As the Arbitration
Centre did not communicate the assessment of the Arbitrators(cid:129) fees and Administrative costs, the
same could not be deposited by the parties. On 04.04.2023, the issues were recast for hearing.
However, there was no communication from the Arbitration Centre concerning the assessment of
Arbitrators(cid:129) fees and administrative costs. For one reason or the other, the Arbitration Centre failed
to assess the Arbitrators(cid:129) fees and administrative expenses because of which the matter was
adjourned on several dates awaiting such assessment. Later, in November 2023, the petitioner
deposited its share of the Arbitrators(cid:129) fees and administrative costs and the opposite party
undertook to deposit its share. The matter was argued at length by the counsel for the petitioner on
16.12.2023 and 17.12.2023. The matter was again taken up on 27.01.2024 consequent upon the
change of the name of the opposite party from "the Board of Trustees of Paradip Port Trust" to "the
Board of Trustees of Paradip Port Authority" and the amendment of the cause title was carried out.
Considering the substantial lapse of time on account of administrative procedure, both parties
undertook to file the present application. This is the background in which the present application
has been filed for extending the time limit for completion of Arbitration Proceedings and passing of
the Arbitral Award under Section 29-A(5) of the Act. It is noted at this juncture that both the parties
in the present application have jointly submitted that this Court, in exercise of power under
Sub-Sections (4) and (5) of the Section 29- A of the Act should extend the period for completion of
Arbitration Proceedings and passing of the award by six months.
5. Section 29-A of the Act reads thus:
"[29-A.Time-limit for arbitral award.--(1) The award in matters other than
international commercial arbitration shall be made by the arbitral tribunal within a
period of twelve months from the date of completion of pleadings under sub- section
(4) of section 23:
Provided that the award in the matter of international commercial arbitration may be
made as expeditiously as possible and endeavour may be made to dispose of the
matter within a period of twelve months from the date of completion of pleadings
under sub-section (4) of section 23. (2) If the award is made within a period of six
months from the date the arbitral tribunal enters upon the reference, the arbitral
tribunal shall be entitled to receive such amount of additional fees as the parties may
agree.
(3) The parties may, by consent, extend the period specified in sub-section (1) for
making award for a further period not exceeding six months.
(4) If the award is not made within the period specified in sub- section (1) or the
extended period specified under sub-section (3), the mandate of the arbitrator(s)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 3
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
shall terminate unless the Court has, either prior to or after the expiry of the period
so specified, extended the period:
Provided that while extending the period under this sub- section, if the Court finds
that the proceedings have been delayed for the reasons attributable to the arbitral
tribunal, then, it may order reduction of fees of arbitrator(s) by not exceeding five per
cent. for each month of such delay. Provided further that where an application under
sub- section (5) is pending, the mandate of the arbitrator shall continue till the
disposal of the said application:
Provided also that the arbitrator shall be given an opportunity of being heard before
the fees is reduced. (5) The extension of period referred to in sub-section (4) may be
on the application of any of the parties and may be granted only for sufficient cause
and on such terms and conditions as may be imposed by the Court.
(6) While extending the period referred to in sub-section (4), it shall be open to the
Court to substitute one or all of the arbitrators and if one or all of the arbitrators are
substituted, the arbitral proceedings shall continue from the stage already reached
and on the basis of the evidence and material already on record, and the arbitrator(s)
appointed under this section shall be deemed to have received the said evidence and
material.
(7) In the event of arbitrator(s) being appointed under this section, the arbitral
tribunal thus reconstituted shall be deemed to be in continuation of the previously
appointed arbitral tribunal.
(8) It shall be open to the Court to impose actual or exemplary costs upon any of the
parties under this section. (9) An application filed under sub-section (5) shall be
disposed of by the Court as expeditiously as possible and endeavour shall be made to
dispose of the matter within a period of sixty days from the date of service of notice
on the opposite party."
6. It can be easily discerned on a plain reading of the aforesaid provisions that Sub-Section (1) of
Section 29-A of the Act prescribed a time- limit of twelve months from the date of completion of the
pleadings under Sub-Section (4) of Section 23 of the Act for making an award in the matters other
than international commercial arbitration. Sub-Section (3) of the said Section states that the parties
may, by consent, extend the period specified in sub-section (1) for making award for a further
period, not exceeding six months. Sub-section (4) of 29-A of the Act lays down that if the award is
not made within the period specified in sub-section (1) or the extended period specified under
sub-section (3), the mandate of the Arbitrator(s) shall terminate unless "the Court" has, either
before or after the expiry of the period so specified, extended the period.
7. The word "Court" finds its definition under Clause-(e) of sub-section (1) of Section-2 of the Act,
which reads as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 4
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
"2. Definitions.--(1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires,--
xxx xxx xxx
(e) "Court" means-
(i) in the case of an arbitration other than
international commercial arbitration, the principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction
in a district, and includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil
jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-matter of
the arbitration if the same had been the subject-matter of a suit, but does not include
any Civil Court of a grade inferior to such principal Civil Court, or any Court of Small
Causes;
(ii) in the case of international commercial arbitration, the High Court in exercise of
its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions
forming the subject-matter of the arbitration if the same had been the subject-matter
of a suit, and in other cases, a High Court having jurisdiction to hear appeals from
decrees of courts subordinate to that High Court."
8. The "Court" as stands defined under Clause-(e) (i) of Section 2(1) of the Act means "the principal
Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a district, and includes the High Court in the exercise of its
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject-
matter of the arbitration if the same had been the subject-matter of a suit." It is not disputed that
the High Court of Orissa does not fall within the meaning of "Court" as it does not exercise its
ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject
matter of the arbitration by way of a suit.
9. In the said background, a question has arisen as to whether the High Court of Orissa can exercise
jurisdiction vested in the "Court" for an extension of the period under sub-section (4) of Section
29-A of the Act.
10. Mr Acharya has very fairly drawn this Court(cid:129)s attention to single- judge bench decisions of this
Court KCS Private Limited v. Rosy Enterprises reported in MANU/OR/0585/2018: 2018 (II) OLR
781 (KCS Private Limited v. Rosy Enterprises) rendered on 06.07.2018 in W.P.(C) No.25344 of
2017, with particular reference to paragraphs 8 and 10 thereof and Liladitya Deb v. Tara Ranjan
Pattanaik and others reported in MANU/OR/0267/2021: 2021 (II) ILR-CUT 585.
Paragraphs 8 and 10 of KCS Private Limited (supra)
8. A Three Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of State of West Bengal and others
v.
Associated Contractors, (2015) 1 SCC 32, wherein the question arose that which court has the
jurisdiction to entertain and decide the application under Section 34 of the Act. Hon'ble Supreme
Court in the case of State of West Bengal and others (supra) have held that "section 2(1)(e) contains
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 5
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
an exhaustive definition marking out only the Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction in the
district or a High Court having original civil jurisdiction in the State, and no other court as "court"
for the purpose of Part I of the Arbitration Act, 1996. The definition of "court" in Section 2(1)(e) in
the 1996 Act fixes "court" to be the Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction in the district or the
High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction. Section 2(1)(e) further goes on to say
that a court would not include any civil court of a grade inferior to such Principal Civil Court, or a
Small Cause Court. The definition is an exhaustive one as it uses the expression "means and
includes". It is settled law that such definitions are meant to be exhaustive in nature". Hon'ble
Supreme Court further held that "where a High Court exercises ordinary original civil jurisdiction
over a district, the High Court will have preference to the Principal Civil Court of Original
Jurisdiction in that district. Firstly, the very inclusion of the High Court in the definition would be
rendered nugatory if the above conclusion was not to be accepted, because the Principal Civil Court
of Original Jurisdiction in a district is always a court lower in grade than the High Court, and such
District Judge being lower in grade than the High Court would always exclude the High Court from
adjudicating upon the matter. Secondly, the provisions of the Arbitration Act leave no room for any
doubt that it is the superior most court exercising original jurisdiction which has been chosen to
adjudicate disputes arising out of arbitration agreements". It was a case of Calcutta High Court
which exercised original civil jurisdiction. Hence, the Hon'ble Supreme Court have held that the
High Court of Calcutta was held to be the Principal Civil Court of Original Jurisdiction. Thus, it is
clear that while the High Courts of Patna and Kerala are not the 'Court', the Calcutta High Court is
the 'Court' within the meaning of Section 2(1)(e) of the Act.
xxx xxxx xxx
10. In that view of the matter, the learned District Judge, Sundargarh does have jurisdiction under
Sub-Section (5) of Section 29A of the Act to extend the period of passing of the arbitral award.
Instead of remanding the matter, as considerable time has been elapsed in the mean time, this Court
think it proper to extend the time as prayed for by the petitioner and the opposite parties. It may be
remembered that the petitioner and the opposite parties have filed a joint petition before the
learned District Judge, Sundargarh and both the parties are agreed to extend the time frame as
envisaged under Section 29A of the Act, I am inclined to extend the time for passing of the arbitral
award. Secondly, it is stated that the matter of dispute is complicated and involves voluminous
evidence. Hence, in the interest of justice, it is appropriate to extend the period of passing of arbitral
award by another six months, which would start from the date of production of certified copy of this
order before the Arbitral Tribunal. With the aforesaid observations, this writ petition is allowed. The
order impugned is hereby quashed. There shall be no order as to cost. "
11. Taking a similar view, in a subsequent decision in the case of Liladitya Deb (supra), this Court,
referring to and relying on the decision rendered in KCS Private Limited (supra) rejected a challenge
to an order passed by the learned District Judge, Bhubaneswar for extension of time in the exercise
of power under Sub-Sections (4) and (5) of Section 29-A of the Act.
12. It has, however, been argued by him that Liladitya Deb (supra) has followed the decision in the
case of KCS Private Limited (supra). KCS Private Limited (supra) has referred to with approval, a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 6
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
Single Judge Bench decision of Kerala High Court in the case of URC Construction Pvt. Ltd. v.
BEML Ltd., Palakkad reported in 2017 (5) KHC 865: ILR (2018) 1 Ker 440, wherein it was held that
in case of domestic arbitration, an application under Sub-Section (5) of Section 29-A of the Act
seeking extension of the period referred to in Sub-Section (4) has to be made before the principal
civil court of original jurisdiction in the District or the High Court in exercise of its original civil
jurisdiction. He has drawn this Court(cid:129)s attention, however, to a subsequent Division Bench decision
of Kerala High Court in the case of Lots Shipping Company Limited v. Cochin Port Trust (AIR 2020
Ker 169) wherein the view expressed in the case of URC Construction Pvt. Ltd. (supra) has been
overruled. He accordingly submits that the views expressed by this Court in the case of KCS Private
Limited (supra) and Liladitya Deb (supra) require reconsideration by a Larger Bench of this Court.
He has contended the High Court of Orissa does have the jurisdiction to exercise the powers of a
Court vested under Section 29(4) and 29(5) of the Act in the case of domestic arbitration and not the
civil court of original jurisdiction by referring to the definition of "Court" under Section 2(1)(e) of
the Act.
13. To strengthen his argument, he has submitted that the word "Court" falling under Section
29-A(4) of the Act will have to be read in the context in which it has been used as the definition of
the "Court" under Section 2(1)(e) of the Act is subject to the stipulation "unless the context
otherwise requires." He has contended that it is not the legislative intent that the definitions under
Section 2 of the Act shall be strictly construed as per the said definition, everywhere in the Act as the
definition clause itself clearly excepts the circumstances where the context of the defined terms
require a definition, different from that prescribed under Section 2 of the Act. He has relied on
decisions of various High Courts interpreting the word "Court" under Section 29-A(4) of the Act,
wherein the said Courts have held that the word "Court" used in Section 29-A of the Act partakes the
character of the appointing authority as has been prescribed in Section 11 of the Act as the Court
exercising jurisdiction under Section 29-A of the Act may be required to substitute an Arbitrator in a
given case. He has argued that it will create an anomalous situation if the word "Court" in Section
29-A of the Act is given a definition, strictly as prescribed under Section 2(1)(e) of the Act since in
that case, whereas the power to appoint an Arbitrator under Section 11 of the Act would lie with the
High Court, power to substitute an Arbitrator will vest in the Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a
district. He has relied on the following decisions of various High Courts in support of his
submission:
"1. K.I.P.L. Vistacore Infra Projects J. V. v. Municipal Corporation of the City of
Ichalkarnji, decided on 22.01.2024 by the Bombay High Court in Commercial
Arbitration Petition No.181 of 2023
2. Indian Farmers Fertilizers Cooperative Ltd. v.
Manish Engineering Enterprises, decided on 11.03.2022 by the Allahabad High Court
in Arbitration and Concili. Appl. No.5 of 2022
3. Rajesh Kaila v. Union of India and others, decided on 09.12.2022 by Madhya
Pradesh High Court (Jabalpur Bench) in Misc. Civil Case No.28555 of 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 7
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
4. Amit Kumar Gupta v. Dipak Prasad, decided on 03.02.2021 by the Calcutta High
Court in A.P. No.417 of 2020
5. South Bihar Power Distribution Company Limited and others v. Bhagalpur
Electricity Distribution Company Private Limited and others, decided on 26.04.2023
by the Patna High Court in Civil Writ Jurisdiction Case No.20350 of 2021 and other
cases
6. India Power Corporation (Bodhgaya) Ltd. and others v. South Bihar Power
Distribution Company Limited and others, decided on 15.09.2023 by the Patna High
Court in Request Case Nos.36 of 2021 and 78 of 2022
7. Nilesh Ramanbhai Patel and others v. Bhanubhai Ramanbhai Patel and others,
decided on 14.09.2018 by the Gujarat High Court at Ahmedabad in Misc.
Civil Application (O.J.) No.1 of 2018 in Petition under
8. DDA v. Tara Chand Sumit Construction Co., decided on 12.05.2020 by the Delhi High Court in
O.M.P.(Misc.)(COMM.)236/2019
9. Lots Shipping Company Limited v. Cochin Port Trust, decided on 28.04.2020 by the Kerala High
Court at Ernakulam in OP (C) No.586 of 2018 (O)"
14. The argument advanced by Mr Acharya that it is the High Court, in case of
domestic arbitration, which can exercise the power under Section 29- A(4), 29A(5)
and 29A(6) of the Act exclusively, irrespective of the fact whether the High Court has
the ordinary original civil jurisdiction or not, has been adopted by learned Senior
Counsel/counsel appearing in other matters.
15. Mr Naresh Thacker, learned advocate appearing in ARBP No.89 of 2023 has
further submitted that this Court should hold, in the present case, that the decisions
rendered by the Single-Judge Bench of this Court in the case of KCS Private Limited
(supra) and Liladitya Deb (supra) are per incuriam for the reason that both the
decisions do not take into account the significance of the expression "unless the
context otherwise requires" under Sub-Section (1) of Section 2 of the Act, and decide
the issues upon due and correct interpretation of the word "Court" under Section
29-A of the Act based on fundamental principles of contextual and purposive
construction of a statutory provision.
16. I have given my thoughtful consideration to the submissions advanced at the Bar
as noted above.
17. Contextual interpretation is a well-accepted tool for the interpretation of statutes,
even in the absence of any such statutory prescription in a statute.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 8
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
Interpretation, the Supreme Court has held, must depend on the text and context. In
Reserve Bank of India v. Peerless General Finance & Investment Co. Ltd. others
reported in (1987) 1 SCC 424, the Supreme Court, explaining the principle, observed,
"...one may well say if the text is the texture, context is what gives the colour. Neither
can be ignored. Both are important. The interpretation is best which makes the
textual interpretation match the contextual." Further, a statute is required to be read
as a whole, so that an enactment within it is not treated as standing alone but is
interpreted in its context as part of the instrument. Construction as a whole requires
that unless the contrary appears, three principles should be applied. These are: (i)
every word in the Act should be given a meaning, (ii) the same word should be given
the same meaning, and (iii) different words should be given different meaning. It
may happen, however, that no sensible meaning can be given to some word or
phrase. It must then be disregarded. It is a canon of construction that, if it be
possible, an effect must be given to every word of an Act of Parliament or other
documents; but that, if there be a word or phrase therein to which no sensible
meaning can be given, it must be eliminated; (See--Statutory Interpretation, Francis
Bennion, Third edition Pages--898,899). Further, general words are taken not to be
intended to disturb express stipulations (clausula generalis non referta ad expressa).
The general words are not to be supposed that the drafter could have had in mind
every possible combination of circumstances which may chance to fall within the
literal meaning of general words.
18. A Division Bench of Patna High Court in the case of South Bihar Power
Distribution Company Limited and others v. Bhagalpur Electricity Distribution
Company Private Limited and others (supra) dealing extensively with the definition
of the word "Court" under Section 2(1)(e) of the Act and the same expression "Court"
falling under Section 29-A of the Act, had framed a question as to whether the a
Court of District Judge, being principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a
district, was competent to entertain a petition for extension of the mandate of an
Arbitral Tribunal.
Taking note of the definition of "Court" under Section 2(1)(e) and Section 11 of the
Act, the Division Bench of Patna High Court concluded as under:
"92. A question may arise for consideration in the present case as the Arbitrators
were not appointed by the High Court and were appointed by the parties themselves
during pendency of Request Case No.06 of 2016 filed on behalf of BEDCPL for
appointment of Arbitrator on behalf of SBPDCL, there ought not to be any issue for
their extension or for that matter substitution under Section 29 (4) (6) of the Act. But
in that case, the proceedings on this assumption that the Principal Civil Court got
jurisdiction as the Arbitrators were appointed by the parties themselves would again
give rise to conflicting situation. Let us take example of a situation where one of the
Arbitrators has been appointed by the one of the parties and the second Arbitrator by
the High Court and for substitution of either of them there could not be jurisdiction
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 9
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
conferred upon both the principal civil court as well as on the High Court. So, to
avoid such difference and conflicting cases in future it is more necessary to clear this
aspect that the Principal Civil Court (the court of learned District Judge in the
present case) has no jurisdiction to entertain the applications for extension of
mandate of Arbitral Tribunal."
19. While reaching the aforesaid conclusion, the Division Bench of Patna High Court in the case of
South Bihar Power Distribution Company Limited and others v. Bhagalpur Electricity Distribution
Company Private Limited and others (supra) has noticed the decisions of Bombay High Court in
case of Cabra Instalaciones Y. Servicios v. Maharashtra State Electricity Distribution Company
Limited [Decided in Commercial Arbitration Petition (L) No.814 of 2019 reported in
MANU/MH/2097/2019] and Allahabad High Court in case of Indian Farmers Fertilizers
Cooperative Ltd. v. Manish Engineering Enterprises (supra).
20. The same question again fell for consideration in the case of India Power Corporation
(Bodhgaya) Ltd. and others (supra), before Patna High Court. After having taken note of the
Division Bench(cid:129)s decision in the case of South Bihar Power Distribution Company Limited and
others v. Bhagalpur Electricity Distribution Company Private Limited and others (supra), a
single-judge bench of the Patna High Court, relying on various decisions of the High Courts, held in
paragraph-30 as under:
"30. Hence, I find that the jurisdiction to extend the period of time, has to be
exercised by this Court under Section 29A. There shall hence be an extension of the
mandate of the Arbitral Tribunal by four months starting from the date of appearance
of the parties before the Arbitral Tribunal, as per the extension granted by this
Court."
21. A similar view has been taken in a recent decision of the Bombay High Court in the case of
K.I.P.L. Vistacore Infra Projects J. V. (supra) wherein the Court has held as under:
"Hence, I am persuaded to accept the submission of Mr. Patil that the words used by
the Statute in Sub Section (1) or (2) are not otiose when it permits the definitions to
be read in the manner provided, unless the context otherwise requires and if the
meaning assigned to term 'court' in Section 2(1)(e) is introduced in Section 29A, it
would run contrary to the intention of legislation and defeat the purpose of the
provision by permitting a 'court' as defined under Section 2(1)(e) to partake the
power vested in the High Court to extend the mandate of the Arbitrator and
substitute the Arbitrator or Arbitral Tribunal itself."
22. The Bombay High Court, in the case of K.I.P.L. Vistacore Infra Projects J. V. (supra) has taken
note of the reasoning assigned by the same High Court in the case of Cabra Instalaciones Y.
Servicios (supra) wherein it had held that substantive powers are conferred on the Court under
Section 29-A of the Act. Given the clear provision under Sub-Section (6) of Section 29-A of the Act,
which provides that while extending the period referred to in Sub-Section (4) of Section 29-A of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 10
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
Act, it would be open to the Court to substitute one or all the Arbitrators, which is in fact a power to
make appointment of a new/substitute Arbitrator or any member of the Arbitral Tribunal. Taking
into account Section 29-A of the Act as a whole, the Bombay High Court opined in the case of Cabra
Instalaciones Y. Servicios (supra) that the "Court" under Section 29-A(4) of the Act refers to the
authority which has the power to appoint an Arbitrator under Section 11(6) of the Act.
23. A similar view has been echoed in the case of Tara Chand Sumit Construction Co. (supra) by the
Delhi High Court wherein a similar question had arisen regarding the exercise of power under
sub-section (4) of Section 29-A of the Act. Emphasizing the significance of the expression "In this
Part, unless the context otherwise requires", the Delhi High Court held in the case of Tara Chand
Sumit Construction Co. (supra) in paragraphs 26 and 27 as under:
"26. When one looks at the definition of the term „Court(cid:129) under Section 2(1)(e) of the
Act, it is clear that in the case of International Commercial Arbitration, the Court
would mean the High Court, in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction,
having jurisdiction to decide the questions forming the subject matter of the
arbitration if the same had been the subject matter of the sui or the High Court
having jurisdiction to hear appeals of Courts subordinate to that High Court.
However, in cases of arbitration other than International Commercial Arbitration,
Court would be the Principal Civil Court of original jurisdiction in a District and
includes the High Court in exercise of its ordinary original civil jurisdiction, having
jurisdiction to decide questions forming subject matter of the arbitration if the same
had been the subject matter of the suit. This definition has been substituted by way of
the Amendment Act 3 of 2016, which came into effect from 23.10.2015.
27. If the definition of the term „Court(cid:129) is looked into, no doubt the contention of the
respondent seems plausible that the power to extend the mandate of the Arbitrator
would lie with the Principal Civil Court. However, on a careful analysis, in my
opinion, this interpretation would lead to complications and would perhaps be in the
teeth of the powers of the Courts under Section 11 of the Act. Thus, the question that
poses a challenge is, whether the term „Court(cid:129) can be interpreted differently in the
context of Section 29A. In my view, sub-Section (1) of Section 2 of the Act itself gives
that answer, as it begins with the expression "in this part, unless the context
otherwise requires".
24. It is manifest that this Court, in both the cases i.e. KCS Private Limited (supra) and Liladitya
Deb (supra), the Singe-Judge benches have not noticed and dealt with the expression "unless the
context otherwise requires" falling under Section 2(1) of the Act, while interpreting the word "Court"
under Section 29-A of the Act. In my opinion, the said decisions do not lay down the correct law. I
am in respectful disagreement with the view expressed in the said decisions.
25. In the background of aforesaid discussions, though I do not agree with the views taken by the
Single Judge Bench of this Court in cases of KCS Private Limited (supra) and Liladitya Deb (supra),
I am of the opinion that the legal issue involved concerning the interpretation of the term "Court"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 11
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
under Section 29-A of the Act requires consideration by a larger Bench for an authoritative
pronouncement. In my considered opinion, it would be inappropriate for me to decide the matter
upon taking a different view than what has been taken by two different Benches of equal strength
and hold that the said views are incorrect on the reasoning that a possible aspect of the matter was
not considered by or raised before the said Benches. Such an approach would not conform to the
judicial discipline required to be observed by a bench of equal strength. Notably, it has been held in
the case of Dr. Vijay Laxmi Sadho v. Jagdish, (2001) 2 SCC 247 that if a learned Single Judge is not
in agreement with the view expressed by a Bench of equivalent strength, it would have been proper,
to maintain judicial discipline, to refer the matter to a larger Bench rather than to take a different
view. While observing so, the Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Vijay Laxmi Sadho (supra) held in
paragraph 33 as under:
"33. xxx We note it with regret and distress that the said course was not followed. It is
well-settled that if a Bench of coordinate jurisdiction disagrees with another Bench of
coordinate jurisdiction whether on the basis of "different arguments" or otherwise,
on a question of law, it is appropriate that the matter be referred to a larger Bench for
resolution of the issue rather than to leave two conflicting judgments to operate,
creating confusion. It is not proper to sacrifice certainty of law. Judicial decorum, no
less than legal propriety forms the basis of judicial procedure and it must be
respected at all costs."
26. In Halsbury's Laws of England (4th Edn.) Vol. 26: Judgment and Orders: Judicial Decisions as
Authorities (pp. 297-98, para 578) explained per incuriam rule as under:
"A decision is given per incuriam when the court has acted in ignorance of a previous
decision of its own or of a court of coordinate jurisdiction which covered the case
before it..."
27. In case of Government of A.P and another v. B. Satyanarayana Rao reported in (2000) 4 SCC
262, the Supreme Court, dealing with rule of per incuriam has held as under:
"8. Learned counsel for the respondent attempted to convince us that the decision in
the case of State of A.P. v. V. Sadanandam [1989 Supp (1) SCC 574 : 1989 SCC (L&S)
511 : (1989) 11 ATC 391] has to be ignored on the principle of per incuriam as certain
relevant provisions of the Rules were not considered in the said case, and in any case
this case requires to be referred to a larger Bench of three Judges. The rule of per
incuriam can be applied where a court omits to consider a binding precedent of the
same court or the superior court rendered on the same issue or where a court omits
to consider any statute while deciding that issue. This is not the case here. In State of
A.P. v. V. Sadanandam [1989 Supp (1) SCC 574 : 1989 SCC (L&S) 511 : (1989) 11 ATC
391] the controversy was exactly the same as it is here and this Court after
considering para 5 of the Presidential Order of 1975 held that the Government has
power to fill a vacancy in a zone by transfer. We, therefore, find that the rule of per
incuriam cannot be invoked in the present case. Moreover, a case cannot be referred
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 12
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
to a larger Bench on mere asking of a party. A decision by two Judges has a binding
effect on another coordinate Bench of two Judges, unless it is demonstrated that the
said decision by any subsequent change in law or decision ceases to laying down a
correct law. We, therefore, reject the arguments of learned counsel for the
respondents."
28. The rule of per incuriam has been discussed in the case of State of U.P. and another v. Synthetics
and Chemicals Ltd. and another reported in (1991) 4 SCC 139, paragraph 40 of which reads thus:
"40. „Incuria(cid:129) literally means „carelessness(cid:129). In practice per incuriam appears to
mean per ignoratium. English courts have developed this principle in relaxation of
the rule of stare decisis. The „quotable in law(cid:129) is avoided and ignored if it is
rendered, „in ignoratium of a statute or other binding authority(cid:129). (Young v. Bristol
Aeroplane Co. Ltd. [(1944) 1 KB 718 : (1944) 2 All ER 293] ). Same has been accepted,
approved and adopted by this Court while interpreting Article 141 of the Constitution
which embodies the doctrine of precedents as a matter of law. In Jaisri Sahu v.
Rajdewan Dubey [(1962) 2 SCR 558 : AIR 1962 SC 83] this Court while pointing out
the procedure to be followed when conflicting decisions are placed before a bench
extracted a passage from Halsbury's Laws of England incorporating one of the
exceptions when the decision of an appellate court is not binding."
29. A Reference may also be made to the Supreme Court(cid:129)s decision in the case of State of Punjab
and another v. Devans Modern Breweries Ltd. and another reported in (2004) 11 SCC 26 wherein
the Court held that a Coordinate Bench is bound to follow the earlier Coordinate Bench or refer the
matter to a larger Bench. Paragraph 339 of the said decision is relevant and is reproduced herein
below:
"339. Judicial discipline envisages that a coordinate Bench follow the decision of an
earlier coordinate Bench. If a coordinate Bench does not agree with the principles of
law enunciated by another Bench, the matter may be referred only to a larger Bench.
(See Pradip Chandra Parija v. Pramod Chandra Patnaik [(2002) 1 SCC 1] , SCC at
paras 6 and 7; followed in Union of India v. Hansoli Devi [(2002) 7 SCC 273] , SCC at
para
2.) But no decision can be arrived at contrary to or inconsistent with the law laid
down by the coordinate Bench. Kalyani Stores [AIR 1966 SC 1686 : (1966) 1 SCR 865]
and K.K. Narula [AIR 1967 SC 1368 : (1967) 3 SCR 50] both have been rendered by
the Constitution Benches. The said decisions, therefore, cannot be thrown out for any
purpose whatsoever; more so when both of them if applied collectively lead to a
contrary decision proposed by the majority."
30. Situated thus, I am of the view that the following legal questions require to be referred to a
larger Bench for an authoritative pronouncement:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 13
M/S. Dredging & Desiltation vs The Board Of Trustees Of .... Opposite ... on 12 April, 2024
i. Whether the meaning of the word "Court" under the provisions of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 should be the same as defined under Section 2(1)(e)
thereof, irrespective of the context in which the said word has been used?
ii. Whether the term "Court" contained in Section 29- A(4) and Section 29-A(5) of the
Act in the case of domestic arbitration shall mean the High Court, applying the rule of
contextual interpretation as permitted by the Act itself in its definition clause under
Section 2(1) thereof?
iii. Whether the decisions of this Court in cases of KCS Private Limited (supra) and
Liladitya Deb (supra) lay down the correct law on the point of interpretation of the
word "Court" under Section 29-A(4) and Section 29-A(5) of the Act?
31. Put up these matters before the Chief Justice on the administrative side, for these matters to be
placed before a larger Bench of appropriate strength.
(Chakradhari Sharan Singh) Chief Justice M. Panda Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/31690530/ 14
