M/S.Kanishk Steel Industrial Ltd vs The Chairman And Managing Director on 23 December, 2021
M/S.Kanishk Steel Industrial Ltd vs The Chairman And Managing
Director on 23 December, 2021
Author: S.M. Subramaniam
Bench: S.M. Subramaniam
W.P.No.26165 of 2014
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 23.12.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.M. SUBRAMANIAM
W.P.No.26165 of 2014
and
M.P.Nos.1 & 2 of 2014
M/s.Kanishk Steel Industrial Ltd.,
H.T.Sc.No.1501
No.7, Thiru.Vi.Ka. III Street,
Royapettai High Road,
Mylapore, Chennai - 600004.
Rep. by its Director,
Ashok Bohra ... Petitioner
Vs.
1. The Chairman and Managing Director,
TANGEDCO,
144, Anna Salai,
Chennai- 600002.
2. The Superintending Engineer,
Chennai Electricity Distribution Circle/ North
TANGEDCO,
144, Anna Salai,
Chennai - 600002. ... Respondents
Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Page 1 of 17
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46358816/ 1
M/S.Kanishk Steel Industrial Ltd vs The Chairman And Managing Director on 23 December, 2021
(cid:12) W.P.No.26165 of 2014
India for issuance of a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus calling for
the records of the 2nd respondent in demand in Item No.14 of the Bill
No.1501 dated 31.08.2014 and quash the same as illegal, arbitrary
and untenable under Law and against the Supply Code 2004 and
Tariff Order dated 20.06.2013 and CEA Regulations and
consequently direct the 2nd respondent to withdraw the impugned
demand in Item 14 of the Bill dated 31.08.2014.
For Petitioner : Mr.Rahul Balaji for
Mr.K.Seshadri
For Respondents : Mr.L.Jai Venkatesh
ORDER
The impugned demand notice passed by the 2nd respondent, dated 31.08.2014, is sought to be
quashed in the present writ petition and a further direction is also sought to direct the 2nd
respondent to withdraw the impugned demand in Item 14 of the Bill dated 31.08.2014.
2. The relief sought for in the present writ petition is similar to https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the
relief sought for by the writ petitioners in a batch of writ petitions in W.P.No.25 of 2015
[M/s.S.Palaniyandi Mudaliar Memorial Hospital v. TANGEDCO], etc. and batch, which was decided
by this Court on 05.06.2017.
3. The relevant paragraphs of the said order are extracted hereunder :
“24. In view of the above, since the harmonics have several undesirable effects and
affects power quality, on 21.02.2007, the Central Electricity Authority (CEA)
introduced a new Regulation and accordingly, its Technical Standards for
Connectivity to the Grid Regulations, 2007, came for enforcement. Applicability of
the Regulations is provided in Regulation 3, which reads as under :
“3. Applicability of the Regulations – These Regulations shall be applicable to all the
users, requesters, Central Transmission Utility and State Transmission Utility.” It is
clear from the above that the said Regulation is applicable only to four categories,
namely, Users, Requesters, Central Transmission Utility and State Transmission
Utility. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
25. In this context, let me find out the meaning given under the CEA Regulations,
2007, for Users and Requesters.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46358816/ 2
M/S.Kanishk Steel Industrial Ltd vs The Chairman And Managing Director on 23 December, 2021
Section 2(34) defines the meaning of “User”, which is given as under:-
“2(34)-- User means a person such as, a Generating Company including captive
generating plant or Transmission Licensee (other than the Central Transmission
Utility and State Transmission Utility) or Distribution Licensee or Bulk Consumer,
whose electrical plant is connected to the grid at voltage level 33kv and above.”
Section 2(25) defines the meaning of “Requester”, which is given as under:-
“2(25)-- Requester means a person, such as a Generating Company including captive
generating plant or Transmission Licensee (excluding Central Transmission Utility
and State Transmission Utility) or Distribution Licensee or Bulk Consumer, who is
seeking connection of his new or expanded electrical plant to the Grid at voltage level
33kv and above.” https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis A conjoint reading of the above
said provisions show that a person such as, Generating Company including captive
generating plant or Transmission Licensee or Distribution Licensee or Bulk
Consumer, whose electrical plant is connected to the grid at voltage level 33 kv and
above. Therefore, it is clear that the above said Regulations are applicable to only
those consumers whose electrical plant is connected to the Grid at the voltage level of
33kv and above, hence, the petitioners, who are connected to the Grid at voltage level
of 11kv/22kv supply lines, cannot be made applicable under the said Regulations.
26. Again, to be more clear, it is also pertinent to refer to Section 34 of the Electricity
Act, 2003, dealing with the Grid Standards, which is given as under:-
“34. Grid Standards.---- Every transmission licensee shall comply with such technical
standards, of operation and maintenance of transmission lines, in accordance with
the Grid Standards, as may be specified by the Authority.” It is clear from the above
that Section 34 of the Electricity Act, 2003, mandates every transmission licensee to
comply with such technical standards of operation and maintenance as may be
specified by the Authority, which https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis means, as per
Section 2(6) of the Act, the Central Electricity Authority (CEA) is the Authority as
referred to in sub-section (1) of Section 70. Thus, the CEA, established under Section
70 and whose functions are set forth in Section 73, has the exclusive powers under
Section 73(d) of the Act. It is also pertinent to extract Section 73(d) of the Act, which
is given as under:-
“(d) specify the Grid Standards for operation and maintenance of transmission lines.”
27. In view of the above legal position, the Central Electricity Authority (CEA), being
an Apex Body, is the appropriate authority on the issue of Grid Standards and to
ensure both National Grid Code and State Grid Code are consistent and there cannot
be any inconsistencies of different standards at the State level. This is purely for the
purpose of ensuring uniform operation across the country. It is also an admitted fact
that the National Grid Code and the State Grid Code do not have any provision with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46358816/ 3
M/S.Kanishk Steel Industrial Ltd vs The Chairman And Managing Director on 23 December, 2021
regard to harmonics.
28. In this context, it is relevant to refer to Clause 3 of Part IV of the CEA
Regulations, 2007, which is given as under:-
“3. Voltage and Current Harmonics --
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (1) The total harmonic distortion for voltage at the
connection point shall not exceed 5% with no individual harmonic higher than 3%.
(2) The total harmonic distortion for current drawn from the transmission system at
the connection point shall not exceed 8%.
(3) The limits prescribed in (1) and (2) shall be implemented in a phased manner so
as to achieve complete compliance not later than five years from the date of
publication of these regulations in the official Gazette.” Although Clause 3 of Part IV
of the CEA Regulations, 2007, says that the total harmonic distortion for voltage at
the connection point shall not exceed 5% with no individual harmonic higher than 3%
and that the total harmonic for current drawn from the transmission system at the
connection point shall not exceed 8%, the limits prescribed as mentioned above shall
be implemented in a phased manner so as to achieve complete compliance not later
than five years from the date of publication of these regulations in the official
Gazette.
29. It is an admitted fact that the CEA Regulations came into force in the year 2007, however, even
after a lapse of 9 years, the TANGEDCO has not published any notification
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis in the official Gazette enforcing the consumers, who are connected
with 11kv/22kv supply lines, to install harmonic filers so as to levy harmonic compensation charges.
30. Moreover, when this Court directed the learned Additional Solicitor General of India to get
instruction whether the consumers connected to a distribution system irrespective of the capacity of
supply they receive including 11kv and 22kv supply lines need to provide harmonic control
equipments, as a reply thereto, the Chief Engineer (Legal), Central Electricity Authority, Ministry of
Power, New Delhi, in his letter dated 10.08.2015, has clarified that the CEA Regulations, with
respect to compensation on account of harmonic distortions, are applicable to only those
consumers, who are connected to 33kv or above, namely, only bulk consumers. For better
appreciation, relevant portion of the said communication is extracted below:-
“This is reference to your letter dated 07.08.2015 on the above subject. It is to inform
that almost 305 case are filed in the Hon'ble Court by the petitioners having
grievances similar to this case. It is to submit that:
(i) CEA Regulation with respect to compensation on account of harmonic distortions
is applicable to only those consumers who are https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46358816/ 4
M/S.Kanishk Steel Industrial Ltd vs The Chairman And Managing Director on 23 December, 2021
connected at 33kv or above.
(ii) Further any consumer who is connected below 33kv to the distribution system is
not governed by the Grid Standards for connectivity to the Grid.
(iii) The Grid is defined under Electricity Act, 2003, stating that the Grid is high
voltage backbone system of inter-connected transmission lines, sub station and
generating plants.
Therefore, only systems which can directly affect the Grid are covered under such Standards and as
such the present petition for the consumers connected at 33kv or above which are defined as Bulk
Consumer shall be covered for Harmonic Compensation.”
31. Subsequent to the above said communication, one Mr.P.D.Siwal, Secretary to the Central
Electricity Authority, New Delhi, issued a clarification on 26.08.2015 with regard to applicability of
Part IV of CEA Regulations, 2007. Relevant portion of the said communication is extracted below:
“This has reference to the Part IV of the CEA (Technical Standards for Connectivity to
the Grid) Regulations, 2007. It is clarified that:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(iii) The condition of voltage and current harmonic as prescribed under Part IV is
applicable only to the consumers which are defined as bulk consumers and drawing
power at 33kv and above.
(iv) For the purpose of bulk consumer means a consumer who avails supply at voltage
of 33kv or above.
Therefore, Part IV of CEA Regulations is applicable only to consumers drawing power at 33kv or
above and any consumer who is drawing power below 33kv shall not be covered under Part IV of
CEA (Technical Standards for Connectivity of the Grid) Regulations, 2007.” From the above said
communications of the Chief Engineer (Legal) as well as the Secretary of the Central Electricity
Authority, New Delhi, it is crystal clear that the consumers connected with 11kv/22kv supply lines
are placed outside the scope and purview of the Part IV of the CEA Regulations, 2007, and that it
has further categorically clarified that 11kv/22kv supply lines consumers are not subjected to
harmonic control norms, however, 33kv and above supply lines consumers are alone directed to
comply with harmonic control norms. Thus, the impugned demands issued by the
respondent/TANGEDCO directing the petitioners, who are admittedly connected with 11kv/22kv
supply lines, are against https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the CEA Regulations, 2007.
32. Further, it is also pertinent to note that the CEA, who is the competent authority to declare the
harmonic distortion levels, has not declared harmonic distortion levels to the consumers connected
with 11kv/22kv either through the CEA Regulations, 2007, or by any other relevant provisions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46358816/ 5
M/S.Kanishk Steel Industrial Ltd vs The Chairman And Managing Director on 23 December, 2021
Therefore, until the CEA prescribes any standard of harmonics for 11kv/22kv supply lines
consumers and makes them also obligatory for harmonic controls, no obligation can be cast upon
the 11kv/22kv supply lines consumers for compliance.
33. Taking support from Sections 50, 86 and 181 of the Act read with Regulation 4(1)(iv) of the
Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, learned Additional Advocate General sought to sustain the
impugned order levying harmonic charges on the 11kv/22kv supply line consumers. In this context,
let me extract below the above said provisions:
50. The Electricity Supply Code :- The State Commission shall specify an Electricity
Supply Code to provide for recovery of electricity charges, intervals for billing of
electricity charges, disconnection of supply of electricity for nonpayment thereof,
restoration of supply of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis electricity, tampering,
distress or damage to electrical plat, electric lines or meter, entry of distribution
licensee or any person acting on his behalf for disconnecting supply and removing the
meter, entry for replacing, altering or maintaining electric lines or electrical plant or
meter.
“Section 86 - Functions of State
Commission.-
(1) The State Commission shall discharge the following functions, namely:--
(a) determine the tariff for generation, supply, transmission and wheeling of
electricity, wholesale, bulk or retail, as the case may be, within the State:
Provided that where open access has been permitted to a category of consumers
under section 42, the State Commission shall determine only the wheeling charges
and surcharge thereon, if any, for the said category of consumers;
(b) regulate electricity purchase and procurement process of distribution licensees
including the price at which electricity shall be procured from the generating
companies or licensees or from other sources through agreements for purchase of
power for distribution and supply within the State;
(c) facilitate intra-State transmission and wheeling https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
of electricity;
(d) issue licences to persons seeking to act as transmission licensees, distribution
licensees and electricity traders with respect to their operations within the State;
(e) promote cogeneration and generation of electricity from renewable sources of
energy by providing suitable measures for connectivity with the grid and sale of
electricity to any person, and also specify, for purchase of electricity from such
sources, a percentage of the total consumption of electricity in the area of a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46358816/ 6
M/S.Kanishk Steel Industrial Ltd vs The Chairman And Managing Director on 23 December, 2021
distribution licensee;
(f) adjudicate upon the disputes between the licensees and generating companies and
to refer any dispute for arbitration;
(g) levy fee for the purposes of this Act;
(h) specify State Grid Code consistent with the Grid Code specified under clause (h)
of subsection (1) of section 79;
(i) specify or enforce standards with respect to quality, continuity and reliability of
service by licensees;
(j) fix the trading margin in the intra-State trading of electricity, if considered,
necessary;
(k) discharge such other functions as may be assigned to it under this Act.”
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Section 50 of the Act dealing with the Electricity
Supply Code statutorily provides for the cases, inter alia, with regard to the
tampering of electric lines or meter and method of collection of electricity charges.
Similarly, Section 86 of the Act empowers the State Commission to determine the
tariff for generation, supply, transmission and wheeling of electricity, wholesale, bulk
and retail within the State. But, till date, it has not provided for setting up of
standards for harmonics charges. Therefore, neither Section 50 nor Section 86 of the
Act supports respondent TANGEDCO in the matter of levying of harmonic charges on
the 11kv/22kv supply line consumers.
34. Likewise, Section 181 gives power to the State Commission to make Regulations consistent with
the Act and Rules to carry out the provisions of this Act. By exercising such power, the Tamil Nadu
Electricity Regulatory Commission had issued the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, wherein the
Regulation 4(1)(iv) of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, which is extracted below, deals with
additional charges for harmonic dumping.
“4.Charges recoverable by the Licensee – The charges, recoverable by the Licensee from the
consumers are:-
xxxx (1). Tariff related charges, namely, -
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (iv). Additional charges for harmonics dumping Where any
equipment installed by a consumer generates harmonics, the consumer shall provide adequate
harmonic suppression units to avoid dumping of harmonics into Licensee's distribution system and
the Licensee is at liberty to provide suitable metering equipment to measure the harmonic level
pursuant to such harmonic. Where the consumer fails to provide such units, he shall be liable to pay
compensation at such rates as the Commission may declare from time to time.” In view of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46358816/ 7
M/S.Kanishk Steel Industrial Ltd vs The Chairman And Managing Director on 23 December, 2021
Regulation 4(1)(iv) of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, although the State has got power to
direct the consumers to install harmonic filters irrespective of their voltage connection as stated by
learned Additional Advocate General for the TANGEDCO, the same cannot be sustained in view of
non-specification of any standard of harmonics for 11kv/22kv/supply line consumers by the CEA,
who, being an Apex Body as per Section 73(d) of the Act, has exclusive powers to specify the Grid
Standards for operation and maintenance of transmission lines.
35. Thus, for all the reasons stated above, the impugned demands are quashed. Consequently, the
writ petitions are allowed. No Costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petitions are also
closed. ”
4. In view of the fact that the case of the petitioner is also https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis similar
to that of the cases cited supra, the petitioner is also entitled to the relief. Accordingly, the impugned
demand notice is quashed and the writ petition is allowed. No costs. Consequently, connected
miscellaneous petitions are closed.
23.12.2021
raja/shr
Internet : Yes
Index : Yes / No
Speaking order / Nonspeaking order
S.M. SUBRAMANIAM, J.
raja/shr
To
1. The Chairman and Managing Director, TANGEDCO, 144, Anna Salai, Chennai- 600002.
2. The Superintending Engineer, Chennai Electricity Distribution Circle/ North TANGEDCO, 144,
Anna Salai, Chennai - 600002.
and M.P.Nos.1 & 2 of 2014 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 23.12.2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/46358816/ 8
