M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 9 March, 2023
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 9 March,
2023
Author: Rahul Bharti
Bench: Rahul Bharti
Sr. No. 171
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP(C) No. 566/2023
CM No. 1340/2023
M/s Fazal Rehman Dar
.....Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. R.K.Gupta, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Jugal Kishore Gupta, Advocate.
Vs
UT of J&K and others ..... Respondent(s)
Through:
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAHUL BHARTI, JUDGE
ORDER
1. In response to a Tender Notice e-NIT No. 69 of 2022-23 dated 21.01.2023 issued by respondent
no.2 i.e. Superintending Engineer, PW (R&B) Department Circle, Rajouri with respect to
construction of a road work from Main Road to Mohalla Manjha Khana, Tehsil Balakote, District
Poonch under the Rural Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF) financed by the National Bank
for Agriculture and Rural Development (NABARD), bids came to be invited. With respect to the bids
so received from the intending bidders, the Contract Committee headed by the respondent no.2 i.e.
Superintending Engineer, PW (R&B) Department Circle, Rajouri came to publish online Technical
Evaluation Summary Report in which five bids were declared to be technically responsive and, thus,
qualifying for the next stage of opening and evaluation of financial bids.
2. Five bids so declared to be technically qualified included the bid of the petitioner, bid of M/s
Green Earth concern and three other bids that of respondent nos. 3 to 5 herein.
3. Upon getting apprised of the said Technical Evaluation Summary Report finding mention of
respondent nos. 3 to 5 as being held responsive in the technical evaluation in the context of their
respective bids, the petitioner came to invoke the provision in terms of Clause 23 (f) of Standard
Bidding Document (SBD) by registering its objection to the entertainment and qualification of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111427969/ 1
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 9 March, 2023
bids of the respondent Nos. 3 to 5 which as per the petitioner were not accompanied with requisite
supporting documents as solicited in terms of the Tender Notice. Petitioner came to register its
objection in writing on 26.02.2023 to respondent no.2 i.e. Superintending Engineer, PW (R&B)
Department Circle, Rajouri.
4. Given the fact that the petitioner had invoked its right of objection as available in terms of clause
23 (f) of the Standard Bidding Document (SBD) within the time given before the respondent no.2.
i.e. Superintending Engineer, PW (R&B) Department Circle, Rajouri, as such, it was required on the
part of the said Official as being the tender receiving authority and also the tendering authority to
consider the said written objection of the petitioner No.1 quo the said three bids of respondent nos.
3 to 5 and decide the same before proceeding any further with the opening of financial bids.
5. The situation which led the petitioner to approach this court with the present writ petition is the
inaction/default on the part of respondent no.2 i.e. Superintending Engineer, PW (R&B)
Department Circle, Rajouri in not taking any decision whatsoever and conveying it to the petitioner
about the written objections so registered by the petitioner with respect to entertainment of the
respective bids of respondent nos. 3 to 5.
6. In view of the facts and circumstances so obtaining, this Court has a basis to dispose of this writ
petition at this stage itself without putting the respondents to any notice as that course of action
would be to the advantage of none except to the disadvantage of the public project for which the
contract work is meant to be allotted by public auction.
7. Thus, this writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondent no.2 i.e. Superintending
Engineer, PW (R&B) Department Circle, Rajouri to consider, decide and dispose of the written
objections dated 26.02.2023 of the petitioner with respect to the entertainment of the respective
bids of respondent nos. 3 to 5 and by passing an order to the effect bearing reasons. Needful be done
by respondent no.2 i.e. Superintending Engineer, PW (R&B) Department Circle, Rajouri within a
period of ten days from the date a certified copy of this order is received by him to be delivered by
the petitioner along with copy of the written objections dated 26.02.2023 for the sake of ready
reference of respondent no.2 i.e. Superintending Engineer, PW (R&B) Department Circle, Rajouri.
Till the passing of order by the respondent no.2 i.e. Superintending Engineer, PW (R&B)
Department Circle, Rajouri with respect to written objections of the petitioner, the opening of
financial bids and consequent finalization of tendering process shall not be carried out by
respondent no.2. i.e. Superintending Engineer, PW (R&B) Department Circle, Rajouri or the
Authority whosoever competent to take final decision with respect to the finalization of the
tendering process.
8. Writ petition is disposed of.
(Rahul Bharti) Judge Jammu :
09.03.2023
Bunty
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111427969/ 2
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 9 March, 2023
Whether the order is speaking : Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable : Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/111427969/ 3
