M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co.
.... ... on 25 February, 2025
Author: S.K. Panigrahi
Bench: S.K. Panigrahi
Signature Not Verified
Digitally Signed
Signed by: BHABAGRAHI JHANKAR
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY
Reason: Authentication
Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.20185 of 2024
(In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India, 1950).
M/s. Tarini Prasad Mohanty, .... Petitioner(s)
Keonjhar
-versus-
M/s. Sunflag Iron and Steel Co. .... Opposite Party (s)
Ltd., Nagpur
Advocates appeared in the case through Hybrid Mode:
For Petitioner(s) : Mr. Pitambar Acharya, Sr. Adv.
Along with
Mr. S. S. Tripathy, Adv.
For Opposite Party (s) : Mr. S. K. Padhi, Sr. Adv.
Along with
Mr. V. Rajsekharan, Adv.
Mr. B. Panigrahi, Adv.
CORAM:
DR. JUSTICE S.K. PANIGRAHI
DATE OF HEARING:-14.02.2025
DATE OF JUDGMENT:-25.02.2025
Dr. S.K. Panigrahi, J.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 1
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
1. This Writ Petition is preferred by the Petitioner against order dated 30.5.2024 passed by the Ld.
Arbitral Tribunal in I.A. No. 4, whereby the Ld. Arbitral Tribunal held that the Stamp Duty payable
on Agreement dated 12.2.2004 and subsequent agreements/amendments thereto is Designation:
AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025
17:02:27 governed by Article 5(c) of Schedule I of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, i.e. Agreement or
Memorandum of Agreement.
I. FACTUAL MATRIX OF THE CASE:
2. The Petitioner is a sole proprietorship concern and is the holder of the Mining Lease for Iron and
Manganese Ore issued by the Government of Odisha in respect of an area situated at village Naibaga
and Katupali in the District of Keonjhar, Odisha. The Opposite Party is a Public Limited Company
involved in the manufacturing of steel.
3. The facts giving rise to the present Petition can be pithily summarised as under:
(i). On 25.11.1998, the Petitioner applied to the Department of Steel & Mines,
Government of Orissa for grant of mining lease for iron and manganese ore for an
area of over 48.117 hectares in the villages of Naibaga and Katupali, District of
Keonjhar, Odisha. After receiving necessary approvals from the Union Ministries and
State Departments, on 17.11.2009, a Mining Lease deed was entered into between the
Government of Odisha and the Petitioner for a period of twenty years for carrying out
mining or other operations as prescribed by the Government of India under the
Mines and Minerals (Development and Regulation) Act, 1957. By letter dated
27.06.2011, the Deputy Director Mines, Joda, Department of Steel & Mines,
Government of Odisha allowed the Petitioner to operate the Mine. Subsequently, a
Supplementary Lease Deed was signed between the Government of Odisha and the
Petitioner extending the lease deed till 16.11.2059, Designation: AR-CUM-SR.
SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025
17:02:27 subject to fulfilment of certain conditions as provided in Section 8A of the
MMDR Act, 1957.
(ii). On 12.02.2004, the Petitioner and Opposite Party entered into an Agreement of
Sale of Iron Ore (hereinafter referred to as the "Sale Agreement") for a period of ten
years from the date of commencement of mining operations. As per Clauses 1.1, 1.2
and 4 of the Sale Agreement, the Opposite Party was entitled to exclusive purchase of
the entire extracted iron ore from the mine of the Petitioner with at least 10,000 MT
of iron ore on a monthly average over a quarter after twelve months of
commencement of mining operation. Furthermore, the said clauses provided for a
profit-sharing margin of 70% upon the sale of the iron and manganese ore and a
specific covenant that the Petitioner cannot sell/part-with/dispose-off any
manganese or iron ore from the leasehold mine. The Sale Agreement was amended
by a Supplementary Agreement dated 23.12.2006, by an Agreement 13.7.2009 and by
second Ore Sales Amendment Agreement dated 9.1.2011.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 2
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
(iii). The Opposite Party raised some claims arising out of the breach of the Sale
Agreement and subsequent amendments thereto. The Opposite Party invoked
arbitration under Clause 9 of the Sale Agreement. As the Petitioner did not refer the
disputes to arbitration, the Opposite Party approached this Court under Section 11(6)
of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 for appointment of an arbitrator. This
Court by its judgment dated 22.11.2022 in ARBP No. 29 of 2022, appointed the Sole
Arbitrator to adjudicate the disputes between the parties.
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27
(iv). The Statement of Claim was filed before the Sole Arbitrator on 30.1.2023 and the Statement of
Defence and Counterclaims on 15.4.2023. In the Statement of Defence, admittedly, the Petitioner
did not raise any plea under Section 16 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 that the Arbitral
Tribunal did not have jurisdiction to decide the disputes between the parties. But the moot question
was with respect to the stamping of agreement and its consequences.
(v). On 25.4.2023, the majority of the judges of a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in NN
Global Mercantile Pvt Ltd v. Indo Unique Flame Ltd & Ors1. held that an unstamped instrument
containing an arbitration agreement is void under Section 2(g) of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
Such an unstamped instrument, not being a contract and not enforceable in law, cannot exist in law
and therefore the Arbitration agreement in such aninstrument can be acted upon only if it is duly
stamped. Moreover, it was held that the "existence" of an arbitration agreement contemplated under
Section 11(6)(a) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 is not merely a facial existence or
existence in fact, but also "existence in law". Therefore, it was concluded that the Court acting under
Section 11 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996 cannot disregard the mandate of Sections 33
and 35 of the Stamp Act, 1899 requiring it to examine and impound an unstamped or insufficiently
stamped instrument.
(vi). Subsequently, the Petitioner sought permission from the Ld. Sole Arbitrator to raise
preliminary issues with regards to the (2023) 7 SCC 1 Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY
Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 maintainability of the
arbitral proceeding which was permitted vide the Ld. Sole Arbitrator's order dated 16.5.2023.
Pursuant thereto, the Petitioner filed an application on 4.8.2023 under Section 16 of the Arbitration
and Conciliation Act, 1996 raising the following three issues:
a). The Agreements executed between the parties (including the arbitration
agreement) are not adequately stamped, and consequently, inadmissible, and non-est
in law, therefore the arbitral proceedings arising there under is not maintainable.
b). The arbitral proceedings have been initiated/ filed by Mr. Pawan Kumar, who has
not been duly authorized by the Claimant, and therefore, the claims preferred by the
Claimant are not maintainable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 3
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
c). In respect of the electronic records filed and relied upon by the Claimant, they
have not filed a supporting affidavit with the required details as mandated under
Section 65B of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872.
(vii). It is pertinent to mention here that, upon the Petitioner's request, the Tribunal
segregated the aforesaid three issues into three different applications, viz. IA-4, IA-5
and IA-6.
(viii). The present Petition pertains to the Impugned Order dated 30.5.2024 passed
by the Ld. Tribunal in IA-4. The said IA-4 deals with the issue of Agreement being
insufficiently stamped under the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 as amended by the Indian
Stamp Act (Odisha Amendment), 2021 (hereinafter referred to as "Stamp Act").
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27
(ix). By way of the Impugned Order, the Ld. Sole Arbitrator dismissed IA-4.
The Ld. Sole Arbitrator returned its finding that the Sale Agreement is an 'agreement to sell' and not
a conveyance or sale. As a result, the Sale Agreement would fall under the category of Article 5(c) of
Schedule I of the Stamp Act i.e., Agreement or Memorandum of Agreement.
4. Aggrieved by the Impugned Order, the instant Petition has been preferred. As the facts leading up
to the instant Petition have been laid down, this Court shall endeavour to summarise the
contentions of the Parties and the broad grounds that have been raised to seek the exercise of this
Court's writ jurisdiction.
II. PETITIONER'S SUBMISSIONS:
5. The Ld. Sr. Counsel appearing for the Petitioner Mr. Pitambar Acharya contends that there has
been a complete failure by the Arbitral Tribunal in exercising jurisdiction and deciding the
application under Section 16.
6. Insofar as the maintainability of the petition is concerned, it is urged by him that the provisions of
the Act cannot oust the jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226 and 227. While the said
power ought to be exercised sparingly, the jurisdiction of High Courts can not be ousted especially
when there is a manifest error committed by the Arbitral Tribunal in that case, the High Court ought
to exercise jurisdiction under Article 227.
7. In this connection, Ld. Sr. Counsel for the Petitioner referred to the judgments in Deep Industries
Ltd. v. Oil and Natural Gas Corporation Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA
HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 Ltd.2 and Bhaven Construction through
Authorised Signatory Premjibhai K. Shah v. Executive Engineer Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam
Ltd.3. Relying upon the judgment in Deep Industries (supra) his submission was that in the said
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 4
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
case the Supreme Court categorically held that the jurisdiction of the writ court under Article 227
would not be ousted.
8. Next, it is submitted that the total value of the claim made by the Claimant in arbitration, on
account of alleged short-supply or non- supply of iron ore, exceeds (cid:128)4,000 crores.
9. The Learned Tribunal returned its finding that the Agreement is an "agreement to sell" and not a
conveyance or sale. As a result, the Sale Agreement would fall under the category of Article 5(c) of
Schedule I of the STAMP ACT, i.e., Agreement or Memorandum of Agreement. The Tribunal has
returned the aforesaid finding on the basis that the title or property in the iron ore has not passed to
the Claimant upon the execution of the agreements. As set out in the following paragraphs, the
Petitioner submits that the impugned order is bad in law and suffers from not only non-appreciation
of material facts but also abject misinterpretation of the settled position of law under the SOGA and
the STAMP ACT.
10. The Petitioner further submits that Section 2(10) of the STAMP ACT provides the definition of
"conveyance." It is contended that the Sale Agreement falls under Article 23 of Schedule I of the
Indian Stamp Act, 2019 SCC OnLine SC 1602 (2022) 1 SCC 75 Designation: AR-CUM-SR.
SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 as
amended by the Orissa Amendment, as the Sale Agreement would amount to a "Conveyance" as
defined under Section 2(10) of the STAMP ACT.
11. It is submitted that as per the STAMP ACT, conveyance occurs when the transfer of goods is
effected between parties. It is the Opposite Party's (the Claimant in the arbitration proceedings) own
case that the right in the iron ore vested in the Opposite Party from the date of the Sale Agreement.
In other words, the conveyance took place on the date of the Sale Agreement.
12. The Petitioner further relied on the judgment of the Supreme Court in State of Uttaranchal v.
Khurana Brothers,4 wherein it has been held that an agreement for the sale of crude resin was a
conveyance under Section 2(10) of the STAMP ACT, and therefore, it was chargeable to stamp duty
under Article 23, Schedule I-B.
13. It is further submitted that a perusal of the first purchase order dated 06.08.2011 ("1st PO"),
which is one out of 89 purchase orders placed on the Petitioner, along with Clause 5(c) and Clause 4
of the Sale Agreement, would demonstrate that the 'transfer of property in goods' was concluded as
per the scheme of Section 4(4) of the SOGA as early as in 2011.
14. The stamp duty presently paid on all agreements is only INR 100/-. However, the amount or
value of consideration under the Sale Agreement exceeds INR 20,000/-. Therefore, even on a prima
facie assessment, it is apparent that the stamp duty paid is insufficient. For 2010 (14) SCC 334
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 instance, in relation to the 1st PO alone, which amounts to INR
6,60,00,000/-, the stamp duty payable as per Article 23 of the STAMP ACT would be INR
6,60,000/-. This further substantiates that the Sale Agreement, read in conjunction with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 5
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
purchase orders, qualifies as a "conveyance" and should be subjected to appropriate stamp duty
under the STAMP ACT.
15. It is, therefore, submitted that the Tribunal failed to appreciate that until the underlying
instrument is impounded and adequate Stamp duty is paid, determination of rights, liabilities,
obligations and enforceability of such an instrument must be kept in abeyance. Therefore, at this
stage, the arbitral proceedings ought to be kept in abeyance/suspension. III. OPPOSITE PARTY'S
SUBMISSIONS:
16. On the other hand, Ld. Sr. Counsel for the Opposite Party submits that the orders of an Arbitral
Tribunal are not amenable to writ jurisdiction.
17. The Counsel for the Opposite Party relied on multiple Supreme Court pronouncements in Fuerst
Day Lawson Ltd. v. Jindal Exports Ltd.,5 Nivedita Sharma v. Cellular Operators Association of
India,6 and Thansingh Nathmal v. Superintendent of Taxes7 to argue that the Arbitration Act is
complete in itself and any interference by this court shall be unwarranted and unnecessary. It is
emphasized that the Arbitration Act is a self-contained and specialized statute aimed at (2011) 8
SCC 333 (2011) 14 SCC 337 AIR 1964 SC 1419 Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location:
ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 ensuring swift and effective dispute
resolution while minimizing judicial interference.
18. Under Section 16, the only outcomes that are contemplated under the Act are where the
objection as to maintainability is upheld by the Tribunal and whereby the Tribunal rejects the plea
and continues with the arbitral proceedings. In the former, when the plea is accepted by the
Tribunal under Section 16(2) or 16(3) of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act, 1996, an appeal would
lie under Section 37 of the Act. If the plea is either rejected or no ruling is rendered by the Tribunal,
the proceedings would continue and the challenge if any would be only after the final award is
passed.
19. The Opposite Party further reiterates that the Learned Arbitral Tribunal correctly held that the
Sale Agreement is an "agreement to sell" and not a conveyance or sale. The iron ore had not been
immediately transferred, and the transaction did not meet the legal requirements of a conveyance
under the Stamp Act. The agreements were sufficiently stamped under Article 5(c) of Schedule I of
the Stamp Act.
20. The Opposite Party denies that the Arbitral Tribunal erred in finding that the iron ore to be
extracted in the future did not pass to the Claimant at the time of the execution of the agreements.
The Respondent reaffirms that the Sale Agreement was an executory contract, and the property in
the form of goods was to be transferred in the future, subject to the conditions of the agreement.
21. The Opposite Party denies the Petitioner's assertion that iron ore worth crores had been
transferred under the Sale Agreement at the time of Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY
Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 execution. The property
in the iron ore had not passed at the time of execution, and the agreement remained an "agreement
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 6
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
to sell" until the specified conditions were fulfilled.
22. The Opposite Party submits that the Petitioner's argument that conveyance had occurred under
the Sale Agreement lacks legal merit. The Learned Arbitral Tribunal correctly interpreted the
agreement as an "agreement to sell," wherein the transfer of property would occur only on a future
date/ time.
23. The Opposite Party further agrees with the Learned Arbitral Tribunal's application of Section
4(4) of the SOGA and denies the Petitioner's assertion that the Tribunal failed to appreciate this
provision. The property in the form of goods was not transferred upon the execution of the Sale
Agreement but was subject to future conditions.
24. The Opposite Party denies that conveyance occurred under the purchase orders issued under the
Sale Agreement. The purchase orders were part of the overall framework of the Sale Agreement,
which remained an "agreement to sell" and did not constitute a conveyance. The Learned Arbitral
Tribunal rightly classified the Sale Agreement as such.
25. The Opposite Party denies that any additional consideration beyond what was stipulated in the
Sale Agreement was received by the Petitioner. The Respondent denies that the findings of the
Learned Arbitral Tribunal are contrary to the judgment in Khurana Brothers (supra). The facts of
that case differ significantly from the present matter, as Khurana Brothers (supra) dealt with an
actual conveyance, Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT,
CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 whereas the present case involves an "agreement to sell."
The agreements in this case do not fall under the definition of "conveyance" under Section 2(10) of
the Stamp Act.
26. The Opposite Party categorically denies the Petitioner's contention that the stamp duty paid on
the Sale Agreement is insufficient. It is reiterated that the stamp duty was duly and correctly
calculated in accordance with the applicable provisions of Article 5(c) of the Stamp Act. The
Petitioner's claim of insufficiency is entirely unfounded and lacks any substantive legal basis. The
agreements in question were duly stamped at the time of execution, and there exists no deficiency in
compliance with the statutory requirements under the Stamp Act. The mere fact that the Petitioner
is now attempting to classify the Sale Agreement as a "conveyance" to support its arguments does
not alter the legal position regarding the sufficiency of the stamp duty already paid.
27. The Opposite Party further submits that the Petitioner's assertion that the Sale Agreement
transformed into a "sale" merely upon the issuance of purchase orders is legally untenable and
contrary to the fundamental principles of contract law. It is evident from the explicit terms of the
Sale Agreement, as well as the nature of the transaction between the parties, that the agreement was
always intended to be an executory contract.
28. The transfer of property in the iron ore was conditional and subject to the fulfillment of specific
contractual obligations, including compliance with procedural and delivery requirements. The
Learned Arbitral Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 7
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 Tribunal, after due consideration of the contractual
framework, correctly determined that the Sale Agreement remained an "agreement to sell" and did
not constitute an immediate or outright sale.
29. The issuance of purchase orders did not, in any manner, alter the legal nature of the agreement
or result in the automatic transfer of ownership in the iron ore. Therefore, the Respondent reiterates
that the Tribunal's findings on this issue are legally sound and should not be interfered with.
30. The Opposite Party strongly refutes the Petitioner's contention that the arbitral proceedings
should be suspended or kept in abeyance pending the alleged impounding of the Sale Agreement. It
is submitted that there exists no legal basis whatsoever for the impounding of the Sale Agreement or
for halting the arbitral proceedings. The Petitioner's reliance on the Stamp Act to justify such a
suspension is entirely misplaced.
31. It is respectfully submitted that the arbitration must proceed without any unwarranted delays, as
there is no legitimate ground to suspend or abate the matter at this stage IV. ISSUES FOR
CONSIDERATION
32. Having heard the parties and perused the materials available on record, this Court has identified
the following issues to be determined:
A. Whether this Court can exercise its writ jurisdiction to interfere with an order
passed by the Ld. Sole Arbitrator under Section 16 of the A&C Act?
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT,
CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 B. Whether the Agreement dated 12.2.2004
and all subsequent agreements thereof entered into between the Parties are governed
by Article 5(C) of Schedule I of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899?
C. Whether this Court ought to interfere with the impugned order?
V. ISSUE A: WHETHERTHIS COURT CAN EXERCISE ITS WRIT JURISDICTION
TO INTERFERE WITH AN ORDER PASSED BY THE LD. SOLE ARBITRATOR
UNDER SECTION 16 OF THE A&C ACT?
33. The present Petitioner had preferred an Application under Section 16 before the Ld. Sole
Arbitrator pursuant to the judgment of the Supreme Court in Interplay Between Arbitration
Agreements under Arbitration, 1996 & Stamp Act, 1899, In re8, wherein the Supreme Court was
pleased to arrive at the following conclusions:
"M. Conclusions
235. The conclusions reached in this judgment are summarised below:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 8
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
235.1. Agreements which are not stamped or are inadequately stamped are
inadmissible in evidence under Section 35 of the Stamp Act. Such agreements are not
rendered void or void ab initio or unenforceable;
235.2. Non-stamping or inadequate stamping is a curable defect;
(2024) 6 SCC 1 Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT,
CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 235.3. An objection as to stamping does not fall for
determination under Sections 8 or 11 of the Arbitration Act. The Court concerned must examine
whether the arbitration agreement prima facie exists;
235.4. Any objections in relation to the stamping of the agreement fall within the ambit of the
Arbitral Tribunal; and 235.5. The decision in N.N. Global (2) [N.N. Global Mercantile (P) Ltd. v.
Indo Unique Flame Ltd., (2023) 7 SCC 1] and SMS Tea Estates [SMS Tea Estates (P) Ltd. v.
Chandmari Tea Co. (P) Ltd., (2011) 14 SCC 66] are overruled. Paras 22 and 29 of Garware Wall
Ropes [Garware Wall Ropes Ltd. v. Coastal Marine Constructions & Engg. Ltd., (2019) 9 SCC 209]
are overruled to that extent."
34. It is pertinent to draw close attention to Paragraph 235.3 in Interplay Between Arbitration
Agreements under Arbitration, 1996 & Stamp Act, 1899, In re (supra) wherein the Court concluded
that:
"An objection as to stamping does not fall for determination under Sections 8 or 11 of
the Arbitration Act. The Court concerned must examine whether the arbitration
agreement prima facie exists".
35. If the said objection is not to fall under Section 8 or 11, then the 'Court' i.e. the Ld. Tribunal's
power to examine whether the arbitration agreement prima facie exists falls under Section 16 of the
A&C Act. Section 16 of the A&C Act is reproduced hereunder for the sake of convenience:
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT,
CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 "Section 16: (1) The arbitral tribunal may
rule on its own jurisdiction, including ruling on any objections with respect to the
existence or validity of the arbitration agreement, and for that purpose,--
(a) an arbitration clause which forms part of a contract shall be treated as an
agreement independent of the other terms of the contract; and
(b) a decision by the arbitral tribunal that the contract is null and void shall not entail
ipso jure the invalidity of the arbitration clause.
(2) A plea that the arbitral tribunal does not have jurisdiction shall be raised not later
than the submission of the statement of defence; however, a party shall not be
precluded from raising such a plea merely because that he has appointed, or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 9
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
participated in the appointment of, an arbitrator.
(3) A plea that the arbitral tribunal is exceeding the scope of its authority shall be
raised as soon as the matter alleged to be beyond the scope of its authority is raised
during the arbitral proceedings.
(4) The arbitral tribunal may, in either of the cases referred to in sub-section (2) or
sub-section (3), admit a later plea if it considers the delay justified.
(5) The arbitral tribunal shall decide on a plea referred to in sub-section (2) or
sub-section (3) and, where the arbitral tribunal takes a decision rejecting the plea,
continue with the arbitral proceedings and make an arbitral award.
(6) A party aggrieved by such an arbitral award may make an application for setting
aside such an arbitral award in accordance with section 34."
(Emphasis supplied) Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT,
CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27
36. Therefore, the Petitioner's application under Section 16 which was moved after obtaining
permission from the Ld. Sole Arbitrator was not without basis or based on an erroneous
interpretation of the Supreme Court's judgment in Interplay Between Arbitration Agreements under
Arbitration, 1996 & Stamp Act, 1899, In re (supra).
37. In India, the maintainability of writ petitions in respect of arbitration matters presents a
nuanced legal challenge, requiring the balancing of the extraordinary powers of High Courts under
Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India with the objectives of the Arbitration and
Conciliation Act, 1996 (hereinafter "Arbitration Act").
38. Section 5 of the Arbitration Act minimises judicial interference in arbitral proceedings, confining
intervention strictly to the circumstances outlined within the statute. However, courts have
frequently grappled with situations where exercising the writ powers was deemed necessary to
preserve the streams of justice. Over the years, landmark judgments have delineated the scope of
judicial intervention, affirming two fundamental principles: (i) the writ jurisdiction of High Courts
remains intact despite Section 5 of the Arbitration Act; and (ii) its exercise must be limited to rare
and exceptional cases, such as those involving a manifest lack of jurisdiction, bad faith, or violations
of natural justice principles.
39. This question assumes greater importance as arbitration continues to gain prominence as an
alternative dispute resolution mechanism in India. While Arbitral Tribunals are afforded significant
autonomy to adjudicate disputes, judicial scrutiny is sometimes required to prevent Designation:
AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025
17:02:27 the misuse of arbitration or a miscarriage of justice. Recent rulings of the Apex Court have
further clarified the contours of this balance, emphasising that writ petitions should be entertained
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 10
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
sparingly and in line with the Arbitration Act's objective of efficient, independent dispute resolution.
40. The extraordinary jurisdiction of High Courts in India, enshrined in Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution, serves as a foundation for protecting fundamental rights and administering justice.
Article 226 empowers High Courts to issue writs for the enforcement of fundamental rights, offering
a remedy against both legislative and executive actions. Article 227, on the other hand, confers every
High Court with supervisory powers over all courts and tribunals within the jurisdiction of such
High Court. Together, these articles establish a robust framework for judicial review, reinforcing the
rule of law and providing a mechanism to check the misuse of power.
41. The Arbitration Act establishes a robust legal framework designed to facilitate efficient dispute
resolution through arbitration. This landmark legislation was crafted to minimise judicial
intervention and enhance party autonomy, thereby aligning Indian arbitration practices with
international norms and expectations. Section 5 of the Arbitration Act embodies a fundamental
principle: courts are expressly prohibited from interfering in matters governed by the Arbitration
Act, except as explicitly stipulated within its framework. Through this provision, the legislature aims
to preserve the integrity of arbitration as a preferred dispute resolution mechanism, ensuring that
Arbitral Tribunals operate Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH
COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 with the requisite independence to deliver fair and
impartial awards. In addition to defining the limits of judicial oversight, the Act encompasses
provisions that further reinforce the principle of minimal intervention. It grants arbitrators
substantial discretion to determine procedural matters and the scope of their jurisdiction.
42. In Fuerst Day Lawson Ltd. v. Jindal Exports Ltd.,9 the Supreme Court characterised the
Arbitration Act as a comprehensive and specialised law designed to facilitate quick and efficient
dispute resolution through arbitration while reducing judicial interference.
43. One of the main objectives of the Arbitration Act is to minimise the supervisory role of Courts in
the arbitral process. Party autonomy and settlement of disputes by an Arbitral Tribunal are the
hallmarks of arbitration law. Section 5 gives effect to the true intention of the parties to have their
disputes resolved through arbitration in a quick, efficient and effective manner by minimising
judicial interference in the arbitral proceedings10.Parliament enacted Section 5 to minimise the
supervisory role of Courts in the arbitral process to the bare minimum, and only to the extent "so
provided" under the Part I of the Arbitration Act. In doing so, the legislature did not altogether
exclude the role of Courts or judicial authorities in arbitral proceedings, but limited it to
circumstances where the support of judicial authorities is required for the successful
implementation and enforcement of the arbitral process1112. The Arbitration Act in fact, envisages
the role of Courts to (2011) 8 SCC 333 Food Corpn. of India v. Indian Council of Arbitration, (2003)
6 SCC 564. Union of India v. Popular Construction Co., (2001) 8 SCC 470 Designation:
AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025
17:02:27 "support arbitration process"13 by providing necessary aid and assistance when required
by law in certain situations.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 11
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
44. Section 5 begins with the expression "notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for
the time being in force." The non obstante clause is Parliament's addition to Article 5 of the Model
Law. It is of a wide amplitude and sets forth the legislative intent of limiting judicial intervention
during the arbitral process. In the context of Section 5, this means that the provisions contained in
Part I of the Arbitration Act ought to be given full effect and operation irrespective of any other law
for the time being in force. It is now an established proposition of law that the legislature uses
non-obstante clauses to remove all obstructions which might arise out of the provisions of any other
law, which stand in the way of the operation of the legislation which incorporates the non obstante
clause.14
45. In Chandavarkar Sita Ratna Rao v. Ashalata S. Guram15 , Sabyasachi Mukharji, J. explained the
purport of non obstante clause in the following terms :
"67. A clause beginning with the expression "notwithstanding anything contained in
this Act or in some particular provision in the Act or in some particular Act or in any
law for the time being in force, or in any contract" is more often than not appended to
a section in the beginning with a view to give the enacting part of the section in case
of conflict an overriding effect over the provision of the act or P. Anand Gajapathi
Raju v. P.V.G. Raju, (2000) 4 SCC 539 Swiss Timing Ltd. v. Commonwealth Games
2010 Organising Committee, (2014) 6 SCC 677 State of Bihar v. Bihar Rajya
M.S.E.S.K.K. Mahasangh, (2005) 9 SCC 129 (1986) 4 SCC 447 Designation:
AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 the contract mentioned in the non obstante clause. It is
equivalent to saying that in spite of the provision of the Act or any other Act
mentioned in the non obstante clause or any contract or document mentioned the
enactment following it will have its full operation or that the provisions embraced in
the non obstante clause would not be an impediment for an operation of the
enactment."
46. Although a non obstante clause must be allowed to operate with full vigour, its effect is limited to
the extent intended by the legislature. In ICICI Bank Ltd. v. Sidco Leathers Ltd.,16 the High Court
held that a non-obstante clause must be interpreted by confining it to the legislative policy. Thus,
even if a non obstante clause has wide amplitude, the extent of its impact has to be measured in view
of the legislative intention and legislative policy. In view of this settled legal position, the issue that
arises for our consideration is the scope of the non obstante clause contained in Section 5 of the
Arbitration Act.
47. Section 5 has two facets; positive and negative. The positive facet vests judicial authorities with
jurisdiction over arbitral proceedings in matters expressly allowed in or dealt with under Part I of
the Arbitration Act. The flip side to this approach is that judicial authorities are prohibited from
intervening in arbitral proceedings in situations where the Arbitral Tribunal has been bestowed with
exclusive jurisdiction. This is the negative facet of Section 5. The non obstante clause limits the
extent of judicial intervention in respect of matters expressly provided under the Arbitration Act. In
Bhaven Construction v. Sardar Sarovar Narmada Nigam Ltd. (supra), the Apex Court observed that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 12
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
the:
(2006) 10 SCC 452 Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA
HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 "12. ... non obstante clause is
provided to uphold the intention of the legislature as provided in the Preamble to
adopt Uncitral Model Law and Rules, to reduce excessive judicial interference which
is not contemplated under the Arbitration Act."
48. The interplay between the legislative framework under the Arbitration Act and the constitutional
powers of the High Courts under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution has been discussed in
several matters. These rulings have not only elucidated the parameters within which High Courts
may exercise their writ powers but have also reinforced the fundamental principles underlining the
Arbitration Act.
49. In Union of India v. R. Gandhi, President Madras Bar Association,17 the Supreme Court
observed on the question as to what constitutes 'Courts' and 'Tribunals' as under:
"38. The term 'Courts' refers to places where justice is administered or refers to
Judges who exercise judicial functions. Courts are established by the state for
administration of justice that is for exercise of the judicial power of the state to
maintain and uphold the rights, to punish wrongs and to adjudicate upon disputes.
Tribunals on the other hand are special alternative institutional mechanisms, usually
brought into existence by or under a statute to decide disputes arising with reference
to that particular statute, or to determine controversies arising out of any
administrative law. Courts refer to Civil Courts, Criminal Courts and High Courts.
Tribunals can be either private Tribunals (Arbitral Tribunals), or Tribunals
constituted under the Constitution (Speaker or the Chairman acting under Para 6(1)
of the Tenth (2010) 11 SCC 1 Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location:
ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 Schedule) or
Tribunals authorized by the Constitution (Administrative Tribunals under Article
323A and Tribunals for other matters under Article 323B) or Statutory Tribunals
which are created under a statute (Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Debt Recovery
Tribunals and consumer fora). Some Tribunals are manned exclusively by Judicial
Officers (Rent Tribunals, Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, Labour Courts and
Industrial Tribunals). Other statutory Tribunals have Judicial and Technical
Members (Administrative Tribunals, TDSAT, Competition Appellate Tribunal,
Consumer fora, Cyber Appellate Tribunal, etc)."
(Emphasis supplied)
50. Similar observations were made by the Supreme Court in Srei Infrastructure Finance Ltd. v. Tuff
Drilling (P) Ltd.18,as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 13
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
"14. Arbitration is a quasi judicial proceeding, equitable in nature or character which
differs from a litigation in a Court. The power and functions of arbitral tribunal are
statutorily regulated. The tribunals are special arbitration with institutional
mechanism brought into existence by or under statute to decide dispute arising with
reference to that particular statute or to determine controversy referred to it. The
tribunal may be a statutory tribunal or tribunal constituted under the provisions of
the Constitution of India. Section 9 of the Civil Procedure Code vests into the Civil
Court jurisdiction to entertain and determine any civil dispute. The constitution of
tribunals has been with intent and purpose to take out different categories of
litigation into the special tribunal for speedy and effective determination of disputes
in the interest of the society. Whenever, by a legislative enactment jurisdiction
exercised by ordinary civil court is transferred or entrusted (2018) 11 SCC 470
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT,
CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 to tribunals such tribunals are entrusted
with statutory power. The arbitral tribunals in the statute of 1996 are no different,
they decide the lis between the parties, follows Rules and procedure conforming to
the principle of natural justice, the adjudication has finality subject to remedy
provided under the 1996 Act. Section 8 of the 1996 Act obliges a judicial authority in
a matter which is a subject of an agreement to refer the parties to arbitration. The
reference to arbitral tribunal thus can be made by judicial authority or an arbitrator
can be appointed in accordance with the arbitration agreement under Section 11 of
the 1996 Act."
(Emphasis Supplied)
51. Thus, the Supreme Court has time and again held that arbitral tribunals are private tribunals
unlike those tribunals set up under the statute or specialized tribunals under the Constitution of
India. Thus, a Petition under Article 227 challenging orders of an Arbitral Tribunal would be
maintainable.
Scope and extent of interference
52. Coming now to the question as to what would be the scope of interference under Article 226/227
against orders passed by the Arbitral Tribunals, though, a number of judgments have been cited by
both parties, recent decisions of the Supreme Court and of this Court have settled the issue.
53. Until 2019, an order passed by an arbitral tribunal dismissing a Section 16 application preferred
by either of the parties could not have been challenged at any court in India. The party aggrieved by
such a Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 dismissal was left with no remedy and had to wait for the arbitrator to pass
the final award and then challenge the same on the grounds of dismissal at a court of law. This was
the scenario until 2019 when a three Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in a judgement authored by
Justice R.F Nariman in the case of M/S Deep Industries Ltd. v Oil And Natural Gas Corporation
(supra) held that it is possible to challenge such a dismissal order through a writ at a High Court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 14
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, but the same laid down some stringent
terms to challenge a Section 16 dismissal order.
54. In Deep Industries (supra) decided on 28th November, 2019, the Supreme Court considered
S.B.P. & Company v. Patel Engineering Ltd.19 and Fuerst Day Lawson Limited v. Jindal Exports
Limited20 and observed as under:
"15. Given the aforesaid statutory provision and given the fact that the 1996 Act
repealed three previous enactments in order that there be speedy disposal of all
matters covered by it, it is clear that the statutory policy of the Act is that not only are
time limits set down for disposal of the arbitral proceedings themselves but time
limits have also been set down for Section 34 references to be decided. Equally, in
Union of India v. Varindera Const. Ltd., dated 17.09.2018, disposing of SLP (C) No.
23155/2013, this Court has imposed the self-same limitation on first appeals Under
Section 37 so that there be a timely resolution of all matters which are covered by
arbitration awards.
16. Most significant of all is the non-obstante Clause contained in Section 5 which
states that notwithstanding (2005) 8 SCC 618 (2011) 8 SCC 333 Designation:
AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 anything contained in any other law, in matters that arise
under Part I of the Arbitration Act, no judicial authority shall intervene except where
so provided in this Part.
Section 37 grants a constricted right of first appeal against certain judgments and orders and no
others. Further, the statutory mandate also provides for one bite at the cherry, and interdicts a
second appeal being filed (See Section 37(2) of the Act).
17. This being the case, there is no doubt whatsoever that if petitions were to be filed Under Articles
226/227 of the Constitution against orders passed in appeals Under Section 37, the entire arbitral
process would be derailed and would not come to fruition for many years. At the same time, we
cannot forget that Article 227 is a constitutional provision which remains untouched by the
non-obstante Clause of Section 5 of the Act. In these circumstances, what is important to note is that
though petitions can be filed Under Article 227 against judgments allowing or dismissing first
appeals Under Section 37 of the Act, yet the High Court would be extremely circumspect in
interfering with the same, taking into account the statutory policy as adumbrated by us herein above
so that interference is restricted to orders that are passed which are patently lacking in inherent
jurisdiction."
(Emphasis supplied)
55. In Punjab State Power Ltd. v. Emta Coal Ltd.21 again the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered
Deep Industries Ltd. (supra) and held:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 15
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
"We are of the view that a foray to the writ Court from a section 16 application being
dismissed by the Arbitrator can only be if the order passed is so (2020) 17 SCC 93
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT,
CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 perverse that the only possible conclusion is
that there is a patent lack in inherent jurisdiction. A patent lack of inherent
jurisdiction requires no argument whatsoever - it must be the perversity of the order
that must stare one in the face. Unfortunately, parties are using this expression which
is in our judgment in Deep Industries Ltd., to go to the 227 Court in matters which do
not suffer from a patent lack of inherent jurisdiction. This is one of them. Instead of
dismissing the writ petition on the ground stated, the High Court would have done
well to have referred to our judgment in Deep Industries Ltd. and dismiss the 227
petition on the ground that there is no such perversity in the order which leads to a
patent lack of inherent jurisdiction. The High Court ought to have discouraged
similar litigation by imposing heavy costs. The High Court did not choose to do either
of these two things.
In any case, now that Shri Vishwanathan has argued this matter and it is clear that this is not a case
which falls under the extremely exceptional category, we dismiss this special leave petition with
costs of Rs. 50,000/- to be paid to the Supreme Court Legal Services Committee within two weeks."
(Emphasis supplied)
56. In Bhaven Constructions (supra), the Supreme Court was dealing with a similar situation where
an order passed by the arbitrator under Section 16(2) of the Act was assailed in a petition under
article 226/227. In the said case, the ld. Arbitrator held that he had jurisdiction to adjudicate the
dispute. The Supreme Court considered the question of maintainability of the writ petition and held:
"....10. Having heard both parties and perusing the material available on record, the
question which needs to be answered is whether the arbitral process could be
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT,
CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 interfered under Article 226/227 of the
Constitution, and under what circumstance?
11. We need to note that the Arbitration Act is a code in itself. This phrase is not
merely perfunctory, but has definite legal consequences. One such consequence is
spelled out under Section 5 of the Arbitration Act, which reads as under
"Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, in
matters governed by this Part, no judicial authority shall intervene except where so
provided in this Part." The non-obstante clause is provided to uphold the intention of
the legislature as provided in the Preamble to adopt UNCITRAL Model Law and
Rules, to reduce excessive judicial interference which is not contemplated under the
Arbitration Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 16
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
12. The Arbitration Act itself gives various procedures and forums to challenge the
appointment of an arbitrator. The framework clearly portrays an intention to address
most of the issues within the ambit of the Act itself, without there being scope for any
extra statutory mechanism to provide just and fair solutions.
13. Any party can enter into an arbitration agreement for resolving any disputes
capable of being arbitrable. Parties, while entering into such agreements, need to
fulfill the basic ingredients provided under Section 7 of the Arbitration Act.
Arbitration being a creature of contract, gives a flexible framework for the parties to
agree for their own procedure with minimalistic stipulations under the Arbitration
Act.
14. If parties fail to refer a matter to arbitration or to appoint an arbitrator in
accordance with the procedure agreed by them, then a party can take recourse for
court assistance under Section 8 or 11 of the Arbitration Act.
15. In this context, we may state that the Appellant acted in accordance with the
procedure laid down under the Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location:
ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 agreement to
unilaterally appoint a sole arbitrator, without Respondent No. 1 mounting a judicial
challenge at that stage. Respondent No. 1 then appeared before the sole arbitrator
and challenged the jurisdiction of the sole arbitrator, in terms of Section 16(2) of the
Arbitration Act.
16. Thereafter, Respondent No. 1 chose to impugn the order passed by the arbitrator
under Section 16(2) of the Arbitration Act through a petition under Article 226/227
of the Indian Constitution. In the usual course, the Arbitration Act provides for a
mechanism of challenge under Section 34. The opening phrase of Section 34 reads as
'Recourse to a Court against an arbitral award may be made only by an application
for setting aside such award in accordance with subsection (2) and sub-section (3)'.
The use of term 'only' as occurring under the provision serves two purposes of
making the enactment a complete code and lay down the procedure.
17. In any case, the hierarchy in our legal framework, mandates that a legislative
enactment cannot curtail a Constitutional right. In Nivedita Sharma v. Cellular
Operators Association of India, (2011) 14 SCC 337, this Court referred to several
judgments and held:
"11. We have considered the respective arguments/submissions. There cannot be any
dispute that the power of the High Courts to issue directions, orders or writs
including writs in the nature of habeas corpus, certiorari, mandamus, quo warranto
and prohibition under Article 226 of the Constitution is a basic feature of the
Constitution and cannot be curtailed by parliamentary legislation - L. Chandra
Kumar v. Union of India, (1997) 3 SCC 261. However, it is one thing to say that in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 17
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
exercise of the power vested in it under Article 226 of the Constitution, the High
Court can entertain a writ petition against any order passed by or action taken by the
State and/or its agency/instrumentality or any public authority or order Designation:
AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 passed by a quasi-judicial body/authority, and it is an
altogether different thing to say that each and every petition filed under Article 226 of
the Constitution must be entertained by the High Court as a matter of course
ignoring the fact that the aggrieved person has an effective alternative remedy.
Rather, it is settled law that when a statutory forum is created by law for redressal of
grievances, a writ petition should not be entertained ignoring the statutory
dispensation.(emphasis supplied)"
57. It is therefore, prudent for a Judge to not to exercise discretion to allow judicial interference
beyond the procedure established under the enactment. This power needs to be exercised in
exceptional rarity, wherein one party is left remediless under the statute or a clear 'bad faith' shown
by one of the parties or in case which allowed to go unchecked would result in a situation of patent
illegality being perpetuated. This high standard set by this Court is in terms of the legislative
intention to make the arbitration fair and efficient.
58. In this context, this Court may revert to Deep Industries (supra) wherein interplay of Section 5
of the Arbitration Act and Article 227 of the Constitution was analyzed as under:
"15. Most significant of all is the nonobstante clause contained in Section 5 which
states that notwithstanding anything contained in any other law, in matters that arise
under Part I of the Arbitration Act, no judicial authority shall intervene except where
so provided in this Part. Section 37 grants a constricted right of first appeal against
certain judgments and orders and no others. Further, the statutory mandate also
provides for one bite at the cherry, and interdicts a second appeal being filed (See
Section 37(2) of the Act) Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA
HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27
16. This being the case, there is no doubt whatsoever that if petitions were to be filed
under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution against orders passed in appeals under
Section 37, the entire arbitral process would be derailed and would not come to
fruition for many years. At the same time, we cannot forget that Article 227 is a
constitutional provision which remains untouched by the non-obstante clause of
Section 5 of the Act. In these circumstances, what is important to note is that though
petitions can be filed under Article 227 against judgments allowing or dismissing first
appeals under Section 37 of the Act, yet the High Court would be extremely
circumspect in interfering with the same, taking into account the statutory policy as
adumbrated by us herein above so that interference is restricted to orders that are
passed which are patently lacking in inherent jurisdiction."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 18
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
59. Furthermore, the Apex Court in Estralla Rubber v. Dass Estate (P) Ltd.22, has observed that the
High Court's power under Article 227 of the Constitution of India is limited to ensuring that inferior
courts and tribunals act within their jurisdiction and perform their duties lawfully. It is not a tool for
correcting every error or hardship within the subordinate courts' jurisdiction but is reserved for
cases of serious dereliction of duty or violation of fundamental principles of law, where failure to
intervene would result in grave injustice. The relevant excerpt from the judgement is produced
hereinbelow:
"6. The scope and ambit of exercise of power and jurisdiction by a High Court under
Article 227 of the Constitution of India is examined and explained in a number of
decisions of this Court. The exercise of power (2001) 8 SCC 97 Designation:
AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 under this article involves a duty on the High Court to keep
inferior courts and tribunals within the bounds of their authority and to see that they
do the duty expected or required of them in a legal manner. The High Court is not
vested with any unlimited prerogative to correct all kinds of hardship or wrong
decisions made within the limits of the jurisdiction of the subordinate courts or
tribunals. Exercise of this power and interfering with the orders of the courts or
tribunals is restricted to cases of serious dereliction of duty and flagrant violation of
fundamental principles of law or justice, where if the High Court does not interfere, a
grave injustice remains uncorrected. It is also well settled that the High Court while
acting under this article cannot exercise its power as an appellate court or substitute
its own judgment in place of that of the subordinate court to correct an error, which
is not apparent on the face of the record. The High Court can set aside or ignore the
findings of facts of an inferior court or tribunal, if there is no evidence at all to justify
or the finding is so perverse, that no reasonable person can possibly come to such a
conclusion, which the court or tribunal has come to.
7. This Court in Ahmedabad Mfg. & Calico Ptg. Co.
Ltd. v. Ram TahelRamnand [(1972) 1 SCC 898 : AIR 1972 SC 1598] in AIR para 12 has stated that
the power under Article 227 of the Constitution is intended to be used sparingly and only in
appropriate cases, for the purpose of keeping the subordinate courts and tribunals within the
bounds of their authority and, not for correcting mere errors. Reference also has been made in this
regard to the case Waryam Singh v. Amarnath [AIR 1954 SC 215 : 1954 SCR 565] . This Court in
BathutmalRaichand Oswal v. Laxmibai R. Tarte [(1975) 1 SCC 858 : AIR 1975 SC 1297] has observed
that the power of superintendence under Article 227 cannot be invoked to correct an error of fact
which only a superior court can do in exercise of its statutory power as a court of appeal and that the
High Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 Court in exercising its jurisdiction under Article 227 cannot convert itself
into a court of appeal when the legislature has not conferred a right of appeal. Judged by these
pronounced principles, the High Court clearly exceeded its jurisdiction under Article 227 in passing
the impugned order."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 19
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
60. A perusal of the above-mentioned decisions, shows that the following principles are well settled,
in respect of the scope of interference under Article 226/227 in challenges to orders by an arbitral
tribunal including orders passed under Section 16 of the Act:
(i). An arbitral tribunal is a 'tribunal' against which a petition under Article 226/227
would be maintainable;
(ii). The non-obstante clause in section 5 of the Act does not apply in respect of
exercise of powers under Article 227 which is a Constitutional provision;
(iii). For interference under Article 226/227, there have to be 'exceptional
circumstances';
(iv). Though interference is permissible, unless and until the order is so perverse that
it is patently lacking in inherent jurisdiction, the writ court would not interfere;
(v). Interference is permissible only if the order is completely perverse i.e., that the
perversity must stare in the face;
(vi). High Courts ought to discourage litigation which necessarily interfere with the
arbitral process;
(vii). Excessive judicial interference in the arbitral process is not encouraged;
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27
(viii). It is prudent not to exercise jurisdiction under Article 226/227;
(ix). The power should be exercised in 'exceptional rarity' or if there is 'bad faith' which is shown;
(x). Efficiency of the arbitral process ought not to be allowed to diminish and hence interdicting the
arbitral process should be completely avoided.
61. The Supreme Court, while acknowledging that the hierarchy in our legal framework mandates
that a legislative enactment cannot curtail a constitutional right, has observed that it is settled law
that when a statutory forum is created by law for redressal of grievances, a writ petition would not
'ordinarily' be entertained ignoring the statutory dispensation. This power needs to be exercised in
exceptional rarity, wherein the illegality or perversity in the order of the Ld. Sole Arbitrator stares
one in the face.
62. Furthermore, it is also well settled that availability of an alternative remedy does not prohibit the
High Courts from entertaining a writ petition in an appropriate case. The High Courts may entertain
a writ petition, notwithstanding the availability of an alternative remedy, particularly (i) where the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 20
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
writ petition seeks enforcement of a fundamental right, (ii) where there is failure of principles of
natural justice, (iii) where the impugned orders or proceedings are wholly without jurisdiction or
(iv) the vires of an act is under challenge.
63. This Court concludes that the High Court "can" exercise its powers under writ jurisdiction in
spite of Section 5 of the A&C Act or the Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA
HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 remedies provided in Section 16 of the A&C
Act, but whether it "ought" to in this present case remains to be seen.
VI. ISSUE B: WHETHERTHE AGREEMENT DATED 12.2.2004 AND ALL SUBSEQUENT
AGREEMENTS THEREOF ENTERED INTO BETWEEN THE PARTIES ARE GOVERNED BY
ARTICLE 5(C) OF SCHEDULE I OF THE INDIAN STAMP ACT, 1899?
64. As the agreements between the parties were entered into in Odisha, the provisions of the Stamp
Act, 1899 as amended by Orissa/Odisha Amendments Acts from time to time will be applicable.
65. Section 2(10) of the STAMP ACT provides the definition of "conveyance". It states that:
"conveyance includes a conveyance on sale every instrument by which property,
whether moveable or immoveable is transferred inter vivos and which is not
otherwise specifically provided for by Schedule I, Schedule I- A or Schedule I-B, as
the case may be."
66. It is the Petitioner's case that the Sale Agreement entered into between the parties was a 'Sale
Agreement' and not an 'Agreement to Sell". Therefore, being in the nature of a conveyance, where
the movable property is transferred between the Parties, the stamp duty payable on the Agreements
would be as per Article 23 of Schedule 1 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899. Article 23 of Schedule 1 of
the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 on which the Petitioner relies on is extracted hereunder:
"23. Conveyance [as defined by Sec. 2(10)], not being a transfer charged or exempted
under No. 62 -
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT,
CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 where the amount or value of the
consideration for such conveyance as set forth therein does not exceed Rs. 50 - Eight
annas where it exceeds Rs. 50 but does not exceed Rs. 100 - One Rupee and for every
Rs. 500 or part thereof in excess of Rs. 1,000 - Five Rupees"
67. On the other hand, the Opposite Party contends that the Sale Agreement entered into between
the Parties is an 'Agreement to Sell' and therefore, stamp duty payable on the Agreements would be
as per Article 5(C) of Schedule 1 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899.
68. Article 5 of Schedule 1 of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 on which the Opposite Party relies on is
extracted hereunder:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 21
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
"5. AGREEMENT OR MEMORANDUM OF AN AGREEMENT--
(a) if relating to the sale of a bill of exchange - Two annas.
(b) if relating to the sale of a Government security or share in an incorporated
company or other body corporate -
Subject to a maximum of ten rupees, one anna for every Rs. 10,000 or part thereof of the value of
the security or share.
(c) if not otherwise provided for - Eight annas."
69. At this juncture it is relevant to refer to Section 4 of the Sale Of Goods Act which reads as
follows:
"Sale and agreement to sell.
(1) A contract of sale of goods is a contract whereby the seller transfers or agrees to
transfer the property in goods to the buyer for a price. There may be a contract of sale
between one part-owner and another.
(2) A contract of sale may be absolute or conditional.
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 (3) Where under a contract of sale the property in the goods is transferred
from the seller to the buyer, the contract is called a sale, but where the transfer of the property in the
goods is to take place at a future time or subject to some condition thereafter to be fulfilled, the
contract is called an agreement to sell.
(4) An agreement to sell becomes a sale when the time elapses or the conditions are fulfilled subject
to which the property in the goods is to be transferred." (Emphasis supplied)
70. Now, this court shall embark on a perusal of the true intention of the Parties by examining the
Agreement itself as it is settled in law, that the mere title of the document would not be indicative of
the true nature of the document itself. The recital in the Sale Agreement dated 12.02.2004 states the
following:
"..AND WHEREAS upon knowing the desire of the Mine Owner as aforesaid, the
Buyer offered to enter into a long- term contract with the Mine Owner for purchase of
the entire output of the said Mine as a sole buyer...
... AND WHEREAS Mr. Tarini Prasad Mohanty the Mine Owner hereby further
declares that it has the right and the authority to enter into and execute this
agreement with SISCO and that SISCO is entitled to the undsitrubed purchase of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 22
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
entire Iron Ore excavated by SIPL but at least 10,000MT on monthly average of a
quarter after 12 months of operation from the lease hold area without interference,
interruption claim or demand whatsoever from or by Mr. Tarini Prasad Mohanty or
any one claiming under this subject, or course, to the specification of composition,
contents, etc."
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27
71. Clause 1 of this Agreement is extracted hereunder:
"1. Sale of Material 1.1. Mr. Tarini Prasad Mohanty shall, during the period often
years from the date of start of mining operation sell and SISICO shall purchase the
entire Iron Ore excavated by SIPL from the mine of Mr. Tarini Prasad Mohanty.
1.2 During the subsistence of this Agreement, Mr. Tarini Prasad Mohanty agrees and
covenants not to sell, dispose or part with Iron Ore excavated by SIPL from the
leasehold area to any other party other than SISCO or any one nominated by SISCO
and SISCO shall have sole and exclusive right to purchase the same from Mr. Tarini
Prasad Mohanty either by itself or by its nominee. In the event Tarini Prasad
Mohanty sells to any of the parties nominated by SISCO and sustain losses, if any, it
shall be on account of SISCO.
1.3 In the event SISCO refuses to purchase Iron Ore either by itself or through its
nominees, Mr. Tarini Prasad Mohanty shall be entitled to adjust the value of unsold
ore against advance, if any, even by SISCO. In the event such advance is not sufficient
enough to cover value of uplifted ore, Mr. Tarini Prasad Mohanty shall be entitled to
sell such portion of the uplifted ore to a third party as is sufficient enough to cover the
unadjusted amount.
1.4. In the event any other minerals/substances are excavated from the leasehold
area, the same shall also be available for sale to SISCO on mutually agreed term s. In
the event the terms are not agreed upon, Mr. Tarini Prasad Mohanty shall have the
right to sell the same to any third party. In the event, during the pendency of this
agreement if iron ore is not available in the lease hold area in required."
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27
72. Sub-Clause 1.1 of Clause 1 of the Agreement dated 12.02.2004 extracted above shows that Mr.
Tarini Prasad Mohanty, during the tenure from the start of mining operation, 'shall' sell and SISCO
'shall' purchase the entire iron ore excavated by SIPL from the mine of Mr. Tarini Prasad Mohanty
for an exclusive period of 10 years. The seller was also injuncted from selling to any third party
during the said period.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 23
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
73. On 9.1.2011, a second amendment agreement was entered into between the parties (hereafter
referred to as the "Second Ore Sales Amendment Agreement (SOSAA)'') in terms of which a pre
determined sale consideration was payable by the Petitioner to the Opposite Party fixing a price
component. The SOSAA extended the term of the agreement to 11 years from 10 years, amended the
scope of supply of iron ores from iron ore lumps to calibrated lumpy ores, iron ore fines and rejects
and further stipulated that the rights and obligations of the parties were subject to such limitations
or restrictions as may be imposed by the applicable law and further that the mine owner would not
transfer the mining lease in any manner. According to the Petitioner, the SOSAA was intended to
supersede the first two agreements. The Petitioner has stated that up to this point, it had paid more
than Rs.5 crores to the Opposite Party.
74. It is also pertinent to note that the Sale Agreement entered into by and between the parties has
been "acted upon", in the sense that 89 purchase orders have been issued by virtue of the
understanding contained in the Sale Agreement. The same purchase orders have been issued in
performance of the contract conditions and have to be read to Designation: AR-CUM-SR.
SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 a part of
the contract itself. It is thus clear that the agreements have been acted upon and form a concluded
contract with the meaning of the Indian Contract Act, 1872.
75. The intention of the Parties makes it abundantly clear that all the minerals so excavated from the
Mines of the Opposite Party would stand vested in the Petitioner for a period of ten years,
commensurate to which the consideration was already fixed and paid. Therefore, it is grossly
erroneous and perverse that the Ld. Sole Arbitrator has merely relied on the title of the document
without endeavouring to examine the true intention of the parties and the manner in which the
contract has been worked out between the parties. The conveyance of the goods in question has been
done and as such nothing remains to be performed in the future upon fulfilment of any contingency.
76. When faced with a similar question, the Apex Court in State of Uttaranchal v. Khurana
Brothers23, held as follows:
"5. The short question that arises for consideration is whether the above contract of
sale for crude resin amounts to "conveyance" as defined under Section 2(10) of the
Stamp Act, 1899 (for short "the Stamp Act") and, if the answer is in the affirmative,
whether stamp duty is chargeable thereon. In order to answer the aforesaid question,
the true and real meaning of the document needs to be ascertained. When we look at
the contract, it would be seen that in consideration of the price stated in the contract,
the State Government agreed to deliver the specified quantity of the crude resin to
the writ petitioner (purchaser). The parties agreed that quantity may increase (2010)
14 SCC 334 Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH
COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 or decrease by 10% and the resin
will have to be removed by the purchaser within 60 days from the date of approval of
sale and it will not be removed in more than 60 instalments.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 24
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
As per the terms of the contract, the purchaser was required to pay the amount of sale price
irrespective of the fact whether the contracted quantity of resin was lifted by it or not. By a
subsequent communication dated 7-4-2001, the purchaser was informed of the acceptance of the
bid for the stated resin lot(s) in its favour and it was asked to arrange for lifting of the same within
60 days of the issuance of that letter.
...
7. The essence of sale is the transfer of the property in a thing from one person to another for a
price. As per Section 4, the contract of sale includes an agreement to sell. It is not necessary that
contract of sale must be absolute. It may be conditional as well. The essential feature that
distinguishes the contract of sale from an agreement to sell is that in a contract of sale the property
in the goods is transferred from the seller to the buyer immediately whereas in an agreement to sell
property is transferred on a future date(s). An agreement to sell becomes a sale on fulfilment of the
conditions or when the time provided in the agreement elapses.
...
13. Under Section 2(10), inter alia, every document by which movable property is transferred is
"conveyance". Does the contract of sale for crude resin entered into between the partiesamount to
transfer of movable property? In our opinion, it does. In the contract under consideration, all
essential conditions of transfer of movable property are satisfied. By this document right in
auctioned lot of crude resin has been created in favour of the writ petitioner. Correspondingly, the
State Government is under obligation to deliver the quantity of crude resin specified in the
document. Pertinently, Clause 1(B) provides that resin sold Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY
Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 will remain at the
purchaser's risk from the date of acceptance of its bid and the seller will not be responsible for any
loss and damage which may occur thereto from any cause whatsoever. The document read as a
whole leaves no manner of doubt that property in the auctioned lot of crude resin vested in the
purchaser as a result of the subject contract and, thus amounts to transfer of movable property.
Even if the document dated 24-3-2001 is treated as an agreement to sell, in view of the acceptance
letter dated 7-4- 2001 whereby the writ petitioner has been informed that public auction is accepted
in its name and that it must arrange for lifting of the auctioned resin within 60 days from the
issuance of this letter, it is very clear that the contract of sale dated 24-3-2001 read with the letter
dated 7- 4-2001 amounts to "conveyance" within the meaning of Section 2(10) and is chargeable to
stamp duty under Article 23, Schedule I-B as admittedly there is no exemption from payment of
stamp duty in respect of such conveyance under Article 62."
77. This Court, in view of the discussion hereinabove concludes that, the Sale Agreement and
agreements pursuant thereto, amounts to "conveyance" within the meaning of Section 2(10) and is
chargeable to stamp duty under Article 23, Schedule I-B. The terms of the arrangement between the
Parties leave no doubt that the essentials of transfer are satisfied. A right has been created in favour
of the Petitioner, corresponding to which the Opposite Party has to deliver the quantity of minerals
specified. Moreover, the right of the Petitioner is sole and exclusive. It is also pertinent to note that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 25
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
an advance had already been given by the Petitioner to the Opposite Party which could be utilised in
case the Petitioner was not able to purchase the ore, Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY
Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 meaning thereby that all
the ore that was excavated was already in a sense paid for and remained vested in the Petitioner.
VII. ISSUE C: WHETHERTHIS COURT OUGHT TO INTERFERE WITH THE IMPUGNED
ORDER?
78. The majority judgment of the Apex Court in N.N. Global (2)24 summed up its holding in the
following terms:
"109. ... An agreement which is unstamped or insufficiently stamped is not
enforceable, as long as it remains in the said condition. Such an instrument would be
void as being not enforceable [see Section 2(g) of the Contract Act]."
The above observation conflates the distinction between enforceability and admissibility.
79. Section 35 of the Stamp Act carries an air of unequivocal clarity. It stipulates:
"No instrument chargeable with duty shall be admitted in evidence..."
(Emphasis supplied)
80. The term "admitted in evidence" refers to the admissibility of the instrument. Sub-section (2) of
Section 42, too, states that an instrument in respect of which stamp duty is paid and which is
endorsed as such will be "admissible in evidence". The effect of not paying duty or paying an
inadequate amount renders an instrument inadmissible and not void. Non-stamping or improper
stamping does not result in the N.N. Global Mercantile (P) Ltd. v. Indo Unique Flame Ltd., (2023) 7
SCC 1 Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 instrument becoming invalid. The Stamp Act does not render such an
instrument void. The non-payment of stamp duty is accurately characterised as a curable defect. The
Stamp Act itself provides for the manner in which the defects may be cured and sets out a detailed
procedure for it. It bears mentioning that there is no procedure by which a void agreement can be
"cured".
81. In N.N. Global (2) (supra), the Supreme Court held that the failure to stamp an arbitration
agreement is not a "curable defect". Relying on the provisions of the Contract Act as well as Section
11(6-A) of the Arbitration Act, it held that an unstamped arbitration agreement is void. The relevant
paragraphs of the judgment of the majority are extracted below :
"103. ... It may not be apposite to merely describe an unstamped arbitration
agreement as a "curable defect". As long it remains an unstamped instrument, it
cannot be taken notice of for any purpose, as contemplated in Section 35 of the
Stamp Act. It remains unenforceable. ... It is "not enforceable in law". In the said
sense, it also cannot exist in law. It would be void. Our view in this regard that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 26
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
voidness is conflated to unenforceability receives fortification from Section 2(j) of the
Contract Act which renders a contract which ceases to be enforceable void."
82. However, the above observation of the Apex Court in N.N. Global (2) was held to be incorrect by
the Court in Interplay Between Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration, 1996 & Stamp Act, 1899,
In re (supra).
Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
06-Mar-2025 17:02:27
83. The Stamp Act is a fiscal legislation which is intended to raise revenue for the Government. It is
a mandatory statute. In Hindustan Steel Ltd. v. Dilip Construction Co.25, the Supreme Court dealt
with the import of Sections 35, 36 and 42 of the Stamp Act. One of the parties relied on the
difference in the phraseology between Sections 35 and 36 to argue that an instrument which was
insufficiently stamped or not stamped could be admitted in evidence upon the payment of duty and
a penalty (if any) but that it could not be acted upon, once admitted. It was argued that Section 35
operates as a bar in two respects, namely, the admission of an instrument into evidence as well as
acting upon that instrument. It was argued that Section 36, in contrast to Section 35, removed the
bar in one respect alone: the admissibility of the instrument into evidence. The Supreme Court
rejected this argument and held that the provisions of the Stamp Act clearly provide that an
instrument could be admitted into evidence as well as acted upon once the appropriate duty has
been paid and the instrument is endorse. The relevant excerpt is produced hereinunder:
"6. ... The argument ignores the true import of Section 36. By that section an
instrument once admitted in evidence shall not be called in question at any stage of
the same suit or proceeding on the ground that it has not been duly stamped. Section
36 does not prohibit a challenge against an instrument that it shall not be acted upon
because it is not duly stamped, but on that account there is no bar against an
instrument not duly stamped being acted upon after payment of the stamp duty and
penalty according to the procedure prescribed by the Act. The doubt, if any, is (1969)
1 SCC 597 Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH
COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 removed by the terms of Section
42(2) which enact, in terms unmistakable, that every instrument endorsed by the
Collector under Section 42(1) shall be admissible in evidence and may be acted upon
as if it has been duly stamped."
84. In declaring so, the Supreme Court made a significant observation about the purpose of the
Stamp Act and the manner in which it is to be interpreted by courts when it observed that the Stamp
Act is a fiscal measure enacted to secure revenue for the State on certain classes of instruments. It is
not enacted to arm a litigant with a weapon of technicality to meet the case of his opponent. The
stringent provisions of the Act are conceived in the interest of the revenue once that object is
secured according to law, the party staking his claim on the instrument will not be defeated on the
ground of the initial defect in the instrument.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 27
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
85. The Stamp Act is a legislation which is enacted in the interest of the revenue. The statute must
be interpreted with due regard to its purpose.
86. Furthermore, it is pertinent to note that in view of the law enunciated by the 7 Judge Bench of
the Supreme Court in Interplay Between Arbitration Agreements under Arbitration, 1996 & Stamp
Act, 1899, In re (supra), the Ld. Sole Arbitrator did not have jurisdiction till the time the "existence
and validity" of the Sale Agreement has been revived by the payment of appropriate stamp duty. The
Ld. Sole Arbitrator was bound by the law declared by the Supreme Court and ought to have
impounded the Sale Agreement and sent it for collection of deficient stamp duty and meanwhile
could have been kept the arbitration in abeyance, awaiting the curing the defect of payment of
deficit stamp Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK
Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 duty on the instrument. It is pertinent to note that in view of the above
discussion, that the existence of an agreement also covers within its fold the "existence in law". The
authoritative pronouncement of the Apex Court is quite clear in that regard as to what is to be done
in situations as in the present one.
87. Given this Court's conclusion in Issue B and the reasons discussed above, this Court believes that
the present matter comes within the meaning of "exceptional" and writ jurisdiction ought to be
exercised in the face of such patent illegality, which necessitates interference. VIII. CONCLUSION:
88. Therefore, in light of the discussion above, keeping the settled principles of law in mind and for
the reasons given above, this Court is of the considered view that the impugned order merits
interference.
89. The Arbitral Tribunal has to mandatorily impound the Agreement/s which is not duly stamped
as per Article 23, Schedule I-B of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899 in terms of Sections 33 and 35 of the
aforementioned Act.
90. The Arbitral Tribunal after impounding the instrument, which is not duly stamped as per the
provisions of the Indian Stamp Act, 1899, will forward it to the Collector. The Collector then, shall,
direct the appropriate stamp duty at the rate of 5% of the Sale Agreement value and levy penalty.
91. In this regard, it is clarified that the Collector while determining the applicable stamp duty will
take the summation of all 89 purchase orders Designation: AR-CUM-SR. SECRETARY Location:
ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 06-Mar-2025 17:02:27 as the Sale Agreement value. Upon
payment, the Collector shall endorse that the proper stamp duty has been paid under Section 42 of
the Indian Stamp Act, 1899. This endorsed instrument shall be returned to the Ld. Tribunal, after
which the same can be acted upon. Till such time, the arbitration proceedings shall remain in
abeyance.
92. Ergo, the present petition is allowed and disposed of.
93. All pending I.As stand disposed of in light of the directions hereinabove. Ordered accordingly.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 28
M/S. Tarini Prasad Mohanty vs M/S. Sunflag Iron And Steel Co. .... ... on 25 February, 2025
94. No order to costs.
(Dr. S.K. Panigrahi) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack, Dated the 25th February, 2025/
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115756779/ 29
