M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August,
2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on : 14.06.2023
Pronounced on : 04.08.2023
WP(C) No. 72/2023
CAV No. 104/2023
M/s Fazal Rehman Dar .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. R. K. Gupta, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Jugal Kishore Gupta, Advocate.
vs
UT of J&K and others ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Ravinder Gupta, AAG.
Mr. Sunil Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Ravi Abrol, Advocate.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The respondent No.2, vide e-NIT No. CEJ/PMGSY/723 of 2022-23 dated14.11.2022 invited
tenders from the eligible contractors for allotment of various contracts for different works including
the "Upgradation of road from MRL-18 Mangota to Darhal, Package No. JK12-3056, PMGSY-111,
Batch-I of 2022-23; Block-Thana Mandi, District Rajouri Length 20.00 Kms (Using Waste Plastic)".
2. The petitioner after having failed to procure the above mentioned contract on account of
submission of the higher financial bid by the petitioner vis-a-vis the respondent No. 3 (successful
bidder), has now approached this court raising grievance in respect of the defective technical bid
submitted by the respondent No. 3 and its acceptance by the respondent No.2 vide order No.
CEJ/PMGSY/25846 dated 06.12.2022, which as per the petitioner was uploaded on 14.01.2023. The
petitioner has also questioned the action of the respondent No.2 for declaring the respondent No.3
as successful bidder for the contract under reference.
3. The case projected by the petitioner is that initially vide e-NIT No. CEJ/ PMGSY714 of 2022-23
dated 27.08.2022, the respondent No. 2 had invited tenders from approved and eligible contractors
for execution of various works in Jammu including the tender for "Up-gradation of road from MRL
18 Mangotra to Darhal, Package No. JK12-3056, PMGSY 111, Batch-I of 2022-23, Block-Thana
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 1
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
Mandi, District Rajouri Length 20.00 Kms. (Using Waste Plastic). The tender document was
inclusive of the Standard Bidding Documents (SBD) containing in details terms and conditions,
which the bidders were supposed to comply before being declared as responsive. The petitioner
submitted its bid to the official respondent for allotment of aforesaid contract, but during the course
of evaluation of technical bid of the bidders, the petitioner and another firm namely M/s Puran
Chand and Sons were declared as technically disqualified/non responsive on account of certain
deficiencies. The aforesaid e-NIT was cancelled and fresh e-NIT i.e. e-NIT in question was issued.
4. The petitioner again submitted its bid on the e-Portal of the official respondents and enclosed all
the requisite documents as per the requirements of e-NIT as well as SBD. Besides petitioner, four
other contractors including the respondent No. 3 also participated in the tendering process. It needs
to be mentioned that the bids were made in two parts i.e. Part-I was the technical part of the bid and
the Part-II was the financial part. The petitioner as well as the other bidders, were notified by the
system generated e-mail/SMS about the opening of Part 1 of the bid containing names of the bidders
who had submitted their response to the above mentioned e-NIT. The respondent No. 2 vide No.
CEJ/PMGSY/25846 dated 14.01.2023 issued technical evaluation list of the bidders. On 14.01.2023
the petitioner received another e-mail/SMS regarding opening of the financial bid wherein the
petitioner was informed that the respondent No. 3 has been found as the lowest bidder in the
financial bid.
5. Being aggrieved of the respondent No. 3 having successfully qualified the technical bid and the
subsequent declaration of respondent No. 3 as lowest bidder, the petitioner has filed the present
petition on the following grounds:
(i) That in terms of clause 4.4 B (a) III (b) Income Tax Returns (for short „the ITRs(cid:129))
for the last five financial years and in terms of clause 4.4 B (a) xi evidence of access to
line(s) of credit and availability of other financial resources/facilities (10 percent of
the contract value) certified by the banker (the certificate being not more than 3
months old) were required to be submitted along with bid by the participants. The
respondent No. 3 did not enclose the copies of ITRs for the last five years but had
enclosed acknowledgements of having filed the ITRs with the department which does
not meet the requirement as envisaged in the said clause. More so, the bank
certificate enclosed with the bid did not meet the requirement of the evidence to
access to line(s) of credit and availability of the financial resources/facilities in the
said certificate, as the bank had declined to take any responsibility for the certificate
which had been issued at the request of respondent No. 3 only.
(ii) That one contractor M/s Green Earth RLS (JV) has been declared as
disqualified/non-responsive merely for not submitting the company audit report for
the last five years as the bidder had submitted the said report for two years only in
respect of upgradation of road from MRL 18-Sohal to Sangrampur via Bumhal
Package no. JK05-3008 PMGSY-III Batch-I of 2022-23, Block Akhnoor District
Jammu. The respondent No. 2 cannot be allowed to adopt different yardsticks for the
qualification and disqualification of the bidders as per its own whims and caprices.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 2
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
(iii) That in earlier e-NIT in respect of same contract work, the petitioner was
declared as non-responsive only on the ground that the petitioner had submitted the
audit reports under Income Tax Act for the last four financial years instead of last five
financial years.
(iv) That the mala fide on part of the respondent No. 2 is evident from the
disqualification of contractor Sh. Vipan Kumar for the contract work "Upgradation of
road from MRL02-Hubbi to Bagyalkote, Package No. JK12-3050, PMGSY-III Batch-I
of 2022-23 Block Budhal, District Rajouri Length: 7.000 Kms"
only for the reason that he had not enclosed the Laboratory Equipments details
which was a very minor issue, however, an essential requirement as per clause 4.4.B
(a) (ix) of the NIT. In the same NIT M/s Padha Construction Co. was disqualified and
held non-responsive on account of having not submitted an affidavit regarding
renewal of registration card as contractor, though the said contractor had enclosed
the original registration card with the documents.
(v) That the respondent No. 2 has not followed the procedure prescribed in the e-NIT
for opening the tender bid, both for the technical and financial evaluation. In terms of
clause 22.7 of clause (E), pertaining to bid opening of the e-NIT, the result of
evaluation of Part-I (Technical Evaluation) of the bids was required to be made
public on e-procurement system, following which there had to be a period of five
working days during which any bidder could have submitted a complaint to be
considered for resolution before opening Part-II (Financial Bid) of the bid. In the
instant case, the result of the technical evaluation of the bidders who had participated
in the bidding process for the allotment of the aforesaid contract was uploaded on e-
procurement system on 14.01.2023 at 4.47 P.M. and that the financial bid was uploaded on the same
day at 5.03 P.M.
6. The respondents have filed the response. Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 besides raising preliminary
objections with regard to the maintainability of the writ petition, have stated that order No.
CEJ/PMGSY/25846 dated 06.12.2022 updated on the e-portal of the department on 14.01.2023 was
actually uploaded on the tender portal on 06.12.2022 itself and the same was digitally signed again
on 06.12.2022 itself at 17:31:01 IST which was uploaded online on PMGSY website at 05.32 P.M. on
06.12.2022 itself. This fact was mentioned by the petitioner in the communication dated 05.01.2023
addressed to the Chief Engineer, PMGSY Jammu. On the same date and time, an SMS was also got
generated which was transmitted to all the participants. It is further submitted that on the tender
website, anybody, even without having Digital Signature can check any technical bid opening
summary and the PDF gets downloaded by clicking on the link which displays the summary of the
technical evaluation report. The petitioner has concealed this fact so as to make it appear before the
Court that no time was given to the petitioner to respond to the technical valuation from the date,
technical summary was uploaded i.e. 06.12.2022. It is further stated that the financial bids which
were to be opened on 10.12.2022, were actually opened on 14.01.2023 because one of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 3
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
participating bidders on 09.12.2022 had obtained directions from the Court in one of the works
which figured in the same e-NIT dated 14.11.2022- that the respondents shall not finalize the
bidding process in reference to e-NIT No. CEJ/PMGSY/723 of 2022-23 dated 14.11.2022. The same
participant M/s Green Earth also got stay order in two other cases as well. Chief Engineer, PMGSY
Jammu sought guidance from the Administrative Department and the Administrative Department
vide its communication dated 15.12.2022 requested to implement the orders of the Court passed in
three different petitions and restrain from carrying the bid evaluation process qua the three
remaining packages as mentioned in the para and further take steps for carrying the bid evaluation
for remaining packages, so that the development of road project may not be hampered in public
interest. So the financial bids were opened on 14.01.2023. It is also stated by the official respondents
that ITR documents uploaded on the tender portal by the respondent No. 3 in the PDF format are
sufficient to meet the criteria laid down by the standard bid document (SBD). These documents are
required from each bidder only to ascertain whether the bidder is an Income Tax compliant or not
and do not have any role in the evaluation of the bid capacity of the bidder for the particular work.
There is no additional information in the ITR that is used to find out the responsiveness of the bid of
the bidder. The financial information which has the bearing for working out the responsiveness of
the bid of the bidder is gathered from the five year Annual Turnover Certificate issued by the
Chartered Accountant bearing UDIN number mentioning annual turnover of the bidder for civil
works. The highest turnover of civil work of one year from the last five financial years is considered
for working out the bid capacity of the bidder as per clause 4.6 of instructions to the bidders of SBD.
Further it is stated that since there is no particular format specified by the tender inviting authority
in the SBD so the certificate in respect of the evidence of access to line(s) credit and availability of
other resources has been issued by the bank as per the format adopted by that bank branch, as
different banks have devised their own format. It is also averred that M/s Green Earth RLS (JV) has
filed writ petition bearing WP(C) No. 2669/2022 in respect of the summary of the technical
evaluation report of Upgradation of Road from T06-Roun Domail to Ramnagar, Package No.
JK14-3003, PMGSY-III, Batch-I of 2022-23, Block Ramnagar, District Udhampur, Length-27.50
Km (Using Plastic Waste) and not for MRL18 Sohal to Sangrampur via Bumhal, Package No.
JK05-3008, PMGSY-III Batch-I of 2022-23, block Akhnoor, District Jammu, as M/s Green Earth
RLS (JV) was declared non responsive under Clause 4.4 B (a) iii (f). Infact the petitioner vide its
communication dated 05.01.2023 objected to the postponing of the tendering process and had
rather requested for finalising the tender by opening the financial bid and when the financial bid
was opened and the petitioner could not succeed, he filed the present writ petition thereby
challenging the technical summary of the bid submitted by the respondent No.3, which the
petitioner did not challenge, when the time of five working days was provided to every bidder to
submit complaint in respect of evaluation of the technical bid vide Clause 22.6 of the SBD. Once the
period of 5 working days expires without any complaint, the technical bid summary becomes
absolute. When the work was previously advertised vide e-NIT No. CEJ/PMGSY/714 of 2022-23
dated 27.08.2022, the technical evaluation report was uploaded on the strength of documents
uploaded by each bidder on the tender portal. It is also stated that in its communication dated
05.01.2023 the petitioner has nowhere mentioned that the bid of the respondent No. 3 i.e. M/s A. H.
Wani Infratech Private Limited did not qualify the criteria. The fact remains that the petitioner was
very confident that the petitioner would emerge as L-1 and after finding that someone else has
emerged as L-1, the present petition has been filed on the concocted facts.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 4
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
7. The respondent No. 3 too has filed its response to the writ petition. In its response, besides raising
preliminary objections, the respondent No. 3 has stated that the Income Tax acknowledgements of
the last five years submitted by the respondent No. 3 duly contain the total income for each financial
year, tax paid and allied information. Income tax Return acknowledgements submitted by the
respondent No. 3 contain the necessary information, as was the requirement of the relevant
condition of NIT. Various successful tenderers in whose favour various contracts have been awarded
by the official respondents have also uploaded ITR acknowledgements instead of ITRs. It is further
stated that the bank certificate was issued by the J&K Bank on request of the respondent No. 3 and
on the basis of similar certificates issued by the bank to the respondent No. 3, number of contracts
have been awarded to the respondent No. 3. It is also stated that in earlier tendering process
pursuant to e-NIT dated 27.08.2022, the respondent No. 3 was the only tenderer whose technical
bid was found responsive whereas the technical bid of the petitioner was declared unresponsive. The
petitioner did not feel aggrieved at that time, but now when the respondent No. 3 has been declared
as L-1, the petitioner has challenged the result of technical bid of the respondent No. 3 without any
basis. It is further stated that case of M/s Green Earth RLS (JV) and Vipan Kumar cannot be
equated with the case of respondent No. 3. Infact, the respondent No. 3 has filed the response in
identical manner as that of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
8. The petitioner has also filed a supplementary affidavit and has stated that the stand of the official
respondents is contrary to the clear mandate/terms and conditions of SBD, as ITR is a mother
document which reflects the annual turnover, sources of generation of turnover/income, annual
income and taxable income. ITR submitted by the assessee accompanied by balance sheets reflects
the different sources of turnover as well as profit and loss account. In order to verify and cross-check
the correctness of the figures stated in the balance sheet, profit and loss account as well as annual
turnover certificate to be issued by the chartered accountant, filing of complete ITR is mandatory.
The mandatory submission of ITR for the relevant years by the bidders as per the SBD was felt only
in recent few years when similar cases came up before the indenting departments where it was
found that the annual turnover certificates and balance sheet certificates issued by the Chartered
Accountants did not match the figures reflected in the ITR and were manipulated. The petitioner
has given instance of one M/s Ghulam Qadir Natnoo Contractor (JV) whose bid was rejected
because copy of PAN Card was not submitted by the second partner of joint venture, Sh. Harish
Gupta. In that case also PAN numbers of the partners could have been easily verified from the
annual turnover certificate / Balance Sheets certified by the chartered accountant. Further as per
Clause 4.4 B (a) iv as well as 4.7 of the SBD each bidder was required to submit affidavit stating
therein that the forms, statement, affidavits and attachments submitted in proof of qualification
requirements are true and correct and if it was found that the bidder has made any misleading or
false representation pertaining to work, he was to be disqualified. A perusal of the affidavit filed by
the respondent No. 3 shows that respondent No. 3 has stated that he has filed reports on financial
standing of its profit and loss statements supported with ITRs for the last five years, whereas the fact
remains that the respondent No. 3 has not submitted any ITR but only ITR acknowledgement. The
petitioner has placed on record the sample format for evidence of access to or availability of credit
facilities as provided by J&K Public Works (R&B) Department Engineering Manual 2020. The
official respondent in the present case not only declared the details of the bidders who had
submitted their bids but also proceeded to declare result of non responsive and responsive bidders
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 5
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
at the same stage and uploaded at the website contrary to the procedure provided in SBD. It is
further stated that irrespective of whether any complaint has been filed by the co-bidder or not, it
was the responsibility of the Tender Inviting Authority to ensure that all the bidders meet the
criteria of SBD and its terms and conditions even at the time of allotment of contract, as in terms of
clause 27 of SBD, the Employer has to ensure that the criteria is met by the successful bidder.
9. Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have filed response to the supplementary affidavit in which they have
reiterated the submissions made in the response to the writ petition and have further pleaded that
any bidder who has uploaded the Income Tax Return form or Income Tax Return
Acknowledgements is treated as responsive. It is general practice of authorities/regulator/banks etc
to obtain acknowledgments of return of income to verify that the party is regular in filing its return
of income. In fact, obtaining of full income tax return from bidder would be of no use, as the other
documents which suffice the purpose of verifying the genuineness of financial information are the
turn over certificate of last five years duly certified by the Chartered Accountant with UDIN
mentioned on it, balance sheet and profit and loss account of the bidder of the last five years duly
signed by the Chartered Accountant and tax audit report (form 3CA/3CB and 3CD) duly signed by
the Chartered Accountant. The balance sheets, profit and loss account and turn over certificates are
not made on the basis of figures contained in ITR, rather ITRs are prepared on the basis of balance
sheets and profit and loss account. Infact, the official respondents are interested in knowing the
work done by the bidders and that information is best gathered from the certificate issued by the
Chartered Accountant. So far as case of M/s Ghulam Qadir Natnoo contractor is concerned, the copy
of PAN Card issued by the Income Tax Authority was required to be uploaded mandatorily. In fact,
the petitioner has been allotted two contracts, which clearly shows that the allegations of mala fide
and bias are wrong. It is further stated that the PWD Engineering Manual 2020 and PMGSY
Standard Bid Document are two different documents and PWD Engineering Manual, 2020 cannot
be considered for the purpose of determining the validity of the credit certificate issued by the
banker in the instant case.
10. The respondent No. 3 has also filed response to the supplementary affidavit filed by the
petitioner in an identical manner as that of respondent Nos. 1 and 2.
11. The petitioner has filed yet another supplementary affidavit thereby stating that the petitioner
has come across various technical evaluation reports of the same official respondent issued in
different NITs for several works but having same terms and conditions whereby the official
respondents have out-rightly rejected the bids of number of bidders on the ground of their having
failed to upload the ITRs along with their bids. The petitioner has placed on record 8 technical
evaluation summaries to substantiate its contention.
12. The respondent Nos. 1 and 2 have filed objections to the supplementary affidavit wherein they
have mentioned in details the reasons for declaring the bidders as un-responsive in four technical
evaluation reports. In nut-shell, the stand of the respondent Nos. 1 and 2 is that SBD had asked for
income tax returns and not ITR form and any bidder who had uploaded either income tax return
form or income tax acknowledgement has been treated as responsive.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 6
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
13. The respondent No. 3 has also filed response to the supplementary affidavit and it has been
stated that the proprietorship concern of M/s Abdul Hafiz Wani Contractor was merged with M/s A.
H. Wani Infratech Private Ltd. Company under Companies Act 2013, with all its assets and
liabilities. The respondent No. 3 has placed on record the copy of dissolution and deed of taking over
of business agreement. The respondent No. 3 has also placed on record the certificate of registration
with regard to „A(cid:129) class contractor issued in favour of proprietorship concern of M/s Abdul Aziz
Wani, which was subsequently cancelled and converted to M/s A. H. Wani Infratech Pvt. Limited.
14. Mr. R. K. Gupta, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of the petitioner vehemently argued
that the respondent No. 3 had not uploaded the ITR but only the ITR acknowledgements and as
such, respondent No. 3 had not complied with the terms and conditions prescribed by Clause 4.4 B
(a) III b) of SBD. He further submitted that the credit guarantee submitted by the respondent No. 3
was in fact not a commitment on part of the bank to provide credit. He further argued that even if
the petitioner did not object to the eligibility of respondent No. 3 within a period of five working
days, still the official respondents were under a legal obligation to ensure that the
standard/mandatory terms and conditions of the e-NIT are complied by all the bidders. He
vehemently argued that the respondent No. 3 had uploaded two ITR acknowledgments filed by A. H.
Wani as proprietor of A. H. Wani concern and the said ITRs acknowledgements could not have been
considered by the official respondents for declaring the respondent No. 3 as having qualified part I
of the tendering process. It was also urged by Mr. R. K. Gupta that the submissions of official
respondents that requirement of filing ITRs was mandatory and not ITR forms, is an afterthought
just to wriggle out the challenge thrown to illegality committed by the official respondents while
entertaining the acknowledgement of ITRs instead of ITRs submitted by the respondent No.3. He
relied on judgment of Delhi High Court in case M/s Pratap Technocrats Pvt. Ltd. vs. M/s Bharat
Sanchar Nigam Ltd. passed in WP(C) No. 1712/2017 on 30th May, 2017 and judgment of the
Uttarakhand High Court in Laxmi Datt Binwal vs. the State of Uttarakhand and ors passed in
Special Appeal No. 551 of 2019 on 31st May, 2019.
15. Mr. Ravinder Gupta, learned counsel appearing for respondent Nos. 1 and 2 submitted that the
only purpose for uploading the ITRs was to ensure that the participant bidder was income tax
compliant and the financial capacity of the bidder was to be determined from the annual turnover
certificates issued by the Chartered Accountant having UDI No. He further argued that it was for the
employer to satisfy itself that the bidder satisfied the terms and conditions of the e-NIT. The
respondent No. 3 was declared qualified in respect of technical bid on 06.12.2022 and the petitioner
did not chose to make any complaint in respect of ineligibility of respondent No. 3 within the period
of five working days. Rather the petitioner submitted a representation dated 05.01.2023 for opening
the financial bid without any further delay. Once the petitioner did not chose to object the eligibility
of respondent No. 3, the petitioner cannot raise any grievance in the writ petition in respect of
evaluation of the technical bids, particularly when the respondent No. 3 has been declared as
successful bidder. He further submitted that different banks have different formats for the purpose
of assuring the credit guarantee and merely the fact that the same bank has issued two certificates in
different manners to its two customers would not mean that the certificate uploaded by the
respondent No. 3 is not in accordance with the terms and conditions as prescribed by the e-NIT. He
further submitted that in other cases also the bank certificates issued in the similar manner have
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 7
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
been accepted by the official respondents.
16. Mr. Sunil Sethi, learned senior counsel appearing on behalf of respondent No. 3 submitted that
the respondent No. 3 was incorporated on 02.04.2019. All the assets and liabilities of M/s A. H.
Wani concern were taken over by the respondent No. 3 with effect from 31.03.2020, therefore, the
income tax return acknowledgements filed by the M/s A. H. Wani as proprietorship concern for two
years have rightly been accepted by the official respondents. He further submitted that no particular
format was provided for furnishing the bank assurance and in number of other cases, similar
certificates issued by the banks have been accepted by the official respondents.
17. Heard and perused the record.
18. From the record it is evident and in fact it is admitted by all the parties that all the parties were
notified by the system generated e-mail/SMS about the opening of the part I of the bid containing
the names of the bidders who had submitted their bids in response to the e-NIT. Part I of the bid
pertains to technical qualification part of the bid and part II pertains to technical-financial part of
the bid. It is substantiated by the Annexure-VI in the form of system generated e-mail dated
06.12.2022 placed on record by the petitioner that the bid of the petitioner was opened, meaning
thereby the technical bids in respect of e-NIT under reference were opened on 06.12.2022 at 05.32
P.M. During the course of arguments, on a specific query by this Court, it was admitted by the
learned counsels for the parties that all the documents uploaded by all the responsive bidders were
visible to all the bidders on the date of opening of the technical bids. Whether or not the petitioner
examined the documents uploaded by the respondent No. 3 on 06.12.2022 when the technical bids
were opened but this is clear that the petitioner had an opportunity to examine the documents
uploaded by the respondent No. 3 on 06.12.2022 itself. The petitioner could have raised the
complaint within the five working days as per clause 22.6 of the SBD. The petitioner has not denied
the communication dated 05.01.2023 addressed by the petitioner to Chief Engineer, PMGSY
Jammu and the relevant portions of the said communication are reproduced as under:
"Your office has postponed the tendering process for the aforementioned work
contract on the pretence that the Honourable High Court of J&K, Jammu has stayed
the finalisation of the aforementioned work contract in the case of Green Earth
Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. Versus UT of J&K and others, whereas the fact remains that
the technical evaluation of the aforementioned work contract has not been contested
before the Honourable High Court.
In light of the foregoing information, you are hereby most respectfully requested to
open and finalise the aforementioned tender in order to permit the participating
bidders to withdraw their security deposits totalling Rs. 56 Lac and to continue
taking part in other bidding processes while evaluating their current bid capacity in
order to obtain competitive bids to save the state exchequer."
19. From perusal of above mentioned communication dated 05.01.2023 it becomes clear that the
petitioner was aware about the technical evaluation in respect of e-NIT under reference on the said
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 8
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
date and further that the petitioner was keen for conclusion of the tendering process as early as
possible. The petitioner despite being aware that all the documents were uploaded by all the
responsive bidders were available on the portal, did not chose to make any complaint within the
period of five working days from 06.12.2022 in terms of clause 22.6 of the instructions to the
bidders. The petitioner still chose to take a chance for finalisation of the tendering process and filed
the present writ petition only when the respondent No. 3 was declared as successful bidder. Had the
petitioner been declared as successful bidder, he would have never complained about ineligibility of
the respondent No. 3. Be that as it may, this Court deems it proper to examine the contentions
raised by the petitioner.
20. Before this Court examines the issues raised by the petitioner, this Court deems it appropriate to
examine the scope of judicial review in the interpretation of terms and conditions of tender, by the
High Court in exercise of its power under Article 226 of Constitution of India.
21. In Silppi Constructions Contractors v. Union of India, (2020) 16 SCC 489, the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex
Court has held as under:
"19. This Court being the guardian of fundamental rights is duty- bound to interfere
when there is arbitrariness, irrationality, mala fides and bias. However, this Court in
all the aforesaid decisions has cautioned time and again that courts should exercise a
lot of restraint while exercising their powers of judicial review in contractual or
commercial matters. This Court is normally loathe to interfere in contractual matters
unless a clear-cut case of arbitrariness or mala fides or bias or irrationality is made
out. One must remember that today many public sector undertakings compete with
the private industry. The contracts entered into between private parties are not
subject to scrutiny under writ jurisdiction. No doubt, the bodies which are State
within the meaning of Article 12 of the Constitution are bound to act fairly and are
amenable to the writ jurisdiction of superior courts but this discretionary power must
be exercised with a great deal of restraint and caution. The courts must realise their
limitations and the havoc which needless interference in commercial matters can
cause. In contracts involving technical issues the courts should be even more
reluctant because most of us in Judges' robes do not have the necessary expertise to
adjudicate upon technical issues beyond our domain. As laid down in the judgments
cited above the courts should not use a magnifying glass while scanning the tenders
and make every small mistake appear like a big blunder. In fact, the courts must give
"fair play in the joints" to the government and public sector undertakings in matters
of contract. Courts must also not interfere where such interference will cause
unnecessary loss to the public exchequer.
20. The essence of the law laid down in the judgments referred to above is the
exercise of restraint and caution; the need for overwhelming public interest to justify
judicial intervention in matters of contract involving the State instrumentalities; the
courts should give way to the opinion of the experts unless the decision is totally
arbitrary or unreasonable; the court does not sit like a court of appeal over the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 9
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
appropriate authority; the court must realise that the authority floating the tender is
the best judge of its requirements and, therefore, the court's interference should be
minimal. The authority which floats the contract or tender, and has authored the
tender documents is the best judge as to how the documents have to be interpreted. If
two interpretations are possible then the interpretation of the author must be
accepted. The courts will only interfere to prevent arbitrariness, irrationality, bias,
mala fides or perversity. With this approach in mind we shall deal with the present
case."
(Emphasis Added)
22. In Air India Ltd. v. Cochin International Airport Ltd., (2000) 2 SCC 617, the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex
Court has held as under:
"7. The law relating to award of a contract by the State, its corporations and bodies
acting as instrumentalities and agencies of the Government has been settled by the
decision of this Court in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority
of India , Fertilizer Corpn. Kamgar Union (Regd.) v. Union of India , CCE v. Dunlop
India Ltd., Tata Cellular v. Union of India , Ramniklal N. Bhutta v. State of
Maharashtra and Raunaq International Ltd. v. I.V.R. Construction Ltd. The award of
a contract, whether it is by a private party or by a public body or the State, is
essentially a commercial transaction. In arriving at a commercial decision
considerations which are paramount are commercial considerations. The State can
choose its own method to arrive at a decision. It can fix its own terms of invitation to
tender and that is not open to judicial scrutiny. It can enter into negotiations before
finally deciding to accept one of the offers made to it. Price need not always be the
sole criterion for awarding a contract. It is free to grant any relaxation, for bona fide
reasons, if the tender conditions permit such a relaxation. It may not accept the offer
even though it happens to be the highest or the lowest. But the State, its corporations,
instrumentalities and agencies are bound to adhere to the norms, standards and
procedures laid down by them and cannot depart from them arbitrarily. Though that
decision is not amenable to judicial review, the court can examine the
decision-making process and interfere if it is found vitiated by mala fides,
unreasonableness and arbitrariness. The State, its corporations, instrumentalities
and agencies have the public duty to be fair to all concerned. Even when some defect
is found in the decision-making process the court must exercise its discretionary
power under Article 226 with great caution and should exercise it only in furtherance
of public interest and not merely on the making out of a legal point. The court should
always keep the larger public interest in mind in order to decide whether its
intervention is called for or not. Only when it comes to a conclusion that
overwhelming public interest requires interference, the court should intervene.
(Emphasis Added)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 10
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
23. The ratio laid down in both judgments has been reiterated by the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in
"Tata Motors Ltd. v. Brihan Mumbai Electric Supply & Transport Undertaking (BEST)", 2023 SCC
OnLine SC
671.
24. In Bharat Coking Coal Ltd. v. AMR Dev Prabha, (2020) 16 SCC 759, the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court has
held as under:
"(III) Deference to authority's interpretation
50. Lastly, we deem it necessary to deal with another fundamental problem. It is
obvious that Respondent 1 seeks to only enforce terms of the NIT. Inherent in such
exercise is interpretation of contractual terms. However, it must be noted that
judicial interpretation of contracts in the sphere of commerce stands on a distinct
footing than while interpreting statutes.
47. Even if there had been a minor deviation from explicit terms of the NIT, it would not be
sufficient by itself in the absence of mala fide for courts to set aside the tender at the behest of an
unsuccessful bidder. [Central Coalfields Ltd. v. SLL-SML (Joint Venture Consortium),] This is
because notice must be kept of the impact of overturning an executive decision and its impact on the
larger public interest in the form of cost overruns or delays.
51. In the present facts, it is clear that BCCL and C1-India have laid recourse to clauses of the NIT,
whether it be to justify condonation of delay of Respondent 6 in submitting performance bank
guarantees or their decision to resume auction on grounds of technical failure. BCCL having
authored these documents, is better placed to appreciate their requirements and interpret them.
[Afcons Infrastructure Ltd. v. Nagpur Metro Rail Corpn. Ltd.]
52. The High Court ought to have deferred to this understanding, unless it was patently perverse or
mala fide. Given how BCCL's interpretation of these clauses was plausible and not absurd, solely
differences in opinion of contractual interpretation ought not to have been grounds for the High
Court to come to a finding that the appellant committed illegality."
25. Keeping above principles in mind, this court now would examine the issues raised by the
petitioner.
26. Issue No. 1:
Whether the respondent No. 3 was required to be disqualified as the respondent No.
3 had uploaded only the ITR acknowledgements and not the ITRs including the
balance sheets and profit and loss account?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 11
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
27. In order to examine the issue No. 1, this Court deems it appropriate to reproduce the relevant
portion of Clause 4.4 B (a) as the controversy involved in the issue No. 1 hinges around the said
clause and the same is reproduced as under:
"4.4 B (a) Each bidder must upload scanned copies of the following documents on
website www.pmgsytender.gov.in at appropriate place failing which the bid shall be
rejected out rightly. I. Copy of PAN Card issued by Income Tax Authorities (Clause
4.4 of ITB) (pdf).
II. Contractor Registration certificate (Clause 3 of ITB) duly renewed for current
financial year (pdf).
III. Reports on financial standing
a) Annual Turnover Certificate from Chartered Accountant for last
five financial years (2017-18, 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21 and 2021-
22) excluding current financial year bearing Unique Document Identification
Number (UDIN) of Institute of Chartered Accountants of India with breakup of civil
works and total works excluding GST/VAT in each financial year. (Clause 4.4 of ITB)
(pdf). Without UDIN the certificate will not be entertained and the bid rejected.
b) Income Tax returns for the last financial years immediately preceding the bid due
date i.e. for the last financial year (2016-17, (2017-18, 2018-19, 2019-20, 2020-21).
c) Balance Sheet for last five financial years.
d) Profit and Loss account for last five financial years.
e) Company Audit report (if applicable) for last five financial
years.
f) Audit Reports under Income Tax Act (3CA/3CB along with
3CD reports) (wherever applicable) for the last five financial years.
g) TDS certificate/26AS form downloaded from Income Tax Website for the last five
financial years.
h) The successful bidder will have to provide the original documents (from a to g)
duly certified by a Chartered Accountant before a work is allotted to him. Any
certificate issued by the Chartered accountant should mandatorily bear UDIN.
IV. Affidavit regarding correctness of certificates/Affidavit on correctness of information submitted
with the bid. (Clause 4.4 of ITB) (pdf) which must bear e-NIT No. and Name of the work.
V. Any other documents as specified by the UT in the Bid Data Sheet (pdf).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 12
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
VI. Satisfactorily completed as Prime Contractor or sub-contractor during the last five financial
years excluding current financial year at least one similar work equal in value to one-third
(one-fourth) in case of Naxal/LWE affected districts) of the estimated cost of work of any
Government/Semi Government Department (excluding maintenance cost for five years) for which
the bid is invited, or such higher amount as may be specified in Appendix to ITB.
A certificate from employer, duly issued by an officer not below the rank of Executive Engineer or
Equivalent, shall be submitted along with the application incorporating clearly the name of the
work, contract value, billing amount, date of commencement of works, actual date of completion of
work, satisfactory performance of the contract and any other relevant information. The certificate
should be furnished as per format shown in Section 3 Qualification Information Clause No:- 1.3.1
supported with allotment which shall also be uploaded. The value of road work completed by the
bidder under Pradhan Mantri Gram Sadak Yojana in originally stipulated period of completion shall
be counted as 120% for the purpose of this Sub- Clause.
VII. Copies of original documents defining the constitution or legal statues, place of registration,
and principal place of business; written power of attorney of the signatory of the Bid to commit the
Bidder. VIII. The bidder shall also furnish details of other civil works of similar nature executed and
completed in any Govt. or Semi Govt. Department during the last five financial years and details of
works underway or contractually committed, with certificate from the concerned officer not below
the rank of Executive Engineer or equivalent and clients who may be contracted for further
information on those contracts.
IX. Evidence of ownership of major items of construction equipment named in Clause 4.4 B(b) (i) of
ITB or evidence of arrangement of processing them on hire/lease/buying as defined therein
including equipment required for establishing field laboratory to perform mandatory tests, and
those stated in the Appendix to ITB. X. Details of the technical personnel proposed to be employed
for the Contract having the qualifications defined in Clause 4.4 B (b) (ii) of ITB for the construction.
XI. Evidence of access to line(s) of credit and availability of other financial resources/facilities (10
percent of contract value) certified by banker (the certificate being not more than 3 months old).
XII. Bidders shall furnish proof of latest returns in GSTR-3B. XIII. Authority to seek references from
the Bidder(cid:129)s bankers; XIV. Information regarding any litigation or arbitration during the current
financial year and during the last five financial years in which the Bidder is involved, the parties
concerned, the disputed amount, and the matter; This information may be supplied either in the
shape of affidavit duly signed or on letter head duly signed or by filing the excel sheet attached.
XV. Proposals for subcontracting the components of the Works for construction/upgradation,
aggregating to not more than 25 percent of the Contract Price; and subcontracting of part/full
routine maintenance of roads after completion of construction work.
XVI. The proposed programme of construction and Quality Management Plan proposed for all the
works as per technical specifications and within the stipulated period of completion.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 13
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
(b) Each must demonstrate:
(i) Availability for construction work, either owned, or on lease or on hire, of the key
equipment stated in the Appendix to ITB including equipments required for
establishing field laboratory to perform mandatory tests, and those stated in the
Appendix to ITB;
(ii) Availability for construction work of technical personnel as stated in the
Appendix to ITB.
(c) The bidder must not have in his employment:
(i) The near relations (defined as first blood relations, and their spouses, of the
bidder or the bidder(cid:129)s spouse) of persons listed in the Appendix to ITB.
(ii) Without Government permission, any person who retired as gazetted officer
within the last two years of the rank and from the department listed in the Appendix
to ITB."
28. A perusal of above mentioned clause reveals that the bidder was required to upload ITRs for the
last five financial years. It is urged by the petitioner that the respondent No. 3 has simply uploaded
the ITR acknowledgements and has not uploaded the income tax returns accompanied by the
balance sheets and profit and loss account. In absence of the income tax returns, the technical bid of
respondent No. 3 was required to be held non-responsive. The stand of the official respondent is
that the purpose of uploading of ITRs was only to ascertain as to whether the bidder is income tax
compliant or not and ITR did not have any role in evaluation of capacity of the bidder for a
particular work. The financial information required to determine the responsiveness of the financial
status of the bidder is to be obtained from the five years annual turnover certificate issued by the
Chartered Accountant bearing UDIN number, balance sheet for last five years and the profit & loss
account for last five years. The official respondents are the employer and it is within the domain of
the TIA to interpret the terms and conditions of the tender documents so as to find out the
responsiveness of the bidder and until or unless the decision of the TIA is arbitrary or perverse, no
interference is warranted in the decision arrived at by the TIA. A perusal of clause 4.4 B (a) as
mentioned above reveals that the financial standing of the bidder was to be determined on the basis
of the documents to be uploaded by the participants as provided from S. No. III (a) to (h). If the
contention of the petitioner is accepted that whole of the ITRs for the last five financial years
accompanied by the balance sheets and profit and loss account were required to be uploaded, then
the official respondents would not have made it mandatory to submit the balance sheets and profit
and loss account for the last five financial years in terms of clause iii(c) and
(d). The bidders were also required to submit the audit reports under Income Tax Act and TDS
certificate/26 AS form for the last five financial years. This Court has examined the annual turnover
certificate, ITR acknowledgments, balance sheets and profit and loss account uploaded by the
respondent No. 3 and this Court does not find any infirmity or any discrepancy in the same. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 14
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
official respondents have provided in detail the documents required for determining the financial
capacity of the bidder and the stand taken by the official respondents that the ITRs to be uploaded
by the bidders were only for the purpose of determining the tax compliance of the bidder and ITR
acknowledgements suffice the said purpose as the ITR acknowledgements cannot be generated
without providing the requisite information on the portal of Income Tax Department, is neither
arbitrary nor perverse. The judgments relied upon by Mr. R. K. Gupta, learned senior counsel for the
petitioner in case titled M/s Pratap Technocrats Pvt. Ltd. & M/s Laxmi Datt Binwal (supra) are not
applicable in the instant case because in the said case the bidder had not furnished correct and
complete income tax particulars for the last three years, whereas in the instant case ITR
acknowledgements have been uploaded by the bidder-respondent No. 3. Once the TIA, in the instant
case i.e. the respondent No. 2 has determined the responsiveness of the respondent No.3 by
demonstrating the rationale behind uploading the income tax returns and the said rationale is
neither irrational nor perverse, no fault can be found with the decision arrived at by the official
respondents with regard to technical eligibility of the respondent No. 3.
29. Issue No. 2:
Whether the bank certificate uploaded by the respondent No. 3 was conditional one
and in fact, was no certificate in the eyes of law?
To buttress his submission Mr. R. K Gupta, learned senior counsel placed much
reliance upon the certificate issued by the same banker in favour of the petitioner
which has been issued un-conditionally. Respondent Nos. 1 and 2 in their reply have
pleaded that every bank has devised its own format, as no particular format has been
specified by the Tender Inviting Authority (TIA) in the SBD. In order to substantiate
this contention the official respondents have placed on record the certificates issued
by the Bank of Baroda, J&K Bank and UCO Bank. In the certificate issued in favour of
respondent No. 3, there is a stipulation that the certificate has been issued at the
specific request of the customer without any risk or responsibility on part of the bank
or any of its officials. The respondent No. 3 has also placed on record the bank
certificates issued in favour of other bidders in various other tenders, issued by J&K
Bank, HDFC Bank and Bank of Baroda. Mr. R. K. Gupta, learned senior counsel tried
to persuade this Court that earlier there was specific format for evidence of access to
or availability of the credit facilities, but at the same time he frankly admitted that at
present no format has been prescribed by the tender inviting authority with regard to
the bank certificate in the e-NIT in question. Once the TIA has accepted the
certificate, notwithstanding the fact that it contained the stipulation as mentioned
above, not only in case of respondent No. 3, but in case of number of bidders in other
NITs, the action of official respondents cannot be faulted with. As such, this
contention raised by the petitioner is rejected.
30. Issue No. 3:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 15
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
Whether the respondent No.3 was required to be disqualified as two ITRs were
submitted qua Mr. A.H Wani, as proprietor and not of the respondent No.3 as
company?
The third issued raise by the petitioner is that the respondent No. 3 has uploaded the
acknowledgments of ITRs for the five years but for the assessment year 2018-19 and
2019-20 the ITR acknowledgments of Abdul Hafiz Wani as assessee, have been
uploaded by the respondent No. 3. Mr. R. K. Gupta, learned senior counsel has placed
reliance upon the judgment of Delhi High Court in M/s Pratap Technocrat Pvt. Ltd.
(supra) to substantiate his contention that experience as well as ITR
acknowledgements of Sh. Abdul Hafiz Wani contractor cannot be considered for the
purpose of considering the respondent No. 3 as tax compliant as well as for the
purpose of determining the eligibility of respondent No. 3. The respondent No. 3 in
the reply to the supplementary affidavit has met this objection of the petitioner by
stating that proprietorship concern of Abdul Hafiz Wani contractors was merged with
M/s A. H. Wani Infratech Private Ltd. with all its assets and liabilities including the
qualifications, experiences and business and even the certificate of registration with
regard to registration as „A(cid:129) Class contractor issued in favour of proprietorship
concern of Sh. Abdul Hafiz Wani was cancelled and converted to M/s A. H. Wani
Infratech Pvt. Ltd.
A perusal of deed for taking over the business dated 31.03.2020 executed between the respondent
No. 3 and Abdul Hafiz Wani reveals that the respondent No. 3 has acquired trade and business of
proprietorship concern of Abdul Hafiz Wani with all his business, assets, rights, permissions,
registrations, privileges, concessions, goodwill, experience and qualifications along with all the
liabilities from 31.03.2020. Once all the assets, liabilities and experiences have been taken over by
the respondent No. 3 by virtue of deed of taking over of business dated 31.03.2020 and the TIA has
accepted the eligibility of the respondent No. 3, there appears to be no reason for this Court to sit as
a court of appeal over the decision of the TIA. The judgment of Delhi Court relied upon by Mr. R. K.
Gupta in case of M/s Pratap Technocrat Pvt. Ltd. (supra) is not applicable in the present case as in
the said case, the petitioner therein could not prove that the sole proprietorship business was
entirely taken over by the petitioner company and also no documents establishing that goodwill was
parted or separate consideration was made, was proved by the petitioner, so the said judgment is
not applicable in the present facts and circumstances of the case. Therefore, this contention of the
petitioner too is rejected.
31. This court has examined the exemplars stated by the petitioner where the respondent No.2 has
chosen to reject the technical bids in other NITs but this court has not come across any instance
where in identical situation, the bids were rejected. As a matter of fact, the bids were rejected in
other cases on other grounds. The petitioner also cannot claim that the respondent No. 2 was having
any bias against the petitioner because the petitioner has been allotted two allotments in PMGSY III
vide Chief Engineer PMGSY Office No. CEJ/PMGSY/28633-42 dated 09.01.2023 for up-gradation
of road from T01-Darhal to Upper Simbli via Patathanahariban, Package No. JK12- 3054,PMGSY
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 16
M/S Fazal Rehman Dar vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 4 August, 2023
III, Batch-I of 2022-23 Block Darhal, District Rajouri, length 6.2 Kms and CEJ/PMGSY/28622-42
dated 09.01.2023 for up- gradation of road, from T01- L055 Link from Km 12th T02 to Kassian
Darhal, PMGSY III, Batch-I of 2022-23, Package No. JK12-3001 Block Rajouri, District Rajouri,
length 8.1 Kms, as stated by the respondent No.2 in objections to supplementary affidavit.
32. The whole issue raised by the petitioner in the present petition is to further its commercial
interest and not the public interest. In fact, the petitioner is trying to find faults with the magnifying
glass in the technical bid of the respondent No.3, which is not permissible as TIA is the sole judge in
respect of interpretation of the terms and conditions of the tender document and it is only when the
interpretation of any condition of the tender document of TIA is perverse or irrational and not in
public interest, that the High Court can show indulgence. Neither the decision of the respondent
No.2 is perverse/irrational nor public interest is involved in the present case, that may warrant
indulgence of this court.
33. In view of what has been discussed above, this Court does not find any merit in the present
petition, as such, the same is dismissed.
34. Interim direction stands vacated.
35. Record be returned to Mr. Ravinder Gupta, AAG.
(RAJNESH OSWAL) JUDGE Jammu 04.08.2023 Sahil Padha Whether the order is speaking:
Yes/No. Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166463481/ 17
