M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports
University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 428 of 2022
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. through its Director 19, Nellie
Sengupta Sarani 3rd Floor, Kolkata- 70087.
... Petitioner.
-Versus -
1. National Sports University (NSU), thorough its Vice
chancellor, Office at 2nd Floor, Olympic Bhawan Khuman
Lampak.
2. M/S NBCC (India) Ltd., through its Managing Director,
Office at NBCC Bhawan, Lodhi Road, New Delhi
......Respondents
BEFORE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
For the petitioner : Mr. S.D Singh, Advocate
For the : Mr. M.Devananda, Advocate
respondents
Date of Hearing : 07-07-2022
Date of Order : 27-07-2022
ORDER
[1] Heard Mr. S. D Singh, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. M. Devananda,
learned counsel appearing for the respondents.
WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 1
[2] The fact of the present case in a nutshell is that M/S
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 1
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd., a subsidiary of the NBCC (India) Ltd., while working as
Project Manager Consultant for the Ministry of Youth Affairs and Sports published a notice inviting
e-tender dated 28- 11-2018 for construction of buildings including allied external development
works for National Sports University (Package 2 - A) at Imphal, Manipur. The value of the said
tender was fixed as Rs. 96,40,07,726/- and the period for completion of the contract work was fixed
as 15 (fifteen) months and the date of commencement of the period was to be reckoned from the
10th day after issuance of the letter of award.
[3] The said contract work was awarded to the petitioner viz, M.S Simplex Project Ltd, and the said
contract work was to be executed under the terms and conditions of the contract drawn up between
the parties. When the said contract work could not be completed in time, the petitioner made a
request to the employer for extension of time for completion of the said contract work and the
employer granted provisional extension of time for completion of the said contract work which was
up to 31-12-2021. Subsequently, when the petitioner could not complete the execution of the said
contract work in time, the period for completion of the said contract work was extended from time
to time on the request made by the petitioner and ultimately, when the petitioner failed to complete
the execution of the said contract work even during the extended time, the respondents declined to
entertain the request of WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 2 the petitioner for granting further extension
of time and informed the petitioner that they would terminate the contract and invoke the bank
guarantee. Having been aggrieved, the petitioner filed the present writ petition praying for granting
the following reliefs:
" a. Issue a Rule-in-Nisi;
b. Call for record of the case, hear the parties and make the Rule absolute;
c. Issue the writ of mandamus or any other writ/direction/order of similar nature
whereby Respondents are commanded to take practical view of the volume of work
and the time which are required for execution of the entire works by constituting an
independent Committee and extend the period accordingly enabling the Petitioner to
execute the works, even by opening the Escrow Account with full monitoring by the
Respondents qua the funds to be disbursed to the agencies who are working at the
site and further adhere to their own minutes of meeting and decisions for extension
of time, whereby they have committed to extend the period for one year from the date
of supply of the final drawings;
d. Issue the writ of prohibition or any other writ/direction/order of similar nature
whereby restraining the Respondents herein from invoking and encashing the Bank
Guarantees i.e., Bank Guarantee Nos. INBG07921000072 for a sum of Rs.
5,30,19.600.00, INBG07921000073 for a sum of Rs.
1,25,00,000.00, INBG07921000074 for a sum of Rs. 1, 25, 00,000.00,
INBG07921000075 for a sum of Rs. 1,25,00,000.00 and INBG07921000076 for a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 2
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
sum of Rs. 1,06,99,632.00 Band Guarantee No. INBG07922000069 dated
22-03-2022 for a sum of Rs. 88,36,600.00 valid up to 21-03-2022, Bank Guarantee
No. INBG07922000071 dated 22-03-2022 for a sum of Rs.
88,36,600.00 valid up to 21-03-2023 and the respondents be further restrained from
taking any coercive action against the WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 3 Petitioner qua
the contract No. HSCL-CPG/GWY15BD003/e094 (LoA)101-8874/G-16945 dated
28-01-2019.
e. Issue a writ of mandamus or any other writ/direction/order or similar nature whereby
commanding the Respondents herein not to take any coercive action against the Petitioner qua the
Contract No. HSCL-CPG/GWT15BD003/e094 (LoA)101-8874/G- 16945 dated 28-01-2019 and the
petitioner be permitted to execute the works as per the specifications and complete the same in
accordance with the terms and conditions of contract; f. Pass such and further order (s) as this
Hon'ble Court may deem fit ad proper in the facts and circumstances of the present case;
g. Pending the final outcome of the present writ petition. Restrain the Respondents from taking any
coercive action against the Petitioner including the invocation and encashment of Bank Guarantees
as mentioned above; And/or h. Pass such and further order(s) as this Hon'ble Court may deem fit
and proper in the facts and circumstances of the present case."
[4] Mr. M. Devananda, learned counsel appearing for the respondents raised a preliminary
objection on the issue of maintainability of the present writ petition. It has been submitted by the
learned counsel for the respondents that the works for construction of buildings including allied and
external development works for National Sports University (Package - 2A) at Imphal, Manipur was
originally awarded to the petitioner by Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd. and thereafter, as
per the Memorandum of Understanding dated 25-09- 2019 between the Ministry of Youth Affairs &
Sports, Government of India, and the respondent No. 2 i.e., NBCC (India) Ltd, the respondent
WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 4 No. 2 was tasked with monitoring the execution of the said contract
work and to make payments to the contractors directly. It has also been submitted by the learned
counsel that the head office of the respondent No. 2 is at New Delhi and the respondent No. 2 is
carrying on its business at New Delhi. After taking over the execution of the said contract work from
the HSCL, an Agreement of Novation and Assignment in connection with the said contract work was
signed and executed at New Delhi between the respondent No. 2, HSCL and the petitioner on 13th
March, 2020. Learned counsel also submitted that in Para No. 10 and 12 of the said Agreement of
Novation and Assignment dated 13th March, 2020, it has been laid down as under:
'' 10. NBCC, the Assignee shall be responsible for release of all future payments to
SPL as per Agreement dated April 8th, 2019 (for Package 2-A) from the Effective
date. Further SPL shall not be entitled to any compensation or any other payments
due to or arising out of the present agreement from the Assignor and or the Assignee
in any manner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 3
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
"12. The Courts of Delhi shall have the sole jurisdiction in respect of any disputes or
claims arising out of or in respect to the present Agreement.'' [5] Mr. M. Devananda,
learned counsel for the respondents place before this Court a letter dated 07-09-2021
of the Project Manager of the petitioner addressed to the Joint Manager of the
respondent No. 2 furnishing the details of the bank account of the petitioner
maintained at UCO Bank at New Delhi which shall be used exclusively for payment in
WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 5 connection with the said contract work and also
requesting to release further payment to the petitioner in respect of the said contract
work into the aforesaid bank account of the petitioner. It has also been submitted by
the learned counsel for the respondents that the bank account of the respondent No.
2 is also at New Delhi and that the respondent No. 2 has been making payment to the
petitioner in connection with the said contract work through the bank account of the
respondent No. 2 and that the bank accounts of the petitioner and the respondent
No. 2 are both at New Delhi. Learned counsel accordingly submitted that, as the
respondent No. 2 is carrying on its business at New Delhi through its head office and
as the Agreement of Novation and Assignment between the petitioner and the
respondent No. 2 in connection with the said contract work was executed at New
Delhi and as the respondent No. 2 has been making payments to the petitioner in
connection with the said contract work through their banks situated at New Delhi,
cause of action arose partly in New Delhi and the Delhi High Court has also the
jurisdiction to entertain and decide any disputes or claims arising out of or in respect
of the said contract work in terms of the provisions of Section 20 of the CPC, 1908.
[6] Mr. M. Devananda, learned counsel for the respondents vehemently submitted
that the petitioner and the respondent No. 2 have voluntarily made an agreement in
para No. 12 of the Agreement of Novation and Assignment dated 13-03-2020 that the
Courts of Delhi WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 6 shall have the sole jurisdiction in
respect of any disputes or claims arising out of or in respect of the said contract work
and accordingly, the Delhi High Court shall have the sole jurisdiction to entertain the
present writ petition and the present writ petition is not maintainable since the
jurisdiction of this Court have been ousted by the aforesaid agreement between the
petitioner and the respondent No. 2. In support of his contention, learned counsel
cited the following Judgments of the Apex Court :-
(i) "New Moga Transport Co., through its Proprietor Krishanlal Jhanwar Vs. United
India Insurance Co. Ltd. & Ors"
reported in (2004) 4 SCC 677 wherein, it has been held that -
"14. By a long series of decisions it has been held that where two courts or more have
jurisdiction under CPC to try a suit or proceeding, an agreement between the parties
that the dispute between them shall be tried in any one of such courts is not contrary
to public policy and in no way contravenes Section 28 of the Indian contract Act,
1872. Therefore, if on the facts of a given case more than one court has jurisdiction,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 4
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
parties by their consent may limit the jurisdiction to one of the two courts. But by an
agreement parties cannot confer jurisdiction on a court which otherwise does not
have jurisdiction to deal with the matter.
"17. As we observed by this Court in Shriram case referring to Hakam Singh case an
agreement affecting jurisdiction of courts is not invalid. It is open to the parties to
choose any of the two competent courts to decide the disputes. Once the parties bind
themselves as such it is not open for them to choose a different jurisdiction.
"18. Above being the factual and legal position, the inevitable conclusion is that the
High Court was not justified in upsetting the order of the first appellate court. It is
not a case where the chosen court did not have jurisdiction. The only question,
therefore, related to exclusion of the other courts.
WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 7
"19. The intention of the parties can be culled out from use of the
expressions "only", "alone" , "exclusive" and the like with reference to a particular
court. But the intention to exclude a court's jurisdiction should be reflected in clear,
unambiguous, explicit and specific terms. In such case only the accepted notions of
contract would bind the parties. The first appellate jurisdiction to try the suit. The
High Court did not keep the relevant aspects in view while reversing the judgment of
the trial court. Accordingly, we set aside the judgment of the High Court and restore
that of the first appellate court. The court at Barnala shall return the plaint to
Plaintiff 1 (Respondent
1) with appropriate endorsement under its seal which shall present it within a period
of four weeks from the date of such endorsement of return before the proper court at
Udaipur. If it is so done, the question of limitation shall not be raised and the suit
shall be decided on its own merits in accordance with the law. The appeal is allowed.
No cost."
(ii) "AVM Sales Corporation Vs. Anuradha Chemicals Private Ltd." reported in (2012) 2 SCC 315
wherein, it has been held that -
"11. However, in this case a slightly different question arises, namely, as to whether if
two courts have the jurisdiction to try a suit, can the parties to an agreement mutually
agree to exclude the jurisdiction of one court in preference to the other and as to
whether the same would amount to violation of the provisions of Sections 23 and 28
of the Contract Act? The said question has been answered in the affirmative by the
trial court and has been upheld by the High Court.
"12. The question which has been raised in this special leave petition is not new and
has been considered by this Court earlier in several decisions. We are, therefore,
required to consider as to whether the cause of action for the suit filed by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 5
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
respondent in Vijayawada arose within the jurisdiction of the court of the Principal
Senor Civil Judge at Vijayawada, exclusively, or whether such cause of action arose
both in Vijayawada and also Calcutta? "13. As has been mentioned herein before on
behalf of the petitioner, it had been urged that the entire cause of action for the suit
had arisen within the jurisdiction of the Calcutta courts and the courts at Vijayawada
had no jurisdiction whatsoever to entertain a suit pertaining to the understanding
and agreement arrived at between the parties. However, it was contended WP(C) No.
428 of 2022 Page 8 on behalf of the respondent that its registered office was situated
at Vijayawada, the invoices for the goods were raised at Vijayawada, the goods were
dispatched from Vijayawada and the money was payable to the plaintiff or its
nominee at Vijayawada by way of demand drafts and, accordingly, the courts at
Vijayawada had the jurisdiction to entertain the suit. "14. It has often been stated by
this Court that cause of action comprises a bundle of facts which are relevant for the
determination of the lis between the parties. In the instant case, since the invoices for
the goods in question were raised at Vijayawada, the goods were dispatched from
Vijayawada and the money was payable to the respondents or its nominee at
Vijayawada, in our view, the same comprised part of the bundle of facts giving rise to
the cause of action for the suit. At the same time, since the petitioner-defendant in
the suit had its place of business at Calcutta and the agreement for supply of the
goods was entered into at Calcutta and the goods were to be delivered at Calcutta, a
part of the cause of action also arose within the jurisdiction of the courts in Calcutta
for the purposes of the suit. Accordingly, both the Courts within the jurisdiction of
Calcutta and Vijayawada had jurisdiction under Section 20 of the Code of Civil
Procedure to try the suit, as part of the cause of action of the suit had arisen within
the jurisdiction of both the said courts.
"15. This leads us to the next question as to whether, if two courts have the
jurisdiction to entertain a suit, whether the parties may by mutual agreement exclude
the jurisdiction of one of the courts, having regard to the provisions of Section 23 and
28 of the Contract Act, 1872. Section 23 of the aforesaid Act indicates what
considerations and objects are lawful and what are not, including the considerations
or objects of an agreement, if forbidden by law. "18. One of the earlier cases in which
this question had arisen, was A.B.C Laminart (P) Ltd v A.P Agencies. In the said case,
the cause of action for the suit had arisen both within the jurisdiction of the civil
court at Salem in Andhra Pradesh and in the civil court of Kaira in the State of
Gujarat. The question arose as to whether since by mutual agreement the jurisdiction
had been confined only to the courts within Kaira jurisdiction, the suit filed at Salem
was at all maintainable? This Court inter alia held that :
"10 ...... there (could) be no doubt that an agreement to oust absolutely the
jurisdiction of the court will be unlawful and void being against public policy."
WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 9 However, such a result would ensue if it is shown that
the jurisdiction to which the parties had agreed to submit had nothing to do with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 6
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
contract. If on the other hand, it is found that the jurisdiction agreed would also be a
proper jurisdiction in the matter of the contract, it could not be said that it ousted the
jurisdiction of the court.
"19. After considering the facts involved in the said case and the submissions made
on behalf of the parties, this Court observed as follows: "18 .....Thus it is now a settled
principle that where there may be two or more competent courts which can entertain
a suit consequent upon a part of the cause of action having arisen there within, if the
parties to the contract agreed to vest jurisdiction in one such court to try the dispute
which might arise as between themselves the agreement would be valid. If such a
contract is clear, unambiguous and explicit and not vague it is not hit by Sections 23
and 28 of the Contract Act. This cannot be understood as parties contracting against
the statute."
"20. A similar view was taken by this Court in Angile Insulations Vs. Davy Ashmore
India Ltd., wherein, the Hon'ble Judges while referring to the decision of this Court
in A.B.C Laminart (P) Ltd., case, inter alia, held that where two courts have the
jurisdiction consequent upon the cause of action or a part thereof arising therein, if
the parties agree in clear and unambiguous terms to exclude the jurisdiction of the
other, the said decision could not offend the provisions of Section 23 of the Contract
Act. In such a case, the suit would lie in the court to be agreed upon by the parties.
"21. This Court has consistently taken the same view in several subsequent cases. We
may refer to one such decision of this Court in Hanil Era Textiles Ltd. V. Puromatic
Filters (P) Ltd., where part of the cause of action arose at both Delhi and Bombay.
This Court held that the mutual agreement to exclude the jurisdiction of the Delhi
courts to entertain the suit was not opposed to public policy and was valid.
"22. As indicated herein earlier, in this case also the cause of action for Original Suit
No. 519 of 1991 filed by the respondent before the Principal Senior Civil Judge,
Vijayawada arose partly within the jurisdiction of the Calcutta courts and the courts
at Vijayawada.
"23. Having regard to the provisions referred to herein above, though the courts at
Vijayawada would also have jurisdiction, along with the courts at WP(C) No. 428 of
2022 Page 10 Calcutta, to entertain and try a suit relating to and arising out of the
agreement dated 23-12-1988, and the mutual understanding dated 15-05- 1989, such
jurisdiction of the courts at Vijayawada would stand ousted by virtue of the exclusion
clause in the agreement."
(iii) "Swastik Gases Private Limited Vs. Indian Oil Corporation Limited" reported in (2013) 9 SCC
32 wherein, the Apex Court after considering a number of its earlier judgments held that -
"29. When it comes to the question of territorial jurisdiction relating to the
application under Section 11, besides the above legislative provisions, Section 20 of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 7
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
the Code is relevant. Section 20 of the Code states that subject to the limitations
provided in Sections 15 to 19, every suit shall be instituted in a court within the local
limits of whose jurisdiction;
(a) the defendant, or each of the defendants, where there are more than one, at the
time of commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carry on
business, or personally works for gain; or
(b) any of the defendants, where there are more than one, at the time of the
commencement of the suit, actually and voluntarily resides, or carries on business, or
personally works for gain, provided that in such case either the leave of the court is
given, or the defendants who do not reside, or carry on business or personally work
for gain, as aforesaid, acquiesce in such institution; or
(c) the cause of action, wholly or in part arises.
"30. The Explanation appended to Section 20 clarifies that a corporation shall be
deemed to carry on business at its sole or principal office in India or, in respect of any
cause of action arising at any place where it has also a subordinate office, at such
place.
"31. In the instant case, the appellant does not dispute that part of cause of action has
arisen in Kolkata. What appellant says is that part of cause of action has also arisen in
Jaipur and, therefore, the Chief Justice of the Rajasthan High Court or the designate
Judge has jurisdiction to consider the application made by the appellant for the
appointment of an arbitrator under Section 11. Having regard to Section 11 (12)(b)
and Section 2 (e) of the 1996 Act read with Section 20 (c) of the Code, there remains
no doubt that the Chief Justice or the designate Judge of the Rajasthan High Court
has WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 11 jurisdiction in the matter. The question is,
whether parties by virtue of Clause 18 of the agreement have agreed to exclude the
jurisdiction of the courts of Jaipur or; in other words, whether in view of Clause 18 of
the agreement, the jurisdiction of the Chief Justice of the Rajasthan High Court has
been excluded?
"32. For answer to the above question, we have to see the effect of the jurisdiction
clause in the agreement which provides that the agreement shall be subject to
jurisdiction of the courts at Kolkata. It is a fact that whilst providing for jurisdiction
clause in the agreement the words like "alone", "only", "exclusive" or "exclusive
jurisdiction" have not been used but this, in our view, is not decisive and does not
make any material difference. The intention of the parties - by having Clause 18 in the
agreement - is clear and unambiguous that the courts at Kolkata shall have
jurisdiction which means that the courts in Kolkata alone shall have jurisdiction. It is
so, because for construction of jurisdiction clause, like Clause 18 in the agreement,
the maxim expressio unius est exclucio alterius comes into play as there is nothing to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 8
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
indicate to the contrary . This legal maxim means that expression of one is the
exclusion of another. By making a provision that the agreement is subject to the
jurisdiction of the courts at Kolkata, the parties have impliedly excluded the
jurisdiction of other courts. Where the contract specifies the jurisdiction of the courts
at a particular place and such courts have jurisdiction to deal with the manner, we
think that an inference may be drawn that parties intended to exclude all other
courts. A clause like this is not hit by Section 23 of the Contract Act at all. Such clause
is neither forbidden by law nor it is against the public policy. It does not offend
Section 28 of the Contract Act in any manner.
"33. The above view finds support for the decisions of this Court in Hakam Singh,
A.B.C Laminart, R.S.D.V Finance, Angile Insulations, Shriram City, Hanil Era
Textiles and Balaji Coke.
"34. In view of the above, we answer the question in the affirmative and hold that the
impugned order does not suffer from any error of law. The civil appeal is,
accordingly, dismissed with no order as to costs. The appellant shall be at liberty to
pursue its remedy under Section 11 of the 1996 Act in the Calcutta High Court."
WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 12
[7] Mr. S. D Singh, learned counsel for the petitioner
did not deny or controvert any of the factual position submitted by the learned
counsel for the respondents, however, learned counsel strenuously submitted that
some cause of action arose in Delhi is irrelevant inasmuch as the contract work is to
be executed in the State of Manipur and this Court has jurisdiction to entertain and
decide the present writ petition. Learned counsel further submitted that the
agreement in Para No. 12 of the Agreement of Novation and Assignment dated
13-03-2020 is not valid for the reason that a private agreement entered into between
the petitioner and the respondent No. 2 cannot exclude/oust the writ jurisdiction of
this Court or confer jurisdiction in a court where no cause of action arose. The
learned counsel accordingly submitted that there is no merit in the submission
advanced by the learned counsel for the respondents and that the present writ
petition is maintainable. In support of his contention, learned counsel for the
petitioner relied on the judgment of the Apex Court rendered in the case of
"Maharashtra Chess Association Vs. Union of India & Ors"
reported in (2020) 13 SCC 285 wherein, it has been held as under:
"17. The observation extracted above raises an important consideration with respect
to the present case. If, by the self- imposed rule, the writ jurisdiction of High Courts
is circumscribed by the existence of a suitable alternate remedy, whether
constitutional, statutory, or contractual, then a High court should WP(C) No. 428 of
2022 Page 13 not exercise its writ jurisdiction where such an alternate remedy exists.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 9
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
Thus, before we address the question of whether or not Clause 21 of the Constitution
and bye-laws compel the Bombay High Court to abstain from entertaining the
appellant's writ petition, we must first address ourselves to whether, even in the
absence of Clause 21, the existence of an alternate remedy would create a bar on the
Bombay High Court entertaining the appellant's writ petition.
"18. The case of the second respondent is that the dispute should be heard and
decided at Chennai. It follows that if the respondents argument is accepted, the High
Court of Madras would hear the present matter. Therefore, the alternate remedy (i.e,
a writ petition before the High Court of Madras) is equal in every way to the present
remedy sought by the appellant. The High Court of Madras imbued with the same
powers in the exercise of its writ jurisdiction. The submission on the above premises
is that the appellant can avail of the same relief at Chennai as it may in Mumbai.
Hence, the agreement between the parties may prevail and the writ jurisdiction of the
Bombay High Court under Article 226 stands ousted.
"19. This argument of the second respondent is misconceived. The existence of the
alternate remedy, whether adequate or not, does not alter the fundamentally
discretionary nature of the High Court writ jurisdiction and therefore, does not create
an absolute legal bar on the exercise of the writ jurisdiction by a High Court. The
decision whether or not to entertain an action under its writ jurisdiction remains a
decision to be taken by the High Court on an examination of the facts and
circumstances of a particular case.
"20. This understanding has been laid down in several decisions of this Court. In U.P
State Spg. Co. Ltd. v R.S. Pandey this Court held (SCC p. 270, para 11) "11. Except for
a period when Article 226 was amended by the Constitution (Forty-second
Amendment) Act,, 1976, the power relating to alternative remedy has been WP(C)
No. 428 of 2022 Page 14 considered to be a rule of self-imposed limitation. It is
essentially a rule of policy, convenience and discretion and never a rule of law.
Despite the existence of an alternative remedy it is within the jurisdiction or
discretion of the High Court to grant relief under Article 266 of the Constitution. At
the same time, it cannot be lost sight of that though the matter relating to alternative
remedy has nothing to do with the jurisdiction of the case, normally the High Court
should not interefere if there is an adequate efficacious alternative remedy."
"21. The principle that the writ jurisdiction of a High Court can be exercised where on
adequate alternative remedies exists can be traced further back to the decision of the
Constitution Bench of this Court in State of U.P v Mohd. Nooh where Vivian Bose, J.
observed: (AIR p. 93, para 10) "10. In the next place it must be borne in mind that
there is no rule, with regard to certiorari as there is with mandamus, that it will lie
only where there is no other equally effective remedy. It is well established that,
provided the requisite grounds exist, certiorari will lie although a right of appeal have
been conferred by statute. (Halsbury's Laws of England, 3rd Edn., Vol. 11, p. 130 and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 10
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
the cases cited there). The fact that the aggrieved party has another an adequate
remedy may be taken into consideration by the superior court in arriving at a
conclusion as to whether it should, in exercise of its discretion, issue a writ or
certiorari to quash the proceedings and decisions of inferior court subordinate to it
and ordinarily the superior court will decline to interfere until the aggrieved party has
exhausted his other statutory remedies, if any. But this rule requiring the exhaustion
of statutory remedies before the writ will be granted is a rule of policy, convenience
and discretion rather than a rule of law and instances are numerous where a writ of
certiorari has been issued inspite of the fact that the aggrieved party had other
adequate legal remedies."
"22. The mere existence of alternate forums where the aggrieved party may secure
relief does not create a legal bar on a WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 15 High Court to
exercise its writ jurisdiction. It is a factor to be taken into consideration by the High
Court amongst several factors. Thus, the mere fact that the High Court a Madras is
capable of granting adequate relief to the appellant does not create a legal bar on the
Bombay High Court exercising its writ jurisdiction in the present matter.
"26. In the present case, the Bombay High Court has relied solely on Clause 21 of the
Constitution and bye-laws to hold that its own jurisdiction is ousted. The Bombay
High Court has failed to examine the case holistically and make a considered
determination as to whether or not it should, in its discretion exercise its powers
under Article 226. The scrutiny to be applied to every writ petition under Article 226
by the High Court is crucial safeguard of the rule of law under the Constitution in the
relevant territorial jurisdiction. It is not open to a High Court to abdicate this
responsibility merely due to the existence of a privately negotiated document ousting
its jurisdiction.
"27. It is certainly open to the High Court to take into consideration the fact that the
appellant and the second respondent consented to resolve all their legal disputes
before the courts at Chennai. However, this can be a factor within the broader factual
matrix of the case. The High Court may decline to exercise jurisdiction under Article
226 invoking the principle of forum non conveniens in an appropriate case. The High
Courto must look at the case of the appellant holistically and make a determination
as to whether it would be proper to exercise its writ jurisdiction. We do not express
an opinion as to what factors should be considered by the High Court in the present
case, nor the corresponding gravity that should be accorded to such factors. Such
principles are well known to the High Court and it is not for this Court to interfere in
the discretion of the High Court in determining when to engage its writ jurisdiction
unless exercise arbitrarily or erroneously. The sole and absolute reliance by the
Bombay High Court on Clause 21 of the Constitution and bye-laws WP(C) No. 428 of
2022 Page 16 to determine its jurisdiction under Article 226 is ousted, is however one
such instance.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 11
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
"28. We accordingly allow the appeal and set aside the impugned judgment and order
of the High Court dated 25-09- 2018. Writ Petition No. 7770 of 2017 is accordingly
restored to the file of the High Court for being considered afresh. No costs. Pending
application (s), if any, shall stand disposed of."
[8] After hearing the rival submissions of the learned counsel for the parties, this Court is of the
considered view that there is no dispute with regard to the fact that the cause of action arose partly
in Delhi and accordingly both this Court and the High Court of Delhi have jurisdiction to entertain
and decide the disputes raised in the present writ petition.
[9] The principle of law that when two Courts have concurrent jurisdiction to try the dispute
between the parties and the parties have agreed that the disputes should be tried by only one of the
courts, then the court mentioned in the agreement shall have jurisdiction has been well settled by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in a catenae of its judgments. In my considered view, such principle of
law had been clearly laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of "Hanil Era Textiles Ltd."
(supra), "A.V.M Steel Corporation" (supra), "Swastika Gases Private Ltd." (supra) etc., relied on by
the learned counsel for the petitioner.
[10] In the present case, having regard to the undisputed facts and as the petitioner and the
respondent No. 2 WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 17 have voluntarily entered into an agreement in
Para No. 12 of the Agreement of Novation and Assignment dated 13-03-2020 that the courts of
Delhi shall have the sole jurisdiction in respect of any disputes or claims arising out of or in respect
of the said contract work, this Court has no hesitation to hold that only courts of Delhi shall have the
sole jurisdiction to decide the disputes raised in the present writ petition and in view of the
exclusion clause in the agreement, jurisdiction of this Court would stand ousted.
[11] The facts of the case of "Maharashtra Chess Association" (supra) cited by the counsel for the
petitioner is totally different from the facts of the present case. In the said case, no issue was raised
or considered as to whether both the Courts at Chennai and Bombay High Court have concurrent
jurisdiction to entertain and decide the disputes involved in the said case and that it has been clearly
held by the Apex Court in Para No. 26 of the said judgment that the Bombay High Court relied solely
on Clause 21 of the Constitution and By-Laws to hold that the Bombay High Court has no
jurisdiction and that the said High Court has failed to examine the case holistically and make a
considered determination as to whether or not it should, in its discretion, exercise its power under
Article 226. It has been further held that the scrutiny to be applied to every writ petition under
Article 226 by the High Court is crucial safeguard of the rule of law under the Constitution in the
WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 18 relevant territorial jurisdiction and that it is not open to a High
Court to abdicate the responsibility merely due to the existence of the privately negotiated document
ousting its jurisdiction. [12] In Para No. 9 of the said judgment, the Hon'ble Apex Court clearly
upheld the principle of law that where parties to a contract confer jurisdiction on one amongst
multiple courts having proper jurisdiction to the exclusion of all other courts, the parties cannot be
said to have ousted the jurisdiction of all court and that such a contract is valid and will bind the
parties to a civil action. [13] In view of the above, this Court is of the considered view that the
judgment of the Apex Court in the case of "Maharashtra Chess Association" (supra) relied by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 12
M/S Simplex Projects Ltd. Through Its ... vs National Sports University (Nsu) on 27 July, 2022
counsel for the petitioner is not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
[14] Having regards to the undisputed facts of the present case and in view of the settled principle of
law laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case relied on by the learned counsel for the
respondents, this Court is of the considered view that the jurisdiction of this Court would stand
ousted and that only the courts of Delhi shall have the sole jurisdiction to entertain and decide the
disputes raised by the petitioner in the present writ petition and accordingly, the present writ
petition is hereby dismissed as not maintainable. It is, however, made clear that the WP(C) No. 428
of 2022 Page 19 petitioner will have liberty to file appropriate proceedings before the appropriate
Court to redresses any of its grievances raised in the present writ petition. Having regard to the facts
and circumstances of the present case, the parties are to bear their own cost.
JUDGE
FR/NFR
kim
WP(C) No. 428 of 2022 Page 20
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187072475/ 13
