M/S. Pinnacle Clothing Co vs State Of Odisha ... Opp. Party on 4 January, 2021
M/S. Pinnacle Clothing Co vs State Of Odisha ... Opp. Party on 4
January, 2021
Author: S.Pujahari
Bench: S.Pujahari
CORAM : HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE S.PUJAHARI
CRLREV No.481 of 2020
M/s. Pinnacle Clothing Co. ... Petitioner
- Versus -
State of Odisha ... Opp. Party
ORDER
03. 04.01.2021 In the wake of the pandemic Covid-19, the case is taken up through V.C.
2. The petitioner in this criminal revision has challenged the sustainability of the order dated
04.12.2020 passed by the learned Special Judge, Koraput-Jeypore in Misc. Case No.143 of 2020,
arising out of T.R. No.12 of 2020 rejecting the prayer made by him under Section 457 of Cr.P.C. for
release of the fabric bundles/rolls seized in connection with Boipariguda P.S. Case No.20 of 2020
registered for alleged commission of offence under Section 20(b)(ii)(C) of the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (for short "the NDPS Act").
3. Facts relevant for disposal of this revision petition are as follows:-
The S.I. of Police, namely, Ramesh Kumar Debata of Boipariguda Police Station along with the staff
of the said Police Station while returning to the Police Station after performing patrolling duty and
checking of vehicles in the night intervening 8/9.02.2020 near Boipariguda Chhak, intercepted a
close body container truck bearing registration No.HR- 38-Z-1135 coming from Malkangiri side. On
such interception, out of the four occupants in the said truck, two persons alighted from the said
vehicle and took to their heel, but the other two persons, one of whom was in the driver seat, on
being asked the cause of their fleeing, disclosed that as the vehicle was containing contraband
'Ganja', seeing the police, they fled away. The police personnel commanded to nab those two,
however nabbed them soon after and brought them to the Police Station. Then on verification of the
container, it was found that the container was carrying Fabric roll / bundles and smell of 'Ganja' was
emitting out. On search, it was also found 47 nos. of jerry bags containing 'Ganja' were there, besides
500 nos. of rolls of fabric. Those jerry bags were then unloaded and on weighment of the 'Ganja' in
all 47 jerry bags weighed 1127 Kgs. Then the police conducting other formalities required under law
stated to have seized the 'Ganja', so also the truck along with fabric roll and other documents in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145949780/ 1
M/S. Pinnacle Clothing Co vs State Of Odisha ... Opp. Party on 4 January, 2021
respect of the transportation of such fabric roll. Since against the persons, who are apprehended at
the spot, disclosed commission of offence punishable under Section 20(b)(ii)(C) of the NDPS Act,
the S.I. of Police of Boipariguda Police Station conducting such search and seizure lodged the report,
pursuant to which, the case was registered and during the course of investigation, the seizure of the
articles was reported to the learned Special Judge in the aforesaid case.
4. The case of the petitioner is that he is the owner of the seized fabric roll/bundles which he had
imported from the manufacturer-Shaoxing Easyway Textile Co. Ltd. at Chaina through Chennai Port
and on landing of the articles, i.e., 869 fabric roll/bundles at Chennai Port, after the custom
clearance of the entire stock, the same were handed over by their clearing agent, namely, R.K.
Logistics for the delivery of the same in the destination of the petitioner at Noida to the Transporter
- Tamil Nadu Logistics. The said Transporter hired two container trucks from one Mr. Sohan Singh
for transportation of the aforesaid goods and out of the same, the container truck carrying 233 fabric
roll/bundles had already reached the destination, but the offending truck bearing registration
No.HR-38-Z-1135 carrying 636 fabric rolls/bundles did not reach at the destination in time. On
being enquired, it was disclosed before the petitioner by their transporter that it was seized in
connection with the aforesaid case. Thereafter, the transporter filed a petition under Section 457 of
Cr.P.C. for release of the aforesaid articles seized, but the same was rejected by the learned Special
Judge, Koraput-jeypore on irrelevant ground that the investigation was in progress and against the
said order, the petitioner had filed a revision petition vide CRLREV No.343 of 2020 before this
Court and when this Court declined to entertain the same as the present petitioner had not filed a
petition under Section 457 of Cr.P.C. before the Court below, the petitioner sought for withdrawal of
the same with liberty to approach the Court below by filing a petition under Section 457 of Cr.P.C.
which was allowed. In the meanwhile investigation has already been completed and the petitioner is
not arraigned as an accused. Thereafter, the petitioner moved the Court below by filing a petition
under Section 457 of Cr.P.C. for release of the articles seized. The learned Special Judge refused to
release the same in favour of the petitioner for the reasons that original invoice showing his
entitlement and also his power of attorney had not filed the original authorizing him to make such
prayer and the article being used to conceal the contraband Narcotic drugs, i.e., 'Ganja' inside, was
liable for confiscation. Even if the case of the prosecution is accepted, it reveals that both the
articles, such as, 'Ganja' and fabric roll/bundles were separately, inside the container at the time of
seizure. However, without appreciating the aforesaid fact and also in a misconception of law with
regard to post-trial confiscation, the prayer of the petitioner was rejected assigning the reasons, as
stated earlier. Hence, he has filed this revision petition challenging the same.
5. It is the contention of the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner that since the
articles seized were subject to natural decay and destruction and he is the rightful owner of the
property, even Section 61 of the NDPS Act says that the articles seized if used to conceal the
contraband narcotic drugs is liable for confiscation, but the same being a post-trial exercise and can
only be done only in the event when the evidence are brought during the trial disclosing the same,
the learned Special Judge should not have refused to release the articles in favour of the petitioner
in exercise of the jurisdiction under Section 457 of Cr.P.C., more so when evidence collected does
not disclose that the articles seized were used to conceal the contraband 'Ganja' as both the articles
were remained distinct inside the container and it was never the case of the prosecution that inside
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145949780/ 2
M/S. Pinnacle Clothing Co vs State Of Odisha ... Opp. Party on 4 January, 2021
the fabric roll/bundles 'Ganja' packets were there. Therefore, there being no material to disclose that
the fabric roll were used to conceal the 'Ganja', as such, the same is not liable for confiscation. In
such premises, more particularly when the petitioner-company is not an accused, the order of the
learned Special Judge suffers from gross illegality and, as such, liable to be set-aside. The other
ground that is assigned, are not tenable in the absence of any rival claim with regard to ownership
and also the Firm having authorized to file the case to the attorney holder. However, the attorney
holder has also filed special power of attorney in this case, that is executed by the partners of the
company. In such premises, the revision petition be allowed by setting aside the impugned order
and the trial Court be directed to release the aforesaid fabric roll/bundles in favour of the
petitioner-owner, submits the learned counsel for the petitioner.
6. Counter affidavit in this case though stated to have been filed by the State counsel, but the same
has not been brought to record. However, it is fairly submitted by the learned counsel for the State
that the fabric roll/bundles and the 'Ganja' seized inside the offending vehicle were kept
independently, but he defended the impugned order on the ground that there is provision of
confiscation as the same was used as cover to transport the contraband 'Ganja', and the person who
sought for release of the fabric roll/bundles did not show his authority for seeking release on behalf
of the owner and document was not filed indicating entitlement of the petitioner for the same as
owner.
7. Before addressing the contention of the parties, it would be apposite to mention here that release
of the property seized in connection with N.D.P.S. Act in appropriate cases, in exercise of power
under Sections 451 and 457 of Cr.P.C is not ousted under the N.D.P.S Act. But, it appears that the
trial Court refused to release the seized fabric rolls in favour of the transporter assigning the reason
that the petitioner could not show his entitlement by filing the original invoice and also the
authority of special power of attorney to represent him, so also taking note of the provision of
Section 61 of the N.D.P.S Act that the property is liable for confiscation, sustainability of which has
been questioned by the learned senior counsel appearing for the petitioner, but defended by the
State counsel with the submission, as stated earlier.
8. To appreciate the contention of the parties, it would be apposite to have a look to the provision of
dealing with disposal of the article seized in connection with cases under the NDPS Act, Section 52
of the N.D.P.S Act which mandates the Authority or Officer to take necessary steps with regard to
the persons taken to custody and the articles seized, reads thus:-
"52. Disposal of persons arrested and articles seized - (1) Any officer arresting a
person under section 41, section 42, section 43 or section 44 shall, as soon as may be,
inform him of the grounds for such arrest.
(2) Every person arrested and article seized under warrant issued under sub-section
(1) of section 41 shall be forwarded without unnecessary delay to the Magistrate by
whom the warrant was issued.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145949780/ 3
M/S. Pinnacle Clothing Co vs State Of Odisha ... Opp. Party on 4 January, 2021
(3) Every person arrested and article seized under sub-section (2) of section 41,
section 42, section 43 or section 44 shall be forwarded without unnecessary delay to -
(a) the officer-in-charge of the nearest
police station, or
(b) the officer empowered under
section 53.
(4) The authority or officer to whom
any person or article is forwarded under sub-
section (2) or sub-section (3) shall, with all convenient despatch, take such measures as may be
necessary for the disposal according to law of such person or article.
9. Sections 60, 61, 62 and 63 of the N.D.P.S Act deal with post-trial disposal of the articles
mentioned therein. Section 63 deals with the manner of making confiscation. However, Section
63(2) deals with confiscation of the articles which are liable for confiscation under Sections 60, 61
and 62 of the N.D.P.S Act when the person who has committed the offence, is not known. The said
Sections are reproduced below :-
"60. Liability of illicit drugs, substances, plants, articles and conveyances to
confiscation - (1) Whenever any offence punishable under this Act has been
committed, the narcotic drug, psychotropic substance, controlled substance, opium
poppy, coca plant, cannabis plant, materials, apparatus and utensils in respect of
which or by means of which such offence has been committed, shall be liable to
confiscation.
(2) Any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance [or controlled substances] lawfully
produced, imported inter-
State, exported inter-State, imported into India, transported, manufactured, possessed, used,
purchased or sold along with, or in addition to, any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance [or
controlled substances] which is liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) and the receptacles,
packages and coverings in which any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance [or controlled
substances], materials, apparatus or utensils liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) is found,
and the other contents, if any, of such receptacles or packages shall likewise be liable to confiscation.
(3) Any animal or conveyance used in carrying any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance [or
controlled substances], or any article liable to confiscation under sub-section (1) or sub-section (2)
shall be liable to confiscation, unless the owner of the animal or conveyance proves that it was so
used without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the person-in-
charge of the animal or conveyance and that each of them had taken all reasonable precautions
against such use.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145949780/ 4
M/S. Pinnacle Clothing Co vs State Of Odisha ... Opp. Party on 4 January, 2021
61. Confiscation of goods used for concealing illicit drugs or substances - Any goods used for
concealing any [narcotic drug, psychotropic substance or controlled substance] which is liable to
confiscation under this Act shall also be liable to confiscation.
Explanation.- In this section "goods" does not include conveyance as a means of transport.
62. Confiscation of sale proceeds of illicit drugs or substances.- Where any [narcotic drug,
psychotropic substance or controlled substance] is sold by a person having knowledge or reason to
believe that the drug or substance is liable to confiscation under this Act, the sale proceeds thereof
shall also be liable to confiscation.
63. Procedure in making confiscations. - (1) In the trial of offences under this Act, whether the
accused is convicted or acquitted or discharged, the court shall decide whether any article or thing
seized under this Act is liable to confiscation under section 60 or section 61 or section 62 and, if it
decides that the article is so liable, it may order confiscation accordingly.
(2) Where any articles or thing seized under this Act appears to be liable to confiscation under
section 60 or section 61 or section 62, but the person who committed the offence in connection
therewith is not known or cannot be found, the court may inquire into and decide such liability, and
may order confiscation accordingly:
Provided that no order of confiscation of an article or thing shall be made until the
expiry of one month from the date of seizure, or without hearing any person who may
claim any right thereto and the evidence, if any, which he produces in respect of his
claim.
Provided further that if any such article or thing, other than a narcotic drug,
psychotropic substance [controlled substance], the opium poppy, coca plant or
cannabis plant is liable to speedy and natural decay, or if the court is of opinion that
its sale would be for the benefit of its owner, it may at any time direct it to be sold;
and the provisions of this sub- section shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to
the net proceeds of the sale."
10. A bare perusal of the aforesaid provisions would go to show that it is incumbent
on the part of the Authority or officer who is in custody of the persons or articles
seized in connection with a case under the N.D.P.S Act to take steps for disposal of
the person and articles in the manner known to law. The same necessarily implies
that the officer concerned has to produce before the Court the articles seized and also
the person concerned who has been taken to custody in connection with a case under
the N.D.P.S Act. Sections 60, 61 and 62 of the N.D.P.S Act provide for the post-trial
decision required to be taken by the Court with regard to disposal of the illicit
narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances, plants, articles and
conveyances, so also any lawful drugs and the narcotic drugs or substances [or
controlled substances] which though are imported or exported lawfully, but along
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145949780/ 5
M/S. Pinnacle Clothing Co vs State Of Odisha ... Opp. Party on 4 January, 2021
with the same, there are illicit narcotic drugs or psychotropic substances or
controlled substances, and also the materials, apparatus, utensils which are used, the
receptacles or packages covering used for such contraband drugs and the contents in
the same, and animal or conveyance used in committing such offence.
Section 61 of the N.D.P.S Act speaks of confiscation of goods besides the conveyance, which is used
for concealing any narcotic drug or psychotropic substance or controlled substance which are liable
for confiscation under Section 60 of the N.D.P.S Act. Section 62 of the N.D.P.S Act relates to
confiscation of the sale proceeds of such illicit drugs or substances. Section 63 of the N.D.P.S Act
prescribes the procedure for confiscation with regard to the articles or things seized under the
N.D.P.S Act, which are liable for confiscation under Sections 60, 61 and 62 of the N.D.P.S Act
irrespective of conviction/acquittal or discharge of the accused tried for committing such offence in
the trial. However, Section 63(2) of the N.D.P.S Act deals with disposal of the articles or things
seized which are liable for confiscation under Sections 60, 61 and 62 of the N.D.P.S Act, but the
person who committed the offence in connection therewith is not known. Exercise of such power
under Section 63(2) of the NDPS Act, however, is subject to limitation that no order for
confiscation/disposal can be made until expiry of thirty days of such seizure or without hearing the
person, who comes forward claiming such article seized or without considering the evidence
produced by him. The second proviso to the said sub-ection, however, speaks that if any article or
thing seized in such case other than the narcotic drug, psychotropic substance [controlled
substance], opium poppy, coca plant or cannabis plant, is liable to speedy and natural decay or the
Court is of the opinion that it's immediate sale would be for the benefit of its owner, the Court may
dispose of the same by sale without complying with the requirement as mentioned for confiscation
as provided in the first proviso to the same. But, the sale proceeds thereof shall be subject to
confiscation complying with procedure for confiscation of the articles sold.
11. Under the NDPS Act, when it was enacted, there was no provision for pre-trial disposal of the
articles seized in the cases where the accused persons are known. But, later on, considering the
hazardous nature, vulnerability to theft, substitution, constraint of proper storage space or any other
relevant considerations, in respect of any narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled
substances, or conveyances, Section 52A of the NDPS Act empowers the Central Government to
notify for disposal of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substance or controlled substance or
conveyance, or class thereof soon after seizure by such officer in such manner as that Government
may provide from time to time. However, procedure for such disposal has been prescribed in the
said section. The Central Government has also in the meanwhile come with a notification in this
regard. The same necessarily oust the jurisdiction of the Court to exercise the power under Sections
451 and 457 of Cr.P.C. in respect of those articles mentioned in the notification seized in connection
with NDPS cases. But, the same is not relevant for the purpose of this case as the articles / goods
sought to be released in this case are not the narcotic drugs or psychotropic substance or the
conveyance, to which the said provision applies.
12. Section 452 of Cr.P.C. also deals with the post-trial disposal of the property by way of
confiscation, destruction or release of the same to appropriate person of property seized in
connection with a case. In spite of the same, the Court are not denuded of power to exercise the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145949780/ 6
M/S. Pinnacle Clothing Co vs State Of Odisha ... Opp. Party on 4 January, 2021
jurisdiction under Sections 451 and 457 of Cr.P.C. in appropriate cases to direct disposal or release
of the articles seized as the mandate of law is not to keep such property unnecessarily detained. The
mandate of the Apex Court in the case of Sunderbhai Ambala Desai vrs. State of Gujarat, reported in
(2003) 24 OCR (SC) 444 is to release such property or dispose of the same. In such premises, when
the NDPS Act does not specifically or impliedly prohibit, applicability of Sections 451 and 457 of
Cr.P.C. to any article/goods seized, the said provisions can be invoked to release and disposal of the
goods or articles seized, by the Court concerned in appropriate cases during investigation or
pre-trial stage, if facts and circumstance, so warrants, notwithstanding the provision for post-trial
confiscation
13. Keeping in mind the aforesaid, when the case in hand is addressed, it appears to this Court that
post- trial confiscation has weighed the mind of the Court as prima-facie materials were there
indicating that inside the fabric roll/bundles, 'Ganja' were kept to prevent it detection of the 'Ganja'
being transported with the fabric rolls. The learned Special Judge, therefore, held as the goods were
used to conceal the narcotic drugs and, as such, liable for confiscation, hence, refused to release the
same. However, such a finding of the trial Court has been seriously disputed by the learned senior
counsel appearing for the petitioner. According to him, though prima-facie materials are there to
indicate both contraband 'Ganja' and fabric rolls seized were there in the container, but fabric roll
being never used as a wrapper, therefore, it is submitted, Section 61 of the NDPS Act, which weighed
the mind of the trial Court, has no application to the case at hand. Furthermore, it is also submitted
that when the petitioner-firm, the owner, is not added as an accused in this case and he has no
nexus with the offence alleged, his article seized is not liable for confiscation. On close scrutiny of
the order of the learned Special Judge, it cannot be said that the learned Special Judge under the
impression that as the petitioner was an accused in the case and also using the article seized as
wrapper, refused to release the same. What weighed the mind of the learned Special Judge is that
since the fabric roll were used as cover up to avoid the detection of 'Ganja', the learned Special Judge
has held it to be coming under Section 61 of the NDPS Act and, as such, the same is liable for
confiscation. The article seized is used for concealment of the 'Ganja' or not can be decided during
confiscation proceeding after going through the evidence adduced in the trial. But, it appears that in
the container truck 'Ganja transportation' was camouflaged by the fabric roll therein, as such,
finding of the learned Special Judge prima-facie cannot be said to be without any substance. In such
cases, prima-facie applicability of Section 61 of the NDPS Act is not ruled out, but the same being a
post-trial exercise and applicability of Sections 451 and 457 of Cr.P.C. is not ousted by such
prescription of post-trial confiscation of the fabric roll as well as the fabric roll being subject to
natural decay and destruction, the learned Special Judge should have considered the same while
considering the prayer of the petitioner. Furthermore, the learned Special Judge should have also
taken note of the fact that keeping the aforesaid articles in the Police Station till the conclusion of
the trial to be dealt with Section 61 of the NDPS Act, is beneficial to none. In such premises, when
there was no rival claim and the materials on record, those were collected by the police, indicate the
petitioner to be the owner, the learned Special Judge should have released the same in his favour
allowing him to use the articles keeping the value of the same as security, to be dealt with Section 61
of the NDPS Act after conclusion of the trial. If at all, the learned Special Judge was not satisfied
from the materials produced about the ownership of the petitioner, it could have asked for more
information or documents in support of the same as well as the person representing the same to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145949780/ 7
M/S. Pinnacle Clothing Co vs State Of Odisha ... Opp. Party on 4 January, 2021
furnish the proof thereof. But, without making such an effort, the learned Special Judge rejected the
prayer. At the cost of repetition, it is stated that keeping the article seized in the Police Station is
beneficial to none. There is also no rival claim. In such premises, the articles seized are required to
be disposed of at the pre-trial stage in exercise of power under Section 457 of Cr.P.C.
14. Hence, this Court set-aside the impugned order and direct the learned Special Judge, Koraput-
Jeypore to release the fabric roll in favour of the petitioner after verifying the documents with regard
to the ownership of the seized articles, on furnishing Bank Guarantee commensurate to the value of
the fabric roll/bundles seized. It is stated that the value of the fabric roll/bundles is Rs.39 lacs.
However, this Court is not inclined to make any comment on the value thereof and, as such, it is left
open to the learned Special Judge to go through the materials collected or produced or obtained
such information as it may deem fit and proper with regard to the value of the fabric roll seized and
asked the petitioner to furnish Bank Guarantee of that amount. The period of Bank Guarantee is
required to be fixed by the learned Special Judge. The Bank concerned be intimated by the learned
Special Judge to invoke the Bank Guarantee before its expiry if not renewed and transmit the sale
proceeds thereof to the Court to be dealt with after disposal of the case, if the same is not renewed by
the petitioner well ahead of expiry of the same. However, on conclusion of the trial, if it is found that
the articles are liable for confiscation, the Bank concerned be asked to invoke the Bank Guarantee
and remit back the amount to the Court to forfeit the same to the State. But, if it is found that the
fabric rolls released are not liable for confiscation, the Bank concerned be directed to discharge the
Bank Guarantee furnished.
15. With the aforesaid order, this revision petition stands disposed of being allowed.
The parties may utilize a copy of this order as per the High Court's Notice No.4587 dated
25.03.2020.
.......................
S.Pujahari, J.
MRS
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145949780/ 8
