M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India
Through ... on 31 January, 2023
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
LHAINEI Digitally signed
by
CHONG LHAINEICHONG
HAOKIP AT IMPHAL
Date: 2023.01.31
HAOKIP 11:57:44 +05'30'
W.P.(C) No. 411 of 2020
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei, aged about 61 years, s/o. (L) Tariang
Panmei, a resident of Langol Tarung, Near RNBA House, Imphal
West, Manipur - 795004.
... Petitioner
-Versus -
1. The Food Corporation of India through the Chairman and
Managing Director, having its office at 16-20, Barakhamba
Lane, New Delhi - 110001, India
2. The Food Corporation of India, Regional Office, House No. 105,
Bank Colony, Dimapur, Nagaland - 797112.
3. The Food Corporation of India, Regional Office (Manipur) Old
Assembly Complex, Imphal - 795001, Manipur.
4. The Executive Director (Zone), Food Corporation of India, Zonal
Office (NE), Ulubari, Guwahati - 7.
... Respondents
B E F O R E HON'BLEMR. JUSTICE AHANTHEMBIMOL SINGH For the Petitioner : Mr.N.
Gunedhor, Adv.
For the respondents : Mr. W. Darakishwor, Sr.
Panel Counsel.
Date of Hearing : 18.10.2022
Date of Judgment & Order : 31.01.2023
Judgment & Order
[1] Heard Mr. N. Gunedhor, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner and Mr. W. Darakishwor, learned senior panel counsel appearing for the respondents.
WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 1 The present writ petition had been filed challenging the legality and
sustainability of the order dated 29.06.2020 issued by the authority of the FCI thereby disqualifying
the tender bids submitted by the petitioner's firm and forfeiting the EMD amounting to Rs.
20,80,512/- (Rupees Twenty Lakh eighty thousand five hundred and twelve only) and also black
listing the petitioner's firm for a period of three years from participating in FCI tenders.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 1
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
[2] The legal question which has arisen is whether, upon there being a material non-disclosure or a
material concealment, the forfeiture clause under Clause No. 13 of the General Information to
tenderer can be invoked thereby resulting in issuance of the impugned order. [3] The relevant facts
of the present case in a nutshell is that the FCI issued a notice dated 21.02.2020 inviting E-Tenders
from eligible and interested contractors for appointment of contractor for transportation of food
grains and alike materials, etc, from FSD/CWC, Dimapur to FSDBishnupur for a period of two
years.
Along with the said NIT, a comprehensive General Information to tenderers containing altogether
15 Clauses was also notified. Under Clause (4) of the said General Information, the conditions for
disqualification are given. One of the conditions for disqualification as provided under Clause (4)
(III) is that tenderer whose Earnest Money Deposit and /or Security Deposit had been forfeited by
the FCI or any WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 2 Department of Central or State Government or any
other public sector undertaking, during the last five years, will be, ineligible. UnderCaluse (6) of the
said General Information, it is provided that each tender must be accompanied by an earnest money
@ 2% value of the contract amounting to Rs. 20,80,512/- (Rupees Twenty Lakh, Eighty Thousand
Five Hundred and Twelve Only). Under Clause (11) of the said General Information, it is provided
that Food Corporation of India reserved the right to reject any or all tenders without assigning any
reason and that the successful tenderer will be intimated of the acceptance of his tender by
letter/telegram/fax/e- mail. Under Clause (13) of the said General Information, it is provided that if
the information given by the tenderer in the Tender Document and its Annexures and Appendices is
found to be false/incorrect or has violated/breached any of the terms & conditions of the contract, at
any stage, FCI shall have the right to disqualify/summarily terminate the contract, forfeit the
Earnest Money Deposit/SD/BG, make good any other loses cause to the corporation and black list
the party for three years without prejudice to any other rights that the Corporation may have under
contract and law.
[4] Pursuant to the said NIT, the petitioner's firm submitted its tender bids along with a forwarding
letter marked as Appendices-II and a Tender Submission Undertaking dated 13.03.2020.In the said
forwarding letter, the petitioner stated that he had thoroughly examined and understood all WP(C)
No. 411 of 2020 Page 3 the terms & conditions as contained in the Tender Document, invitation to
tender/information to tender and its annexure and appendices and agreed to abid by them and that
he had deposited EMD amounting to Rs. 20,80,512/- (Rupees Twenty Lakh Eighty Thousand Five
Hundred and Twelve Only). In the said letter, the petitioner also made a declaration that no Earnest
Money Deposit and/or Security Deposit had been forfeited or adjusted against any compensation
payable, in a case of any contract entered into by him with the Food Corporation of India for any
other public sector undertaking or any Government during the last five years. In the said letter, the
petitioner also made a declaration that all information furnished by him was correct and true and in
the event that the information was found to be incorrect/untrue, the FCI shall have the right to
disqualify without giving any notice or reason therefore or summarily terminate the contract. In the
said Tenders Submission Undertaking, the petitioner also gave an undertaking that in case any
provisions of the tender are found violated, then the FCI has the liberty to reject his tender bid
including the forfeiture of the full Earnest Money Deposit.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 2
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
[5] During the evaluation of the tender bids submitted by the petitioner, the authorities of the FCI
came to have knowledge that the Engineering Department of the FCI forfeited the Security Deposit
and performance guaranty deposited by the petitioner in connection with the failure to complete the
execution of a contract work awarded to him in 2019. On WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 4 coming to
know about such information, the FCI issued the impugned order dated 29.06.2020 thereby
disqualifying the petitioner's firm and forfeiting the Earnest Money Deposit amounting to Rs.
20,80,512/- (Rupees Twenty Lakh Eighty Thousand Five Hundred and Twelve Only) and also black
listing the petitioner's firm for a period of three years from participating in FCI tenders by invoking
the forfeiture clause as provided under clause (13) of the General Information.
Having been aggrieved, the petitioner approached this Court by filing the present writ petition for
redressing his grievances. [6] Mr. N. Gunedhor, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner
submitted that under Clause (13) of the General Information to tenderers, it is clearly provided that
if the information given by the tenderer in the Tender Documents and its Annexures and
Appendices is found to be false/incorrect or has violated/breached any of the terms & conditions of
the contract, at any stage, FCI have the right to summarily terminate the contract and forfeit the
EMD and to black list the party for three years. The learned counsel submitted that in terms of the
words employed in the said clause (13), the forfeiture clause can be invoked only after the parties
entered into a contract and not before. It has also been submitted by the learned counsel that if the
FCI intend to invoke the forfeiture clause as provided under Clause (13) of the General Information
to tenderers, it naturally implies that the FCI has accepted the fact that the FCI have WP(C) No. 411
of 2020 Page 5 entered into a contract with the petitioner and accordingly, the provisions of Section
73 and 74 of the Contract Act, 1872 is attracted while invoking the said forfeiture clause.
[7] The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that Section 73 & 74 of the Contract Act
provides that the party which has suffered due to the breach of the contract is liable to be
compensated by the party which has broken the contract by way of compensation for any loss or
damage and that damage or loss is the sine qua non for payment of compensation for breach of
contract. It has also been submitted that in a claim for damages there is first the factum that has to
be established before the quantum of damages can be accessed and that in the present case, the
breach is only of non-disclosure of material facts or concealment thereof. It has also been submitted
that as the impugned order had been issued during the evaluation of the tender bids submitted by
the petitioner, the FCI did not suffer any loss or damage and accordingly, the forfeiture of a large
amount of money and black listing the petitioner without indicating any corresponding loss or
damage of commensurate value is arbitrary, unreasonable and illegal and as such, the same is not
sustainable in the eye of law.
In support of his contentions, the learned counsel relied on the judgment rendered by the High
Court of Calcutta in the case of "MBL WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 6 Infrastructure Ltd. Vs. Rites
Ltd." reported in AIR 2020 Cal. 155 wherein, it has been held as under:-
"16. In the present case, a notice inviting tender was issued by Rites. On the basis of
the terms of the tender documents, the joint venture bidder made a bid. Though the
primary objective of the process was to identify a person who would be awarded the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 3
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
substantial contract, upon a person inviting tenders and another making of a bid
pursuant thereto, there is an agreement in place. To boot, in this case there was also a
declaration which was furnished by the bidder certifying, inter alia, that it had
disclosed all that was necessary in accordance with the tender terms and had not
concealed any relevant material. Even if such a declaration had not been furnished by
the bidder in this case, there was an agreement between the parties which involved a
basic promise on the part of Rites that it would consider the bid fairly and award the
contract to the bidder if found eligible and the financial terms were the best. The
corresponding promise that the bidder made while submitting the bid was that the
bid conformed to the terms and conditions of the tender documents. Since the tender
documents required disclosures to be made regarding the previous poor performance
of the bidder, the non-disclosure of an instance of poor performance by the bidder
was a breach of the agreement. There is no reason why the agreement between the
parties that came about upon the bidder putting in the bid may not be enforceable by
law. There is, therefore, clearly a breach of contract by the bidder in this case in not
disclosing the material fact while submitting its bid."
"26. In a claim for damages there is first the factum that has to be established before
the quantum of damages can be assessed. When the breach is of the kind as
complained in the present case - of non-disclosure of material facts or concealment
thereof - the extent of damages that may have been suffered would depend on how far
the bid had progressed and at what stage the discovery of the breach was made or at
what stage such discovery could be made upon exercise of ordinary diligence. The
legal issue has to be answered with reference to 73 and 74 of the Act of 1872 and
cannot be seen to be beyond the pale of such provisions. Notwithstanding the stray
lines in some of the judgments cited that there may not have been any concluded
contract for Section 74 of the Act of 1872 to come into play, it has already been
discussed above that there was an enforceable agreement in place upon there being a
notice inviting tender and a bid being deposited in terms thereof. The breach is
established and unquestionable but it would not necessarily follow that the breach
would result in the entire quantum of the earnest deposit being forfeited. If such
interpretation were to be given, the clause would be penal and fall foul of Section 74
of the Act.
WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 7 "27. It is, thus, that the quantum of damages suffered
has to be assessed with reference to how the bid was received, how it was processed,
the extent to which it progressed, the nature of the work involved and like factors. It
is inconceivable that in processing the bid, the respondents here would have
expended an amount of Rs. 50 lakh or even a substantial part of such amount. It
would seem that it is for such reason that the respondents suggest at paragraph 20 of
their affidavit that once the amount was quantified they were not required to prove
the quantum of loss actually suffered.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 4
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
"28. Several principles must be kept in mind while making the assessment. Merely
because such a clause is included in the tender documents does not attach any level of
sanctity to it than any other clause which is required to pass the test of
reasonableness in the context in which it is applied. That a sum is specified as
security deposit or earnest deposit does not imply that upon the breach, such amount
is liable to be forfeited and the party forfeiting is entitled to the windfall without there
be any loss or damage suffered by such party. Indeed, that is the exact reasoning in
Kailash Nath where the court was satisfied that DDA did not suffer any loss since the
subsequent auction fetched a price of more than three times what the previous
auction had. If, on the other hand, the subsequent auction had fetched a lower price,
the previous highest bidder could have been proceeded against for the difference as
that would have been the quantum of damages suffered as a consequence of the
previous bidder failing to honour its bid.
"30. While it is salutary to introduce clauses that provide for forfeiture in the case of
non-disclosure or concealment of facts or for corrupt or fraudulent practices being
adopted, if a nominal amount is fixed, the court may not frown upon the same,
depending on the value of the work proposed to be awarded, the degree of
specialization involved in undertaking the work and others similar factors. In
addition to the imposition of a penalty being impermissible, when the employer or
the person inviting tender is a State or a statutory body, it is expected to act
reasonably and rationally and such an entity cannot be permitted to unjustly enrich
itself merely on the basis of a clause that may be altogether unreasonable.
Contractors have, per force, to apply for obtaining work from government employers.
There is always a degree of inequality involved in the bargain. While, theoretically, it
can be said that a person is not obliged to participate in a tender process when it does
not like the terms stipulated therein, government agencies cannot be permitted to
incorporate unreasonable terms or take advantage thereof.
WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 8 "31. A balance has to be stuck in every case, when the
assessment of the quantum becomes a difficult or an impossible task; to allow the
forfeiture in principle, but to limit the quantum so as not to make it punitive or
extortionist. Indeed, there is always an element of approximation and guesswork
involved in assessing the quantum of damages even after receipt of the best evidence
possible. After all, the court is trying to put a person in the position as if the breach
had not happened, though the breach has, in fact, happened.
"32. Considering the nature of the contract in this case and the value of the work, the
offer made by the appellant for Rs. 2 lakh to be forfeited in either case appears to be
reasonable and appropriate. Indeed, the quantum of loss that may have been suffered
by the respondents in either case may not be Rs. 2 lakh; but since the appellant has
fairly offered that such should be the amount that the forfeiture should be restricted
to, this court perceives a sum of Rs. 2 lakh in either case to be appropriate
compensation for the respondents having received the applications, processed the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 5
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
same and proceeded therewith for some time before discovering the non-disclosure
and concealment of material facts."
[8] Mr. W. Darakishwor, learned senior panel counsel appearing for the respondents submitted that
the FCI issued the NIT dated 21.02.2020 inviting tender bits for appointment of contractor for
executing the contract work of transportation of food grains and alike materials, etc., from
FSD/CWC, Dimapur to FSD Bishnupur for a period of two years. Along with the said NIT, a General
Information to tenderers containing certain conditions for acceptance or rejection of the tender bids
submitted by the bidders was also notified. It has also been submitted that under Clause (13) of the
said General Information to tenderers, it is specifically provided that if the information given by the
tenderer in the Tender Documents and its Annexures and Appendices is found to be false or
incorrect, the FCI has the right to disqualify the bidder and to forfeit the EMD and also to WP(C)
No. 411 of 2020 Page 9 black list the party for three years.It has also been submitted that at the time
of evaluation of the tender bids submitted by the petitioner, the authorities of the FCI found out that
the petitioner had given false or incorrect information in the Tender Documents submitted by him
and accordingly, the FCI issued the impugned order dated 29.06.2020 disqualifying the petitioner's
firm and forfeiting his EDM as well as black listing him for a period of three years.It has also been
submitted by the learned counsel for the respondents that as the tender bids submitted by the
petitioner had been rejected by disqualifying him at the time of evaluation of his tender bids, no
contract had been entered into between the FCI and the petitioner and accordingly, there is no
question of violation or breach of any terms & conditions of the contract and as such, the provisions
of Section 73 and 74 of the Contract Act, 1872 are not at all attracted.The learned counsel further
submitted that the forfeiture of the petitioner's EMD and his black listing had been carried out by
invoking the forfeiture clause provided under Clause (13) of the General Information to tenderers as
the petitioner had given false or incorrect information in his Tender Documents submitted by him
and that such forfeitures are permissible under law and the FCI did not commit any illegality in
issuing the impugned order.
In support of his contention, the learned counsel relied on the following judgments:-
WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 10
(i) "National Highway Authority of India Vs. Ganga
Enterprises and Another" reported in (2003) 7 SCC 410 wherein, it has been held as under:-
"9. In our view, the High Court fell in error In so holding. By invoking the bank
guarantee and / or enforcing the bid security, there is no statutory right, exercise of
which was being fettered. There is no term in the contract which is contrary to the
provisions of the Indian Contract Act. The Indian contract Act merely provides that a
person can withdraw his offer before its acceptance. But withdrawal of an offer,
before it is accepted, is a completely different aspect from forfeiture of
earnest/security money which has been given for a particular purpose. A person may
have a right to withdraw his offer but if he has made his offer on a condition that
some earnest money will be forfeited for not entering into contract or if some act is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 6
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
not performed, then even though he may have a right to withdraw his offer, he has no
right to claim that earnest/ security be returned to him. Forfeiture of such
earnest/security, in no way, affects any statutory right under the Indian Contract Act.
such earnest /security is given and taken to ensure that a contract comes into
existence. It would be an anomalous situation that a person who, by his own conduct,
precludes the coming into existence of the contract is then given advantage or benefit
of his own wrong by not allowing forfeiture. It must be remembered that, particularly
in government contracts, such a term is always included in order to ensure that only a
genuine party makes a bid. If such a term was not there even a person who does not
have the capacity or a person who has no intention of entering into the contract will
make a bid. The whole purpose of such a clause i.e. to see that only genuine bids are
received would be lost if forfeiture was not permitted.
(ii) "State of Haryana and Others Vs. Malik Traders"
reported in (2011) 13 SCC 200 wherein, it has been held that:-
"11. In taking the above view, we are supported by the decision of this Court in
National Highways Authority of India v. Ganga Enterprises &Anr, which was
rendered in a similar case. In the said case, the appellant, National Highways
Authority of India, by a notice, called for tenders by 31.7.1997 for collection of toll on
a portion of a particular highway. The notice provided that toll plazas would be got
completed by the appellant and handed over to the selected enterprise. The notice
required the bidders to furnish: (i) a bid security in a sum of 50 lakhs in the form of a
bank draft or bank guarantee, and (ii) a performance security in the form of a bank
guarantee of 2 crores. The bid security was liable WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 11 to
forfeiture in case the bidder withdrew his bid during the validity period of the bid or
failed within the specified period to furnish the performance security and sign the
agreement. The bid was to remain valid for a period of 120 days after the last date of
bid submission. In terms of the tender document, the respondent firm gave its bid or
offer and furnished a bank guarantee in a sum of 50 lakhs. It was an "on-demand
bank guarantee" stating that it could be enforced on demand if the bidder withdrew
his bid during the period of bid validity or failed to furnish the performance security
or failed to sign the agreement. While the validity period of the bid was to end on
28.11.1997, the respondent withdrew its bid on 20.11.1997 and did not furnish the
performance guarantee. Therefore, the appellant although found the respondent to
be the highest bidder and accepted its offer on 21.11.1997, encashed the bank
guarantee for 50 lakhs. The respondent then filed a writ petition in the High Court
for refund of the amount. The High Court formulated two questions viz.: (a) whether
the forfeiture of security deposit was without authority of law and without any
binding contract between the parties and also contrary to Section 5 of the Contract
Act; and (b) whether the writ petition was maintainable in a claim arising out of a
breach of contract. Without considering Question (b), the High Court allowed the
writ petition on the ground that the offer was withdrawn before it was accepted and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 7
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
thus no completed contract had come into existence. The High Court observed that in
law a party could always withdraw its offer before acceptance. Therefore, it held that
the invocation and encashment of the bank guarantee was illegal and void and was
liable to be set aside. The appellant then approached the Supreme Court. Allowing
the appeal, this Court held as follows:
"In our view, the High Court fell in error in so holding. By invoking the bank
guarantee and/or enforcing the bid security, there is no statutory right, exercise of
which was being fettered. There is no term in the contract which is contrary to the
provisions of the Indian Contract Act. The Indian Contract Act merely provides that a
person can withdraw his offer before its acceptance. But withdrawal of an offer,
before it is accepted, is a completely different aspect from forfeiture of
earnest/security money which has been given for a particular purpose. A person may
have a right to withdraw his offer but if he has made his offer on a condition that
some earnest money will be forfeited for not entering into contract or if some act is
not performed, then even though he may have a right to withdraw his offer, he has no
right to claim that the earnest/security be returned to him. Forfeiture of such
earnest/security, in no way, affects any statutory right under the Indian Contract Act.
Such earnest/security is given and taken to ensure that a contract comes into
existence. It would be an anomalous situation that a person who, by his own conduct,
precludes the coming into existence of the contract is then given advantage or benefit
of his own wrong by not allowing forfeiture. It WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 12 must
be remembered that, particularly in government contracts, such a term is always
included in order to ensure that only a genuine party makes a bid. If such a term was
not there even a person who does not have the capacity or a person who has no
intention of entering into the contract will make a bid. The whole purpose of such a
clause i.e. to see that only genuine bids are received would be lost if forfeiture was not
permitted."
We respectfully agree with the above view of this Court."
(iii) "National Thermal Power Corporation Ltd. Vs. Ashok Kumar Singh and Others) reported in
(2015) 4 SCC 252 wherein, it has been held that:-
"12. Reference may also be made to a decision of this Court in Malik Traders (supra).
Even in this case this Court was dealing with the effect of withdrawal of a bid before
acceptance in the context of Section 5 of the Contract Act, 1872. Rejecting the
submission that the bid can be withdrawn without any forfeiture in view of Section 5
of the Contract Act, this Court observed:
... ... ...Thus, even though under Section 5 of the Act a proposal may be revoked at any
time before the communication of its acceptance is complete as against the proposer,
the respondent was bound by the agreement contained in its offer/bid to keep the bid
open for acceptance up to 90 days after the last date of receipt of bid and if the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 8
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
respondent withdrew its bid before the expiry of the said period of 90 [pic]days the
respondent was liable to suffer the consequence (i.e. forfeiture of the full value of bid
security) as agreed to by the respondent in Para 10 of the offer/bid. Under the cover
of the provisions contained in Section 5 of the Act, the respondent cannot escape
from the obligations and liabilities under the agreements contained in its offer/bid.
The right to withdraw an offer before its acceptance cannot nullify the agreement to
suffer any penalty for the withdrawal of the offer against the terms of agreement. A
person may have a right to withdraw his offer, but if he has made his offer on a
condition that the bid security amount can be forfeited in case he withdraws the offer
during the period of bid validity, he has no right to claim that the bid security should
not be forfeited and it should be returned to him. Forfeiture of such bid security
amount does not, in any way, affect any statutory right under Section 5 of the Act.
The bid security was given by the respondent and taken by the appellants to ensure
that the offer is not withdrawn during the bid validity period of 90 days and a
contract comes into existence. Such conditions are included to ensure that only
genuine parties make WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 13 the bids. In the absence of such
conditions, persons who do not have the capacity or have no intention of entering
into the contract will make bids. The very purpose of such a condition in the offer/bid
will be defeated, if forfeiture is not permitted when the offer is withdrawn in violation
of the agreement."
"13. The upshot of the above discussion is that it is no longer possible for the
respondents to contend that the right to withdraw the bid in terms of Section 5 of the
Contract Act, 1872 would entitle them to withdraw without suffering forfeiture of the
earnest money even in cases where the submission and receipt of bids is itself subject
to the condition that in the event of a withdrawal of the bid the earnest money stand
forfeited. Inasmuch as the High Court remained totally oblivious of the true legal
position while directing refund of the earnest money, it committed an error."
[9] I have heard the rival submissions advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the parties at
length and also carefully examined the materials available on records. Basically the arguments of the
learned counsel for the petitioner is that there is a contract between the petitioner and the FCI and
that forfeiture clause under Clause (13) can be invoked or enforced only when any of the terms &
conditions of the contract is violated or breached and that if the forfeiture clause is invoked, then the
provisions under Section 73 and 74 of the Contract Act, 1872 is attracted.
On the other hand, the arguments of the learned counsel for the respondents is that there is no
contract between the FCI and the petitioner and the forfeiture of the EDM of the petitioner and his
black listing had been effected only on the ground that the information given by the petitioner in his
Tender Documents are found to be false or incorrect and not for violation or breach of any of the
terms & conditions of the WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 14 contract and accordingly, the provisions of
Section 73 and 74 of the Contract Act are not attracted at all.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 9
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
[10] In view of the rival arguments advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the parties, this
Court is of the considered view that the question as to whether there is any contract between the
petitioner and the FCI needs to be settled first.
In the present case, the NIT was issued for selecting an appointment of a contractor for execution of
the contract work for transportation of food grains of the FCI. Along with the said NIT, a General
Information to tenderers containing certain conditions like qualification conditions for bidding,
disqualification conditions, submissions and rejection of tender, etc., was also notified. Under
Clause (13) of the said General Information to tenderers, it is specifically provided as under:-
"Clause (13)"
"13. If the information given by the tenderer in the Tender Document and its
Annexures and Appendices is found to be false/incorrect or has violated/breached
any of the terms & conditions of the contract, at any stage, Food Corporation of India
shall have the right to disqualify/summarily terminate the contract, forfeit
EMD/SD/BG, make good any other losses cause to the Corporation and black list the
period for three years, without prejudice to any other rights that the Corporation may
have under the Contract and law."
[11] On careful examination of the above quoted clause (13), this Court is of the considered view that
the forfeiture clause can be invoked or enforced in two situations. Firstly, when a bidder is
disqualified by rejecting the tender bids submitted by him at the time of evaluation of the tender
WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 15 bids on the ground that the information given by him in the Tender
Documents are found to be false or incorrect, the forfeiture clause can be invoked or enforced before
there were any contract or agreement between the parties. Secondly, the FCI can summarily
terminate the contract and the forfeiture clause can be invoked or enforced at any time after the
parties have entered into a contract or agreement on the ground for breach or violation of any of the
terms & conditions of the contract.
In the present case, as the petitioner's firm was disqualified by rejecting its tender bids at the stage
of evaluation of the tender bids and before entering into any contract or signing any agreement on
the ground that the information furnished by the petitioner in his Tender Documents was found to
be false or incorrect, in my considered view, the FCI invoked the forfeiture clause before there was
any contract or agreement between the FCI and the petitioner and accordingly, the provisions of
Section 73 and 74 of the Contract Act are not at all attracted. In this regard, we can gainfully referred
to the judgment rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of "Kailash Nath Associates Vs.
Delhi Development Authority &Anr." reported in (2015) 4 SCC 136 wherein, it has been held as
under:
"41. It must, however, be pointed out that in cases where a public auction is held,
forfeiture of earnest money may take place even before an agreement is reached, as
DDA is to accept the bid only after the earnest money is paid. In the present case,
under the terms and conditions of auction, the highest bid (along with which earnest
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 10
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
money has to be paid) may well have been rejected. In such cases, Section 74 may not
be attracted on its plain language because it applies only "when a contract has been
broken".
WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 16 "43.7. Section 74 will apply to cases of forfeiture of
earnest money under a contract. Where, however, forfeiture takes place under the
terms and conditions of a public auction before agreement is reached, Section 74
would have no application."
[12] In the present case, the FCI disqualified the petitioner's firm at the time of evaluation of the
Tender Documents and before there were any agreement or contract between the two parties and
only on the ground that at the time of submitting their Tender Documents, the petitioner had given
false or incorrect information. The petitioner did not deny or dispute such facts and there is also no
material available on record to come to any other finding or conclusion. In the case laws cited by the
counsel for the respondents, the Hon'ble Apex Court has categorically held that :-
"A person may have a right to withdraw his offer but if he has made his offer on a
condition that some earnest money will be forfeited for not entering into contract or
if some act is not performed, then even though he may have a right to withdraw his
offer, he has no right to claim that earnest/ security be returned to him. Forfeiture of
such earnest/security, in no way, affects any statutory right under the Indian
Contract Act. such earnest /security is given and taken to ensure that a contract
comes into existence. It would be an anomalous situation that a person who, by his
own conduct, precludes the coming into existence of the contract is then given
advantage or benefit of his own wrong by not allowing forfeiture. It must be
remembered that, particularly in government contracts, such a term is always
included in order to ensure that only a genuine party makes a bid. If such a term was
not there even a person who does not have the capacity or a person who has no
intention of entering into the contract will make a bid. The whole purpose of such a
clause i.e. to see that only genuine bids are received would be lost if forfeiture was not
permitted."
In view of the undisputed facts narrated hereinabove and in view of the principle of law laid down by
the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 17 of (i) "National Highway
Authority of India" (Supra), (ii) "State of Haryana and Others" (Supra) and (iii) "National Thermal
Power Corporation Ltd." (Supra), this Court did not find any ground or reason for interfering with
the impugned order.
In the result, this Court did not find any merit in the present writ petition and accordingly, the same
is hereby dismissed.
Parties are to bear their own costs.
JUDGE
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 11
M/S Gaikhonlung Panmei vs The Food Corporation Of India Through ... on 31 January, 2023
FR/NFR
Lhaineichong
WP(C) No. 411 of 2020 Page 18
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/109962228/ 12
