M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December,
2021
Author: R. Mahadevan
Bench: R. Mahadevan
WP No. 16953 of 2021
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
Dated : 20.12.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE R. MAHADEVAN
Writ Petition No. 16953 of 2021
M. Sameeha Barvin
D/o. Mujith
C/o. Mohammed Ghowe
No.36, Eagavalli Amman Koil Street
Thandurai, Pattabiram
Chennai - 600 072 .. Petitioner
Versus
1. The Joint Secretary
Ministry of Youth and Sports
Department of Sports
Government of India
Shastri Bhavan
New Delhi - 110 001
2. The Director General
Sports Authority of India
Government of India
Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium Complex
(East Gate) Lodhi Road
New Delhi - 110 003
3. The Chairman
All India Sports Council of the Deaf
No.1-B, Institutional Area
Near Janata Flats, Sarita Vihar
New Delhi - 110 076
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 1
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
1/63
(cid:12) WP No. 16953 of 2021
4. The Secretary
Department of Welfare of Differently Abled Persons
Government of Tamil Nadu
Secretariat, Chennai - 600 009
5. The Principal Secretary
Sports Development Authority of Tamil Nadu
Government of Tamil Nadu
Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium
Periyamet, Chennai - 600 003 .. Respondents
Petition filed under Article 226 of The Constitution of India praying to
issue a Writ of Mandamus directing the third respondent to include the
petitioner's name in the final selection list and send her to participate in the
Fourth World Deaf Athletics Championship, which is scheduled to be conducted
at Lublin, Poland from 23.08.2021 to 28.08.2021.
For Petitioner : Mr. R. Prabhakaran
For Respondents : Mrs. N.K. Nithila Vani
Central Government Standing Counsel for RR1 to 3
Mr. G. Krishnaraja
Government Counsel for RR4 and 5
ORDER
“Disabled women struggle with both the oppression of being women in male dominated societies
and the oppression of being disabled in societies dominated by the able-bodied”
- Susan Wendell1, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
2.That in effect, it explains the tribulations faced by the petitioner, who finds it impossible to speak
or listen, but able to achieve gold and silver medals in long jump and high jump at the State and
National levels, having been denied the opportunity of participation in the Fourth World Deaf
Athletics Championship, 2021, held at Lublin, Poland and being able to participate in the same only
on the strength of the interim order dated 13.08.2021, on knocking the doors of this Court.
3.Women athletes with disabilities, aspiring to high levels of sport competition often face double
discrimination associated with gender and disability2. Being a woman and also having a disability,
survival in the world of sport is a kind of double jeopardy in the practical sense, where the barriers
faced are not only from the angle of being a woman, but also being disabled, thereby compounding
the problem. Hence, they require more institutional, legal and societal support to achieve success
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 2
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
with specific reference to the world of sport.
4.The case at hand is not to be viewed as being limited only to the factual circumstances, in which,
the petitioner has approached this Court and the specific narrow relief sought for thereunder.
Rather it brings to light the various https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis issues faced by the women
with disability in the world of sports. There have been diverse studies as well as research on the
issues or barriers faced by able- bodied women themselves in sports, which has always been treated
as a field dominated by men both due to stereotyped understanding of physical strength and
attributes as well as the socio-cultural mindset, which itself acts as a barrier for women to excel in
sports. Be that as it may, the cases like the one at hand, would expose the fact that the generalised
issues faced by female athletes are quite different when compared to athletes, who are female and
disabled. It is significant to note that where the axis of discrimination is not singular, but plural,
multiple, cumulative or intersectional, the same has to be viewed with an analytical lens in order to
understand the problems and barriers faced by such persons with more than one axis of
discrimination which is unique and different and hence, the redressal of such issues needs a more
holistic and understanding approach.
FACTS:
5.A brief factual narration may help get a hang of the case. The petitioner is a disabled person with
loss of hearing to the extent of 90% and she has also lost her speech ability at the age of six. With
such disability, she excelled herself in the sports events by participating in the long jump and high
jump in National and State levels. She has several first to her credit. She had so far won 13
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis medals viz., 11 gold, 1 silver and 1 bronze in National and State
Level competitions. When the petitioner participated in the National selection test conducted at
New Delhi on 22nd July 2021 by the third respondent, among the 12 participants, she excelled
herself in jumping a distance of 5.5 meters in the long jump, surpassing the eligible parameter of
4.25 meters which is the requirement to get selected. Inspite of such performance, she was not
selected to participate in the World Deaf Athletics Championship. The petitioner came to know that
out of the 12 candidates viz., 10 male and 2 female candidates, in the female category, she secured
the first in the selection list. When she sought the reason for her non-selection, it was disclosed that
the selection authorities were not inclined to send a lone female member to the event and therefore,
they have preferred male members for the event. This, according to the petitioner, is a
discrimination based on gender and thereby her achievement in jumping 5.5 meters over and above
the required 4.25 meters has been ignored. Therefore, the petitioner has filed the present writ
petition seeking a mandamus, directing the third respondent to include her name in the final
selection list and send her to participate in the Fourth World Deaf Athletics Championship, which
was scheduled to be held at Lublin, Poland from 23.08.2021 to 28.08.2021.
6.On 13.08.2021, when the writ petition was taken up for admission, this
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis court has directed the petitioner to appear before the third
respondent and on such appearance, the third respondent was directed to declare her as selected
and permit her to participate in the 4th World Deaf Athletics Championship held at Poland under
the women category. Accordingly, she was permitted to participate in the said event and upon her
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 3
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
performance, she is now eligible to participate in the World Deaf Olympic Championship 2022 as
well as Paralympic 2023.
CONTENTIONS OF THE PARTIES:
7.The learned counsel for the petitioner made an extensive arguments about the discrimination
meted out by the petitioner at the hands of the respondents on the grounds of gender as well as
disability and hence, sought appropriate direction to the authorities concerned, considering this
case as an eye opener for all female athletes with disabilities. According to the learned counsel, the
petitioner's merit and ability have been grossly disregarded by the respondents without any reason.
Inviting the attention of this Court to the communication dated 28.07.2021 of the third respondent,
the learned counsel submitted that in the said communication, the ability and performance of the
petitioner was never undermined or questioned, however, the third respondent expressed their
inability to select the petitioner purely on gender biased reasons. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Thus, according to the learned counsel, this is a clear case of gender discrimination, which should
not play as it spoils sports.
8.The learned counsel further contended that though this court has granted an interim order on
13.08.2021 in favour of the petitioner, she along with her mother, has been driven from pillar to post
without there being any help forthcoming from any body. The State has a deaf sports body in the
form of Tamil Nadu Sports Council of the Deaf (TNSCD). It is an incompetent body that is barely
functioning with the objectives with which it was formed. The petitioner was not properly treated by
the officials of All India Sport Council for the Deaf (AISCD) during her stay at Delhi. She was
dismissed from the conversation, when it was her turn to interact with the rest of the team, before
leaving to Poland. Further, the petitioner was abused and threatened that if she returns to India
without winning a medal, she will not be allowed to be a part of deaf sports in India. Besides that,
the officials of the AISCD withheld the passport of the petitioner and failed to get the visa work done
for two days. Thus, she was subjected to harsh treatment by the officials of the respondents at every
stage, till she participated in the event, which had impacted on her performance adversely. Even
after the petitioner returned to India, she was still receiving mal-treatment from the officials of
AISCD as well as TNSCD in the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis context of receiving funds that
were allocated to other players.
9.It is also contended by the learned counsel for the petitioner that while the Sports Authority of
India (SAI) paid for the petitioner's travel only on the basis of the interim order passed by this
Court, no responsibility was taken by them in all other respects and hence, appropriate direction has
to be issued to the respondents, so that no one like the petitioner is discriminated on the ground of
gender or disability.
10.Ultimately, the learned counsel for the petitioner placing reliance on the decisions of the High
Courts, supreme court and the foreign courts, submitted that the inequalities and improper
treatment meted out by the petitioner should not be received by any similarly placed person in
future and the entire system relating to activities in sports has to be revamped and/or streamlined.
Therefore, he prayed this Court to issue appropriate guidelines to be followed by the respondents, so
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 4
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
that the potentialities of those who are meritorious in any form of sports, should not go unnoticed.
11.Repudiating the averments made by the petitioner in the writ petition,
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the learned Central Government Standing Counsel appearing for
the respondents 1 to 3 submitted that the respondent officials have rendered all sort of assistance to
the petitioner in participating in the event and she was not in any manner discriminated by reason
of her gender and in fact, she was encouraged to prove the best of her ability and excel well. The
learned counsel further submitted that the respondent authorities will continue to extend their
unstinted cooperation to improve the sports, without any ill-treatment or gender discrimination as
alleged by the petitioner.
12.Adding further, the learned Government counsel appearing for the respondents 4 and 5
submitted that the respondent authorities are rendering all kind of supports to the sport persons,
without any discrimination and treating them with equality and dignity, so as to encourage them to
participate actively in all the events and achieve success.
13.Heard both sides and perused all the materials placed before this court. ANALYSIS:
14.As stated earlier, pursuant to the interim order dated 13.08.2021,
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis granted by this court, the petitioner participated in the 4th World
Deaf Athletics Championship held at Poland and she is now, eligible to participate in the World Deaf
Olympic Championship 2022 as well as Paralympics, 2023. In view of the subsequent development
that had taken place, the relief sought for in the writ petition no longer survives for consideration.
However, the difficulties and problems faced by the petitioner at the hands of the respondent
officials, on the ground of gender and disability, at each level, though she was qualified in the
National selection test to participate in the event and was also armed with the interim order of this
court, cannot be slightly brushed aside, by this court. This is a clear-cut case of gender
discrimination attracting the rigour of Article 15(1) of The Constitution of India3 and the petitioner
has meted out the double discrimination and hence, this has to be examined with an intersectional
lens so as to take appropriate measures by the authorities concerned for the purpose of eradicating
all the difficulties / challenges faced and preventing from the injury suffered, not only by the
petitioner, but also all the women athletes with disabilities.
Concept of Intersectionality:
15.Due to gender and disability, the women with disabilities confront
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis various disadvantages which includes not only social divisions,
but also poverty, race, class or sexuality. These factors contribute and exclude disabled women from
a uniform category, since each disability suffers by every woman is unique in itself and it calls for a
potent tool that can address them all. Intersectionality lends itself to such type of analysis. It can be
structural, when it refers to inequalities, which people experience as a result of their position in
society. It has been described as one of “the most important theoretical contributions that women
studies has made thus far”4.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 5
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
16.The term ‘intersectionality’ was crafted by Kimberle Crenshaw5 in 1991, who studied the
experiences of those at the intersections of two factors, that is, racial identity and gender. She
argued that black women did not face marginalisation, discrimination or violence, because of their
race or sex, but because of the intersection of both race and sex, which makes their experience
unique and different from a person facing any one factor/marker of discrimination alone. She
argued that gender-based discrimination is multidimensional and the singular focus on rape as a
manifestation of male power over female sexuality tends to eclipse the use of rape as a weapon of
racial terror.
17.In the Indian context, it is often seen that the factors like caste and gender are intrinsically linked.
Similarly, disability and gender are linked in a https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis way that make
females with disabilities more vulnerable to such cumulative or compounded disadvantage and
resultant discrimination6. Here, it is important to emphasize that the difficulties and barriers faced
by a person facing any one axis of discrimination, for example- gender, are different from a person
facing multiple axis of discrimination like disability, caste and gender together. The different
identities within the same person intersect and co-exist in a way so as to give the individual a
qualitatively different experience than any one of the individual markers of discrimination or any of
the individual characteristics. Therefore, where the axis of discrimination intersect, it is essential to
view such cases from the lens of intersectionality in order to understand that the barriers, the
challenges, the stigma as well as the practical difficulties faced by such persons are not only more
intense, but also different and unique which call for a more in-depth and all-encompassing
approach for addressing their grievances and ensuring substantive equality to them.
Intersectionality, therefore, rejects a narrow or limited understanding of equality where the factors
or markers of discrimination are isolated or are in singular spheres.7
18.In a recent decision in Patan Jamal Vali v. State of Andhra Pradesh8, the Supreme Court has held
that “the intersectional identity of a https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis disabled woman from a
scheduled caste community would place her in a uniquely disadvantaged position”. In the said case,
the Supreme Court has overturned the conviction of the accused by the High Court under the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act 1989 as the prosecution failed
to prove that the offence of rape was committed on account of the woman belonging to the
scheduled caste community under sections 3 to 5 of the Act. In that case, the Supreme Court applied
the concept of ‘intersectionality’ after having considered that it was a relevant factor in sentencing
the accused for the offence of rape under section 376 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 in the light of
the woman’s caste and disability. Ultimately, the Supreme Court observed thus:
“12. The experience of rape induces trauma and horror for any woman regardless of
social position in the society. But the experiences of assault are different in the case of
a woman who belongs to a scheduled caste community and has a disability because
the assault is a result of the interlocking of different relationships of power at play.
When the identity of a woman intersects with, inter alia, her caste, class, religion,
disability and sexual orientation, she may face violence and discrimination due to two
or more grounds. Transwomen may face violence on account of their heterodox
gender identity. In such a situation, it becomes imperative to use an intersectional
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 6
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
lens to evaluate how multiple sources of oppression operate cumulatively to produce
a specific experience of subordination for a blind scheduled caste woman”.
19.The adoption of this intersectional approach breaks new ground in Indian jurisprudence as it
recognises the specific and unique challenges faced by https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the women
with disabilities due to their cumulatively dis-empowered position. The following paragraphs of the
judgement in Patan Jamal Vali9 may be usefully extracted as under:
“17. Intersectionality merely urges us to have “an open textured legal approach that
would examine the underlying structures of inequality”. This requires us to analyse
law in its social and economic context allowing us to formulate questions of equality
as that of “power and powerlessness” instead of difference and sameness. The latter
being a conceptual limitation of single axis of analysis, it may allow a certain
intersectional claims to fall through the cracks since such claims are not
unidirectional in nature.
18. Intersectional analysis requires an exposition of reality that corresponds more
accurately with how social inequalities are experienced. Such contextualised judicial
reasoning is not an anathema to judicial enquiry. It will be useful to note the
comments of Justice L’Heureaux-Dube and Justice McLachlin in the Canadian
Supreme Court’s judgement in R v. S (RD) (1997) 3 S.C.R. 484 AT 506-507 that,
“(j)udicial enquiry into the factual, social and psychological context within which
litigation arises is not unusual. Rather, a conscious, contextual enquiry has become
an accepted step towards judicial impartiality… This process of enlargement is not
only consistent with impartiality; it may also be seen as essential precondition.”
19. Single axis models of operation are a consequence of how historically movements
aiming for the legal protection of marginalised populations developed. Most political
liberation struggles have been focused on a sole characteristic like anti-
caste movements, movements by person with disabilities, feminism and queer liberation. Many such
movements have not been able to adequately address the intragroup diversity leading to a situation
where the needs of the relatively privileged within the group have received more than a fair share of
spotlight. When these liberation struggles were adopted in law the law also developed into mutually
exclusive to a range of different statutes addressing different marginality is failing to take into
account the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis intersectional nature of oppression.
20. In India, the fundamental guarantees under the Constitution provide for such a holistic analysis
of discrimination faced by individuals. One of us (Justice D Y Chandrchud) in Navtej Johar v. Union
of India (2018) 10 SCC 1, applied the intersectional lens to Article 15(1) of the Constitution. In doing
so Justice D Y Chandrachud observed that:
36. This formalistic interpretation of Article 15 would render the constitutional
guarantee against discrimination meaningless. For it would allow the state to claim
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 7
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
that the discrimination was based on sex and another ground and hence outside the
ambit of Article
15. Latent in the argument of the discrimination, are stereotyped notions of the
differences between men and women which are then used to justify the
discrimination.
This narrow view of Article 15 strips the prohibition on discrimination of essential content. This fails
to take into account the intersectional nature of sex discrimination, which cannot be said to operate
in isolation of other identities, especially when from the socio-political and economic context. For
example a rule that people over six feet would not be employed in the Army would be able to stand
an attack on its disproportionate impact on women if it was maintained that the discrimination is on
the basis of sex and height. Such a formalistic view of the prohibition in Article 15, rejects the true
operation of discrimination which intersects varied identities and characteristics.
( emphasis supplied)
21. Noting how the discrimination caused by intersecting identities amplifies the violence against
certain communities (gendered /religious /otherwise), the Justice JS Verma committee appointed
in the aftermath of the NetWare incident to suggest reforms in Indian criminal law, observed that:
“34. We believe that while certain measures may have been taken over a period of
time but they have been too far and too few and they certainly have not attempted to
restructure and transform society and its institutions. If
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis there has to be a society which is based on equality
of gender we must ensure that not only does a woman not suffer on account of gender
but also not suffer on account of caste or religion in addition. Thus a woman may
suffer a double disadvantage-a) because she’s a woman, and b) because she belongs
to a caste/tribe/community/religion which is disadvantaged, she stands at a
dangerous intersection if poor.”
22. While intersectionality has made considerable strides in the field of human rights law and
antidiscrimination law, it has also emerged as a potential tool to understand gender based violence.
In 1991, Crenshaw applied the concept of intersectional it to study violence against women of colour.
She showed how race, gender, poverty, immigrant status and being from a linguistic minority
interacted to place these women in violent relationships.
23. To deal with cases of violence against women from intersectional backgrounds, Shreya Atrey
proposed a model of intersectional integrity. She notes:
"Intersectional gender violence is about: (i) rejecting violations of bodily and mental
integrity when perpetrated based on people’s multiple and intersecting identities
(intersectionality); and (ii) recognising that violence should be understood as a whole
taking into account unique and shared patterns of violations yielded buys into
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 8
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
sections of gender, race, caste, religion, disability, age, sexual orientation etc
(integrity)."
24. She points out that a failure to consider violence perpetrated based on multiple identities and
presents an inaccurate portrayal of the violence at issue which may impact the ability to obtain
relief. On the other hand a comprehensive appraisal of the intersectional nature of the violence can
translate into an appropriate legal response.
25. The above analysis stresses on the need for the court to address and unpack the qualitative
impact of the various identities and individual might have on the violence, discrimination or
disadvantage being faced by them in the society.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis C-2 Disability and Gender: Twin tales of Societal Oppression
26. For many disabled women and girls in India, the threat of violence is an all too familiar fixture of
their lives, contracting their constitutionally guaranteed freedom to move freely and curtailing their
ability to lead full and active lives this threat of violence can translate into a nagging feeling of
powerlessness and lack of control making the realisation of the promises held by Parts III and IV of
our Constitution a remote possibility for women with disabilities.
27. In saying so, we do not mean to subscribe to the stereotype that persons with disabilities are
weak and helpless, incapable of charting the course of their lives or to deprive them of the agency
and bodily autonomy that we all possess and are entitled to exercise. Such a negative presumption of
disability translating into incapacity would be inconsistent with the forward thinking
conceptualisation of disabled lives embodied in a law and increasingly, albeit slowly, in our social
consciousness. As Saptarshi Mandal notes, in critiquing the fashion in which the Punjab and
Haryana High Court dealt with the testimony of a mentally disabled and partially paralysed
prosecutrix, stamping a prosecutrix with the badge of complete helplessness, merely on the basis of
disability, is an inapposite course of action. He notes- The entire rationale behind the conviction of
the accused turned on sympathy for the helpless prosecutrix and her inability to physically resist the
aggressor. Even if one agrees with the judge that there cannot be a single standard burden of proof
for the disabled and the able-bodied, a differentiated scale of the burden of proof must be based on
the concept of vulnerability, not victimhood.
28. Instead, our aim is to highlight the increased vulnerability and reliance on others that is
occasioned by having a disability which makes women with disabilities more susceptible to being at
the receiving end of sexual violence. As the facts of the case makes painfully clear, women with
disabilities, who inhabit a world designed for the able bodied, are often perceived as “soft targets
“and “easy victims “ for the commission of sexual violence. It is for this reason that legal response to
such violence, in the instant case as well at a systemic level must exhibit
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis attentiveness to the salient fact”.
20.“Intersectionality in policy denotes interaction of reciprocally mutually constitutive inequalities
producing an effect which is different from what each of their dimensions would produce separately,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 9
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
and also different from the addition of their separate parts together. When an intersectional
approach is adopted, it should be done in combination with focusing on the effects of discrimination
generated by the intersection of gender and disability”.10 There are many dimensions
differentiating inequalities among the social categories and these inequalities are not independent,
but are influenced by political, historical, social and cultural intersections, which shape individual
and collective experiences.
21.In the intersectional analysis, certain elements are required for consideration and they include
social divisions, such as organizational, experimental and representational discriminations. Social
divisions are witnessed in a daily life of the disabled women in the form of attitudes, ideologies and
communities. They are largely attributable not due to the power, but due to cultural dominant
discourses and ideas relating to representations of body or theories about disability and normality.
These are all the larger factors, which rattle disabled women being disabled.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
22.In 2006, the United Nations adopted the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities
(CRPD), the first international human rights treaty, intending to protect the rights and dignity of the
persons with disabilities. Its purpose is to promote, protect and ensure the full and equal enjoyment
of all human rights and fundamental freedoms by all persons with disabilities, and to promote
respect for their inherent dignity. The Convention adopts a comprehensive and holistic approach to
raise awareness and to ensure the persons with disabilities' rights to accessibility, independent
living and participation in all aspects of society. Discrimination on the basis of gender and disability
is a fact officially recognised by CRPD. Its Article 3 focuses specifically on non-discrimination and
equality between men and women. Article 6 recognizes that women and girls with disabilities are
subject to multiple discrimination, and that State parties shall take all appropriate measures to
ensure the full and equal enjoyment by them of all human rights and fundamental freedoms and to
ensure the full development, advancement and empowerment of women with disabilities. Article 16
is about Freedom from exploitation, violence and abuse; and focuses specially on the obligation for
states parties to put in place effective legislation. In Article 30, the CRPD perceptively addresses
these issues using sports and rights to participation in cultural life, recreation, leisure, and sport as
an influential tool for inclusion and https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Article 30(5) provides for the
right of persons with disabilities to participate “on an equal basis” in sports, recreation, and leisure
activities. Thus, the CRPD brings to the forefront the right of people with disabilities to engage in
sports. Besides that, it calls for state measures, which will safeguard women’s full enjoyment of all
their rights and freedoms, such as, equal rights in accessing services, education, employment, health
and personal life.
23.During the last two Ad hoc sessions of the Convention, the drafters changed the preamble from
‘States Parties recognize the right of persons with disabilities, on an equal basis with others…’ to
‘with a view to enabling persons with disabilities to participate on an equal basis with others …’. This
change was the result of a comment made by the European Union during the 6th Ad hoc session,
which reads as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 10
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
“There is no express ‘right’ to recreational, leisure and sporting activities in the
CESCR [Committee on Economic Social and Cultural Rights]. The language in the
chapeau of para 4 is ambiguous on this point and should be amended accordingly.
The chapeau’s wording may have been based on CEDAW Article 10(g), which
addresses this issue as a matter of equality between women and men and not as a
standalone right. The Report of the Ad hoc Committee (2005) in its sixth session
stated that ‘there was general support to amend the chapeau to make it clear that the
paragraph does not refer to an existing right to participate in sport and leisure
activities.” https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
24.Article 1 of the International Covenant on Economic, Social and Cultural Rights (ICESCR) states,
‘all peoples have the right to self- determination. By virtue of that right they freely determine their
political status and freely pursue their economic, social and cultural development’. Article 7
specifically says that the State parties to the present Covenant recognize the right of everyone to the
enjoyment of just and favourable conditions of work, which ensure, in particular, remuneration, fair
wages, decent living, safe and healthy working conditions, equal opportunity for promotion and rest,
leisure and reasonable limitation of working hours and periodic holidays with pay, as well as
remuneration for public holidays. In addition, Article 12 discusses the right to the highest standard
of physical and mental health; and Article 13 recognizes the right to education directed to the full
development of the human personality and the sense of its dignity. Other Articles of the ICESCR
also recognize the rights that essentially embody the right to sport, recreation, play and leisure. For
example, Article 15 recognizes the right of everyone to take part in cultural life, which universally
includes sports.
25.In the Convention on the Rights of Persons with Disabilities as observed by the Committee in
General Comment No.6, “intersectional https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis discrimination can be
direct, indirect, denial of reasonable accommodation, or harassment”11. This approach has also
been reiterated by the Supreme Court in Vikash Kumar v. UPSC,12 wherein, the supreme court has
held that “disability-based discrimination is intersectional in nature and policy of reasonable
accommodation thus cannot be unidimensional”. The Convention on the Elimination of
Discrimination against Women Committee (CEDAW), which promotes action in order to support
persons with disabilities and their families and caregivers, also recognises that the categories of
discrimination cannot be reduced to watertight compartments. In General Recommendation No.25,
the CEDAW committee suggests “the adoption of special measures for women to eliminate multiple
rounds of discrimination”.13
26.Article 25 of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights, which grants to each person the right to
security in the event of unemployment, sickness, disability, widowhood, old age or other lack of
livelihood in circumstances beyond their control and its prohibition of discriminations, beyond the
International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and the International Covenant on Economic,
Social and Cultural Rights, and due to the World Programme of Action Concerning Disabled People
(1982), the Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989), and the Standard Rules on the
Equalisation of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Opportunities for People with Disabilities (1993),
disability has become a human rights issue. More than 40 nations have adopted disability
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 11
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
discrimination legislations since the 1990s. The concept of human rights for persons with
disabilities is now accepted internationally.
27.The UNESCO International Charter on Physical Education and Sport states, “one of the essential
conditions for the effective exercise of human rights is that everyone should be free to develop and
preserve his or her physical intellectual and moral powers, and that access to physical education and
sport should consequently be assured and guaranteed for all human beings”. The United Nations
Inter-Agency Task Force on Sport for Development and Peace report states “Access to and
participation in sport is a human right and essential for individuals of all ages to lead healthy and
fulfilling lives”.
28.1. “The legal implications of the convention may be on three levels – international, regional, or
national, according to the Article titled: Aiming for Inclusive Sport: the Legal and Practical
Implications of the United Nation's Disability Convention for Sport, Recreation and Leisure for
People with https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Disabilities”.14 The said Article further proceeds to
state that at the international level, several barriers prevent a Convention from being enforced. First,
it is a horizontal system, where there is no legislature or courts with compulsory jurisdiction, but
rather only primary rules without secondary rules of legislative, adjudicative, and enforcement
procedures. In addition, only states may bring actions against other states for violations to the
International Court of Justice. Individuals or non-profit organizations have no power to enforce at
this level. It is also highly unlikely for a State to be concerned with enforcing the right to sport for
citizens of other countries. The main reason is that countries understandably reserve such actions
for more gross violations of human rights, such as, torture or genocide, despite the fact that a
cornerstone principle in human rights is that all human rights are equal.
28.2. Regional human right systems, such as the European Convention on Human Rights, the
Inter-American Commission on Human Rights, or the African Court on Human Rights, have been
labelled by scholars as far more effective than those at the international level. This can be as a result
of operating vertical structure instead of the horizontal structure that the United Nations employs.
For example, the European Union and the Council of Europe employ legislative, executive and
judicial organs. Besides this, they entertain both https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis interstate and
individual complaints.
28.3. At the national level, the Disability Convention, like all human rights Conventions, requires
that states parties take all appropriate measures, including legislation, to modify or abolish existing
laws, regulations, customs and practices that constitute discrimination against persons with
disabilities, (Article 4(b) of CRPD). Countries must also refrain from engaging in any act or practice
that is inconsistent with the present Convention and to ensure that public authorities and
institutions act in conformity with the present Convention, (Article 4(d) of CRPD).
The Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (RPwD Act)
29.While several constitutional exponents have recommended the inclusion of the specific provision
'disability' as a ground for non- discrimination to be included under Article 15 of the Constitution15,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 12
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
it is also important to incorporate a legal and constitutional recognition of discrimination that may
spring from multiple, compounded, cumulative or intersectional markers or factors. Therefore, it is
necessary to take a closer look at the disability legislation, i.e. The Rights of Persons with Disabilities
Act, 2016 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (RPwD Act), which was passed as a measure of
fulfilment of India’s ratification of the United Nations Convention on the Rights of Persons with
Disabilities (UNCRPD) adopted in December 2006 and which became effective with effect from May
2008. The RPwD Act is a paradigm shift from a technical model of disability carrying with it the
heavy burden of stigma under the 1995, Act to a model of disability that encompasses within its fold
physical, mental, intellectual, social, psycho-social and other barriers that accompany disability
which lie at the heart of exclusion of the disabled from realising their full potential and participating
in society as full and equal members and citizens as contemplated by the framers of our
Constitution.
30.Under section 2(s) of the RPwD Act, a “person with disability” means, "a person with long-term
physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairment which, in interaction with barriers, hinders his
full and effective participation in society equally with others.
(iii) A barrier is defined under section 2(c) in the following terms-
“barrier” means any factor including communicational, cultural, economic, environmental,
institutional, political, social, attitudinal or structural factors which hampers the full and effective
participation of persons with disabilities in society”."
31.The RPwD Act recognises 21 specified disabilities and is definitely expansive in scope as
compared to the earlier 1995 Act. However, a deeper https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis analysis
would show that several factors which affect the day-to-day life of the disabled are yet to be captured
either by this legislation or by making specific constitutional provision in this regard. The principle
of ‘reasonable accommodation’ has also found specific mention and manifestation in the 2016 Act
under section 2(y), which means “necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments, without
imposing a disproportionate or undue burden in a particular case, to ensure to persons with
disabilities the enjoyment or exercise of rights equally with others”.
32.Section 3 of RPwD Act deals with equality and non-discrimination, which reads as follows:
“3. Equality and non-discrimination-
(1) The appropriate government shall ensure that the Persons with disabilities enjoy
the right to equality, life with dignity and respect for his or her integrity equally with
others.
(2) The appropriate government shall take steps to utilise the capacity of Persons
with Disabilities by providing appropriate environment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 13
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
(3) No person with disability shall be discriminated on the ground of disability,
unless it is shown that the impugned act or omission is a proportionate means of
achieving a legitimate aim.
(4) No person shall be deprived of his or her personal liberty only on the ground of
disability.
(5) The appropriate government shall take necessary steps to ensure reasonable
accommodation for persons with disabilities.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
33.According to Section 3(2), it is for the appropriate government to take steps to utilise the capacity
of persons with disabilities by providing appropriate environment. In Sub-section (5) of Section (3)
it was further reiterated that the appropriate government shall take necessary steps to ensure
reasonable accommodation of persons with disabilities. In the opinion of this court, the said
provisions of Sections 3(2) & 3(5) of the RPwD Act are directly attracted the facts of the present
case.
34.In the recent judgement in Vikash Kumar16, the Supreme Court has analysed in detail the
provisions of the Rights of Persons with Disabilities Act, 2016 (RPwD Act), and interpreted the
legislation as being a statutory manifestation of a constitutional commitment of equality and non-
discrimination, apart from holding that the RPwD Act is a statutory recognition of the constitutional
rights embodied in Articles 14, 19 and 2117 among other provisions of Part III of the Constitution18.
It further went on to hold that ensuring the disabled a life of equal dignity and worth and non-
discrimination was important along with reasonable accommodation, which would mandate a
positive obligation to the State and private parties to provide additional support to persons with
disabilities to facilitate their full and equal https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis effective participation
in society. On an analysis of the various postulates envisaged under the RPwD Act, the Supreme
Court has held that equality, non- discrimination and dignity are the essence of the protective ambit
of the Act. If one dwells on what exactly is the source from which the ideals of equality, non-
discrimination and dignity which are the perceived goals of the Act along with reasonable
accommodation and affirmative action, are drawn, it would not only be purposive, but also
necessary to aspire to create a constitutional bulwark for enforcement of equality before the law,
equal protection of law as well as equality of status and opportunity to the disabled, in a more
articulate manner. Women with disabilities
35.Normally, it can be perceived that women with disabilities will be at a higher rate of risk of
violence. They can be classified as traditional forms such as physical, sexual and emotional and
non-traditional forms, such as deprivation of medication, restriction for access to mobility or
communication equipment, personal care and hygiene, medical consultation, fear of
institutionalisation, etc. These forms of abuse can best be overcome with increased dependence
(physical, emotional and financial) against the perpetrator, comprehension and reactions by police
or other professionals.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 14
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
36.According to Rashida Manjoo, UN Special Rapporteur on Violence Against Women (SRVAW),
“violence against women is the most pervasive human rights violation, which continues to challenge
every country in the world and the United States is no exception”. Women with disabilities are
always at the receiving end and they are neglected even by their husbands, besides being abused or
deserted by citing their disability. Whereas, men with similar disability are always cared by their
wives. Therefore, women with disability are vulnerable in terms of discrimination by reason of their
gender, age, minority status, convergence and intersect in areas relating to gender-based violence,
traditional practices, trafficking etc. It is the words of Senator, Boren that “Violent crimes against
women are not limited to the streets of the inner cities, but also occur in homes in the urban and
rural areas across the country. Violence against women affects not only those who are actually
beaten and brutalized, but indirectly affects all women. Today, our wives, mothers, daughters,
sisters, and colleagues are held captive by fear generated from these violent crimes-held captive not
for what they do or who they are, but solely because of gender.19 Senator, William Cohen (D-Me.)
followed with a similar statement, noting that “rapes and domestic assaults are not limited to the
streets of our inner cities or to those few highly publicized cases that we read about in the
newspapers or see on the evening news. Women throughout https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the
country, in our Nation's urban areas and rural communities, are being beaten and brutalized in the
streets and in their homes. It is our mothers, wives, daughters, sisters, friends, neighbours, and
co-workers who are being victimized; and in many cases, they are being victimized by family
members, friends, and acquaintances”.
Participation of women athletes in sports:
37.The data furnished on the side of the petitioner, during the course of hearing, would show that
during the 2018 Winter Olympics, 23 out of the 92 competing countries, did not send any female
athletes. The 2018 Winter Olympic Games consisted of 1724 male competitors and 1224 female
athletes. The number of women increased from 2014 but it was a small increase of 46. While
progress has been made in general, when it comes to inclusion rates for women in the Olympics
compared to men, the Paralympics tell a different tale. In 2018, male participants outnumbered
female athletes 431-123. In 2021, India had sent its largest ever contingent to the Tokyo 2020
Paralympic Games with 54 athletes out of which 40 were men and 14 were women, which makes it a
mere 25%. It is therefore apparent that the sheer lack of numbers in participation by itself acts as a
barrier to disabled women athletes. Barriers faced by women athletes with disabilities include
socio-cultural, economic as well as knowledge barriers.20 While society as a whole needs to change
their mindset towards https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis breaking the false correlation between
women with disabilities participating in sport and treating the same as socially unacceptable, the
Government should also do the needful to support the Paralympic competitors by providing
appropriate, safe and accessible infrastructure as also other support like prosthetics and adequate
clothing, along with campaigning for awareness of the benefits of physical activity. Further, the
Government should also grant adequate and structured financial assistance to the athletes in order
that economic conditions do not act as a barrier in the fulfilment of the goals of young women with
disability, in attaining success in their respective fields, which in turn would result in their winning
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 15
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
accolades for our country. It is also seen that the governments offering higher financial rewards and
support to sports persons are naturally performing better on account of the economic support to
them as well as their families allowing them to focus more on the sport while not having to worry
about their livelihood as well as their other financial needs. The State of Haryana has paid the
highest cash reward among all states in India to an Olympic or Paralympic medallist at Rs. 6 crore
for an Olympic gold, Rs.4 crore for silver and Rs. 2.5 crore for bronze. However after the Tokyo
Olympics, the State has announced that it will also give Rs. 50 lakh to athletes who narrowly missed
out on medals finishing fourth. Further, the State gave Rs.15 lakhs to every Haryana athlete, who
qualified for the Tokyo Olympics regardless of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis performance. In
comparison, the Indian Olympic Association gave Rs. 75 lakh for Olympic gold and Rs.1 lakh for all
Olympians.
Doctrine of Reasonable Accommodation:
38.Section 2(6) of RPwD Act defines 'reasonable accommodation' which means
necessary and appropriate modification and adjustments, without imposing a
disproportionate or undue burden in a particular case, so as to ensure that persons
with disabilities enjoy or exercise all rights equally with others. The said doctrine
assumes great significance, as it requires appropriate adjustments in order that
persons with disabilities, enjoy and exercise rights on par with able-bodied persons.
39.The 'doctrine of reasonable accommodation' has been given effect to in the
judgement of the Supreme Court in Vikash Kumar21, wherein, the petitioner sought
for the facility of a scribe for appearing at the Civil Services Examination. After a
detailed and complete exposition on the law on the subject, the Supreme Court held
that to deny the facility of a scribe in such a situation would negate the valuable rights
and entitlements recognised by the RPwD Act, 2016 and therefore declared that the
appellant would be entitled to the facility of a scribe for appearing at the civil services
examination and any other competitive selection conducted under the authority of
the government.
40.In the same judgement, the Supreme Court also had an opportunity to
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis consider the correctness of the judgement in
V.Surendra Mohan v. State of Tamil Nadu22, where a two judge bench of the
Supreme Court had confirmed the judgement of the Madras High Court upholding
the decision of the government that those who are partially blind with 40 to 50%
disability were only eligible and the appellant having 70% disability was not eligible
to participate in the selection for Civil Judge (Junior Division). The Supreme Court
observed in Paragraph 53 thus:
“this judgement was delivered by this court after India became a party to the
UNCRPD and the RPwD Act 2016 came into force. The aforesaid view espoused by
this court is innocent of the principle of reasonable accommodation. This court did
not consider whether the failure of the TNPSC to provide reasonable accommodation
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 16
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
to judge with a disability above the impugned ceiling the statutorily or
constitutionally tenable. There is no reference in the court’s judgement whether the
appellant would have been able to discharge the duties of a Civil Judge (Junior
Division), after being provided the reasonable accommodations necessitated by his
disability.” The Supreme Court thereafter went on to declare that the judgement in
V.Surendra Mohan23 would not be a binding precedent as it stands on a legally
vulnerable footing considering that there was a complete absence of any analysis with
respect to reasonable accommodation by the two judge bench. This will show that the
emphasis laid by the United Nations Convention and the implementation of the same
by the RPwD Act 2016 as interpreted by the Supreme Court on equality,
non-discrimination, dignity as well as equal https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
opportunity and the resultant reasonable accommodation are all uncompromising
ideals especially in view of our Constitution based on the principles of equality and
dignity.
41.In the present case, if the respondents would have given effect to the principle of
reasonable accommodation as mandated by the legislature, the reason cited for not
permitting the petitioner to travel along with her male competitors, smacks of blatant
discrimination cloaked in protectionism, which is anathema to the substantive
equality as envisaged under the Constitution of India. Rather than citing the reason
of unsafe travel, it is incumbent on the State to ensure safety and security of its
women, disabled or otherwise, as highlighted by the judgment in Anuj Garg v. Hotel
Association of India24, where the Court held that “instead of placing curbs on
women’s freedom in the garb of protection and security, and instead of prohibiting
women from taking up certain types of employment, the State should focus on
factoring in ways through which unequal consequences of sex differences can be
eliminated. It is the state’s duty to ensure circumstances of safety which inspire
confidence in women to discharge the duties freely in accordance to the requirements
of the profession they choose to follow”.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Protectionism and Romantic Paternalism:
42.In the legislative background as discussed in the preceding paragraphs, it is also
essential to analyse the other aspects of protectionism in the specific circumstances of
the present case, where the petitioner was not permitted to travel and participate in
the Fourth World Deaf Athletics Championship, 2021 only on account of the fact that
she was the only woman athlete as against 10 male athletes.
43.The discrimination caused to women is often couched in ‘protectionism’ citing
traditional concepts of stereotyped roles for women and the purported concern for
their safety and security. This is also known as “romantic paternalism” of American
jurisprudence [Refer: Frontiero v.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 17
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
Richardson25 and Dothard v. Rawlinson26]. This has been dealt with at length in the first
significant judgment of its kind in Anuj Garg27. The relevant paragraphs of the same judgment may
be profitably reproduced below:
“42. The description of the notion of “Romantic paternalism” by the US Supreme
Court in Frontiero v. Richardson (411 U.S.677, 93 S.Ct. 1764) makes for an interesting
reading. It is not to say that Indian society is similarly situated and suffers from the
same degree of troublesome legislators passed but nevertheless the tenor and context
are not to be missed. The court noted in this case of military service:
“There can be no doubt that our nation has had a long and unfortunate history of sex
discrimination. Traditionally, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis such discrimination
was rationalised by an attitude of “romantic paternalism” which, in practical effect,
put women, not on a pedestal, but in a cage. As a result of notions such as these,
statute books gradually become laden with gross, stereotyped distinctions between
the sexes” The court also maintained a strict scrutiny standard for review and repel
the administrative convenience argument in the following terms:
“in any case, a prior decisions make clear that, although efficacious administration of
governmental programs is not without some importance,’ the Constitution recognises
higher values than speed and efficiency’. And when we enter the realm of strict
judicial scrutiny , there can be no doubt that administrative convenience is not a
shibboleth, the mere re- citation of which dictates constitutionality.
On the contrary, any statutory scheme which draws a sharp line between the sexes,
solely for the purpose of achieving administrative convenience, necessarily
commands “dissimilar treatment for men and women who are similarly situated”,
and therefore involves the “very kind of arbitrary legislative choice forbidden by the
(Constitution). We therefore conclude that, according differential treatment of male
and female members of the uniformed services for the sole purpose of achieving
administrative convenience, the challenged statutes violate the Due Process Clause of
the Fifth Amendment.”
43. In another similar case wherein there was an effective bar on females for the
position of guards are correctional counsellors in the Alabama State penitentiary
system. The prison facility housed sexual offenders and the majority opinion on this
basis inter alia upheld the bar. Justice Marshall’s dissent captures the range of issues
within a progressive paradigm. Dissent in Dothard v. Rawlinson (433 US 321,
97S.CT.2720) serves as useful advice in the following terms:
“It appears that the real disqualifying factor in the court’s view is the ‘the employees
very womanhood’. The Court refers to the large number of sex offenders in Alabama
prisons, and to “the likelihood that inmates would assault a woman
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis because she was a woman”. In short the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 18
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
fundamental justification for the decision is that women as guards will generate
sexual assaults. With all respect, this is rational regrettably perpetuates one of the
most insidious of the old myths about women that women, wittingly or not, are
seductive sexual objects. The effect of the decision, made I am sure with the best of
intentions, is to punish women because their very presence might provoke sexual
assaults it is women who are made to pay the price in lost job opportunities for the
threat of depraved conduct by prison inmates once again, “the pedestal upon which
women have been placed has upon closer inspection, been revealed as a cage”. It is
particularly ironic that the cages erected here in response to feared misbehaviour by
imprisoning criminals.” He also notes the nature of protective discrimination (as
garb) in the following terms:
“The court points to no evidence in the record to support the asserted ‘likelihood that
inmates would assault a woman because she is a woman’. Perhaps the court relies
upon common sense, or ‘innate recognition’. But the danger in this emotionally laden
context is that common sense will be used to mask the ‘romantic paternalism’ and
persisting discriminatory attitudes that the court properly esters. To me the only
matter of innate recognition is that the incidence of sexually motivated attacks on
guards will be minute compared to the “likelihood that inmates will assault” a guard
because he or she is a guard.
The proper response to inevitable attacks on both female and male guards not to limit
the employment opportunities of law-abiding women who wish to contribute to their
community, but to make swift and sure punitive action against the inmate offenders.
Presumably, one of the goals of the Alabama prison system is eradication of inmates’
antisocial behavioural patterns so that prisoners will be able to live one day in free
society. Sex offenders can begin this process by learning to relate to women guards in
a socially acceptable manner. To deprive women of job opportunities because of the
threat and behaviour of convicted criminals is to turn a social propriety’s priorities
upside down.
The standard of judicial scrutiny https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
44. It is to be borne in mind that legislations with pronounced protective
discrimination” aims, such as this one, potentially serve as double-edged boards
script strict scrutiny is test should be employed while assessing the implications of
this variety of legislations. Legislation should not be only assessed on its proposed
aims but rather on the implications and the effects. The new legislation suffers from
incurable fixations of stereotyped morality and conception of sexual role the
perspective thus arrived at is outmoded in content and stifling it means.
45. No law in his ultimate effect should end up perpetuating the oppression of
women. Personal freedom is a fundamental tenet which cannot be compromised in
the name of expediency until unless there is a compelling state purpose.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 19
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
Heightened level of scrutiny is a normative threshold for judicial review in such cases”.
44.The above view of the Supreme Court in Anuj Garg28, as also in the cited decisions of the United
States Supreme Court, would make it clear as daylight that by not permitting the petitioner herein to
travel along with her male counterparts, once again the government and the respondents have
discriminated against her on the ground that she is a woman and that she also suffers the further
cumulative and intersectional disadvantage of being disabled, and that on account of these factors,
the justification seems to be that she is at the risk of being assaulted or unsafe, sexually or otherwise.
In effect, this rationale is, what has been referred to in the above decisions as perpetuating the
dangerous myth that women are seductive sexual objects. Analysing the said factors, it has been
categorically held that it is the duty of the State to provide and ensure safety for
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis women in a way so as to inspire confidence to discharge their duty
freely in any profession of their choice. The same well applies to the case at hand. Indirect
Discrimination:
45.In the most recent cases, on whether women engaged in Short Service Commission in the Indian
Army can claim Permanent Commission, was addressed by the Supreme Court in Ministry of
Defence v. Babita Puniya29, in which, the Supreme Court has stressed upon breaking of the
stereotypes and the duty of the State in this regard. Breathing new life into the concept of
substantive equality, the Supreme Court in Lt. Col. Nitisha and Ors. v. Union of India and Ors30,
has stressed upon the concept of ‘indirect discrimination’ as a tool of jurisprudential analysis and
held that the same can result in the redressing of several inequities by probing provisions, criteria of
practice that have a disproportionate and adverse impact on members, who belong to groups that
are constitutionally protected from discrimination under Article 15(1). While explaining the concept
of indirect discrimination, it has been stated that actions taken on a seemingly innocent ground
in-fact have discriminatory effects due to structural inequalities that exist between the classes.
Indirect discrimination is caused by facially neutral criteria by not taking into consideration the
underlying effects of a provision, practice or a criterion. The relevant portion of the decision of the
Supreme Court in Nitisha31 is as follows:-
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis "47. Indirect discrimination has also been
recognized by the High Courts in India. For instance, in the matters of public sector
employment, the Delhi High Court in Inspector (Mahila) Ravina vs. Union of India
(Writ Petition (C) 4525 of 2014 dated 06.08.2015) and in Madhu vs. Northern
Railways (2018) SCC Online Del 6660, has upheld challenges to conditions of
employment, which though appear to be neutral, have an adverse effect on one
section of the society. Bhat, J, while analyzing the principles of Indirect
discrimination in Madhu (supra) held:
"20. This Court itself has recognised that actions taken on a seemingly innocent
ground can in fact have discriminatory effects due to the structural inequalities that
exist between classes. When the CRPF denied promotion to an officer on the ground
that she did not take the requisite course to secure promotion, but she was pregnant,
the Delhi High Court struck down the action as discriminatory. Such actions would
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 20
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
inherently affect women more than men. The Court in Inspector (Mahila) vs. Union
of India WP (C) 4524/2014 stated, 'A seemingly "neutral" reason such as inability of
the employee, or unwillingness, if not probed closely, would act in a discriminatory
manner, directly impacting her service rights. That is exactly what has happened
here; though CRPF asserts that seniority benefit at par with the petitioner's
colleagues and batchmates (who were able to clear course No.85) cannot be given to
her because, she did not attend that course, in truth, her 'unwillingness' stemmed
from her inability due to her pregnancy'
48. We must clarify here that the use of the term 'indirect discrimination' is not to
refer to discrimination which is remote, but is, instead, as real as any other form of
discrimination. Indirect discrimination is caused by facially neutral criteria by not
taking into consideration the underlying effects of a provision, practice or a criterion.
49. The facts of this case present an opportune moment for evaluating the practices
of the respondents in evaluation for the grant of PC. In this segment of the judgment,
we will first https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis outline the theoretical foundations of
the doctrine of indirect discrimination. We will then survey comparative
jurisprudence concerning the doctrine, with a view to understand its key constituents
and the legal questions surrounding its application, namely the evidentiary burden to
be discharged to invoke the doctrine and the standards of justification to be applied.
We will then offer a roadmap for understanding and operationalizing indirect
discrimination in Indian anti-discrimination law.
50. In evaluating direct and indirect discrimination, it is important to underscore
that these tests, when applied in strict disjunction from one another, may end up
producing narrow conceptions of equality which may not account for systematic
flaws that embody discrimination. Therefore, we will conclude this section with an
understanding of a systemic frame of analysis, in order to adequately redress the full
extent of harm that certain groups suffer, merely on account of them possessing
characteristics that are prohibited axles of discrimination.
F.1 Theoretical Foundations of Indirect Discrimination
51. Hugh Collins and Tarunabh Khaitan explain the concept of indirect
discrimination using Aesop's fable of the fox and the stork. They note;
'Aesop's fable of the fox and the stork invokes the idea of indirect discrimination. The
story tells how the fox invited the stork for a meal. For a mean joke, the fox served
soup in a shallow dish, which the fox could lap up easily, but the stork could only wet
the end of her long bill on the plate and departed still hungry. The stork invited the
fox for a return visit and served soup in a long-necked jar with a narrow mouth, into
which the fox could not insert his snout. Whilst several moral lessons might be drawn
from this tale, it is often regarded as supporting the principle that one should have
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 21
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
regard to the needs of others, so that everyone may be given fair opportunities in life.
Though formally giving each animal an opportunity to enjoy the dinner, in practice,
the vessels for the serving of the soup inevitably excluded the guest on account of
their peculiar characteristics.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 52. Another excellent formulation of the doctrine
can be found in the opinion of Advocate General Maduro of the Court of Justice of
the European Union (CJEU). He notes that the distinctive attribute of direct
discrimination is that the discriminator explicitly relies on a suspect classification
(prohibited ground of discrimination) to act in a certain way. Such classification
serves as an essential premise of the discriminator's reasoning. On the other hand, in
indirect discrimination, the intention of the discriminator, and the reasons for his
actions are irrelevant. He pertinently observes: "In fact, this is the whole point of the
prohibition of indirect discrimination; even neutral, innocent or good faith measures
and policies adopted with no discriminatory intent whatsoever will be caught if their
impact on persons who have a particular characteristic is greater than their impact on
other persons'
53. Thus, as long as a court's focus is on the mental state underlying the impugned
action that is allegedly discriminatory, we are in the territory of direct discrimination.
However, when the focus switches to the effects of the concerned action, we enter the
territory of indirect discrimination. An enquiry as to indirect discrimination looks,
not at the form of the impugned conduct, but as its consequences. In a case of direct
discrimination, the judicial enquiry is confined to the act or conduct at issue,
abstracted from the social setting or background fact-situation in which the act or
conduct takes place. In indirect discrimination, on the other hand, the subject matter
of the enquiry is the institutional or societal framework within which the impugned
conduct occurs. The doctrine seeks to broaden the scope of antidiscrimination law to
equip the law to remedy patterns of discrimination that are not as easily discernible.
F.2 Position in the United States
54. The genesis of the doctrine can be traced to the celebrated United States Supreme
Court judgment in Griggs vs. Duke Power Co. The issue concerned manual work for
which the prescribed qualifications included the possession of a high school
education and satisfactory results in an aptitude test. Two facts about the case bear
emphasis. First, due to the inferior quality of segregated school education, African-
American candidates were disqualified in higher number because of the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis aforementioned requirements than their white
counterparts. Second neither of these two requirements was shock to be significantly
related to successful job performance.
55. Construing the prohibition on discrimination embodied in Title VII of the Civil
Rights Act of 1964, the Chief Justice Burger held:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 22
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
"The Act prescribes not only overt discrimination but also practices that are fair in
form, but discriminatory in operation".
He went on; "good intent or absence of discriminatory intent does not redeem employment
procedures or testing mechanisms that operate as "built-in-headwinds" for majority groups and are
unrelated to measuring job capability.
On the question of the standard of justification for rebutting a charge of indirect discrimination, the
Court held as follows:
'The touchstone is business necessity. If an employment practice which operates to
exclude Negroes cannot be shown to be related to job performance, the practice is
prohibited.' Griggs, therefore, laid the groundwork for the thinking that meaningful
equality does not merely mean the absence of intentional inequality. A statutory
manifestation of disparate impact was codified in US law in the shape of the Civil
Rights Act of 1991. Section 105 of the Civil Rights Act of 1991 makes a practice
causing disparate impact a prima facie violation. The presumption can be rebutted by
establishing that the practice is linked to the job and business. This can be overcome
by a showing of alternative, equally efficacious, practices not causing disparate
impact."
46.In the present case also, a seemingly neutral instance of discrimination without being propelled
by any intent to discriminate as such would fall squarely within the understood definition and
meaning of ‘indirect discrimination’. While the jurisprudence on indirect discrimination is still
growing, it is important to https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis identify these instances of systemic and
indirect discrimination, couched in neutrality and seemingly innocent reasons perpetuated by social
conditioning but which cannot stand scrutiny before law in the teeth of the expansive substantive
equality as envisioned and envisaged in our Constitution, and to discard them just as stark instances
of discrimination. Such instances of indirect discrimination perpetuate inequality and cripple the
salient personal freedom and autonomy available to every citizen of this country, irrespective of
their personal attributes and differences and based on variables of gender, disability, caste, sexual
orientation, religion, or any other identified site of discrimination, and it is the solemn duty of the
Court to stand the ground in fulfilment of the ideals and guarantees and promises held out under
the Constitution, with unflinching commitment.
International law qua discrimination:
47(i).Late Justice Ruth Bader Ginsburg, Associate Judge, Supreme Court of United
States of America, quoted Sara Grimke, noted abolitionist and advocate of equal
rights of men and women, while arguing before the Supreme Court of the United
States of America in Sharron A. Frontiero and Joseph Frontiero v. Elliot L.
Richardson, Secretary of Defense, et al.32, as “I ask no favour for my sex. All I ask of
our brethren is that they take their feet off our https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
necks.” The said quote was pointed out in the opening line of the decision rendered
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 23
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
by the supreme court of India in Nitisha33, wherein it was held that “the evaluation
criteria set by the Army constituted systematic discrimination against the petitioners
and this discrimination has caused an economic and psychological harm and an
affront to their dignity”.
(ii).Walter E. Washington, etc., et. al. v. Alfred E. Davis et al.34, wherein, the case
involves the validity of a qualifying test administered to applicants, who are two
negro police officers, alleging that the promotion policies of the Department were
racially discriminatory, which is violative of the rights under the due process clause of
the Fifth Amendment to the United States Constitution. The test was sustained by the
District Court, but invalidated by the Court of Appeals. The Supreme Court of United
States was in agreement with the District Court and accordingly, reversed the
judgment of the court of appeals. While doing so, it was observed that “a rule that a
statute designed to serve neutral ends is nevertheless invalid, absent compelling
justification, if in practice it benefits or burdens one race more than another would be
far-
reaching and would raise serious questions about, and perhaps invalidate, a whole range of tax,
welfare, public service, regulatory and licensing statutes that may be more burdensome to the poor
and to the average black than to the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis more affluent white”.
(iii).Council Directive 2000/78/EC (27 February, 2000) defines the concept of “indirect
discrimination”. In S.Coleman v. Attridge Law and Steve Law35, it was held by the Grand Chamber,
UK that “the prohibition of harassment laid down by the provisions of the Directive 2000/78 is not
limited only to people who are themselves disabled; where it is established that the unwanted
conduct amounting to harassment, which is suffered by an employee, who is not himself disabled is
related to the disability of his child, whose care is provided primarily by that employee, such conduct
is contrary to the provisions to the prohibition of harassment”.
(iv).The South African Constitutional Court in City Council of Pretoria v. Walker36, while
interpreting and enforcing the Constitution, has held that “the concept of indirect discrimination,...
was developed precisely to deal with situations where discrimination lay disguised behind
apparently neutral criteria or where persons already adversely hit by patterns of historic
subordination had their disadvantage entrenched or intensified by the impact of measures not
overtly intended to prejudice them”. ... “In many cases, particularly those in which indirect
discrimination is alleged, the protective purpose would be defeated if the persons complaining of
discrimination had to prove not only that they were unfairly discriminated against but also that the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis unfair discrimination was intentional. This problem would be
particularly acute in cases of indirect discrimination where there is almost always some purpose
other than a discriminatory purpose involved in the conduct or action to which objection is taken”.
The same was referred to by the Supreme Court of India in Nitisha37 and Delhi High Court in
Madhu v. Northern Railway38.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 24
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
(v).In a recent decision in Mahlangu v. Minister of Labour39, the South African Constitutional Court
had to rule on the constitutionality of Section 1(xix)(v) of the Compensation for Occupational
Injuries and Diseases Act, 130 of 1993. This provision explicitly excluded domestic workers from the
definition of employees under the Act. This had the consequence of depriving domestic workers
access to the social security benefits contained in the legislation, in the event of injury, disablement
and death. The SACC, inter alia, rendered a finding that the provision was hit by the constitutional
prohibition on indirect discrimination.
(vi).In Ontario Human Rights Commission v. Simpsons - Sears40 , the Canadian Supreme Court
expounded the doctrine of indirect discrimination, while entertaining a challenge under Section
4(1)(g) of the Ontario Human Rights Code. In analyzing whether a work policy mandating inflexible
working hours on Friday evenings and Saturdays indirectly discriminated against the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Appellant on the basis of her creed, in that her religion required
her to strictly observe the Sabbath, the Court noted as follows:
“A distinction must be made between what I would describe as direct discrimination
and the concept already referred to as adverse effect discrimination in connection
with employment. Direct discrimination occurs in this connection where an employer
adopts a practice or rule which on its face discriminates on a prohibited ground. For
example, “No Catholics or no women or no blacks employed here.” There is, of
course, no disagreement in the case at bar that direct discrimination of that nature
would contravene the Act. On the other hand, there is the concept of adverse effect
discrimination. It arises where an employer for genuine business reasons adopts a
rule or standard which is on its face neutral, and which will apply equally to all
employees, but which has a discriminatory effect upon a prohibited ground on one
employee or group of employees in that it imposes, because of some special
characteristic of the employee or group, obligations, penalties, or restrictive
conditions not imposed on other members of the work force. For essentially the same
reasons that led to the conclusion that an intent to discriminate was not required as
an element of discrimination contravening the Code I am of the opinion that this
Court may consider adverse effect discrimination as described in these reasons a
contradiction of the terms of the Code. An employment rule honestly made for sound
economic or business reasons, equally applicable to all to whom it is intended to
apply, may yet be discriminatory if it affects a person or group of persons differently
from others to whom it may apply. From the foregoing I therefore conclude that the
appellant showed a prima facie case of discrimination based on creed before the
Board of Inquiry.”
(vii).In Orsus v. Croatia41, the allegation raised by the applicants was that they had
been attending separate classes comprising only roma pupils at times during their
primary education and thereby discriminated against in the enjoyment of that right
on account of their race or ethnic origin. The European
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Court of Human Rights was of the view that
“indirect discrimination shall be taken to occur, where an apparently neutral
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 25
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
provision, criterion or practice would put persons of an ethnic origin at a particular
disadvantage compared with other persons, unless it is objectively justified by a
legitimate aim and the means of achieving that aim are appropriate, necessary and
proportionate”.
(viii).The Supreme Court of Canada, in Action Travail des Femmes v.
Canadian National Railway Company42 analyzed the claim of woman seeking equal employment
opportunities in the National Railroad Company. In echoing the mutually reinforcing consequences
of direct and indirect discrimination within organizational structures as a systemic feature, the
Court observed as under:
“Systemic discrimination in an employment context is discrimination that results
from the simple operation of established procedures of recruitment, hiring and
promotion, none of which is necessarily designed to promote discrimination. The
discrimination is then reinforced by the very exclusion of the disadvantaged group
because the exclusion fosters the belief, both within and outside the group, that the
exclusion is a result of “natural forces”, for example, that women “just can’t do the
job”(see the Abella Report, pp.9-
10). To combat systemic discrimination, it is essential to create a climate in which
both negative practices and negative attitudes can be challenged and discouraged”....
In prescribing remedies against systemic discrimination, the Court consciously noted
that “the remedies do not have to be merely compensatory, but also prospective in
terms of the benefit that is designed to improve the situation in the future”. The Court
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis structured the remedy as follows: “An employment
equity program thus is designed to work in three ways. First, by countering the
cumulative effects of systemic discrimination, such a program renders further
discrimination pointless....”.
(ix).The framework provided in Action Travail des Femmes43 was followed by the
Human Rights Tribunal of Canada, in National Capital Alliance on Race Relations v.
Canada (Health and Welfare)44 wherein the Court had to examine a case against the
Health and Welfare Department of Canada for discriminating against visible
minorities by establishing employment policies and practices that deprive visible
minorities (race, colour and ethnic origin) of employment opportunities in senior
management. The Court conducted a holistic analysis of the organization by collating
testimonies of workers in the organization and by engaging experts on statistical
analysis and human resource management. The evidence of the expert on human
resources was analysed to situate systemic issues ranging from ghettoization of
minorities in Canada translating into lesser encouragement for professional
ambition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 26
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
Societal impact of discrimination was evidenced in the informal staffing decisions providing fertile
ground for unconscious bias and a broader perception of visible minorities as unfit for management.
In upholding the claims of the plaintiffs, corrective measures were prescribed to counteract the
effects of systemic discrimination in the workforce. The said decision was pointed out by the
Supreme Court of India in Nitisha.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(x).In Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali v. United Kingdom45, the European Court of Human
Rights held: "As to the present matter, it can be said that the advancement of the equality of the
sexes is today a major goal in the member States of the Council of Europe. This means that very
weighty reasons would have to be advanced before a difference of treatment on the ground of sex
could be regarded as compatible with the Convention". Following the said decision, the European
Court of Human Rights once again observed in Van Raalte v. The Netherlands46, that in the
applicant's submission, differences in treatmen based on sex were already unacceptable when
section 25 of the General Child Care Benefits Act was enacted in 1962. The wording of Article 14 of
the Convention showed that such had been the prevailing view as early as 1950. Moreover, legal and
social developments showed a clear trend towards equality between men and women. Further
reference was made to Abdulaziz47, which stated explicitly that "the advancement of the equality of
the sexes is today a major goal in the member States of the Council of Europe" and that "very
weighty reasons would have to be advanced before a difference of treatment on the ground of sex
could be regarded as compatible with the Convention".48 These observations were referred to by the
Supreme Court in Anuj Garg49.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis INDIAN SCENARIO:
48.In India with burgeoning population, women in general and disabled women in
particular, struggle with both the oppression of being women in male-
dominated societies and the oppression of being disabled in societies dominated by the able-bodied.
Women with disabilities in aspiring to achieve laurels in high levels of sport competition seldom gets
encouragement and assistance and often face double discrimination associated with gender and
disability. Having disability and being in the world of sports, to which they are not at fault, are
compounded by systematic barriers associated with the brand of being female and participating in a
male dominated sports arena. At the elite level, disability sport has grown and developed at a rapid
pace unprecedented in sport history. The Paralympic Games are the pinnacle of elite competition for
athletes with disabilities and a second largest sporting event in the world - second only to Olympic
games. Despite the accomplishments of Paralympic movement, serious inequalities continue to exist
for women and the case of the petitioner herein is a classic example for the same. Participant
numbers have traditionally been skewed, in that two to three times more men than women compete
at the paralympic level. Professionals with the adapted physical activity field have speculated on the
barriers which exist for women with disabilities in sports. The https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
barriers for participation in such momentous events include classification that are insensitive to
women. Few women involved in the power structures of the disability sports movement and an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 27
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
under-representation of women athletes in wheel-chair sport. If the potential women are given
opportunities coupled with financial support, it will be possible for them to bring more laurels to the
Country. Empowering the female athletes to be an active participant could be achieved by providing
adequate opportunities to them on par with the male athletes. There needs to be feasible avenues for
the female athletes to address their concerns to the decision-makers and it would encourage a
united political front that would represent all female athletes, regardless of their disability level, to
achieve greater horizons.
49.There are several facets of discrimination exist to women in particular and the Supreme Court
time and again has held that such discrimination would infringe the constitutional guarantee
conferred to the women under Article 15 of the Constitution of India50.
50.In Babita Puniya51, it was held by the Supreme Court that absolute bar on women seeking
criteria or command appointments violates guarantee of equality under Article 14 of The
Constitution of India. It was also held that both men and women should be given criteria or
command. In Nitisha52 it was held in https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis para Nos.119 and 120, as
follows:-
"119. Based on the above analysis, we are of the view that the evaluation criteria set
by the Army constituted systemic discrimination against the petitioners. The pattern
of evaluation deployed by the Army, to implement the decision in Babita Puniya
(supra) disproportionately affects women. This disproportionate impact is
attributable to the structural discrimination against women, by dint of which the
facially neutral criteria of selection ACR evaluation and fulfilling the medical criteria
to be in SHAPE-1 at a belated stage, to secure PC disproportionately impacts them
vis-a-vis their male counterparts. The pattern of evaluation, by excluding subsequent
achievements of the petitioners and failing to account for the inherent patterns of
discrimination that were produced as a consequence of casual grading and skewed
incentive structures, has resulted in indirect and systemic discrimination. This
discrimination has caused an economic and psychological harm and an affront to
their dignity."
51.The Supreme Court also had an occasion to consider the effect of gender bias and discrimination
in the Army Service in Union of India and others vs. Lt. Cdr. Annie Nagaraja and others53 wherein
in para No.76, it was held as follows:-
"76. Performance at work and dedication to the cause of the nation are the surest
answers to prevailing gender stereotypes. To deprive serving women officers of the
opportunity to work as equals with men on PCs in the Indian Navy is plainly
discriminatory. Furthermore, to contend that women officers are ill-suited to certain
avocations which involve them being aboard ships is contrary to the equal worth of
the women officers who dedicate their lives to serving in the cause of the nation."
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis FINDINGS:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 28
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
52.Sport is always regarded as a potent tool to achieve human development such as psychological
and physical rehabilitation. It is construed as a bridge, which would associate with peace and social
mobilization by providing a physical foot point. It is an arena, where relationship can be built among
the team-mates even in the midst of adversaries in the form of competition. Participation in any
form of sports immensely benefits those with disabilities more than those without any disabilities. If
a person with disability is provided a socially conducive atmosphere of sport, it will benefit them to
develop their skills of teamwork, communication, confidence, leadership qualities, cooperation and
respect, so that they will become members, who can contribute to the society. It is an inexpensive
form of physical therapy, which is vital for persons with physical disabilities, who need to retain the
movement as much as possible. Pope Francis, speaking at an international conference on sport,
recognized that “sport is a human activity of great value, able to enrich people's lives.” An important
characteristic of sport, the Pope noted, is “the beauty and joy found in sports, whether playing or
watching, is something that benefits and unites everyone, regardless of religion, ethnic group,
nationality, or disability.”54 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
53.It is noteworthy to mention at this juncture that the theme designed by the United Nations for
the year 2021 is “Equality – Reducing inequalities, advancing human rights”. Sports symbolise the
spirit of brotherhood, tolerance, mutual respect, leadership quality, command and communication,
fostering the spirit of accepting victory and defeat as one and the same. Therefore, it should be made
as a platform, where everyone can be given an equal opportunity to prove their might without being
discriminated on the ground of gender or disability in any forms or manifestation. A sports person
should not be defeated by discriminating him/her from participating in the arena of sports, but the
defeat should be the real defeat by allowing all those, who have the potential to participate in the
sports, so that they can contribute with their spirit, body, mind and soul ably.
54.In the instant case, the petitioner being a disabled girl, had to overcome the psychological trauma
of speech and hearing impairment. Despite the same, she excelled herself in the events of the long
jump and high jump at State and National levels and bagged gold, silver and bronze medals,
totalling
13. However, she was denied the opportunity of being participated in the 4th World Deaf Athletics
Championship, 2021, though she was qualified in the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis National
Selection Test. Even after the interim order of this court, the petitioner has been struggling to
participate in the said event held at Poland, in all ways, on account of improper and non-cooperative
attitude on the part of the Sports Council of the Deaf both in the State and Central Levels. Though
faint attempts were made on the side of the respondents denying the allegations made by the
petitioner, the same cannot be countenanced by this court. The concept of fairness and justice,
which is the virtue of all, should be crystallised in all the spheres of human activity from education
to sports to employment. If such discriminating practices are continued, the constitutional vision of
equality and dignity cannot be achieved.
CONCLUSION AND DIRECTIONS:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 29
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
55.In the light of the aforesaid detailed analysis and findings, this Court has reached
the conclusion that this is a case of discrimination based on the gender as well as the
disability, due to which, the petitioner has faced several difficulties and barriers to
participate in the international event. The State and Central Governments, being the
competent authorities to provide and ensure support and safety to the sports women
with disabilities, so as to inspire their confidence freely and take part actively in the
events at all levels, have failed to do the same in an appropriate manner. Therefore,
in exercise of the power https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis conferred under Article
226 of the Constitution of India, to render substantial justice, this court issues the
following directions to the respondent authorities for the purpose of streamlining the
policy qua woman athletes with disabilities, in consultation with experts, so as to
enable them to participate in all the events at State, National and International levels,
with equality and dignity:
(i)to prevent or prohibit unfair discrimination against the women athletes with
disabilities, on one or more grounds including race, gender, sex, marital status,
ethnic or social origin, colour, sexual orientation, age, disability, religion, conscience,
belief, culture, language and birth.
(ii)to provide adequate financial assistance and all other requisites to the women
athletes with disabilities, so as to participate in all the events.
(iii)to follow proper selection process, so as to enable the meritorious candidates to
participate in the events.
(iv)To provide necessary training and free medical facilities to all the women athletes
with disabilities, who achieve meritorious level in the respective sports for
participation in all the international games.
(v)to provide all possible means to entertain women athletes with disabilities to
utilise their fullest potentials and capabilities so as to achieve success in all the
events.
(vi)to provide all the disabled friendly materials, clothes, prosthetics and
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis other accessories that may be required by the
women athletes with disabilities in day today affairs, with incentives so as to
encourage and nurture their excellence in the respective sports and to participate in
the events at all levels.
(vii)to extend the financial assistance to one of the family members, who accompany
the disabled female athletes to participate in the international games.
(viii)To give effect to the principle of reasonable accommodation by providing all
assistance that are required / requested by the females athletes with disabilities so as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 30
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
to enable them to participate in the international games, on par with males.
(ix)to ensure safety and security of the female athletes with disabilities during their
travel, irrespective of number of participants, so as to inspire their confidence freely
and take part actively in the events at all levels.
(x)to sensitize the male counter parts and inculcate the sense of equality in their
mind, so as to maintain safe environment for women athletes at all levels.
(xi)to reward all the disabled women participants in the international games,
irrespective of their achievements or otherwise.
(xii)Must ensure that all the women athletes whether with or without disabilities, be
given equal treatment on par with males, so as to enjoy full and equal rights and
freedoms and to maintain their dignity.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
56.With the aforesaid directions, this writ petition is disposed of. No costs.
20.12.2021 rsh Index : Yes / No Internet : Yes / No To
1. The Joint Secretary Ministry of Youth and Sports Department of Sports Government of India
Shastri Bhavan, New Delhi - 110 001
2. The Director General Sports Authority of India Government of India Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium
Complex (East Gate) Lodhi Road, New Delhi - 110 003
3. The Chairman All India Sports Council of the Deaf No.1-B, Institutional Area Near Janata Flats,
Sarita Vihar New Delhi - 110 076
4. The Secretary Department of Welfare of Differently Abled Persons Government of Tamil Nadu
Secretariat, Chennai - 600 009
5. The Principal Secretary https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Sports Development Authority of Tamil
Nadu Government of Tamil Nadu Jawaharlal Nehru Stadium Periyamet, Chennai - 600 003 R.
MAHADEVAN, J rsh 20.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 1 Wendell, Susan. “Toward a
Feminist Theory of Disability.” Gender Basics: Feminist Perspectives on Women and Men. Ed. A
Minas, Belmont, California: Wadsworth Publishing Co., 1993. 2 Olenik M., Lisa, Matthews M., Joan,
Steadward D., Robert. “Women, Disability and Sport”, Canadian Woman Studies.
3 Article 15(1) Constitution of India, The State shall not discriminate against any citizen on grounds
only of religion, race, caste, sex, place of birth or any of them 4 McCall “The Complexity of
Intersectionality” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and Society (2005) 30 at 1771.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 31
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
5 K.Crenshaw, Demarginalizing The intersection of Race and Sex: A Black Feminist Critique of Anti-
Discrimination Doctrine, Feminist Theory, And Anti-Racist Policies, University of Chicago Legal
Forum, Vol. 4 (1989) 149 6 Centre for Law and Policy Research: Intersectionality: A Report on
Discrimination based on Caste with the Intersections of Sex, Gender Identity and Disability in
Karnataka, Andhra Pradesh, Tamil Nadu and Kerala (2019) 7 The Contemporary Law Forum:
Intersectionality in Gender- based violence (2021) 8 AIR 2021 SC 2190 9 Id 10 Directorate General
for Internal Policies, Policy Department C: Citizens' Rights and Constitutional Affairs; General
equality, 'Discrimination generated by the intersection of Gender and disability' – Study, European
Parliament, manuscript completed in May 2013. 11 UN – Department of Economic and Social
Affairs (Disability), (2007) 12 (2021) 5 SCC 370 13 UN Human Rights Treaty Bodies: CEDAW
Committee General Recommendations (2014) 14 Conroy, E., (2016) “Aiming for Inclusive Sport: the
Legal and Practical Implications of the United Nation’s Disability Convention for Sport, Recreation
and Leisure for People with Disabilities”, Entertainment and Sports Law Journal 5(1), p.4. 15 Article
15 Constitution of India, Prohibition of discrimination on grounds of religion, race, caste, sex or
place of birth 16 Supra n.12 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 17 Article 14 of the Constitution,
Equality before law, The State shall not deny to any person equality before the law or the equal
protection of the laws within the territory of India prohibition of discrimination on grounds of
religion, race, caste, sex or place of birth Article 19 of the Constitution, Protection of certain rights
regarding freedom of speech etc. (1)All citizens shall have the right (a)to freedom of speech and
expression (b)to assemble peaceably and without arms; (c)to form associations or unions; (d)to
move freely throughout the territory of India; (e)to reside and settle in any part of the territory of
India; and (f).. (g)to practise any profession or to carry on any occupation, trade or business (2)..,
(3)...(4)...(5)...(6).... Article 21 of the Constitution, Protection of life and personal liberty, No person
shall be deprived of his life or personal liberty except according to procedure established by law. 18
Part III of Constitution, Fundamental Rights, Articles 12 to 35, Art 12 - The State, Art 13 – Laws
inconsistent with or in derogation of fundamental rights, Art 14 to 18 – Right to Equality, Art 19 to
22 – Right to Freedom, Art 23 and 24 – Right against Exploitation, Art 25 to 28 – Right to Freedom
of Religion, Art 29 and 39 – Educational and Cultural Rights, Art 32 to 35 – Right to Constitutional
Remedies 19Cong. Rec. S611 (daily ed. Jan. 14, 1991) (statement of Sen. Boren) 20 Women's Sports
Foundation: Women in the Olympic and Paralympic Games: An Analysis of Participation,
Leadership and Media Coverage (2017) 21 Supra n.12 22 (2019) 4 SCC 237 23 Id 24 (2008) 3 SCC 1
25 411 U.S.677 (1973) 26 433 US 321, 97S.CT.2720 at page 345 27 Supra n.24 28 id 29 (2020) 7 SCC
469 30 AIR 2021 SC 1797 31 Id https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 32 411 US 677 (1973) 33 Supra
n.30 34 426 US 229 (1976) 35 [2008] IRLR 722 36 (1998) 3 BCLR 257 37 Supra no.30 38 Decision
rendered by the Division Bench of Delhi High Court in LPA No.640 of 2017 on 17.01.2018, 2018 SCC
Online Del.6660 39 [2020] ZACC 24 40 [1985] 2 SCR 53 41 [2010] ECHR 337 42 (1987) 1 SCR 1114
43 Id 45 [1985] ECHR 7 46 [1997] ECHR 6 47 Supra n.45 48 See also: Schuler-Zgraggen v.
Swizerland, [1993] ECHR 29; and Petrovic v. Austria, [1998] ECHR 21) Stereotype Roles and Right
to Options 49 Supra n.24 50 Supra n.15 51 Supra n.29 52 Supra n.30 53 (2020) 3 MLJ 388 (SC) 54
Pope Francis: Sport Has Great Value, Must be Honest, VATICAN RADIO (May 10, 2016)
http://en.radiovaticana.va/news/2016/10/05/pope_francis_sport_has_great_value_must_be_honest/12
63027 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis References:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 32
M. Sameeha Barvin vs The Joint Secretary on 20 December, 2021
Atrey, Shreya: Intersectional Discrimination , Oxford University Press (2019) Smith,
Ben: Intersectional Discrimination and Substantive Equality: A Comparative and
Theoretical Perspective , The Equal Rights Review , Volume 16, (2016) Elise C.Roy
Northeastern University, Boston, MA, Aiming for Inclusive Sport : the Legal and
Practical Implications of the United Nation's Disability Convention for Sport,
Recreation and Leisure for People with Disabilities, ISSN 1748-944X Convention on
the Rights of Persons with Disabilities - Articles https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/145830607/ 33
