M.Selva Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 December, 2021
M.Selva Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 December, 2021
Author: Pushpa Sathyanarayana
Bench: Pushpa Sathyanarayana, P.Velmurugan
WP (MD)No.19912/2021
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED : 02.12.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MRS. JUSTICE PUSHPA SATHYANARAYANA
AND
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.VELMURUGAN
W.A.(MD)No.19912 of 2021
M.Selva Kumar .. Petitioner
Vs.
1. Union of India
Rep. by its Principal Secretary
of the President of India,
Rastrapathi Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 003.
2. Union of India
Rep. by its Principal and Special Secretary
of Official Languages Department,
Home Ministry,
Lok Nayak Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 003.
3. Union of India
Rep. by its Principal Secretary of
Human Resource Development Ministry,
Lok Nayak Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 003.
4. Union of India
Rep. by its Principal Secretary
of Ministry of Parliament Affairs,
Parliament Building,
New Delhi-110 003.
5. The Secretary of Central Board of Education,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132638602/ 1
M.Selva Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 December, 2021
Sixaa Kendra, No.2, Community Centre,
Preeth Vigar, New Delhi-110092.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Page 1/16
(cid:12) WP (MD)No.19912/2021
6. The Commissioner of
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sankethan,
Head Office, Shakit Jee Sing Mark,
Sixaa Kendra, Preeth Vigar,
New Delhi-110 092.
7. State of Tamil Nadu
Rep. by its Secretary of
School Education Department,
St. George Fort,
Chennai-600 009.
8. The Zonal Executive Officer of
Central Board of School Education,
Chennai Zone, 3' J Block,
16th Main Road, Anna Nagar (West),
Chennai-600 040.
9. The Assistant Commissioner
of Kendriya Vidyala Sankethan,
Head Office of South Zone,
Indian Institute of Technology's Block,
Chennai-600 036. .. Respondents
***
Prayer : Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India
praying to issue a Writ of Mandamus (a) Directing the respondents 2 to 9
to make Tamil as the compulsory subject as a medium of instruction and
in the language category in all schools functioning under the Union
Government and its boards in Tamil Nadu ; (b) similarly other 20
languages which are followed as mother tongues of all other States are
the compulsory subject of the schools functioning under the Union
Governments be it Kendriya Vidyalaya, CBSE and other form of Schools
functioning under any banner under the authority of all respondents in
Union Government of India.
***
For Petitioner : Mr.M.Selva Kumar
Party-in-person
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Page 2/16
(cid:12) WP (MD)No.19912/2021
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132638602/ 2
M.Selva Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 December, 2021
For Respondents : Ms.Victoria Gowri,
Assistant Solicitor General of India
for RR 1 to 4
Mr.P.Karthick
for R5 & R8
Mr.P.Subbaraj,
Government Advocate for R7
Mr.E.T.Rajendran for R6 & R9
ORDER
PUSHPA SATHYANARAYANA, J.
Kg;gJ nfho KfKilahs; caph;
bkha;k;g[w bthd;Wilahs; ? ,ts;
brg;g[ bkhHpgjp bdl;Lil ahs;vdpw;
rpe;jid xd;Wilahs; ? ghujpahu;/ To translate in English verbatim, "She has 30 Crore faces, but in
spirit she is one.
She speaks 18 languages, but in thought she is one." Subramanya Bharathi - a Social Reformist
Tamil Poet and Polyglot Writer hails from Tuticorin District in Tamil Nadu, composed this song
about the Mother India, wherein, he lauded "unity in diversity", though 18 languages were spoken in
India with single thought. While celebrating Tamil language, he poetically wrote @ahkwpe;j
bkhHpfspny jkpH;bkhHp nghy; ,dpjhtJ v';Fk; fhnzhk;/@ https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
2. The petitioner, who is the son of the same soil, sought a direction to the respondents 2 to 9 to
make Tamil as the compulsory subject as a medium of instruction and in the language category in all
schools functioning under the Union Government and its boards in Tamil Nadu and also sought
further direction to make other 20 languages, which are followed as mother tongues of all other
States, as the compulsory subjects of the schools functioning under the Union Governments be it
Kendriya Vidyalaya, CBSE and other form of Schools functioning under any banner under the
authority of all respondents in the Government of India.
3. The petitioner, claims to be the ardent lover of Tamil, filed this writ petition pro bono publico
seeking the above directions. His grievance is that in Kendriya Vidyalaya Schools (KVs), which are
52 in number in Tamil Nadu and 1228 in the country come under the Central Board of School
Education (CBSE) and run by the Government of India, either the Tamil or the regional
language/mother tongue of the State is not taught even as an optional language, but, on the other
hand, Hindi and Sanskrit are being taught as a Medium of Instruction or one of the subjects, which
is a violation of the Constitutional scheme. According to him, about 13 lakhs students of the nation,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132638602/ 3
M.Selva Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 December, 2021
who constitute 73% of the total pupil population, are from non-Hindi speaking States and forcing
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis them to read Hindi or Sanskrit is tantamount to breach of their
fundamental rights. Thus, according to him, Tamil, being the oldest language declared as a
"Classical Language", should be made as compulsory subject and also medium of instruction in all
the schools functioning under the Government of India and its boards in the State of Tamil Nadu.
He sought similar direction to give similar treatment to other 20 languages, besides Hindi and
Sanskrit, listed in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution. He submitted a representation to the
respondents and some other higher officials making the said claim on 21.02.2021 followed by
e-mails of even date. He also sent reminder on 31.08.2021. Since there is no whisper from the
authorities, the petitioner relying upon certain newspaper reports to substantiate his claim, filed this
writ petition invoking the jurisdiction of this Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
4. Heard the Party-in-person, the learned Assistant Solicitor General of India appearing on behalf of
the Union of India and the CBSE, learned Government Advocate appearing on behalf of the State of
Tamil Nadu and also the learned counsel for the Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan.
5. The Party-in-Person contended that the reply dated 15.09.2021 obtained by him from the
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sangathan, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Regional Office, Chennai, under
the Right to Information Act shows the sorry state of affairs in the KVs, as Sanskrit and Hindi are
made as compulsory subjects from Class VI to Class VIII, while they are optional subjects among
five from Class IX, but Tamil is not a compulsory subject, much less not even taught as a subject to
those class students. It is his submission that while 101 Hindi Teachers and 50 Sanskrit Teachers are
employed in KVs in the State, not even a single Tamil Teacher is employed, as there is no necessity
for the same, which violates the fundamental rights of the students of the State. It is also submitted
that the Central Government have been expending huge sums of money to promote Sanskrit
language, such treatment was not given to the other Eighth Schedule languages, much less, Classical
languages, which is also again violative of the constitutional scheme.
6. It is to be stated that there were two limbs in the prayer made by the writ petitioner. The first one
pertains to Tamil language, while the second limb of the prayer relates to 20 other languages found
in the Eighth Schedule of the Constitution of India. This Court wonders as to how such a blanket
prayer could be made by the writ petitioner. Nevertheless, this Court has no jurisdiction to hear all
the stakeholders of the respective States and thus, we are of the view that this writ petition
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis is liable to be dismissed as not maintainable, insofar as the second
limb of the prayer is concerned.
7. Now coming to the first part of the prayer, there is no quarrel with regard to the status of Tamil
Language, which is the oldest language and declared as "Classical Language". There is no need to
prove the same by way of newspaper reports, which, howsoever reliable, trustworthy and authentic,
need not relied upon by this Court to arrive at a just decision in the instant case.
8. At this juncture, it is to be stated that the concept of establishment of Kendriya Vidyalayas is to
address the difficulties faced by the wards of transferable Central Government Employees, who have
to move from one place to another owing to their official requirements and a uniform school
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132638602/ 4
M.Selva Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 December, 2021
education system across the country is a necessity to those students to seamlessly continue their
education, irrespective of the transfer of their parents. Merely because one of the parents hailing
from other State has to serve in the State of Tamil Nadu, for a few years, their wards cannot be
forced to study Tamil as a Medium of Instruction, so also as a subject. Similarly, wards of Officers,
who hail from Tamil Nadu and serve in 'home' state, but later transferred to some other State,
cannot be expected to suffer by changing the medium of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Instruction from Tamil to Hindi or any other regional language of the State concerned. Even the
people of a particular State having the regional language of that State as mother tongue may settle
down in another State and their wards may not be in a position to read and write their mother
tongue.
9. In such backdrop, as a common scheme of education English is taught compulsorily from Classes
I to XII and Hindi is taught compulsorily from Classes I to VIII and it is optional in Classes XI and X
and the same can be chosen either as the second language or as an elective by the students in Classes
XI and XII. But, Sanskrit is mandatorily taught from Classes VI to VIII alone and it is optional to
classes IX and X. Article 111 of the Education Code for Kendriya Vidyalayas captioned 'Medium of
Instruction' clearly spells out that "the medium of instruction shall be Hindi and English. Separate
classes for Hindi and English medium shall be provided from class I to XII". Thus, it is the right of
the students to choose one of these two languages of their choice as medium of instruction through
their parents/guardians and the same cannot be found fault with, in view of the circumstances, in
which, the Officers are posed, i.e., their trasferrable nature of job, etc.,.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
10. Now coming to the question of making Tamil as a subject, it is to be stated that having felt the
need to provide platform for learning Regional language, as an additional measure within the broad
scheme of common school education, Article 112 has been introduced in the Education Code for
Kendriya Vidyalayas and there is absolutely no bar to teach Tamil or regional language in KVs, if 20
or more students opt for learning and the said provision reads as follows :
"Article 112. REGIONAL LANGUAGES : Additional arrangement for teaching of the
regional language / mother tongue shall be made, provided 20 or more students are
willing to opt for the same. For this, part-time contractual teacher shall be appointed
after obtaining sanction of the Dy. Commissioner. Teaching of these will be
introduced from class VI and will continue up to class VIII and where need be in class
IX and X also. The teaching will be during school hours for about two to three periods
per week. The teaching or regional language / mother tongue shall be stopped at the
end of February each year."
A reading of the above provision would go to show that additional arrangement for teaching of the
regional language / mother tongue could be made from class VI to VIII and where need be, it is
taught upto class X. Further, for making arrangement for teaching regional language / mother
tongue, 20 or more students have to opt it. This makes it amply clear that there are ways and means
for the students to read their mother tongue in KVs also. Keeping all these in mind, the option to
exercise the medium of instruction and the choice to read and study a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132638602/ 5
M.Selva Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis language judiciously is given to the parents/guardians and such
policy of the Government of India need not be interfered with by this Court.
11. At this juncture, it is apposite to quote the judgment of the First Bench of this Court dated
14.12.2015 made in WP No.16440 of 2014 (Majlis-E-Tahaffuz-E-Urudu, Tamil Nadu rep. by its
President K.Nasarullah V. Commissioner and Secretary to Government, Department of Education,
State of Tamil Nadu), in which, one of us (Pushpa Sathyanarayana, J.) is a party, wherein, this Court
dealt with the writ petition filed by a religious minority trust questioning the validity of Section 3(1)
of the Tamil Learning Act, 2006, as it entrenches the rights of minorities under Articles 29 and
30(1) of the Constitution of India to establish and administer educational institutions of their
choice. While dismissing the writ petition, it has been held as follows :
"8. The office memorandum dated 21.8.2014 was issued by the Ministry of Minority
Affairs calling for Action Taken Report. This was also in the context of the
requirements of all schools affiliated to CBSE to record in the admission form of the
students, the mother tongue of the child, the first language preferred and the optional
language, as also the requirement stipulated under Section 29(2)(f) of the Right of
Children to Free and Compulsory Education (RTE) Act, 2009 to provide for medium
of instructions to the students practicably in the child's mother tongue.
9. In pursuant to the responses received, the Ministry of Human Resources
Development has instructed all the schools affiliated to the Central Board of
Secondary Education by its letter dated 25.9.2014, to record the details of the mother
tongue of the child, preference of first https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis language and
optional language in the admission form itself so as to ensure that the children
belonging to linguistic minority groups are at the reach of the facility for instruction
in their mother tongue at the primary stage of education. It is also stated in the
comments passed by the Ministry of Human Resources Development that the
Government is actively considering bringing out a new policy on education and that
during the formulation stage, it will consult all stakeholders including linguistic
minorities.
.......
15. Introduction of provincial language is a matter of formulation of policy by the
State educational authorities. While fundamental right under Article 19(1)(g) is
subject to the reasonable restrictions that could be imposed by the State by virtue of
the power under Article 19(6), the fundamental right under Articles 29 and 30(1) is
subject to the power of the State Government to make regulations to regulate the
administration of the institutions.
16. The right guaranteed to religious and linguistic minorities by Article 30(1) is two
fold namely, (i) to establish and (ii) to administer educational institutions of their
choice. The administration of the educational institutions has certain limitation as it
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132638602/ 6
M.Selva Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 December, 2021
is subject to regulation by the State. The Hon'ble Supreme Court has, in a catena of
decisions, ruled that High Courts cannot interfere in the Government's policy
decisions since the scope of judicial review is limited in questioning such decisions.
17. One cannot dispute the proposition that policy decision alone can decide which
policy should be adopted after considering all points from different angles and hence,
there can be no second opinion that maintaining policy decisions must be left to the
Government.
18. Broadly, a policy decision is subject to judicial review on the following grounds :
"(a) if it is unconstitutional;
(b) if it is dehors the provisions of the Act and the
Regulations;
(c) if the delegatee has acted beyond its power of delegation;
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(d) if the executive policy is contrary to the statutory or a larger policy."
19. It is a settled principle of law that matters relating to framing and implementation of policy
primarily fall in the domain of the Government. It is an established requirement of good governance
that the Government should frame policies which are fair and beneficial to the public at large. Under
Article 162 of the Constitution, the State Government has executive powers co-extensive with its
legislative powers. As such, the State undoubtedly has powers to prescribe any course of study which
is in the interest of excellence in education. This power would certainly include the power to
prescribe language or languages, as course of study in the educational institutions." As held in the
aforesaid judgment, it is to be reiterated that the settled principle of law is that matters relating to
framing and implementation of policy primarily fall in the domain of the Government and it is an
established requirement of good governance that the Government should frame policies which are
fair and beneficial to the public at large.
12. We are reminisced of the fact that Subramanya Bharathi stated to be proficient in around 14
languages, which includes 3 non- Indian languages, i.e., foreign languages. It is widely known that
many Indians, including one of our former Prime Ministers, could speak more than a dozen
languages. There is no bar for anyone to learn as many as new languages as he or she wants to learn,
be it to speak alone, or read and write as well. In the present technical age, the globe became a
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis village and the smart new generation can read computer
languages, so also the language of their choice, irrespective of their age, if they have interest. It is for
the parents and after certain years, the students, who have to take a call on this issue and the Courts
cannot be expected to protrude into these aspects, which are within the domain of the policy-
makers and the people concerned.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132638602/ 7
M.Selva Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 December, 2021
13. Nevertheless, we are of the view that excepting collecting some paper and web news about the
beauty and glory of the Classical Tamil language, the petitioner has not undertaken any spade work
to file this writ petition seeking a prayer of this nature, which has ramifications on the future assets
of our nation, i.e., children. However, we are refraining from imposing any cost on him.
14. With the observations made hereinabove, the writ petition stands dismissed. No costs.
(P.S.N., J.) (P.V., J.)
02.12.2021
Index : Yes / No
Internet: Yes
gg
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
To
1. The Principal Secretary
of the President of India,
Union of India,
Rastrapathi Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 003.
2. The Principal and Special Secretary,
Official Languages Department,
Home Ministry,
Union of India,
Lok Nayak Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 003.
3. The Principal Secretary,
Human Resource Development Ministry,
Union of India,
Lok Nayak Bhavan,
New Delhi-110 003.
4. The Principal Secretary,
Ministry of Parliament Affairs,
Union of India,
Parliament Building,
New Delhi-110 003.
5. The Secretary,
Central Board of Education,
Sixaa Kendra, No.2, Community Centre,
Preeth Vigar, New Delhi-110092.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132638602/ 8
M.Selva Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 December, 2021
6. The Commissioner,
Kendriya Vidyalaya Sankethan,
Head Office, Shakit Jee Sing Mark,
Sixaa Kendra, Preeth Vigar,
New Delhi-110 092.
7. The Principal Secretary,
School Education Department,
Government of Tamil Nadu,
Fort St. George,
Chennai-600 009.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
8. The Zonal Executive Officer,
Central Board of School Education,
Chennai Zone, 3' J Block,
16th Main Road, Anna Nagar (West),
Chennai-600 040.
9. The Assistant Commissioner,
Kendriya Vidyala Sankethan,
Head Office of South Zone,
Indian Institute of Technology's Block,
Chennai-600 036.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
PUSHPA SATHYANARAYANA, J.
AND
P.VELMURUGAN, J.
gg
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132638602/ 9
M.Selva Kumar vs Union Of India on 2 December, 2021
02.12.2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/132638602/ 10
