Mahant Subash Shah vs Kulbir Singh &Anr on 31 May, 2023
Mahant Subash Shah vs Kulbir Singh &Anr on 31 May, 2023
Author: Javed Iqbal Wani
Bench: Javed Iqbal Wani
Sr.No.
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
AA No. 2/2023
CM No. 1510/2023
Mahant Subash Shah ....Appellant(s)/ Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. U K Jalali, Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Shivani Jalali, Advocate
V/s
Kulbir Singh &Anr ....Respondent(s)
Through :- None
Coram: HON(cid:128)BLE MR. JUSTICE JAVED IQBAL WANI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
31.05.2023 (ORAL)
1. The instant appeal has been filed by the appellant herein, against order dated 15.02.2023, under
an in terms of Section 37 of the Arbitration and Conciliation Act 1996(for short 'the Act(cid:128)) for setting
aside of order dated 15.02.2023 (for short „the impugned order(cid:128)) passed by the Court of Additional
District Judge, Jammu (for short „the Court below(cid:128)) in case titled as "Kulbir Singh vs Mahant
Subah Shah."
2. Upon coming up this appeal for consideration, the counsel for the appellant came to be directed
to address on the question of maintainability of the appeal in the first instance.
3. Mr. U. K. Jalali, Senior Advocate appearing for the appellant, in response to the question of
maintainability of the instant appeal would contend that though the order under challenge in the
instant appeal is not provided to be an appealable order under Section 37 of the Act of 1996, yet the
same can be treated and converted either into a revision petition or else a petition under Article 227
of the Constitution. The counsel for the appellant in support of his submissions relied upon to the
judgments of the Apex Court passed in case titled as "(Col.) Anil Kak (Retd.) vs Municipal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139415229/ 1
Mahant Subash Shah vs Kulbir Singh &Anr on 31 May, 2023
Corporation, Indore, reported in 2005 (12) SCC 734" and in case titled as "Kiran Devi vs The Bihar
State Sunni Wakf Board & Ors, reported in AIR 2021 SC 195". Besides the aforesaid judgments, the
judgment passed by this Court in case titled as "President D.A.V College Managing Committee vs
Poonam Mahajan and Ors., reported in Jammu Kashmir Law Times, 2018 (3) 646" also came to be
relied upon by the counsel.
4. Before proceeding to deal with the submissions made by Mr. Jalali, a brief background of the case
hereunder becomes imperative.
5. The parties herein for resolving their disputes with respect to various properties, appointed
respondent 2 herein as Sole Arbitrator on the basis of an Arbitration Clause contained in an
agreement having been entered into between the parties. The nominated Arbitrator passed an
Award on 10.02.2013. Aggrieved of the said Award, the respondent-1 herein filed an application
under Section 34 of the Act accompanied with an application for condonation of delay before the
court below.
6. The Court below upon considering the aforesaid application for condonation of delay and taking
into consideration response thereto from the non-applicant appellant herein, condoned the delay in
terms of the impugned order allowing the application for condonation of delay.
7. Having regard to the nature of issue being dealt with by this Court, a reference to Section 37 and
Section 5 of the Act becomes necessary.
"S.37. Appealable orders-
(1) An appeal shall lie from the following orders (and from no others) to the Court
authorized by law to hear appeals from original decrees of the Court passing the
order namely:-
(a) Granting or refusing to grant any measure under Section 6:
(b) Setting aside or refusing to set aside an arbitral award under Section 34.
(2) An appeal shall also lie to a court from an order of the arbitral tribunal-
(a) Accepting the plea referred to in sub-section (2) or sub-section(3) of Section 16: or
(b) Granting or refusing to grant an interim measure under Section 17.
(3) No second appeal shall lie from an order passed in appeal under this section, but
nothing in this section shall affect or take away any right to appeal to the Supreme
Court."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139415229/ 2
Mahant Subash Shah vs Kulbir Singh &Anr on 31 May, 2023
What emanates from a plain reading of Section 37 of the Act is that the legislature by using
expression an appeal shall lie from the orders provided therein „and from no others(cid:128) has taken away
the right to appeal against all orders except specified in Section 37 (1) and (2) and the words 'and
from no others(cid:128) although not present in sub-section (2) of Section 37 also qualify the scope of
appeals against the orders of the arbitral Tribunal under Section 37 (2).
"S.5. Extent of Judicial Intervention.
Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in force, in
matters governed by this Part, no judicial authority shall intervene except where so
provided in this Part."
What emerges from Section 5 supra is that the extent of judicial intervention has been
circumscribed to the extent as provided in the Act itself or in other words judicial intervention is
prohibited except as provided for in the Act. Therefore, judicial intervention having been
circumscribed, the Courts cannot interfere at any or every stage or on a ground other than those
available in the Act itself. The object behind this prohibition is to reduce the time and avoid the
procedural hazards of an ordinary litigation before a Court.
Thus a conjoint reading of Section 37 read with Section 5 of the Act would seem to indicate that with
respect to the matters where there does not exist any further right of appeal under the Act, a party
will not be allowed to invoke a remedy other than one provided under the Act and to defeat the
object of minimizing judicial intervention either at pre-award stage or post award stage.
A reference hereunder to the judgment of the Apex Court in case titled as "S.B.P & Co. vs Patel
Engineering Ltd and Another, reported in (2005) 8 SCC 618" also would be advantageous wherein
at paras 45 and 46 following has been held:-
"45. It is seen that some High Courts have proceeded on the basis that any order
passed by an Arbitral Tribunal during arbitration, would be capable of being
challenged under Article 226 or 227 of the Constitution. We see no warrant for such
an approach. Section 37 makes certain orders of the Arbitral Tribunal appealable.
Under Section 34, the aggrieved party has an avenue for ventilating its grievances
against the award including any in-between orders that might have been passed by
the Arbitral Tribunal acting under Section 16 of the Act. The party aggrieved by any
order of the Arbitral Tribunal, unless has a right of appeal under Section 37 of the
Act, has to wait until the award is passed by the Tribnunal. This appears to be the
scheme of the Act. The Arbitral Tribunal s, after all, a creature of a contract between
the parties, the arbitration agreement, even though, if the occasion arises, the Chief
Justice may constitute it based on the contract between the parties. But that would
not alter the status of the Arbitral Tribunal. It will still be a forum chosen by the
parties by agreement. We, therefore, disapprove of the stand adopted by some of the
High Courts that any order passed by the Arbitral Tribunal is capable of being
corrected by the High Court under Article 226 or 227 of the Constitution. Such an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139415229/ 3
Mahant Subash Shah vs Kulbir Singh &Anr on 31 May, 2023
intervention by the high Courts is not permissible.
46. The object of minimizing judicial intervention while the matter is in the process
of being arbitrated upon, will certainly be defeated if the High Court could be
approached under Article 227 or under Article 226 of the Constitution against every
order made by the Arbitral Tribunal. Therefore, it is necessary to indicate that once
the arbitration has commenced in the Arbitral Tribunal, parties have to wait until the
award is pronounced unless, of course, a right of appeal is available to time under
Section 37 of the Act even at an earlier state."
In the light of the aforesaid position of law qua the Act being special legislation governing the
disputes arising out of arbitration proceedings and as legislature having in its wisdom not provided
any appeal or revision against an order allowing an application for condonation of delay
accompanying an application filed under section 34 of the Act, this Court sees no reason to entertain
the instant appeal against such an order having being filed under Section 37 of the Act or else to
convert the same into a revision petition, as such, revisional jurisdiction cannot be exercised for
correcting wrong decisions of the Court below as a matter of course inasmuch as, to interfere with
such a discretionary order of condoning of delay. Furthermore, the instant appeal could not even be
converted into a petition under Article 227 of the Constitution in the light of the principles of law
laid down by the Apex Court in "S.B.P & Co." case supra as also in view of the ambit and scope of
supervisory jurisdiction enshrined under Article 227 of the Constitution laid down by the Apex
Court in case titled as "Shalini Shyam Shetty vs Rajendra Shankar Patil, reported in (2010) 8 SCC
329."
8. Having regard to the aforesaid position of law laid down by the Apex Court, the judgments supra
relied upon by Mr. Jalali, do not lend any support to the case of the appellant and same pale into
insignificance
9. Viewed thus, what has been observed, considered and analyzed, the instant appeal is held to be
not maintainable and further the prayer of the counsel of the appellant for conversion of the appeal
either into a revision petition under Section 115 CPC or else a petition under Article 227 of the
Constitution is rejected.
10. The appeal is, accordingly, dismissed along with all connected application(s).
(Javed Iqbal Wani) Judge Jammu:
31.05.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes Whether the order is reportable:
Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139415229/ 4
