Mahesh Kushwah vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 4 January, 2019
Mahesh Kushwah vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 4
January, 2019
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
WA.09.2019
[Mahesh Kushwah Vs. State of M.P. and others]
1
Gwalior, Dated : 04.01.2019
Shri S.K. Shrivastava, learned counsel for
the appellant.
Heard on admission.
This appeal under Section 2(1) of the
Madhya Pradesh Uchcha Nyayalaya (Khand
Nyayapeeth Ko Appeal) Adhiniyam, 2005, is
directed against the order dated 17.12.2018
passed in WP.8196/2015.
The relevant facts briefly are that:
Having lost his father, a class IV employee of
Municipal Council, Ganjbasoda, Vidisha (M.P.), on
16.04.2015, the appellant on 22.05.2015 applied
for appointment on compassionate ground. On
14.09.2015, an order was passed; whereby, the
appellant was appointed against the vacant post
of Class IV reserved for direct recruitment in
grade Rs.4440-7440+1300. The appellant vide
representation dated 18.09.2015 sought
appointment on Class III post on the ground of he
being Master of Science in Computer. The
request was not acceded to. That by letter dated
09/10/2015 the appellant was called upon to
report joining within seven days, failing which, it
was informed that, the appointment order will be
withdrawn. The appellant reported joining. The
appellant thereafter filed a Writ Petition
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
WA.09.2019
[Mahesh Kushwah Vs. State of M.P. and others]
2
No.8196/2015 for direction to change the order
dated 14.09.2015 in place of Peon to that of Clerk
from the date of his joining as Peon with
consequential benefits. The relief being declined
by order dated 17/12/2018 has led the petitioner
file present Writ Appeal.
While turning down the relief sought,
learned Single Judge observed:
"Now, the next question for
determination is that whether the
petitioner is entitled for appointment as
per Clause 5.1 of the Policy for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62210085/ 1
Mahesh Kushwah vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 4 January, 2019
appointment on a higher post on
compassionate ground or not?
Clause 5.1 of the Policy reads as
under:-
^^vuqdaik fu;qfDr vH;FkhZ }kjk /kkfjr ;ksX;rk ,oa
vgZrk ds vk/kkj ij lh/kh Hkjrh ds fjDr fuEurj
in ij nh tkosxh&;Fkk lgk;d xzsM&3 rFkk
led{k in] lafonk 'kkyk f'k{kd ,oa :i;s
3500&5200 ¼5200&20200$2100 xzsM is½ rd
osrueku okys vU; dk;Zikfyd inkas ¼yksd lsok
vk;ksx ds dk;Z{ks= ds inksa dks NksM+dj½ ij Hkh
vuqdaik fu;qfDr nh tk ldsxh] buesa okMZC;kWo]
iVokjh okf.kfT;d dj foHkkx ds v/khu iath;u
fyfid ¼dk;Zikfyd½ LokLF; foHkkx ds fofHkUu in]
Mªk;oj] rduhdh in Hkh 'kkfey gS] c'krsZ vko';d
rduhdh ;ksX;rk j[krk gksA^^
Thus, it is clear that a person is
entitled for appointment on the lowest
post of a particular cadre in accordance
with his educational qualification and
eligibility. According to the petitioner, he
is entitled for appointment on the lowest
post of Class-III cadre. According to the
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
WA.09.2019
[Mahesh Kushwah Vs. State of M.P. and others]
3
respondents, the post of LDC which has
been re-designated as Assistant Grade-III, is the lowest post of Class-III cadre. For the said post,
Typing is essential. Since the petitioner does not hold the minimum qualification and eligibility for
holding the post of LDC (Assistant Grade-III), therefore, he could not have been given appointment
on the said post and thus, he has been rightly given appointment on the post of peon.
It is submitted by the counsel for the petitioner that even the post of Revenue Sub-Inspector was
also vacant and passing of Hindi Typing Examination is not essential for the said post. Thus, the
petitioner could have been given appointment on the post of Revenue Sub- Inspector, as was done
by the respondents on an earlier occasion by giving appointment to Sudhir Upadhyay on the said
post. The counsel for the petitioner has failed to point out that the post of Revenue Sub-Inspector is
also the lowest post in the Class-III Cadre. As per the policy, a person is entitled for his appointment
on the lowest post of particular cadre and not for any post of particular cadre. Thus, the petitioner
cannot be given appointment on the post of Revenue Sub-Inspector.
So far as the fact that the respondents had earlier given appointment on compassionate ground to
another employee on the post of Revenue Sub-Inspector is concerned, suffice it to say that the
principle of negative equality cannot be applied and until and unless the petitioner points out that
he is eligible for appointment on the post of Revenue THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
WA.09.2019 [Mahesh Kushwah Vs. State of M.P. and others] Sub-Inspector, no direction can be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62210085/ 2
Mahesh Kushwah vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 4 January, 2019
given to the respondents.
It is next contended by the counsel for the petitioner that according to the policy where the posts are
not vacant, then as per Clause 7.5 of the Policy, the application should have been sent to Head of the
Department or as per Clause 7.7 of the Policy, the application should have been forwarded to the
Secretary/ Principal Secretary of any Department in which the posts are vacant. The submission
made by the counsel for the petitioner cannot be accepted, because as per Clause 5.4 of the Policy, if
the candidate does not have the qualification for holding the Class-III post and if he can be
appointed on Class-IV post, then he shall be given appointment on compassionate ground on
Class-IV post.
In the present case, according to the respondents, the petitioner does not possess the minimum
qualification for appointment on the lowest post of Class- III cadre and accordingly, by virtue of
class 5.4 of the Policy he has been granted appointment on the post of peon. It is further submitted
by the counsel for the respondents that the appointment on compassionate ground is not the
alternative mode of direct recruitment and the petitioner cannot seek his compassionate
appointment on a particular post. To buttress their submissions, the counsel for the respondents
have relied upon the judgment passed by the Supreme Court in the case of State of Bihar and Others
vs. Samsuz Zoha and Others, reported in (1996) 4 SCC 546, in which the Supreme THE HIGH
COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH WA.09.2019 [Mahesh Kushwah Vs. State of M.P. and others]
Court has held as under:-
''4. The question that arises for consideration is whether the High Court is right in
giving directions to appoint them afresh or give them promotion? It is not in dispute
that there is no right vested in the candidates for particular appointment on
compassionate grounds. The State had taken policy decision to appoint all the
candidates irrespective of the qualifications as Class IV post and, therefore, the
committee consisting of the Secretary, Addl. Secretary and the Registrar met and
decided the principle that all the available posts in Class IV should be made available
to the candidates in the awaiting list for appointment on compassionate grounds. 12
posts available in Class III were reserved for appointment by promotion to the Class
IV candidates who were entitled thereto as per the rules. The principle adopted by the
Government cannot be said to be unjustified or illegal. Undoubtedly, some
candidates had gone to the Court and obtained orders and in compliance thereof, a
pain of contempt petition, the Government, instead of appointing them to Class IV
posts since by then the Class III posts were not available, upgraded Class IV post as
Class III post and confirmed them as Class III employees. That order which was
wrongly made by the High Court cannot be a base to issue directions. THE HIGH
COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH WA.09.2019 [Mahesh Kushwah Vs. State of M.P.
and others] In other words, if the directions are complied with all the Class IV posts
would be converted into Class III posts which is against the discipline of the service.
The High Court, therefore, was not justified an issuing directions in all the cases for
appointment to Class III post.'' Considering the submissions made by the counsel for
the parties, this Court is of the considered opinion that the respondents have not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62210085/ 3
Mahesh Kushwah vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 4 January, 2019
committed any illegality by giving appointment to the petitioner on the post of peon."
Placing reliance on Clause 6.5 of the policy, it is submitted on behalf of appellant that
even if the appellant was not eligible he ought to have been appointed on Class III
post subject to condition of his acquiring the requisite qualification. Clause 6.5
provides for:
^^6-5 fnoaxr 'kkldh; lsod ds vkfJr dks lgk;d xzsM&3 ds in ij vuqdaik fu;qfDr ds fy;s
dEI;wVj fMIYkksek rFkk dEI;wVj Vk;fiax n{krk izek.k i= ijh{kk ekU;rk izkIr laLFkk ls
mRrh.kZ fd;s tkus gsrq 3 o"kZ dk le; fn;k tkosxkA rhu o"kZ esa Hkh okafNr ijh{kk,a
mRrh.kZ u djus ij lacaf/kr deZpkjh }kjk ijh{kk,a mRrh.kZ djus ds iz;klksa vkSj
Vk;fiax {kerk tks vfTkZr dh xbZ gks] dks ns[krs gq, fu;ksDrk vf/kdkjh }kjk ,d o"kZ dh
vof/k vkSj c<+kbZ tk ldrh gSA bl vof/k ds O;rhr gksus ij Hkh lacaf/kr deZpkjh }kjk
okafNr ijh{kk,a mRrh.kZ u djus ij mudh lsok,a lekIRk dh tk ldsaxhA^^ The
submissions though attractive still are of no assistance to the appellant for
appointment THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH WA.09.2019 [Mahesh
Kushwah Vs. State of M.P. and others] on higher post. The compassionate
appointment is not a vested right. It is a concession. For an authority, please see
"Punjab National Bank and others Vs. Ashwini Kumar Taneja [(2004) 7 SCC 265]"
wherein it is held:
"4. ......appointment on compassionate ground is not a source of recruitment but
merely an exception to the requirement regarding appointments being made on open
invitation of application on merits.
Basic intention is that on the death of the employee concerned his family is not deprived of the
means of livelihood. The object is to enable the family to get over sudden financial crises."
In "Union Bank of India and others Vs. M.T. Latheesh [(2006) 7 SCC 350]", it is held:
"17. When an employee dies, any one of the dependents mentioned in clause 2 (c) of
the appointment on compassionate ground scheme formulated by the Bank can
forward an application as per the said Scheme. Consequently, the dependent does not
automatically become entitled to get employment. The right that accrues on the
applicant is a right to get preferential treatment against the general principle of
appointment, subject to the discretion of the Bank. Further the possession of relevant
qualification does not create any vested right on the applicant to get appointed to a
post specified by the Scheme."
In "Steel Authority of India Limited Vs. Madhusudan Das and others [(2008) 15 SCC THE HIGH
COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH WA.09.2019 [Mahesh Kushwah Vs. State of M.P. and others]
560"], it is held:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62210085/ 4
Mahesh Kushwah vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 4 January, 2019
"15. This Court in a large number of decisions has held that the appointment on
compassionate ground cannot be claimed as a matter of right. It must be provided for
in the rules. The criteria laid down therefor, viz., that the death of the sole bread
earner of the family, must be established. It is meant to provide for a minimum relief.
When such contentions are raised, the constitutional philosophy of equality behind
making such a scheme be taken into consideration. Articles 14 and 16 of the
Constitution of India mandate that all eligible candidates should be considered for
appointment in the posts which have fallen vacant. Appointment on compassionate
ground offered to a dependant of a deceased employee is an exception to the said
rule. It is a concession, not a right. (See SBI v. Anju Jain (2008) 8 SCC 475, para 33.)"
In "State of Rajasthan Vs. Umrao Singh [(1994) 6 SCC 560]", it is held:-
"8. Admittedly the respondent's father died in harness while working as Sub- Inspector, CID
(Special Branch) on 16.3.1988. The respondent filed an application on 8.4.1988 for his appointment
on compassionate ground as Sub-Inspector or LDC according to the availability of vacancy. On a
consideration of his plea, he was appointed to the post of LDC by order dated 14.12.1989. He
accepted the appointment as LDC. Therefore, the right to be considered for the appointment on
compassionate ground was consummated. No further THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
WA.09.2019 [Mahesh Kushwah Vs. State of M.P. and others] consideration on compassionate
ground would ever arise. Otherwise, it would be a case of "endless compassion". Eligibility to be
appointed as Sub-Inspector of Police is one thing, the process of selection is yet another thing.
Merely because of the so- called eligibility, the learned Single Judge of the High Court was
persuaded to the view that direction be issued under proviso to Rule 5 of Rules which has no
application to the facts of this case.
9. Since both the sides relied on Naresh Kumar Bali's case (supra), we will now refer to the same. We
had indicated our mind in that very ruling in paragraph 15 of the said judgment. It reads as under:
Though the respondent claimed that he had applied for the post of a teacher the
Subordinate Service Selection Board had not chosen him for the post of a Teacher
because he did not have the requisite qualification. In fact, the respondent did not
object to his appointment as a Clerk and his claim for consideration for the post of
Teacher was one year after his appointment. Thus, the appointment on
compassionate ground as per the scheme had been completed. (emphasis supplied)
Therefore, once the right has consummated as we indicated earlier, any further or
second consideration for a higher post on the ground of compassion would not arise."
Once it is held that the appointment on compassionate ground is not a vested right
but is THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH WA.09.2019 [Mahesh Kushwah
Vs. State of M.P. and others] a concession, an offer made to an incumbent for an
appointment on a particular post with the stipulation that if he does not join within a
stipulated period, the offer will stand cancelled, in our considered opinion, cannot be
construed to be that the incumbent is compelled to join. Because the order of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62210085/ 5
Mahesh Kushwah vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 4 January, 2019
appointment being an offer, it is still open for the incumbent not to accept the same.
Having accepted, he cannot later on turn around and say that he has been compelled
to join. In view whereof, we do not approve the observation by learned Single Judge
in the impugned order that "this Court is of the considered opinion that merely
because the petitioner has joined on the post of peon, would not be estopped from
claiming his appointment on a higher post as per the policy for appointment on
compassionate ground."
In view whereof, we do not perceive any illegality or perversity in the impugned
order. Subject to the modification, no indulgence is caused.
Consequently, appeal fails and is dismissed. No costs.
(Sanjay Yadav) (Vivek Agarwal)
Judge Judge
pd
PAWAN
DHARKAR
2019.01.1
0 18:16:17
-08'00'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62210085/ 6
