Maisnam Korouhanba Luwang vs State Of Manipur on 5 June, 2023
Maisnam Korouhanba Luwang vs State Of Manipur on 5 June,
2023
Author: A. Guneshwar Sharma
Bench: A. Guneshwar Sharma
Digitally
LAIREN signed by
MAYUM LAIRENMAYU
M INDRAJEET
INDRAJ SINGH
Date:
EET 2023.06.05
SINGH 15:59:22
+05'30'
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
CRIL.PETN. No. 26 of 2022
With
MC(Cril.P.) No. 27 of 2022
Maisnam Korouhanba Luwang, aged about 41 years, S/O Maisnam
Joychandra, resident of Keishamthong Top Leirak, P.O. & P.S. Imphal,
District- Imphal West, Manipur.
... Petitioner/Applicant
- Versus -
1. State of Manipur, represented by the Principal Secretary (Home),
Government of Manipur, Old Secretariat Building, Babupara, Imphal West
District, Manipur- 795001.
2. The Officer-in-Charge, Imphal Police Station, Babupara, Imphal West
District, Manipur- 795001.
3. JEM. M. Bono Singh (J.C No. 638), Ragailong, Commando Complex,
Imphal West District, Manipur.
... Respondents
BEFORE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A. GUNESHWAR SHARMA For the petitioner : Mr. H. Kenajit &
Mr. Albert Keisham, Advocates For the respondent : Mr. H. Samarjit, P.P. Date of Hearing :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163882820/ 1
Maisnam Korouhanba Luwang vs State Of Manipur on 5 June, 2023
02.05.2023 Date of Judgment & Order : 05.06.2023 JUDGMENT & ORDER [1] Heard Mr. H.
Kenajit, learned counsel for the petitioner, assisted by Mr. Albert Keisham, Advocate; and Mr. H.
Samarjit, learned PP for the State. [2] The petitioner herein approached this Court by an application
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. for quashing F.I.R. No. 208 (04) 2012 IPS u/S 17/20 Unlawful Activities
(Prevention) Act. It is stated that the petitioner is presently running a business of mobile food truck
and is a family man taking care of his old aged parents, wife and two minor sons, and he is the only
bread earner of the family and his wife is helping him in the food truck business. The petitioner was
arrested on 21.04.2012 in connection with F.I.R No. 208 (04) 2012 IPS u/S 17/20 UA(P) Act and the
learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Imphal West, released him on bail on 30.04.2012. It is also stated
that respondent No. 3 arbitrarily arrested the petitioner without any material only on the ground
that he was carrying Rs. 90,000/- (Rupees Ninety Thousand) with him. It is further stated that
there is no prima facie case against the petitioner and there is no progress in the investigation since
his arrest 10 years ago. It is stated that the petitioner has been picked up from his residence on every
Independence Day and Republic Day i.e. 15th August and 26th January every year by the police and
took photographs in full public view and hence, his prestige and reputation has been tarnished in
the society. In the F.I.R., it is alleged that the petitioner was a member of a banned militant outfit
PLA/RPF. Since there is no progress in the investigation for more than 10 years, it is prayed that
name of the petitioner may be quashed or deleted from the FIR or direct the respondents to file
charge sheet within a time frame. The relevant portion of the prayer is reproduced below :-
"iii) to quash/delete the name of the petitioner from the impugned FIR No. 208(04)
2012 IPS u/s 17/20 UA(P) Act (Annexure Q/2);
or to direct the respondents to file charge sheet against the petitioner within a time frame;"
[3] The petitioner also filed an application being MC(Cril.Petn.) No. 27 of 2022 inter
alia praying that during the pendency of Cril.Petn. No. 26 of 2022, the State
respondents may be directed not to pick up the petitioner and wrongfully detain him
in custody in the guise of F.I.R No. 208 (04) 2012 IPS u/S 17/20 UA(P) Act on the
ground that such routine detention of the petitioner on the eve of 26th January and
15th August every year and also during the visit of high dignitaries, violates his right
of live with dignity and his right of privacy.
[4] The State respondents submits that the petitioner was arrested for being a
member of the illegal unlawful band outfit PLA/RPF and from his possession, Rs.
90,000/- (Rupees Ninety Thousand) was recovered in cash from his possession. He
used to collect money from various departments and businessman and transferred
the same to the organization as party fund after retaining his percentage. As the State
of Manipur is an insurgency prone State, there has to be strict vigilance and
surveillance over the movement of cadres or members of outlawed organizations,
especially on the occasions of Independence Day and Republic Day. Accordingly, the
petitioner being a bail-out member of PLA/RPF, the police makes some queries about
his life after releasing him on bail and states that he was never arrested or detained.
It is also stated that there are sufficient materials against the petitioner in the FIR. It
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163882820/ 2
Maisnam Korouhanba Luwang vs State Of Manipur on 5 June, 2023
is stated that the petitioner ought to approach the concerned Special Court under the
provisions of Cr.P.C. for calling status of investigation and expediting the same,
instead of approaching this Court for quashing FIR. It is also clarified that the
investigation took a long time as associates of the petitioner are yet to be arrested and
necessary steps will be taken up to complete the investigation as soon as possible. [5]
The petitioner filed rejoinder affidavit to the counter affidavit of the State
respondents and stated that he was implicated in the FIR with mere suspicion
without any evidentiary materials and on the basis of concocted story. On the other
hand, the investigation could not be completed for more than 10 years. The petitioner
has been picked up repeatedly on several occasions such as the Independence Day,
Republic Day and during the visit of high dignitaries and detained the whole night in
the custody of the police. Inability to complete the investigation for more than 10
years shows that there is no evidence against the petitioner and it is a fit case for
quashing the FIR. [6] Mr. H. Kenajit, learned counsel for the petitioner, submits that
there is no progress in the investigation at all for a period of more than 10 years and
during the pendency, the petitioner who leads a normal life by doing a food stall and
maintaining a family has been harassing on occasion of Republic & Independence
Day and visit of high dignitaries and he has been picked up from his residence by the
police and this lowers his dignity in the society. After the filing of MC(Cril.Petn.) No.
27 of 2022 and during the pendency of the present petition, the police has stopped
picking up from his residence. The plea of calling the petitioner to enquire his well
being, cannot be sustained, as he was usually picked up by police from his residence
and took photographs in full public view. It is stated that he was treated as an
accused involved in a heinous crime on the basis of an FIR registered a decade ago
with no progress in the investigation. It is emphasizing that such treatment violates
the petitioner's right to privacy and dignity as enshrined under Article 21 of the
Constitution. Since the FIR does not disclose any material for the involvement of the
petitioner and also inability to complete the investigation for more than 10 years, Mr.
H. Kenajit, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that this is a perfect case
for quashing the FIR. If this Court is not willing to quash the FIR at this stage, Mr. H.
Kenajit, learned counsel, submits that a definite time frame may be given to the
investigating agency to complete the investigation. He draws the attention of this
Court to an order dated 17.10.2022 passed by this Court in CRIL.PETN. No. 31 of
2021 where FIR registered way back in the year 2009 FIR relating to offence of
kidnapping, murder and Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, was handed over to the
CBI directing to complete the investigation and file a final report/charge-sheet before
the competent Court within a period of 6(six) months from the date of receipt of the
order. It is submitted that in the present case also, direction for completing the
investigation within a period of 6(six) months may be given to the investigating
agency. Mr. H. Kenajit, learned counsel, also submits that as prayed in
MC(Cril.Petn.) No. 27 of 2022, the State respondents may be directed not to pick up
the petitioner and wrongfully detain in their custody in connection with F.I.R No.
208 (04) 2012 IPS u/S 17/20 UA(P) Act on the occasions of Independence Day,
Republic Day or visit of high dignitaries to the State.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163882820/ 3
Maisnam Korouhanba Luwang vs State Of Manipur on 5 June, 2023
[7] Mr. H. Samarjit, learned PP for the State submits that an investigation involving
offences under UA(P) Act cannot be quashed on mere technicalities and the
involvement of the petitioner has to be established after due investigation. He further
submits that as clarified in the counter affidavit, the investigation could not be
completed as other associates of the petitioner could not be arrested and the State
endeavor to complete the investigation as soon as possible.
[8] Learned PP has objected to the prayer made in the misc. application being
MC(Cril.Petn.) No. 27 of 2022 to restrain the police from picking up the petitioner on
account of every Republic Day, Independence Day and visit of high dignitaries. It is
clarified that the petitioner was not arrested or picked up as alleged in the
application. Since Manipur is an insurgent prone State and the bail-out surrendered
militants are called on to the police station to enquire about their well-being and for
counselling purpose. Learned PP also draws attention of this Court to the order dated
17.10.2022 in Cril.Petn. No. 31 of 2021 where this Court was not inclined to quash the
FIR on mere technicalities and directed to complete the investigation within 6(six)
months. He also prays that the present petition and the application may be rejected
being devoid of any merit.
[9] It will be fruitful to discuss case laws on the right to live with dignity. In the
celebrated case of Kharak Singh v. State of UP reported as MANU/SC/0085/1962:
AIR 1963 SC 1295, a five Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court considered the
validity of domiciliary visits by police under Regulation 236 of the UP Police
Regulations which authorised visit during night time to the residence of the person
under surveillance (bad character and history sheeter in police record). It was held
that such a provision violated the personal liberty to live with dignity guaranteed
under Article 21 of the Constitution. Para 38 is reproduced for a clear understanding.
"38. ...... If physical restraints on a person's movements affect his personal liberty,
physical encroachments on his private life would affect it in a larger degree. Indeed,
nothing is more deleterious to a man's physical happiness and health than a
calculated interference with his privacy. We would, therefore, define the right of
personal liberty in Art. 21 as a right of an individual to be free from restrictions or
encroachments on his person, whether those restrictions or encroachments are
directly imposed or indirectly brought about by calculated measures. If so
understood, all the acts of surveillance under Regulation 236 infringe the
fundamental right of the petitioner under Art. 21 of the Constitution."
[10] In the recent case of KS Puttuswamy v. Union of India: (2017) 10 SCC 1, a 9 Judge Constitution
Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that the right to privacy and to live with dignity is a facet
of personal liberty as enshrined in Article 21 of the Constitution. In the case of Danial Latifi v. Union
of India: (2001) 7 SCC 740, it was observed that 'right to live with dignity' is included in 'right to life
and personal liberty'.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163882820/ 4
Maisnam Korouhanba Luwang vs State Of Manipur on 5 June, 2023
[11] From the perusal of the record, it is seen that the investigation of the FIR lodged in the year
2012 could not be completed till date and it seems that there is no much progress in the
investigation. The only explanation given by the State authorities is that associates of the present
petitioner could not be arrested and hence, the matter could not be completed. On the other hand,
this Court is conscious of the fact that the offences under UA(P) Act are serious one relating to the
security of the nation and FIR cannot be quashed on mere technicalities without going to the
complete merit of the case. The main prayer in the cril. petition is for quashing of the F.I.R No. 208
(04) 2012 IPS u/S 17/20 UA(P) Act or to direct the respondents to file charge-sheet within a time
frame. This Court is of the view that it will be appropriate and suffice if this Court directs the
respondents to complete the investigation within a period of 6(six) months from the date of receipt
of this order and submit a report under Section 173 Cr.P.C. to the concerned Court. It is also
clarified that if the presence of the petitioner is required by the Investigating Agency in connection
with the FIR or for any reason, a notice in the nature of Section 41-A Cr.P.C. be issued to the
petitioner for his appearance before the Investigating Authority on a particular date. In case, the
petitioner fails to appear before the Investigating Officer, necessary steps may be taken up by the
police for effecting his appearance. This direction is issued keeping in mind the settled principles of
law of maintaining the intricate balance between the fundamental right to live with dignity of a
citizen vis-à-vis the affairs of security of the State. It may be pertinent to observe here that Court
ought not to pass any sort of order which may restrict the power of police in maintaining the law and
order of the State, except for protecting the basic right of a citizen. [12] In terms of the above
observations and directions, CRIL.PETN. No. 26 of 2022 and MC(Cril.Petn.) No. 27 of 2022 are
disposed of. No costs. [13] Send a copy of this order to the O.C., Imphal P.S. for information and
necessary compliance. A copy of this order may also be sent to the Director General of Police for
issuing general directions (SoP) in terms of observations and directions made in para 11 to deal with
bail-out persons with empathy.
JUDGE FR/NFR Indrajeet
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/163882820/ 5
