Malikram vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 1 April, 2025
Malikram vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 1 April,
2025
Author: Saurabh Lavania
Bench: Saurabh Lavania
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:17994
Court No. - 7
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 3054 of 2025
Petitioner :- Malikram
Respondent :- State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. Revenue Deptt., Lko. And Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Shiv Pal Singh,Ambrish Kumar
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Pankaj Gupta
Hon'ble Saurabh Lavania,J.
1. Heard learned counsel for the petitioner, Sri Badrish Kumar Tripathi, Advocate alongwith Sri
Hemant Kumar Pandey, learned State counsel appearing for the respondent Nos. 1 to 3 and Sri
Tushar Gupta, Advocate holding brief of Sri Pankaj Gupta, Advocate, learned counsel appearing for
the respondent No. 4/Gaon Sabha concerned.
2. The present petition has been filed for the following main relief(s):-
"Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of Certiorari thereby quashing of
impugned order dated 30.12.2023 passed by opposite party No. 3 i.e. Tahsildar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91417030/ 1
Malikram vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 1 April, 2025
(Judicial), Tahsil-Bhinga, District-Shrawasti in Case No. RST/06573/2018,
Computerized Case No. T-201808620106573 (Gaon Sabha Versus Malikram), Under
Section-67 of U.P. Revenue Code, 2006 by which evicted the petitioner from the land
gata No. 220-Min area 0.001 hectare, situated at Village-Shivbalak Purwa H/o
Parasrampur, Pargana and Tahsil-Bhinga, District-Shrawasti and also directed the
petitioner to deposit fine of Rs. 200/- for damage and execution cost of Rs. 100 and
has also been issued notice under section-49-Ga, as contained in Annexure No. 1 to
this writ petition."
3. The concerned Authority namelyTahsildar (Judicial), Tahsil-Bhinga, District-Shrawasti has
passed the impugned order dated 30.12.2023 in exercise of power under Section 67 of U.P. Revenue
Code, 2006 (in short "Code of 2006").
4. Challenging the impugned order dated 30.12.2023, learned counsel for the petitioner stated that
the authority concerned namelyTahsildar (Judicial), Tahsil-Bhinga, District-Shrawasti has not
followed the procedure prescribed while passing the impugned order dated 30.12.2023.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner further submitted that the procedure to be followed, after
taking note of the statutory provisions, has been settled by this Court in the judgments passed in the
case of Rishipal Singh vs. State of U.P. and Others reported in 2022 SCC Online All 829 and in
Writ-C No.9500 of 2022, (Sharda Industries Thru. Partner Mayank vs. The Additional District
Collector, District Unnao And 2 Others).
6. Learned counsel for the side opposite opposed the present petition. However, he could not
dispute the law settled by this Court in the judgment referred by the learned counsel for the
petitioner, which indicates the procedure to be followed while deciding the case instituted under
Section 67 of the Code of 2006 and the same was not followed while passing the impugned order
dated 30.12.2023.
7. Considered the submissions made by the counsel for the parties and perused the record.
8. The procedure, which should be followed while deciding the case instituted under Section 67 of
the Code of 2006, has already been settled by this Court as it would appear from para 74 of the
judgment passed in the case of Rishipal Singh (Supra) as also the judgment passed in the case of
Sharda Industries Thru. Partner Mayank (Supra). The relevant para 74 of the judgment passed in
the case of Rishipal Singh (Supra) reads as under:-
"74. Thus, in my view, following guidelines be adopted as procedure to be applied to
proceedings under Sections 67,67A and 26 of the U.P. Revenue Code. It is all aimed
at ensuring transparency in the procedure, judiciousness in approach by the
authorities and to thwart every complaint made with ulterior and oblique motive to
dislodge a long settled possession and causing of unnecessary harassment to an
innocent villager:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91417030/ 2
Malikram vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 1 April, 2025
(i) In case of complaint made on RC From 19, the official making it shall ensure that
proper survey is done in the light of observations made in this judgment; the land,
occupation of which has stood identified to be unauthorized is in exact measurement
and so also shown in the survey map prepared on scale, as per the Land Revenue
Survey Regulations, 1978; the exact assessment of damages on the basis of circle rate
with details of calculation made on that basis.
(ii) In a case of suo motu action, before issuing RC Form 20, the authority will ensure
that proper report upon RC Form 19 is submitted as per para (i) above on parameters
of subrule 1 Rule 67.
(iii) RC Form 20 must be accompanied by a copy of report and spot survey submitted
alongwith RC Form 19 to the person against whom proceedings have been instituted,
or even otherwise submitted in case of suo motu action vide para (ii) above.
(iv) Upon reply being filed to the notice, if authority finds that spot
survey/explanation report is not satisfactory, it may order for a fresh spot report to
be prepared in presence of the party aggrieved.
(v) In the event, objection includes a plea of statutory protection/ benefit under
Section 67-A, the authority should invite the objection from the Gaon Sabha, and will
decide the same alongwith the matter under Section 67, without requiring aggrieved
party to move separate application under Section 67-A.
(vi) If the report is admitted on record, may be in case no objection is filed, the
authority must ensure presence of the person preparing the report before it, to prove
the report by his statement, with a right to aggrieved party to cross question him.
(vii) The authority must endeavour to decide the case within time framed provided
under the relevant Act and the Rules and should desist from granting adjournment to
the parties in a routine manner.
(viii) In case of appeal under Section 67(5) of the U.P. Revenue Code, 2006,
preferred/ filed within the time prescribed alongwith interim relief application, the
interim relief application as far as possible should be decided within two weeks' time
with prior notice to other side and where plea of settlement under Section 67-A has
been taken before Assistant Collector-1st Class, and damages to the tune of 25 %
at-least of the total damages are paid and an affidavit of undertaking is filed for not
raising any further construction upon the land in question, the authorities including
civil administration should avoid taking any coercive measure pursuant to the order
appealed against until the disposal of interim relief application. The Appellate
authority may also consider granting interim relief on the very first day of filing of
appeal with stay application if above conditions are fulfilled by the appellant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91417030/ 3
Malikram vs State Of U.P. Thru. Addl. Chief Secy. ... on 1 April, 2025
(ix) The appellate authority should as far as possible decide the appeal within a
period of two months of its presentation."
9. In the judgement passed in the case of Sharda Industries Thru. Partner Mayank (Supra), this
Court has observed that the report of lekhpal should be proved as per law and an unproved report
cannot be relied upon.
10. A perusal of the order(s) indicate that the procedure, as prescribed by this Court, has not been
followed, which is also not in dispute. Accordingly, the impugned order dated30.12.2023 is hereby
set aside. The matter is remanded back to the Tehsildar/Authority concerned, who shall conclude
the proceedings within a period of two months from the date of production of certified copy of this
order.
11. For concluding the proceedings, the Tehsildar/Authority concerned shall not provide any
adjournment to the petitioner and in case, the petitioner fails to appear on the date fixed, then in
that event, the authority concerned is at liberty to proceed ex-parte, however, in the light of the law
laid down by this Court and conclude the proceedings within a period of two months.
12. In case, the present petitioner fails to produce the certified copy of this order before the authority
concerned within 15 days from today, the benefit of this order would not be available to the
petitioner.
13. With the above observations, the instant petition is allowed.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 Arun/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/91417030/ 4
