Manipur Cycling Association vs Cycling Federation Of India & Ors on 9 February, 2024
Manipur Cycling Association vs Cycling Federation Of India &
Ors on 9 February, 2024
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
SHOUGRA Digitally signed by
SHOUGRAKPAM IN. 12
KPAM DEVANANDA
DEVANAN SINGH
Date: 2024.02.09
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
DA SINGH 15:53:30 +05'30'
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 803 of 2023
Manipur Cycling Association ... Petitioner
Vs.
Cycling Federation of India & ors. ... Respondents
B E F O R E HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH 09-02-2024 Mr. Kh.
Tarunkumar, learned senior counsel assisted by Ms. K. Mercy, learned counsel appearing for the
petitioner submitted that by influx of time, no cause survives for adjudication in the present writ
petition and accordingly, the learned senior counsel seeks leave to withdraw the present wit petition
with liberty to file a fresh one, if need so arises.
Mr. P. Tamphamani, learned counsel appearing for the respondents fairly submitted that he has no
objection.
In view of the submission made by the counsel appearing for the parties, the present writ petition is
hereby dismissed as being withdrawn with liberty as sought for.
JUDGE
Devananda
WP(C) No. 384 of 2023 Contd.../-
SHOUGRA Digitally signed by IN. 13
SHOUGRAKPAM
KPAM DEVANANDA
DEVANAN SINGH
Date: 2024.02.09 IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13087352/ 1
Manipur Cycling Association vs Cycling Federation Of India & Ors on 9 February, 2024
DA SINGH 15:53:50 +05'30'
AT IMPHAL
(Ref:- WP(C) No. 803 of 2023)
Manipur Cycling Association ... Applicant
Vs.
Cycling Federation of India & ors. ... Respondents
B E F O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
09-02-2024
In view of the order passed today in the connected main writ petition, the present application is
hereby closed.
JUDGE
Devananda
WP(C) No. 384 of 2023 Contd.../-
SHOUGRA Digitally signed by
SHOUGRAKPAM IN. 14
KPAM DEVANANDA
DEVANAN SINGH
Date: 2024.02.09
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
DA SINGH 15:54:01 +05'30'
AT IMPHAL
Manipur Cycling Association ... Petitioner
Vs.
Cycling Federation of India & ors. ... Respondents
B E F O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH
09-02-2024
[1] Heard Mr. Kh. Tarunkumar, learned senior counsel assisted by
Ms. K. Mercy, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. P. Tamphamani, learned counsel
appearing for the respondents.
[2] The present writ petition had been filed assailing the letter dated 26-03-2023 of the Secretary
General, Cycling Federation of India (CFI), wherein it has been stated that the selection conducted
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13087352/ 2
Manipur Cycling Association vs Cycling Federation Of India & Ors on 9 February, 2024
by the petitioner i.e., the Manipur Cycling Association (MCA) cannot be taken into account being in
violation of the Constitution of the CFI and National Sports Development Code 2011 for the reason
that the petitioner association is not affiliated to the CFI.
[3] Mr. Kh. Tarunkumar, learned senior counsel submitted that the petitioner association is
affiliated to the CFI and this factum is clearly reflected in the Annual Report of 2013-2014 of the CFI
wherein 22 (twenty two) States Association, including the Manipur Cycling Association, are being
shown as affiliated to the CFI. The learned senior counsel further submitted that this factum has not
been denied or controverted by the respondents. The learned senior counsel further submitted that
even though the respondents have stated in their counter affidavit that the petitioner association
had been de-affiliated, they have not been able to produce any document or order showing such
de-affiliation and as such, it can be safely construed that the MCA is still affiliated to the CFI. The
learned senior counsel submitted that in view of the above undisputed factual position, the stand
taken by the respondents that the petitioner WP(C) No. 384 of 2023 Contd.../-
association is not affiliated to the CFI is not acceptable and contrary to the available record.
Accordingly, the impugned letter dated 26-03-2023 deserve to be quashed and set aside.
[4] Mr. P. Tamphamani, learned counsel appearing for the respondents submitted that the CFI
come to know that the dispute with regard to the affairs of the MCA was going on between the
members and office bearers of the Association, that there is no proper record or proceeding of the
Annual General Body Meeting or election of office bearers as well as no updates of the constitution
of the MCA were communicated to the CFI, which are mandatorily required under the relevant
provision of the constitution of the CFI.
It has further been submitted by the learned counsel that as per Article 7(4) of the Constitution of
the CFI, the States Association were required to inform about every amendment in the data referred
to under para 2 of the Article 7 as soon as possible but within one month of the occurrence of the
events and that the MCA failed to comply with the said provisions. It has also been stated that the
CFI did not know the official address or correspondence, identity of the person empowered to sign
correspondence, composition of the Executive Committee, etc., and as such, the CFI was under the
impression that the MCA does not exist or not functioning. Accordingly, the CFI struck of the name
of the MCA from the affiliated bodies/ states of the CFI and as such, the petitioner association
becomes de-affiliated/ de-recognized body to the CFI.
The learned counsel for the respondents also submitted that the constitution of the CFI was
enacted/ enforced w.e.f. 01-01-2003 and that under para 1 of the Transitorail Provisions of the said
constitution, it is, inter alia, provided that there are 21 (twenty one) States Association and they
automatically become members of the CFI provided they apply for affiliation to the Secretary
General on the format circulated by them and that if any of the affiliated states unit does not apply
in writing, they shall cease to be affiliated members of the CFI. According to the learned WP(C) No.
384 of 2023 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13087352/ 3
Manipur Cycling Association vs Cycling Federation Of India & Ors on 9 February, 2024
counsel, the petitioner association do not submit any written request in the prescribed format under
the aforesaid provision of the Constitution of the CFI and as such, by operation of the said
provisions, the MCA automatically ceased to be an affiliated member of the CFI.
The learned counsel lastly submitted that since the CFI has de-affiliated / re-recognized the
petitioner association, there is no infirmity in issuing the impugned letter and the learned counsel
prays for dismissing the present writ petition as being devoid of merit.
[5] I have heard at length the submission advanced by the counsel appearing for the parties and also
carefully perused all the materials available on record. In the present case, the respondents have not
denied the authenticity or publication of the Annual Report, 2013-2014 by the CFI wherein it is
clearly shown that the MCA is affiliated to the CFI. Even though the respondents have taken the
stand that the CFI had de-affiliated / de-recognized the MCA because of the many lapses committed
by the MCA in running or operating their association, the respondents have not been able to
produce any document or order showing such de-affiliation or de-recognition and as such, this court
is of the considered view that in the absence of any such document or order effecting the
de-affiliation or de-recognition, this court cannot accept such statements made by the respondents
specially when the petitioner has been able to satisfy this court that the MCA is still affiliated to the
CFI.
[6] In connection with the contention made on behalf of the respondents that the petitioner
association automatically ceased to be an affiliated member of the CFI because of the provisions
under para 1 of the Transitorail Provisions of the Constitution of the CFI, it is to be pointed out that
the said constitution was enacted or enforced w.e.f. 01-01-2003 and as the MCA is still shown as an
affiliated unit of the CFI in its Annual Report of 2013-2014, it can be reasonably construed that the
MCA complied with the aforesaid provisions of the constitution and there was no automatic
de-affiliation as contended on behalf of the respondents.
WP(C) No. 384 of 2023 Contd.../-
For the above reasons, this court cannot agree with the stand taken by the respondents that the
petitioner association becomes automatically de-affiliated by operation of the provision under para 1
of the Transitorail Provisions of the Constitution of CFI.
[7] Taking into consideration the facts and circumstances of the present case and for the findings
and discussions given hereinabove, this court is of the considered view that the petitioner had been
able to make out a case for interfering with the impugned letter. Accordingly, the impugned letter
dated 26-03-2023 is hereby quashed and set aside. To the extent indicated above, the present writ
petition is allowed.
Parties are to bear their own costs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13087352/ 4
Manipur Cycling Association vs Cycling Federation Of India & Ors on 9 February, 2024
JUDGE
Devananda
WP(C) No. 384 of 2023 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/13087352/ 5
