Manish Sharma vs Smt. Manisha Sharma on 24 April, 2017
Manish Sharma vs Smt. Manisha Sharma on 24 April, 2017
:: 1 ::
Writ Petition No.12084/2016
24.4.2017.
Shri Pranay Verma, learned counsel for petitioner.
Shri Jafar Khan, learned counsel for respondents.
Petitioner, non-applicant, takes exception to the order- dated 4.6.2016 passed in Case No.10/2016;
whereby, Family Court, Sagar has directed mental check up of the petitioner by Civil Surgeon,
District Hospital Sagar.
Proceedings at the instance of respondent No.1 is under Section 125 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 for grant of maintenance of Rs.40,000/- per month for herself and for children.
The facts as unfurled are that the marriage between petitioner and respondent No.1 was solemnized
on 3.12.1992 and respondents No.2 to 4 were born out of the wedlock. After marriage, respondent
No.1, on noticing that the petitioner, non-applicant, is addicted to liquor, has taken recourse to
mental harassment to the respondent No.1 and also neglected the family. That, for a period of three
months, petitioner was admitted to Rehabilitation Centre at Jabalpur. As the situation worsened,
respondent-applicant had to take shelter of her maternal home along with her children.
Since the petitioner has declined to maintain respondent and children, application has been filed
under :: 2 ::
Section 125 CrPC for grant of maintenance.
Petitioner through his father denied all the allegations. On 2.2.2016, father of the
petitioner informed the Family Court, Sagar that the respondent No.1 has herself left
the company of the petitioner along with children and taken huge amount of money
and jewellery; has resulted in severe mental shock to the petitioner; as a result of
which he has started drinking heavily with has severely effected his mental condition
and that, he has become mentally insane for which he was treated in Jabalpur. Prayer
was also made for taking appropriate proceedings as per Chapter 25 of the CrPC.
Respondent-applicant denied all the allegations that the petitioner is mentally ill.
These facts situation led the Family Court pass impugned order-dated 4.6.2016,
directing for mental check up of the petitioner by referring him to Civil Surgeon
District Hospital Sagar. Petitioner takes exception to the said order on the ground
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/70588522/ 1
Manish Sharma vs Smt. Manisha Sharma on 24 April, 2017
that since he is mentally ill and his guardian, the father, is an old aged person, he is
unable to travel to Sagar and get himself examined by Civil Surgeon.
On 11.4.2017, during course of hearing, in order to ascertain as to whether Civil
Surgeon, District Hospital Sagar to whom the petitioner has been referred to, is a
qualified Psychiatrist, learned Govt. Advocate was called :: 3 ::
upon to seek instructions in respect of availability of Psychiatrist at Sagar/Rewa.
Compliance report is filed on 19.4.2017, wherein it is stated that though there is no
Psychiatrist posted at District Hospitals Sagar, Damoh, Panna, Chhatarpur and
Tikamgarh; however, Dr. P.K. Joel, Professor posted at Bundelkhand Medical
College, Sagar is a trained Psychiatrist. It is also stated that Dr. Rahul Madhusudan
Dev, Associate Professor and Dr. Narendra Solanki, Senior Resident posted at
Bundelkhand Medical College, Sagar are also trained Psychiatrists. It is further
informed that in the Department of Mental Health, Medical College Rewa, there are
four experts who are posted, they are Dr. Pradeep Kumar, Head of Department, Dr.
Nimesh Mishra, Associate Professor, Dr. Amreesh Mishra, Assistant Professor and
Dr. Sunil Ahuja.
Since the Psychiatrist, who is an expert, is posted at Bundelkhand Medical College,
Sagar; therefore, instead of petitioner being examined by Civil Surgeon, District
Hospital Sagar, it is directed that petitioner be examined by a team of Doctors headed
by Dr. P.K. Joel, Professor Bundelkhand Medical College, Sagar.
At this stage, learned counsel for the petitioner raises an objection that since the
petitioner is unable to travel :: 4 ::
along with his father who is an aged person; therefore, direction may be issued for his
examination by the team of Doctors at Rewa.
Serious objection is raised on behalf of the respondents. It is urged that the petitioner
and his father are influential persons at Rewa and there is likelihood that they
causing influence in fair check up of the petitioner. Be that as it may.
Prayer for examination of the petitioner at Rewa is taken note of and rejected at the
outset. It is the petitioner's own case that he is being treated at Rehabilitation Centre
at Jabalpur; therefore, it cannot be said that the petitioner or his guardian is not in a
physically fit condition to travel from Rewa to Sagar.
In view whereof, the impugned order-dated 4.6.2016 is modified to the extent that
the petitioner be examined by a team of Doctors headed by Dr. P.K. Joel, Professor
Bundelkhand Medical College, Sagar.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/70588522/ 2
Manish Sharma vs Smt. Manisha Sharma on 24 April, 2017
Petition is disposed of finally in above terms. No costs.
(SANJAY YADAV) JUDGE vinod
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/70588522/ 3
