Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
1
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
CRR No.1936/2019
(Manish Yadav & Anr. vs. State of M.P. & Anr.)
Gwalior, Dated : 12.04.2019
Shri Rajmani Bansal, Counsel for the applicants.
Shri Purshottam Pandey, Public Prosecutor for the respondent
No.1/State.
This criminal revision under Section 397/401 of Cr.P.C. has been filed for setting aside the order
dated 5.2.2019 passed by Sessions Judge, Gwalior in Sessions Trial No.63/2019 by which the
offence under Sections 308/34, 323 (two counts) and 294 of IPC have been framed.
2. The necessary facts for the disposal of the present revision in short are that the respondent
No.2/complainant lodged a FIR against the applicants on 6.4.2018, on the allegation that the
applicant No.2 was abusing his cousin brother. When the complainant intervened and objected as to
why the applicant No.2 is abusing his cousin brother, as a result of which the applicant No.2
challenged that the complainant should not interfere, otherwise he would rape his mother. At that
time the complainant went back to his house. At about 7:00 PM the applicants came to the house of
the complainant and started abusing him. When it was objected by the complainant, then the
applicant No.1 assaulted by means of lathi on his legs. Other cousin brother also tried to intervene,
then the applicant No.1 also THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH gave lathi blow on his
legs. The applicant No.2 fired two gunshots in the air. On this report, the police registered the
offence punishable under Sections 308, 323, 294/34 of IPC and after concluding the investigation
filed the charge sheet. The Trial Court by impugned order has framed the charge under Sections
308/34, 323 (two counts) and 294 of IPC.
3. Challenging the order framing charge, it is submitted by the counsel for the applicants that
although roving and detailed enquiry is not required at the stage of framing of charges but the Trial
Court cannot be expected to be a mouthpiece of the prosecution and should not act as a Post Office.
It is submitted that the Trial Court has not considered the medical report as well as the spot map. It
is submitted that although the complainant has alleged that he and his cousin brother Deepak were
assaulted on their legs by means of lathi but no external injury was found in the MLC. It is further
submitted that although the allegations are that the applicant No.2 had fired gunshots in air but
since no fired cartridges were found on the spot, therefore, it is clear that firing by gunshot in air is
false.
4. Per contra, it is submitted by the counsel for the State that at the stage of framing of charge,
roving enquiry is not permissible and if the material available on record prima facie indicates that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 1
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
the accused might have committed an offence and raises a grave THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH suspicion, then the charges can be framed.
5. Heard the learned counsel for the parties.
6. In the present case, the order framing charge has been challenged on two grounds:-
"(1) The allegation of firing in air is false because no fired cartridge was found on the
spot. (2) No external injury was found on the legs of the complainant as well as the
victim."
7. So far as the non-recovery of fired cartridge from the spot is concerned, in the considered opinion
of this Court the non-recovery of a fired cartridge would not be of much importance because fired
cartridge would be found on the spot only when a gun is reloaded. If the pistol or the gun is a double
barrel gun/pistol, then reloading is not required and the fired cartridge would remain in the firearm
itself.
Thus in these circumstances, the fired cartridge would not be found on the spot and, therefore, this
Court is of the considered opinion that merely because a fired cartridge was not found on the spot,
by itself would not belie the ocular evidence.
8. So far as the MLC report of the victim as well as the complainant is concerned, it is well
established principle of law that the ocular evidence has to be given preference over the medical
evidence unless and until the medical report completely rules out the truthfulness of the ocular
evidence. If the ocular evidence of the THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH witnesses is
considered, then it is clear that none of the witness had stated that they had suffered any lacerated
wound because of lathi assault. Thus, merely because no external injury was found on the body of
the complainant as well as the injured would not completely belie the ocular evidence of the
witnesses.
9. The Supreme Court in the case of Soma Chakravarty vs. State (Th. CBI) reported in 2007 AIR
SCW 3683 has held as under:-
"20. It may be mentioned that the settled legal position, as mentioned in the above
decisions, is that if on the basis of material on record the Court could form an opinion
that the accused might have committed offence it can frame the charge, though for
conviction the conclusion is required to be proved beyond reasonable doubt that the
accused has committed the offence. At the time of framing of the charges the
probative value of the material on record cannot be gone into, and the material
brought on record by the prosecution has to be accepted as true at that stage. Before
framing a charge the court must apply its judicial mind on the material placed on
record and must be satisfied that the commitment of offence by the accused was
possible. Whether, in fact, the accused committed the offence, can only be decided in
the trial."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 2
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
The Supreme Court in the case of P. Vijayan vs. State of Kerala and Anr. reported in 2010 CRI. L.J.
1427 has held as under:-
"10. If two views are possible and one of them gives rise to suspicion only, as distinguished from
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH grave suspicion, the Trial Judge will be empowered to
discharge the accused and at this stage he is not to see whether the trial will end in conviction or
acquittal. Further, the words "not sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused" clearly show
that the Judge is not a mere Post Office to frame the charge at the behest of the prosecution, but has
to exercise his judicial mind to the facts of the case in order to determine whether a case for trial has
been made out by the prosecution. In assessing this fact, it is not necessary for the Court to enter
into the pros and cons of the matter or into a weighing and balancing of evidence and probabilities
which is really the function of the Court, after the trial starts. At the stage of Section 227, the Judge
has merely to sift the evidence in order to find out whether or not there is sufficient ground for
proceeding against the accused. In other words, the sufficiency of ground would take within its fold
the nature of the evidence recorded by the police or the documents produced before the Court which
ex facie disclose that there are suspicious circumstances against the accused so as to frame a charge
against him."
The Supreme Court in the case of State of Bihar vs. Ramesh Singh reported in AIR 1977 SC 2018 has
held as under:-
".....Strong suspicion against the accused, if the matter remains in the region of
suspicion, cannot take the place of proof of his guilt at the conclusion of the trial. But
at the initial stage if there is a strong suspicion which leads the Court to think that
there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence then it is
not open to the Court to say that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against
the accused. The presumption of the guilt of the accused which is to be drawn at the
initial stage is not in the sense of the law governing the trial of criminal cases in
France where the accused is presumed to be guilty THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH unless the contrary is proved. But it is only for the purpose of deciding
prima facie whether the Court should proceed with the trial or not. If the evidence
which the Prosecutor proposes to adduce to prove the guilt of the accused even if fully
accepted before it is challenged in cross- examination or rebutted by the defence
evidence, if any, cannot show that the accused committed the offence, then there will
be no sufficient ground for proceeding with the trial. .... "
This Court has thus held that whereas strong suspicion may not take the place of the proof at the
trial stage, yet it may be sufficient for the satisfaction of the Trial Judge in order to frame a charge
against the accused."
The Supreme Court in the case of Union of India vs. Prafulla Kumar Samal reported in AIR 1979 SC
366 has held as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 3
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
"(1) That the Judge while considering the question of framing the charges under
Section 227 of the Code has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for
the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the
accused has been made out. (2) Where the materials placed before the Court disclose
grave suspicion against the accused which has not been properly explained the Court
will be fully justified in framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.
(3) The test to determine a prima facie case would naturally depend upon the facts of
each case and it is difficult to lay down a rule of universal application. By and large
however if two views are equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence
produced before him while giving rise to some suspicion but not grave suspicion
against the accused, he will be fully within his right to discharge the accused. (4) That
in exercising his jurisdiction under Section 227 of the Code the Judge which under
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH the present Code is a senior and
experienced court cannot act merely as a Post Office or a mouthpiece of the
prosecution, but has to consider the broad probabilities of the case, the total effect of
the evidence and the documents produced before the Court, any basic infirmities
appearing in the case and so on. This however does not mean that the Judge should
make a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and weigh the evidence as
if he was conducting a trial."
The Supreme Court in the case of Niranjan Singh vs. K.S. Punjabi vs. Jitendra Bhimraj Bijjaya
reported in AIR 1990 SC 1869 has held as under:-
"Can he marshal the evidence found on the record of the case and in the documents
placed before him as he would do on the conclusion of the evidence adduced by the
prosecution after the charge is framed? It is obvious that since he is at the stage of
deciding whether or not there exists sufficient grounds for framing the charge, his
enquiry must necessarily be limited to deciding if the facts emerging from the record
and documents constitute the offence with which the accused is charged. At that
stage he may sift the evidence for that limited purpose but he is not required to
marshal the evidence with a view to separating the grain from the chaff. All that he is
called upon to consider is whether there is sufficient ground to frame the charge and
for this limited purpose he must weigh the material on record as well as the
documents relied on by the prosecution. In the State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh (AIR
1977 SC 2018) this Court observed that at the initial stage of the framing of a charge if
there is a strong suspicion-evidence which leads the court to think that there is
ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence then it is not open
to the court to say that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the
accused. If the evidence THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH which the
prosecutor proposes to adduce to prove the guilt of the accused, even if fully accepted
before it is challenged by cross-examination or rebutted by the defence evidence, if
any, cannot show that the accused committed the offence, then there will be no
sufficient ground for proceeding with the trial. In Union of India v. Prafulla Kumar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 4
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
Samal (AIR 1979 SC 366) this Court after considering the scope of Section 227
observed that the words 'no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused'
clearly show that the Judge is not merely a post office to frame charge at the behest of
the prosecution but he has to exercise his judicial mind to the facts of the case in
order to determine that a case for trial has been made out by the prosecution. In
assessing this fact it is not necessary for the court to enter into the pros and cons of
the matter or into weighing and balancing of evidence and probabilities but he may
evaluate the material to find out if the facts emerging therefrom taken at their face
value establish the ingredients constituting the said offence."
The Supreme Court in the case of Shoraj Singh Ahlawat and others Vs. State of U.P. and another
reported in AIR 2013 SC 52 has held as under :
''11. A plain reading of the above would show that the Court trying the case can direct
discharge only for reasons to be recorded by it and only if it considers the charge
against the accused to be groundless. Section 240 of the Code provides for framing of
a charge if, upon consideration of the police report and the documents sent therewith
and making such examination, if any, of the accused as the Magistrate thinks
necessary, the Magistrate is of the opinion that there is ground for presuming that the
accused has committed an offence triable under Chapter XIX, which such Magistrate
is competent to try and which can be adequately punished by him. The ambit of
Section THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH 239 CrPC and the approach to
be adopted by the Court while exercising the powers vested in it under the said
provision fell for consideration of this Court in Onkar Nath Mishra and Ors. v. State
(NCT of Delhi) and Anr. (2008) 2 SCC 561. That too was a case in which a complaint
under Sections 498-A and 406 read with Section 34 of the I.P.C. was filed against the
husband and parents-in-law of the complainant-wife. The Magistrate had in that case
discharged the accused under Section 239 of the Cr.P.C, holding that the charge was
groundless. The complainant questioned that order before the Revisional Court
which directed the trial Court to frame charges against the accused persons. The High
Court having affirmed that order, the matter was brought up to this Court. This Court
partly allowed the appeal qua the parents-in-law while dismissing the same qua the
husband. This Court explained the legal position and the approach to be adopted by
the Court at the stage of framing of charges or directing discharge in the following
words:
"11. It is trite that at the stage of framing of charge the court is required to evaluate the material and
documents on record with a view to finding out if the facts emerging therefrom, taken at their face
value, disclosed the existence of all the ingredients constituting the alleged offence. At that stage, the
court is not expected to go deep into the probative value of the material on record. What needs to be
considered is whether there is a ground for presuming that the offence has been committed and not
a ground for convicting the accused has been made out. At that stage, even strong suspicion founded
on material which leads the court to form a presumptive opinion as to the existence of the factual
ingredients constituting the offence alleged would justify the framing of charge against the accused
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 5
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
in respect of the commission of that offence."
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (emphasis supplied)
12. Support for the above view was drawn by this Court from earlier decisions rendered in State of
Karnataka v. L. Muniswamy 1997 Cri.LJ 1125, State of Maharashtra & Ors. v. Som Nath Thapa and
Ors. 1996 Cri.LJ 2448 and State of M.P. v. Mohanlal Soni 2000 Cri.LJ 3504. In Som Nath's case
(supra) the legal position was summed up as under:
"if on the basis of materials on record, a court could come to the conclusion that
commission of the offence is a probable consequence, a case for framing of charge
exists. To put it differently, if the court were to think that the accused might have
committed the offence it can frame the charge, though for conviction the conclusion
is required to be that the accused has committed the offence. It is apparent that at the
stage of framing of a charge, probative value of the materials on record cannot be
gone into; the materials brought on record by the prosecution has to be accepted as
true at that stage."
(emphasis supplied)
13. So also in Mohanlal's case (supra) this Court referred to several previous decisions and held that
the judicial opinion regarding the approach to be adopted for framing of charge is that such charges
should be framed if the Court prima facie finds that there is sufficient ground for proceeding against
the accused. The Court is not required to appreciate evidence as if to determine whether the
material produced was sufficient to convict the accused. The following passage from the decision in
Mohanlal's case (supra) is in this regard apposite:
"8. The crystallized judicial view is that at the stage of framing charge, the court has
to prima facie consider whether there is THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. The court is not
required to appreciate evidence to conclude whether the materials produced are
sufficient or not for convicting the accused."
14. In State of Orissa v. Debendra Nath Pandhi(2005) 1 SCC 568, this Court was considering
whether the trial Court can at the time of framing of charges consider material filed by the accused.
The question was answered in the negative by this Court in the following words:
"18. We are unable to accept the aforesaid contention. The reliance on Articles 14 and
21 is misplaced...Further, at the stage of framing of charge roving and fishing inquiry
is impermissible. If the contention of the accused is accepted, there would be a mini
trial at the stage of framing of charge. That would defeat the object of the Code. It is
well-settled that at the stage of framing of charge the defence of the accused cannot
be put forth. The acceptance of the contention of the learned counsel for the accused
would mean permitting the accused to adduce his defence at the stage of framing of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 6
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
charge and for examination thereof at that stage which is against the criminal
jurisprudence. By way of illustration, it may be noted that the plea of alibi taken by
the accused may have to be examined at the stage of framing of charge if the
contention of the accused is accepted despite the well settled proposition that it is for
the accused to lead evidence at the trial to sustain such a plea. The accused would be
entitled to produce materials and documents in proof of such a plea at the stage of
framing of the charge, in case we accept the contention put forth on behalf of the
accused. That has never been the intention of the law well settled for over one
hundred years now. It is in this light that the provision about hearing the THE HIGH
COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH submissions of the accused as postulated by
Section 227 is to be understood. It only means hearing the submissions of the
accused on the record of the case as filed by the prosecution and documents
submitted therewith and nothing more. The expression 'hearing the submissions of
the accused' cannot mean opportunity to file material to be granted to the accused
and thereby changing the settled law. At the state of framing of charge hearing the
submissions of the accused has to be confined to the material produced by the
police...
xx xx xx xx
23. As a result of aforesaid discussion, in our view, clearly the law is that at the time
of framing charge or taking cognizance the accused has no right to produce any
material..."
(emphasis supplied)
15. Even in Smt. Rumi Dhar v. State of West Bengal & Anr. (2009) 6 SCC 364, reliance whereupon
was placed by counsel for the appellants the tests to be applied at the stage of discharge of the
accused person unde Section 239 of the Cr.P.C., were found to be no different. Far from readily
encouraging discharge, the Court held that even a strong suspicion in regard to the commission of
the offence would be sufficient to justify framing of charges. The Court observed:
"...While considering an application for discharge filed in terms of Section 239 of the
Code it was for the learned Judge to go into the details of the allegations made
against each of the accused persons so as to form an opinion as to whether any case at
all has been made out or not as a strong suspicion in regard thereto shall subserve the
requirements of law...
16. To the same effect is the decision of this Court THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH in
Union of India vs. Prafulla Kumar Samal and another (1979) 3 SCC 4, where this Court was
examining a similar question in the context of Section 227 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. The
legal position was summed up as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 7
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
"10. Thus, on a consideration of the authorities mentioned above, the following
principles emerge :
(1) That the Judge while considering the question of framing the charges under
Section 227 of the Code has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for
the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the
accused has been made out:
(2) Where the materials placed before the Court disclose grave suspicion against the
accused which has not been properly explained the Court will be fully justified in
framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.
(3) The test to determine a prima facie case would naturally depend upon the facts of
each case and it is difficult to lay down a rule of universal application. By and large
however if two views are equally possible and the Judge is satisfied that the evidence
produced before him while giving rise to some suspicion but not grave suspicion
against the accused, he will be fully within his right to discharge the accused. (4) That
in exercising his jurisdiction under Section 227 of the Code the Judge which under
the present Code is a senior and experienced Judge cannot act merely as a Post Office
or a mouth- piece of the prosecution, but has to consider the broad probabilities of
the case, the total effect of the evidence and the documents produced before the
Court, any basic infirmities appearing in the case and so on. This however does not
mean that the Judge should make a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the
matter and weigh the THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH evidence as if he
was conducting a trial."
The Supreme Court in the case of Amit Kapoor vs. Ramesh Chander & Anr. reported in (2012) 9 SCC
460 has held as under:-
"17. Framing of a charge is an exercise of jurisdiction by the trial court in terms of Section 228 of the
Code, unless the accused is discharged under Section 227 of the Code. Under both these provisions,
the court is required to consider the "record of the case" and documents submitted therewith and,
after hearing the parties, may either discharge the accused or where it appears to the court and in its
opinion there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence, it shall frame the
charge. Once the facts and ingredients of the section exists, then the court would be right in
presuming that there is ground to proceed against the accused and frame the charge accordingly.
This presumption is not a presumption of law as such. The satisfaction of the court in relation to the
existence of constituents of an offence and the facts leading to that offence is a sine qua non for
exercise of such jurisdiction. It may even be weaker than a prima facie case. There is a fine
distinction between the language of Sections 227 and 228 of the Code. Section 227 is the expression
of a definite opinion and judgment of the Court while Section 228 is tentative. Thus, to say that at
the stage of framing of charge, the Court should form an opinion that the accused is certainly guilty
of committing an offence, is an approach which is impermissible in terms of Section 228 of the
Code.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 8
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
18. x x x x x x x
19. At the initial stage of framing of a charge, the court is concerned not with proof but with a strong
suspicion that the accused has committed an offence, which, if put to trial, could prove him guilty.
All that the court has to see is that the material on record and the facts would be compatible with the
innocence of the accused or THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH not. The final test of guilt
is not to be applied at that stage. We may refer to the well-settled law laid down by this Court in
State of Bihar v. Ramesh Singh (1977) 4 SCC 39: (SCC pp. 41-42, para 4) "4. Under Section 226 of
the Code while opening the case for the prosecution the Prosecutor has got to describe the charge
against the accused and state by what evidence he proposes to prove the guilt of the accused.
Thereafter comes at the initial stage the duty of the court to consider the record of the case and the
documents submitted therewith and to hear the submissions of the accused and the prosecution in
that behalf. The Judge has to pass thereafter an order either under Section 227 or Section 228 of the
Code. If 'the Judge considers that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused,
he shall discharge the accused and record his reasons for so doing', as enjoined by Section 227. If, on
the other hand, 'the Judge is of opinion that there is ground for presuming that the accused has
committed an offence which-- ... (b) is exclusively triable by the court, he shall frame in writing a
charge against the accused', as provided in Section 228. Reading the two provisions together in
juxtaposition, as they have got to be, it would be clear that at the beginning and the initial stage of
the trial the truth, veracity and effect of the evidence which the Prosecutor proposes to adduce are
not to be meticulously judged. Nor is any weight to be attached to the probable defence of the
accused. It is not obligatory for the Judge at that stage of the trial to consider in any detail and weigh
in a sensitive balance whether the facts, if proved, would be incompatible with the innocence of the
accused or not. The standard of test and judgment which is to be finally applied before recording a
finding regarding the guilt or otherwise of the accused is not exactly to be applied at the stage of
deciding the matter under Section 227 or Section 228 of the Code. At that stage the court is not to
see whether there is sufficient ground for conviction of the accused or whether the trial is THE
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH sure to end in his conviction. Strong suspicion against the
accused, if the matter remains in the region of suspicion, cannot take the place of proof of his guilt at
the conclusion of the trial. But at the initial stage if there is a strong suspicion which leads the court
to think that there is ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence then it is not
open to the court to say that there is no sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused. The
presumption of the guilt of the accused which is to be drawn at the initial stage is not in the sense of
the law governing the trial of criminal cases in France where the accused is presumed to be guilty
unless the contrary is proved. But it is only for the purpose of deciding prima facie whether the court
should proceed with the trial or not. If the evidence which the Prosecutor proposes to adduce to
prove the guilt of the accused even if fully accepted before it is challenged in cross-examination or
rebutted by the defence evidence, if any, cannot show that the accused committed the offence, then
there will be no sufficient ground for proceeding with the trial. An exhaustive list of the
circumstances to indicate as to what will lead to one conclusion or the other is neither possible nor
advisable. We may just illustrate the difference of the law by one more example. If the scales of pan
as to the guilt or innocence of the accused are something like even at the conclusion of the trial,
then, on the theory of benefit of doubt the case is to end in his acquittal. But if, on the other hand, it
is so at the initial stage of making an order under Section 227 or Section 228, then in such a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 9
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
situation ordinarily and generally the order which will have to be made will be one under Section
228 and not under Section
227."
20 to 26 xxxxxxx
27. Having discussed the scope of jurisdiction under these two provisions i.e. Section 397 and
Section 482 of the Code and the fine line of jurisdictional distinction, now it will be appropriate for
us to enlist the principles with reference to THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH which the
courts should exercise such jurisdiction. However, it is not only difficult but is inherently impossible
to state with precision such principles. At best and upon objective analysis of various judgments of
this Court, we are able to cull out some of the principles to be considered for proper exercise of
jurisdiction, particularly, with regard to quashing of charge either in exercise of jurisdiction under
Section 397 or Section 482 of the Code or together, as the case may be:
27.1. Though there are no limits of the powers of the Court under Section 482 of the
Code but the more the power, the more due care and caution is to be exercised in
invoking these powers. The power of quashing criminal proceedings, particularly, the
charge framed in terms of Section 228 of the Code should be exercised very sparingly
and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases.
27.2. The Court should apply the test as to whether the uncontroverted allegations as
made from the record of the case and the documents submitted therewith prima facie
establish the offence or not.
If the allegations are so patently absurd and inherently improbable that no prudent person can ever
reach such a conclusion and where the basic ingredients of a criminal offence are not satisfied then
the Court may interfere.
27.3. The High Court should not unduly interfere. No meticulous examination of the evidence is
needed for considering whether the case would end in conviction or not at the stage of framing of
charge or quashing of charge.
27.4. Where the exercise of such power is absolutely essential to prevent patent miscarriage of
justice and for correcting some grave error that might be committed by the subordinate courts even
in such cases, the High Court should be loath to interfere, at the threshold, to throttle the
prosecution in exercise of its inherent powers. 27.5. Where there is an express legal bar enacted in
any of the provisions of the Code or any specific law in force to the very initiation or institution and
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH continuance of such criminal proceedings, such a bar
is intended to provide specific protection to an accused.
27.6. The Court has a duty to balance the freedom of a person and the right of the complainant or
prosecution to investigate and prosecute the offender.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 10
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
27.7. The process of the court cannot be permitted to be used for an oblique or ultimate/ulterior
purpose.
27.8. Where the allegations made and as they appeared from the record and documents annexed
therewith to predominantly give rise and constitute a "civil wrong" with no "element of criminality"
and does not satisfy the basic ingredients of a criminal offence, the court may be
justified in quashing the charge. Even in such cases, the court would not embark
upon the critical analysis of the evidence.
27.9. Another very significant caution that the courts have to observe is that it cannot
examine the facts, evidence and materials on record to determine whether there is
sufficient material on the basis of which the case would end in a conviction; the court
is concerned primarily with the allegations taken as a whole whether they will
constitute an offence and, if so, is it an abuse of the process of court leading to
injustice. 27.10. It is neither necessary nor is the court called upon to hold a
full-fledged enquiry or to appreciate evidence collected by the investigating agencies
to find out whether it is a case of acquittal or conviction.
27.11. Where allegations give rise to a civil claim and also amount to an offence,
merely because a civil claim is maintainable, does not mean that a criminal complaint
cannot be maintained. 27.12. In exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 228 and/or
under Section 482, the Court cannot take into consideration external materials given
by an accused for reaching the conclusion that no offence was disclosed or that there
was possibility THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH of his acquittal. The
Court has to consider the record and documents annexed therewith by the
prosecution.
27.13. Quashing of a charge is an exception to the rule of continuous prosecution.
Where the offence is even broadly satisfied, the Court should be more inclined to
permit continuation of prosecution rather than its quashing at that initial stage. The
Court is not expected to marshal the records with a view to decide admissibility and
reliability of the documents or records but is an opinion formed prima facie.
27.14. Where the charge-sheet, report under Section 173(2) of the Code, suffers from
fundamental legal defects, the Court may be well within its jurisdiction to frame a
charge. 27.15. Coupled with any or all of the above, where the Court finds that it
would amount to abuse of process of the Code or that the interest of justice favours,
otherwise it may quash the charge. The power is to be exercised ex debito justitiae i.e.
to do real and substantial justice for administration of which alone, the courts exist.
(Ref. State of W.B. v. Swapan Kumar Guha [(1982) 1 SCC 561 : 1982 SCC (Cri) 283 :
AIR 1982 SC 949]; Madhavrao Jiwajirao Scindia v. Sambhajirao Chandrojirao Angre
[(1988) 1 SCC 692 : 1988 SCC (Cri) 234]; Janata Dal v. H.S. Chowdhary [(1992) 4
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 11
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
SCC 305 : 1993 SCC (Cri) 36 : AIR 1993 SC 892];
Rupan Deol Bajaj v. Kanwar Pal Singh Gill [(1995) 6 SCC 194 : 1995 SCC (Cri) 1059]; G. Sagar Suri v.
State of U.P. [(2000) 2 SCC 636 : 2000 SCC (Cri) 513]; Ajay Mitra v. State of M.P. [(2003) 3 SCC 11 :
2003 SCC (Cri) 703]; Pepsi Foods Ltd. v. Special Judicial Magistrate [(1998) 5 SCC 749 :
1998 SCC (Cri) 1400 : AIR 1998 SC 128]; State of U.P. v. O.P. Sharma [(1996) 7 SCC
705 : 1996 SCC (Cri) 497]; Ganesh Narayan Hegde v. S. Bangarappa [(1995) 4 SCC 41
: 1995 SCC (Cri) 634]; Zandu Pharmaceutical Works Ltd. v. Mohd. Sharaful Haque
[(2005) 1 SCC 122 : 2005 SCC (Cri) 283]; Medchl Chemicals & Pharma (P) Ltd. v.
Biological E. Ltd. [(2000) 3 SCC 269 : 2000 SCC THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Cri)
615 : AIR 2000 SC 1869]; Shakson Belthissor v. State of Kerala [(2009) 14 SCC 466 : (2010) 1 SCC
(Cri) 1412]; V.V.S. Rama Sharma v. State of U.P. [(2009) 7 SCC 234 : (2009) 3 SCC (Cri) 356];
Chunduru Siva Ram Krishna v. Peddi Ravindra Babu [(2009) 11 SCC 203 : (2009) 3 SCC (Cri)
1297]; Sheonandan Paswan v. State of Bihar [(1987) 1 SCC 288 : 1987 SCC (Cri) 82]; State of Bihar
v. P.P. Sharma [1992 Supp (1) SCC 222 :
1992 SCC (Cri) 192 : AIR 1991 SC 1260]; Lalmuni Devi v. State of Bihar [(2001) 2 SCC
17 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 275]; M. 8 MCRC.6606/2015 Krishnan v. Vijay Singh [(2001) 8
SCC 645 : 2002 SCC (Cri) 19]; Savita v. State of Rajasthan [(2005) 12 SCC 338 :
(2006) 1 SCC (Cri) 571] and S.M. Datta v.
State of Gujarat [(2001) 7 SCC 659 : 2001 SCC (Cri) 1361 : 2001 SCC (L&S) 1201]).
27.16. These are the principles which individually and preferably cumulatively (one or more) be
taken into consideration as precepts to exercise of extraordinary and wide plenitude and jurisdiction
under Section 482 of the Code by the High Court. Where the factual foundation for an offence has
been laid down, the courts should be reluctant and should not hasten to quash the proceedings even
on the premise that one or two ingredients have not been stated or do not appear to be satisfied if
there is substantial compliance with the requirements of the offence.
28. x x x x x x x
29. In the light of the above principles, now if we examine the findings recorded by the High Court,
then it is evident that what weighed with the High Court was that firstly it was an abuse of the
process of court and, secondly, it was a case of civil nature and that the facts, as stated, would not
constitute an offence under Section 306 read with Section 107 IPC. Interestingly and as is evident
from the findings recorded by the High Court reproduced supra that "this aspect of the matter will
get unravelled only after a full-fledged trial", once the High Court itself was of the opinion that clear
facts and correctness of the allegations made can be THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
examined only upon full trial, where was the need for the Court to quash the charge under Section
306 at that stage. Framing of charge is a kind of tentative view that the trial court forms in terms of
Section 228 which is subject to final culmination of the proceedings.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 12
Manish Yadav vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 12 April, 2019
30. We have already noticed that the legislature in its wisdom has used the expression "there is
ground for presuming that the accused has committed an offence". This has an inbuilt element of
presumption once the ingredients of an offence with reference to the allegations made are satisfied,
the Court would not doubt the case of the prosecution unduly and extend its jurisdiction to quash
the charge in haste. A Bench of this Court in State of Maharashtra v. Som Nath Thapa (1996) 4 SCC
659 referred to the meaning of the word "presume" while relying upon Black's Law Dictionary. It
was defined to mean "to believe or accept upon probable evidence"; "to take as proved until evidence
to the contrary is forthcoming". In other words, the truth of the matter has to come out when the
prosecution evidence is led, the witnesses are cross-examined by the defence, the incriminating
material and evidence is put to the accused in terms of Section 313 of the Code and then the accused
is provided an opportunity to lead defence, if any. It is only upon completion of such steps that the
trial concludes with the court forming its final opinion and delivering its judgment. Merely because
there was a civil transaction between the parties would not by itself alter the status of the allegations
constituting the criminal offence."
10. Accordingly, this Court is of the considered opinion that no case is made out for interference.
Accordingly, the order dated 5.2.2019 passed by Sessions Judge, Gwalior in Sessions Trial
No.63/2019 is hereby affirmed.
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
11. Before parting with this case, this Court feels it appropriate to issue a word of caution that any
observations made in this order have been made considering the limited scope of interference at this
stage.
The Trial Court is directed to decide the trial strictly in accordance with the evidence which would
ultimately come on record without getting prejudiced by any of the observation.
12. Accordingly, this revision fails and is hereby dismissed.
(G.S. Ahluwalia)
(alok) Judge
ALOK KUMAR
2019.04.16 16:36:04
+05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195955198/ 13
