Manoj Kushwaha And 4 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 28 March, 2025
Manoj Kushwaha And 4 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on
28 March, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44106
In Chamber
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 528 BNSS No. - 7264 of 2025
Applicant :- Manoj Kushwaha And 4 Others
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Tribhuwan Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Rateesh Singh
Hon'ble Prashant Kumar,J.
1. As the advocates are abstaining from judicial work, I have perused the record.
2. It is evident from the record that there was a dispute between the applicants and opposite party
no. 2. The matter was referred for verification of compromise by order dated 16.10.2024, as the
applicants expressed their willingness to settle the dispute amicably.
3. From perusal of record, it transpires that the compromise has been arrived at between the parties
and they have entered into a settlement agreement on 03-07-2019. The settlement/compromise
deed has been duly verified by the learned trial court on 10-02-2025, which has been enclosed along
with the report of the compromise and placed on the record. As per the aforesaid agreement, parties
have settled all the disputes and differences amicably and they do not want to prosecute the pending
cases against each other.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106015473/ 1
Manoj Kushwaha And 4 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 28 March, 2025
4. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh Vs. Laxmi Narayan and others,
reported in (2019) 5 SCC 688 has laid down principles for quashing the proceeding on the basis of
settlement/compromise. Relevant paragraphs are quoted herein below:-
"15. Considering the law on the point and the other decisions of this Court on the
point, referred to herein above, it is observed and held as under:
i) that the power conferred under Section 482 of the Code to quash the criminal
proceedings for the non-compoundable offences under Section 320 of the Code can
be exercised having overwhelmingly and predominantly the civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of
matrimonial relationship or family disputes and when the parties have resolved the
entire dispute amongst themselves;
ii) such power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions which involved heinous
and serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc.
Such offences are not private in nature and have a serious impact on society;
iii) similarly, such power is not to be exercised for the offences under the special
statutes like Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender;
iv) offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms Act etc. would fall in the category of
heinous and serious offences and therefore are to be treated as crime against the
society and not against the individual alone, and therefore, the criminal proceedings
for the offence under Section 307 IPC and/or the Arms Act etc. which have a serious
impact on the society cannot be quashed in exercise of powers under Section 482 of
the Code, on the ground that the parties have resolved their entire dispute amongst
themselves. However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely because
there is a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this
provision. It would be open to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation
of Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient
evidence, which if proved, would lead to framing the charge under Section 307 IPC.
For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the nature of injury
sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the body,
nature of weapons used etc. However, such an exercise by the High Court would be
permissible only after the evidence is collected after investigation and the charge
sheet is filed/charge is framed and/or during the trial. Such exercise is not
permissible when the matter is still under investigation. Therefore, the ultimate
conclusion in paragraphs 29.6 and 29.7 of the decision of this Court in the case of
Narinder Singh (supra) should be read harmoniously and to be read as a whole and
in the circumstances stated hereinabove;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106015473/ 2
Manoj Kushwaha And 4 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 28 March, 2025
v) while exercising the power under Section 482 of the Code to quash the criminal
proceedings in respect of non-compoundable offences, which are private in nature
and do not have a serious impart on society, on the ground that there is a
settlement/compromise between the victim and the offender, the High Court is
required to consider the antecedents of the accused; the conduct of the accused,
namely, whether the accused was absconding and why he was absconding, how he
had managed with the complainant to enter into a compromise etc."
5. In view of the aforesaid facts, since the parties have amicably settled their dispute outside the
Court and compromise between the parties has already been verified by the trial Court, the present
Application U/S 528 BNSS is liable to be allowed.
6. Accordingly, the present Application U/S 528 BNSS is allowed and the proceeding of Case No.
198 of 2017 (State Vs. Manoj Kushwaha and Others), under Sections 147, 323, 504, 506, 308 IPC,
P.S. Ghatampur, district Kanpur Nagar, pending in the court of learned Additional Chief Judicial
Magistrate, Court No.1 Kanpur Dehat are hereby set aside.
Order Date :- 28.3.2025 pks
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106015473/ 3
