Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Parties on 11 March, 2025
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite
Parties on 11 March, 2025
Author: V. Narasingh
Bench: V. Narasingh
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRLREV No.152 of 2024
(In the matter of an application under Section 397 read with Section
401 of Cr.P.C.)
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai .... Petitioner
-versus-
1. State of Odisha .... Opposite Parties
2. Srikrushna Mandal
For Petitioners : Mr. Sanket Kanungo, Advocate
For Opposite Parties : Mr. P.K. Sahoo, AGA
Mr. Pulakesh Mohanty, Adv.
(Informant)
CORAM:
JUSTICE V. NARASINGH
DATE OF HEARING : 29.11.2024
DATE OF JUDGMENT : 11.03.2025
V. Narasingh, J.
Heard learned counsel for the Petitioner, Mr. Kanungo, learned counsel for the State, Mr. Sahoo,
AGA and learned counsel for the Opposite party No.2, Mr. Mohanty.
Revisionist-husband assails the framing of charge by the learned Asst. Sessions Judge, Baripada in
S.T. Case No.220 of 2021 by order dated 25.03.2022 U/s. 498-A & 306 of IPC vide Annexure-1 and
seeks the following relief.
"It is, therefore, most humbly prayed that this Hon'ble Court may graciously be
pleased to set aside the order of charge dtd. 25.03.2022 framed against the petitioner
U/s. 498-A, 306 1PC in S.T. Case No. 220 of 2021 arising out of Rasgovindapur P.S.
Case No. 226 of 2020 pending before the Court of the Learned Assistant Sessions
Judge, Baripada, in the interest of justice.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143324265/ 1
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Parties on 11 March, 2025
xxx xxx xxx"
Case of the accused:-
1. The factual matrix of the case, is that on 19.11.2020 the Opp. Party No. 2 lodged
FIR against his son in law-the petitioner to the effect that he and his family has
murdered his daughter by giving poison and accordingly FIR was lodged against the
petitioner and his family members U/s. 498-A, 302, 304-B, 34 of IPC and Section 4
of D.P. Act. However, charge sheet was submitted against the petitioner u/s. 498-A
and 306 of IPC and on 25.03.2022 the learned court below has framed the charge
against the petitioner for the said offences which is under challenge.
2. It is submitted by the petitioner that the marriage between the Petitioner - Husband and the
Deceased -Wife was solemnized in the year 2018 and a male child was born out of wedlock in the
year 2018. The Petitioner is working as a Constable in 5th Battalion, Laxmiposi, OSAP, Baripada,
whereas the Deceased - Wife was posted as Shikhya Sahayak in U.P.S. at Astia, Mayurbhanj. 2-A. On
the early hours of 18.11.2020, the Petitioner was informed by his Sister-in-Law i.e Chinmayi Behera
(C.S.W - 2) that his wife has consumed poison. The Petitioner along with his elder brother and sister
immediately took the Deceased to CHC, Rasgovindpur and after preliminary treatment she was
shifted to DHH, Baripada. As her condition deteriorated, she was referred to SCB Medical College,
Cuttack, but on the way as she became non- responsive and pulseless, she was taken to Vishakha
Nursing Home, Cuttack, where she could not be revived and was declared dead.
Thereafter, Post Mortem was conducted at PRM, Medical College, Baripada on 19.11.2020 and the
autopsy reveals that the cause of death as "death due to poisoning."
2-B. Thereafter, on 19.11.2020, the father of the Deceased lodged a complaint before the
Rasgovindpur P.S. and an F.I.R, was registered as Rasgovindpur P.S. Case No. 226 of 2020 citing
the Petitioner and his family members as accused for alleged commission of Offences punishable
U/s- 498-A, 302, 304-B and 34 of the Indian Penal Code, 1860 r/w Section 4 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act, 1961. After investigation charge sheet was filed under section 498A and 306 IPC.
2-C. It is argued by the petitioner that the material collected during investigation does not disclose
anywhere that the Petitioner acted, with a view to either coerce his deceased wife or any person
related to her to meet any unwanted demand of any property or valuable security. Only on the basis
that the Petitioner quarreled with his deceased wife due to some domestic issues or vague
allegations that the Petitioner used to harass his wife, the learned Trial Court erroneously came to a
finding that prima facie there existed materials to frame charges U/s 306 & 498-A against the
Petitioner.
2-D. It is further contended by the petitioner that on a cumulative assessment of the statements of
charge sheeted witnesses recorded U/s 161 Cr.P.C., more especially C.S.W. No. 3, namely Prafulla
Dalei (Neighbour/ Independent Witness); C.S.W. No. 2, namely Chinmay Behera (sister-in-law of
the Petitioner); C.S.W. No. 6, namely Manoranjan Singha (Independent Witness); C.S.W. No. 24,
namely Chandra Mohan Guru (Independent Witness) and C.S.W. No. 34, namely Arati Tarei
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143324265/ 2
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Parties on 11 March, 2025
(Neighbour / Independent Witness), it could be well ascertained that there were no signs of
animosity between the Petitioner and his deceased-wife except for the usual disagreement which is
common in every matrimony. It is also stated that mere inquiry by the Petitioner regarding the
expenses incurred by her and non-disclosure of money being transferred to unknown persons would
not qualify as an act of cruelty let alone abetment for committing suicide. Such an act is at best can
be termed as a disagreement.
2-E. In the case at hand, admittedly two days prior to date of occurrence, on 15.11.2020, the
deceased-wife came to her matrimonial home to get treated for abdominal pain as could be
ascertained from the statement of C.S.W. 21, i.e. Malati Pramanik (mother of the deceased-wife).
Post occurrence, it is borne out that the Petitioner in spite of finding himself besieged by his in-laws
and their henchmen at the hospital, ran from pillar to post in a desperate bid to save the life of his
deceased-wife. The said act, according to the learned counsel for the Petitioner falsifies the
allegation of prosecution of Petitioner's Mens Rea to drive his deceased-wife into such a state so as
to compel her to commit suicide.
2-F. It is submitted that 161 Cr.P.C. Statements of C.S.W. 2 i.e. Smt. Chinmay Behera, C.S.W - 6 i.e.
Manoranjan Singha, C.S.W - 7 i.e. Sanjib Kumar Mandal, C.S.W -8, i.e. Umakanta Bhoi, C.S.W
- 23 i.e. Nalini Kumar Dash, C.S.W - 24, i.e. Chandra Mohan Guru, C.S.W - 26 i.e. Hemendra Mohan
Sahu, C.S.W 32 i.e. Mandakini Singh reveals that the Petitioner and his deceased-wife shared a
harmonious marital relationship without any serious disputes.
In this background, it is submitted by the Petitioner that in the absence of the essential ingredients
constituting the offence of abetment to suicide & cruelty, coupled with the requisite Mens Rea or
Knowledge, especially when there is no prima facie case against him to drive home the charge under
section 498A and 306 IPC, the order framing charges is outcome of perverse exercise of jurisdiction
warranting interference by this Court. 2G. The learned Counsel for the petitioner relied upon the
following decisions:
I. Gian Singh v. State of Punjab & Anr., (2012) 10 SCC II. Amalendu Pal @ Jhantu v.
State of West Bengal, (2010) 1 SCC 707 III. Mariano Anto Bruno and Anr. v.
Inspector of Police, SCC OnLine SC 1387 IV. State of West Bengal v. Orilal Jaiswal
and Anr., (1994) 1 SCC 73 V. S.S. Chheena v. Vijay Kumar Mahajan and Anr., (2010)
12 SCC 190 VI. Sharad Birdhichand Sarda v. State of Maharashtra, (1984) 4 SCC 116
VII. Ritu Makhija v. State of M.P & Ors., (2019) SCC OnLine MP 4198 ANALYSIS OF
THE JUDGMENT CITED BY THE PETITIONER I. In Gian Singh (supra), is more of
a leading judgment regarding exercise of power under section 482 Cr.P.C. for
quashing of offence or criminal proceedings on the ground of settlement between an
offender and victim, than the point at issue in the present case. It is distinguishable
in the facts of the case and do not enure to the benefit of the petitioner.
II. In Amalendu Pal @ Jhantu (supra), Apex Court after referring to some of the previous decisions
held that it has been the consistent view that before holding an accused guilty of an offence under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143324265/ 3
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Parties on 11 March, 2025
Section 306 IPC, the court must scrupulously examine the facts and circumstances of the case and
also assess the evidence adduced before it in order to find out whether the cruelty and harassment
meted out to the victim had left the victim with no other alternative to put an end to her life. It must
be borne in mind that in a case of alleged abetment of suicide, there must be proof of direct or
indirect act(s) of incitement to the commission of suicide. Merely on the allegation of harassment
without there being any positive action proximate to the time of occurrence on the part of the
accused which led or compelled the deceased to commit suicide, conviction in terms of Section 306
IPC would not be sustainable. III. The Apex Court in the case of Mariano Anto Bruno & Anr. (supra)
has held that in cases of alleged abetment of suicide, there must be proof of direct or indirect acts of
incitement to the commission of suicide. Merely on the allegation of harassment without their being
any positive action proximate to the time of occurrence on the part of the Accused which led or
compelled the person to commit suicide, conviction in terms of Section 306 IPC is not sustainable.
It was further held that each suicide is a personal tragedy that prematurely takes the life of an
individual and has a continuing ripple effect, dramatically affecting the lives of families, friends and
communities. However, the Court of law while adjudicating is not to be guided by emotions of
sentiments but the dictum is required to be based on analysis of facts and evidence on record.
In the light of the ruling of the Apex Court relied on by the learned Counsel for the petitioner in
Mariano Anto Bruno & Anr. Vs. The Inspector of Police, to convict the Accused under Section 306 of
IPC there must be proof of direct or indirect acts of incitement to the commission of suicide. Merely
on the allegation of harassment without there being any positive action proximate to the time of
occurrence on the part of the Accused which led or compelled the person to commit suicide,
conviction in terms of Section 306 IPC is not sustainable.
IV. In Orilal Jaiswal (supra), the Apex Court underlined that courts have to be extremely careful in
assessing the facts and circumstances of each case to ascertain as to whether cruelty had been meted
out to the victim and that the same had induced the person to end his/her life by committing
suicide, with the caveat that if the victim committing suicide appears to be hypersensitive to
ordinary petulance, discord and differences in domestic life, quite common to the society to which
he or she belonged and such factors were not expected to induce a similarly circumstanced
individual to resort to such step, the accused charged with abetment could not be held guilty.
V. In case of S.S. Chheena (supra), the Apex Court held that the intention of the legislature is that in
order to convict a person under Section 306 IPC, there has to be a clear mens rea to commit an
offence and that there ought to be an active or direct act leading the deceased to commit suicide,
being left with no option. VI. The celebrated case of Sharad Birdhichand (supra) needs no emphasis
wherein the Apex Court laid down five golden principles/panchsheel for proving a case based on
circumstantial evidence.
Statement of the Prosecution and Informant
3. While supporting the framing of charge, it is contended by the learned counsel for the Opposite
Party No.2, Informant as well as the learned counsel for the State that from the statements recorded
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143324265/ 4
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Parties on 11 March, 2025
under Section 161 Cr.P.C., it is evident that there was demand of dowry from the side of the
Petitioner and his family members for which there was always physical and mental torture on the
deceased and also there is quarrel between the husband and the deceased relating to salary of the
deceased who was working as a teacher. There are consistent statements of all the witnesses is that
there was disturbance relating to salary of the deceased and there was rancor on the said score.
3-A. On 18.11.2020 one witness namely Prafulla Dalei (C.W.3) had been to the house of the
petitioner for dinner and witnessed the quarrel between the husband and the wife so also one Arati
Tarei (C.W.34) who is the neighbour of the Petitioner heard quarrel between them on that evening
and the next morning the deceased was found in serious condition because of consumption of
poison. It is the version of all most all the witnesses that the deceased was driven to consume poison
due to mental torture by the present Petitioner. The medical evidence sufficiently supports that the
accused is the author of crime. Stand taken by the defence is untenable.
3-B. To fortify their submission, learned counsel for the Informant submitted the written note of
submission and the learned counsel for the State relied on the following judgments.
(i) Union of India vs. Prafulla Kumar Samal & anr., (1979) 3 SCC 4.
(ii) Priyanka Jaiswal vs. State of Jharkhand & Ors., 2024 SCC OnLine SC 685.
The Apex Court in Prafulla Kumar Samal (supra), has held thus;
"xxx xxx xxx
10. Thus, on a consideration of the authorities mentioned above, the following principles emerge:
(1) That the Judge while considering the question of flaming the charges under
Section 227 of the Code has the undoubted power to sift and weigh the evidence for
the limited purpose of finding out whether or not a prima facie case against the
accused has been made out.
(2) Where the materials placed before the Court disclose grave suspicion against the
accused which has not been properly explained the Court will be fully justified in
framing a charge and proceeding with the trial.
(3) The test to determine a prima facie case would naturally depend upon the facts of
each case and it is difficult to lay down a rule of universal application. By and large
however if two views are equally possible and the judge is satisfied that the evidence
produced before him while giving rise to some suspicion but not grave suspicion
against the accused, he will be fully within his right to discharge the accused. (4) That
in exercising his jurisdiction under Section 227 of the Code the Judge which under
the present Code is a senior and experienced court cannot act merely as a Post Office
or a mouthpiece of the prosecution, but has to consider the broad probabilities of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143324265/ 5
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Parties on 11 March, 2025
case, the total effect of the evidence and the documents produced before the Court,
any basic infirmities appearing in the case and so on. This however does not mean
that the judge should make a roving enquiry into the pros and cons of the matter and
weigh the evidence as if he was conducting a trial.
xxx xxx xxx"
The Apex Court in Priyanka Jaiswal (supra) held that the Court while exercising
extra-ordinary jurisdiction under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. and cannot conduct a
mini-trial or enter into an appreciation of an evidence of a particular case. It was
observed:-
"xxx xxx xxx
13. We say so for reasons more than one. This Court in catena of Judgments has
consistently held that at the time of examining the prayer for quashing of the criminal
proceedings, the court exercising extra-ordinary jurisdiction can neither undertake to
conduct a mini-trial nor enter into appreciation of evidence of a particular case. The
correctness or otherwise of the allegations made in the complaint cannot be
examined on the touchstone of the probable defence that the accused may raise to
stave off the prosecution and any such misadventure by the Courts resulting in
proceedings being quashed would be set aside. This Court in the case of Akhil Sharda
held to the following effect:
"28. Having gone through the impugned judgment and order passed by the High
Court by which the High Court has set aside the criminal proceedings in the exercise
of powers under Section 482 Cr. P.C., it appears that the High Court has virtually
conducted a mini-trial, which as such is not permissible at this stage and while
deciding the application under Section 482 Cr. P.C. As observed and held by this
Court in a catena of decisions no mini-trial can be conducted by the High Court in the
exercise of powers under Section 482 Cr. P.C. jurisdiction and at the stage of deciding
the application under Section 482 Cr. P.C., the High Court cannot get into
appreciation of evidence of the particular case being considered.
xxx xxx xxx "
3-C. It is further asserted that the conduct of the accused was also doubtful as
because the Petitioner is working as a Constable in Laxmiposi Battalion OSAP, has
absconded from the medical leaving the dead body and was arrested after two days.
3-D. Charge sheet was filed under Section 498-A and 306 of IPC though there are
materials on record for prima facie commission of offence under Section 302 &
304-B IPC and Section 4 D.P. Act. 3-E. From the statements of the witnesses, it
appears that there are enough materials against the Petitioner that the poison which
was consumed by the deceased was forcefully administered by the Petitioner and his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143324265/ 6
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Parties on 11 March, 2025
family members in that fateful night and to find out as to how the deceased could get
access to the poison, the trial is imperative.
It is thus submitted by the Opposite Party No.2 that deceased has died in her
matrimonial house in an abnormal circumstance within 07 years of marriage. As such
the petitioner ought to be put to trial for commission of offences under Section 498A
and 306 IPC.
4. Law is well settled that one cannot be convicted or prosecuted only on the ground
of having absconded unless there are other prima facie materials of involvement in
the commission of crime especially in the background that the petitioner took the
deceased to the hospital in Cuttack where she was declared dead. The petitioner has
stated that after dropping dead body of deceased at Baripada DHH he fled away from
Baripada DHH on the apprehension of being manhandled by the deceased's family.
5. Be that as it may, scope of interference at the stage of framing of charge is well
settled. Before adverting to the rival submissions, this court may briefly notice the
scope and ambit of powers of the Trial Judge under Section 227 of the Criminal
Procedure Code. Chapter XVIII of the Code lays down the procedure for trial before
the Court of Sessions, pursuant to an order of commitment under Section 209 of the
Criminal Procedure Code, 1973 (hereinafter referred as Code).
Section 227 of the Code contemplates the circumstances whereunder there could be a
discharge of an accused at a stage anterior in point of time to framing of charge under
Section 228.
Thereof Section 227 of the Code provides that upon consideration of the materials on
record submitted with the police report and after hearing the accused and the
prosecution, the Court is bound to decide whether there is "sufficient ground" to
proceed against the accused and as a consequence thereof either to discharge the
accused or proceed to frame charge against him. It is trite that the words "not
sufficient ground for proceeding against the accused" appearing in the Section
postulate exercise of judicial mind on the part of the Judge to the facts of the case in
order to determine whether a case for trial has been made out by the prosecution.
6. Since admittedly, no discharge petition was ever filed by the Petitioner before the
learned Trial Court, this leads to the question to be considered by this Court i.e. the
merits of the impugned order dated 25.03.2022 at Annexure-1 whereby charges have
been framed against the Petitioner.
7. There is no cavil that the charge can be quashed, if on the basis of materials, which
the prosecution seeks to rely upon are accepted at its face value, does not implicate
the accused for committing the particular offence. In this background the materials
needs to be scrutinized.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143324265/ 7
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Parties on 11 March, 2025
Analysis of materials on record C.S.W-1-Informant/Father of the deceased as well as
statement of C.S.W.-5 (Brother of the deceased) reflects omnibus allegation against
the Petitioner and his family and no particulars such as amount of dowry given,
amount of dowry demanded or instances when dowry was demanded are mentioned
so as to test the veracity of the same. On the contrary, it seems the entire allegation
has been made on suspicion and thus cannot be made the basis for prima facie case
unless corroborated.
C.S.W-2-is the sister-in-law of the deceased and also happens to be present in the
house on the date of occurrence and the deceased slept with her on the previous
night. On the next morning she saw the deceased in an inebriated position. Upon
asking deceased vomited and said that she has consumed poison. Thereafter the
witness intimated her husband and husband of the deceased i.e. present petitioner
took her to hospital. Her statement does not reveal any allegation or cruelly to
support charges in question.
C.S.W.-3-who is the neighbour of the petitioner and also visited the Petitioner's for
dinner on the previous night of occurrence and witnesses to the quarrel between the
deceased and the petitioner. Though he is neighbour but his statement does not
reflect any allegation regarding cruelty or demand of dowry meted out to the
deceased. On the contrary his statement shows that deceased and the petitioner
fought since the deceased gave Rs.5,000.00 to his father and is silent about the
balance amount. Thus there is no ingredient to support charged offences.
Statements of C.S.W.-4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 22, 32 reveal that there used to be quarrel with
regard to salary of the petitioner but does not reveal any allegation or cruelty to
support charges in question.
Statement of C.S.W.-21 (mother of the deceased) one of the most material witnesses
shows that deceased and the petitioner were pulling on well. But there used to be
quarrel with regard to salary which was amicably settled with the intervention of the
family. She further states that there was a quarrel since, on 04.11.2020, as the
deceased withdrew some money from bank account and spent it. Her statement
reflects omnibus allegation against the petitioner and his family and no particulars
such as amount of dowry given, amount of dowry demanded or instances when
dowry was demanded are mentioned so as to rest veracity on the same. On the
contrary it seems the entire allegation has been made on suspicion and thus cannot
be made the basis for even prima facie case unless corroborated.
Statement of C.S.W.-23, 24, 26 does not support the ingredient of offences charged,
as such is of no help to the prosecution.
C.S.W.-34 is the neighbour of the petitioner and she has stated that there was a
quarrel on 18.11.2020 between the deceased and the petitioner as the deceased had
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143324265/ 8
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Parties on 11 March, 2025
given away some money to outsider/s without the knowledge of the petitioner and
refused to give account for the same. Being annoyed the petitioner said that he will
bring it to the notice of the family of the deceased. On next day the deceased found to
have consumed poison. Her statement does not throw any light regarding the
circumstances of dowry demand or torture. PM Report also does not reflect any
external or internal injury on the body of the deceased.
All the allegations brought forward by the informant are omnibus allegations and in
the considered view of this Court, are a result of sentimental outburst following the
untimely / unnatural demise of the informant's daughter.
8. Section 306 of the IPC penalizes those who abet the act of suicide by another. For a
person to be charged under this section, the prosecution must establish that the
accused contributed to the act of suicide by the deceased. This involvement must
satisfy one of the three conditions outlined in Section 107 of the IPC. These
conditions include that the accused instigated or encouraged the individual to
commit suicide in the case at hand, conspiring with others to ensure that the act was
carried out, or engaging in conduct (or neglecting to act) that directly led to the
person taking his/her own life.
For a conviction under Section 306 of the IPC, it is a well- established legal principle
that the presence of mens rea the intention to abet the act is essential. Mere
harassment, by itself, is not sufficient to find an accused guilty of abetting suicide.
The prosecution must demonstratively establish an active or direct action by the
accused that led the deceased to take his/her own life. The element of mens rea
cannot simply be presumed or inferred; it must be evident and explicitly discernible.
In this context reliance is placed on the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of S.S.
Chheena (supra) wherein the Apex Court observed thus.
"xxx xxx xxx Abetment involves a mental process of instigating a person or
intentionally aiding a person in doing of a thing. Without a positive act on the part of
the accused to instigate or aid in committing suicide, conviction cannot be sustained.
The intension of the legislature and the ratio of the cases decided by the Supreme
Court is clear that in order to convict a person under Section 306 IPC there has to be
a clear mens rea to commit the offence. It also requires an active act or direct act
which led the deceased to commit suicide seeing no option and that act must have
been intended to push the deceased into such a position that he committed suicide.
xxx xxx xxx"
(Emphasized)
9. In the instant case, thorough analysis of materials on record as above does not
show any overt act on the part of the petitioner to satisfy the ingredients of Section
306 IPC and the proximate instance that the petitioner asked for the money encashed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143324265/ 9
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Parties on 11 March, 2025
and spent by the deceased cannot be said to be sufficient to maintain charges under
section 306 IPC.
In this regard it is apt to gainfully refer to the recent decision of Apex Court in the
case of Jayedeepsinh Pravinsinh Chavda & Ors. vs State of Gujarat, (2025) 2 SCC 116.
Relevant paragraphs are quoted hereunder for ready reference:
"xxx xxx xxx
29. The act of abetment must be explicitly demonstrated through actions or behaviors
of the accused that directly contributed to the victim's decision to take their own life.
Harassment, in itself, does not suffice unless it is accompanied by deliberate acts of
incitement or facilitation. Furthermore, these actions must be proximate to the time
of the suicide, showcasing a clear connection between the accused's behavior and the
tragic outcome. It is only through the establishment of this direct link that a
conviction under Section 306 IPC can be justified. The prosecution bears the burden
of proving this active involvement to hold the accused accountable for the alleged
abetment of suicide. The same position has been laid down by this court in several
judgments, such as:
i. M. Mohan v. State;
ii. Amalendu Pal alias Jhantu v. State of West Bengal; iii. Kamalakar v. State of
Karnataka.
30. Therefore, for a conviction under Section 306 IPC, there must be clear evidence
of direct or indirect acts of incitement to commit suicide. The cause of suicide,
especially in the context of abetment, involves complex attributes of human behavior
and reactions, requiring the Court to rely on cogent and convincing proof of the
accused's role in instigating the act. Mere allegations of harassment are not enough
unless the accused's actions were so compelling that the victim perceived no
alternative but to take their own life. Such actions must also be proximate to the time
of the suicide. The Court examines whether the accused's conduct, including
provoking, urging, or tarnishing the victim's self-esteem, created an unbearable
situation. If the accused's actions were intended only to harass or express anger, they
might not meet the threshold for abetment or investigation. Each case demands a
careful evaluation of facts, considering the accused's intent and its impact on the
victim.
xxx xxx xxx"
10. Perusal of the FIR, the analysis of the finding of the Investigating Officer in the
charge sheet vis-à-vis the statements on record prima facie indicate that the deceased
was never subjected to physical as well as mental cruelty by her husband and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143324265/ 10
Manoranjan Tarei @ Tarai vs State Of Odisha .... Opposite Parties on 11 March, 2025
in-laws on account of dowry.
A thorough scrutiny of the materials on record ex-facie do not establish a prima facie
case under section 498A and Section 306 of the IPC and none of the ingredients of
Section 498A and 306 of IPC is satisfied to show "sufficient ground" to sustain the
charge. In Prafulla Kumar Samal (supra), the Apex Court observed that while
considering the question of framing a charge, the Court has the undoubted power to
sift and weigh the materials for the limited purpose for finding out whether or not a
prima facie case against the accused has been made out. In exercising the power the
Court cannot act merely as a post office or a mouthpiece of the prosecution.
In the scenario when there's no material to show sufficient ground to sustain the
charge as discussed above, this court is of the considered view that, the trial vis-à-vis
charges would be a radar less voyage and continuing the criminal proceedings would
be an exercise in futility, resulting in wastage of precious judicial time.
11. On a perspicuous analysis of the materials on record, on the touchstone of the
judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Jayedeepsinh Pravinsinh Chavda (Supra),
this Court is persuaded to hold that the Petitioner cannot be charged under Sections
498A & 306 IPC.
12. Accordingly the CRLREV is allowed and the charge framed under Sections 498A
and 306 IPC at Annexure-1 is quashed and the Petitioner is discharged.
(V. Narasingh) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack, Dated the 11th March,
2025/Ayesha Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143324265/ 11
