Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power ....
Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
Author: Biraja Prasanna Satapathy
Bench: Biraja Prasanna Satapathy
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.20767 of 2015
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of the
Constitution of India.
..................
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors. .... Petitioners
-versus-
National Thermal Power .... Opposite Parties
Corporation Limited & Ors.
For Petitioners : Mr. B.P. Das, Advocate
For Opp. Parties : Mr. B.S. Tripathy 1, Advocate
(Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2)
Mr. G. Mishra, Sr. Advocate
along with
Mr. H.S. Deo, Advocate
(Opp. Party Nos. 3 & 4)
Mr. D.K. Panda, Advocate
(Opp. Party No. 5)
PRESENT:
THE HON'BLE JUSTICE BIRAJA PRASANNA SATAPATHY
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of Hearing: 10.01.2024 and Date of Judgment: 04.04.2024
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biraja Prasanna Satapathy, J.
23 nos. of Petitioners initially filed the present writ petition inter alia with the following prayer:-
// 2 // "It is therefore, prayed that this Hon'ble Court may graciously be pleased to
admit the writ petition, issue notice to the Opposite Parties and issue "Rule NISI" in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 1
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
the nature of a writ of mandamus/certiorari or any other writ(s) calling upon the
Opposite Parties to show cause as to why the Petitioners shall not be allowed to
continue in their respective posts till their superannuation, irrespective of the chance
in the management of the Opposite Party No. 4-School.
And may further be pleased to direct the Opposite Party No. 1 & 2 to disburse the
salary of the Petitioners in accordance to the guidelines of CBSE in this respect, in the
interest of justice, And pass any other order/orders, direction/directions, writ/writs
as this Hon'ble Court deem fit and proper;
And for which act of kindness, the Petitioner shall as in duty bound ever pray."
2. Be it noted that during pendency of the matter, 19 of the Petitioners having withdrawn from the
case at different point of time, the present writ petition is confined to only 4 nos. of Petitioners.
3. It is the case of the Petitioners, in brief that on 08.07.1989 National Thermal Power Corporation
Ltd.-Opp. Party No. 1 (in short NTPC) through its Talcher Super Thermal Power Project Unit - Opp.
Party No. 2 (in short TSTPPU) entered into an agreement with the Association of Handmaids of
Mary - Opp. Party No. 3 (in short the Society) to run and manage the English Medium School at
Deepsikha Township, Kanhia, Talcher for a period of 10 years.
3.1. The agreement so executed on 08.07.1989 was further renewed for another period of 20 years
vide agreement executed on 10.11.1999 // 3 // under Annexure-1. The agreement was so executed in
between Opp.
Party Nos. 1 & 3 enabling Opp. Party No. 3, which is a Society registered under the Societies
Registration Act, 1860 to run and manage the English Medium School at the project site of TSTPPU
at Deepsikha Township in Kanhia, Talcher. Relevant extract of the agreement morefully described in
Para 2(i), 4 to 10 and 12 to 19 are reproduced hereunder:-
"2(i) A School Managing Committee shall be constituted taking into consideration
the requirement of CBSE Board regulations and duly representing the NTPC and
Association as follows:-
(a) The Project Head shall be the Chairman of the Committee.
(b) One of the nominees of the Association shall be the Vice Chairperson and shall act
as Chairperson in the absence of the Project Head.
xxx xxx xxx
4. NTPC will provide school building consisting of class rooms, rooms for other
purposes required to be provided in the school like Music room, craft room, indoor
games, common room, auditorium, hall, play ground and any other areas that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 2
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
Managing committee may deem fit for providing for quality education with light,
electricity, toilets and drinking water facilities for the students and staff of the school
upto Class-XIT.
5. NTPC will provide furniture, audio visual, play materials and other teaching aids as
deemed necessary by the management of NTPC for the upkeep of the standard of the
school NTPC at its discretion may inspect these items through its authorised
representative whenever it is fix felt necessary. These materials will be in the custody
of the school only as long as they run the school. Afterwards they shall return the
above materials to the authorised representative of NTPC in whatever condition on
termination of the contract NTPC shall also provide repair, maintenance of the school
building, furniture, // 4 // equipments, security, sanitation, and cleanliness,
horticulture etc. to manage the school.
6. For the time being NTPC will provide 3 nos. of Type III quarters, till the
construction of the convent with the requisite facilities and amenities as may be
required nearer to the school premises.
Electricity and water shall be provided by NTPC free of cost.
7. Suitable residential accommodation with water and electricity facilities will also be provided to
teaching (other than sisters) and non-teaching staff in township area of NTIC Rent and electricity
will be charged at the rater an applicable to employees of NTPC.
8. The Sisters and the staff (both teaching and non-teaching) and their dependents shall be provided
free medical facilities only at the NTPC Health Center at site. However, NTPC will not reimburse
cost of medicines bought or chartes for medical/surgical treatment obtained outside Recreation and
transport facilities will be provided as available at site as per rules applicable to NTPC Employees.
9. NTPC will provide a place of worship to the Catholic Doicese of Sambalpur in the permanent
township which will be as closely situated as possible to the permanent school building NTPC will
provide conveyance for the sisters to go to Talcher to attend Mass on Sundays and two days a week
and on special occasions or alternately, the same shall be given to a priest to come and offer Holy
Mass at Project site especially on Sundays. Free transport facility shall also be provided to the school
as and when required in connection with the school activities as well as for the sisters to come to the
head quarters occasionally.
10. The school is open to all, irrespective of caste, creed and social back around. In the matter of
admission, school will give first priority to the children of the employees of NTPC and the next
priority will be given to all the agencies working for NTPC at site and to others, subject to availability
of seats on merits basis.
xxx xxx xxx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 3
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
12. The school will charge fees as decided by the School Managing Committee with the consent of
the HTPC from time to time Further the Principal St. Mary's School in consultation with the
NTPC/Managing Committee may extend fees concession to poor/ deserving students. Any revision
from time to time will be decided by the Managing Committee with the consent of NTPC.
// 5 //
13. NTPC will compensate to the extent of shortfall in the realization of fees, However, the
modalities of payment of grants and the quantum there of for the running of the school shall be
decided by the Management of NTPC from time to time as per the recommendation of School
Managing Committee.
14. NTPC will provide accommodation and furniture for library and give appropriate grant every
year for year for building up and developing library in which case the school management will not
charge library fees from the students. The need for and amount of subsidy will be reviewed based on
the requirement of the library by the Managing Committee from time to time.
15. That NTPC will provide Science demonstration laboratory and full fledged Physics, Biology,
Chemistry Laboratory and computers with peripherals as per the requirement of CBSE syllabus and
also provide suitable grant per annum for these laboratories in which case the school management
will not collect the laboratory fees from students. This subsidy will be reviewed from time to time. as
and when need arises by the Managing Committee Caution money deposit shall be charged from
Class-IX upward which is refundable.
16. That RTTC will provide suitable facilities/equipments for development of games/sports and
other extracurricular activities and provide suitable orant per annus in which case the students will
not be charted the games fee. The subsidy will be reviewed from time to time as and when need
arises by the Managing Committee,
17. (i) The school shall submit claims in the form prescribed by NTPC, In respect of funds required
every quarter in advance and such claims shall indicate among other particulars the total budget
expenditure for the year, the cumulative actual expenditure upto previous month after adjusting the
unspent amount out of the advance drawn during the previous quarter. The School shall as far as
practicable spend within the budgeted expenditure NTPC shall pay within 7 days from the date of
receipt of the claim from the school, the amount requisitioned by the school.
17. (ii)Annual audit of the school accounts and relevant records shall be done by the Auditor
appointed by school Managing Committee provided by NTPC and a copy of the auditor's report shall
be submitted by the principal to F & A and P & A department of the NTPC at the end zaak of each
academic session.
// 6 //
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 4
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
18. Salary for the teaching and non-teaching staff will be paid according to the scale prescribed by
the Govt. of India as per the CBSE pattern.
19. The school shall open a Bank Account All fees and fines collected from the students of the school
and all grant received from NTPC shall be deposited in this account and the current and running
expenses shall be met with from this account Principal and the Treasurer of the school shall be
empowered to operate the Bank Account for smooth running of the school.
Annual audit of the school accounts, books, journals etc. shall be done by the representative to be
provided by NTPC and Annual report of the school shall be submitted by principal to F & A and P &
A Department of NTPC at the end of each academic session."
3.2. As further provided in Para 22 of the agreement, any of the Parties if wants to withdraw the
obligation, it may do so by giving one year notice in writing either side with due regard to the
interest of the other Party.
3.3. It is contended that in terms of the agreement so executed in between Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 3
under Annexure-1 and basing on the advertisement issued by Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 4 vide Annexure-2
series, Petitioners herein were appointed as teaching and non-teaching staffs of the school.
3.4. It is contended that while so continuing in terms of the order of appointment issued by the
School, Petitioners in the year 2015 when came to know from reliable sources that Opp. Party No. 1
has terminated the agreement so executed with Opp. Party No. 3 under // 7 // Annexure-1,
Petitioners apprehending their termination approached this Court with the prayer as made in the
writ petition. This Court while issuing notice of the matter vide order dtd.23.11.2015 passed an
interim order to maintain status quo with regard to the posts held by the Petitioners. The said
interim order was allowed to continue and it was made absolute vide order dtd.04.10.2016.
3.5. It is contended that during pendency of the writ petition when with change of management,
Regional Directorate, DAV Institutions, Odisha Zone-I issued a notice on 29.02.2016 inviting
applications to fill up various teaching posts in the school in question, basing on the application
made by the Petitioners, DAV Institutions, Regional Directorate, Odisha Zone-I was impleaded as
Opp. Party No. 5 vide order dtd.10.03.2016 so passed in Misc. Case No. 3891 of 2016. This Court
while considering the prayer of the Petitioners to stay the selection process so initiated by Opp.
Party No. 5, on dtd.29.02.2016, passed another order on 10.03.2016 by holding that selection in
terms of notice dtd.29.02.2016 shall be subject to result of the writ petition.
It is not out of place mentioned here that in the MOU signed by Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 with Opp.
Party No. 5, Clause 3.3 of the MOU reads as follows:-
// 8 // "3.3 That prior to taking over the management of St Mary's School,
Deepshikha, Kaniha sponsored by the NTPC Kaniha by DAVCMC, the payment of all
dues i.e. Provident Fund, Gratuity, Salary disbursement including arrears if any, etc.,
for the period of the earlier services of the existing staff of St Mary's School,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 5
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
Deepshikha, Kaniha will be borne by the Association of Handmaids of Mary or the
Enterprise and will not be the liability of the DAVCMC, New Delhi in anyway."
(Emphasis added).
3.6. However, it is contended that because of change of the Management from St
Mary to DAV Board, Petitioners were not allowed to continue in the school w.e.f. the
Academic Session 2016-17 on the face of the interim order passed by this Court on
23.11.2015.
Petitioners were put to such nature of harassment because of the illegal action of Opp. Party No. 1 in
terminating the agreement with Opp.
Party No. 3 without protecting the interest of the Petitioners. Since in view of the agreement
executed in between the Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 3 under Annexure-1, Opp. Party No. 1 is the Principal
employer and since because of the illegal action of Opp. Party No. 1 in terminating the agreement,
Petitioners could not continue beyond the Academic Session 2015-16, Petitioners are eligible and
entitled to get the benefit as prayed for in the writ petition.
3.7. It is contended that by the time Opp. Party No. 5 came into picture w.e.f. the Academic Session
2016-17, all the Petitioners had also // 9 // rendered more than 10 years of service and accordingly
eligible to get the benefits as prayed for.
4. Mr. B.S. Tripathy, learned counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 on the other hand made
his submission basing on the stand taken in the preliminary counter affidavit as well as further
affidavit filed by Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 on 02.03.2016 and 10.03.2016 respectively. Mr. Tripathy
vehemently contended that Petitioners are not employees of NTPC and there is no existence of any
master-servant relationship between the Petitioners vis-a-vis Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2. Petitioners are
teaching and non-teaching staff and employees of St. Mary's School, Deepsikha, Kanhia - Opp. Party
No. 4, functioning under Opp. Party No. 3- Society. All the Petitioners are appointed by Opp. Party
No. 4, which is a school run by O.P. No.3. It is accordingly contended that writ petition against Opp.
Party Nos. 1 & 2 is not at all maintainable.
4.1. It is also contended that in terms of the agreement executed initially on 29.11.1989 and
subsequent agreement executed on 10.11.1999 under Annexure-1, Opp. Party No. 3 though was
permitted to run an English Medium School in its township at Deepsikha in Kaniha, but Petitioners
having being appointed by the Management of St. Mary at different point of time, Opp. Party Nos. 1
& 2 are not liable // 10 // in any manner whatsoever, with regard to the claim made by the
Petitioners in the present writ petition.
4.2. It is contended that after termination of the agreement in terms of the notice issued by Opp.
Party No. 1 on 10.07.2015 vide Annexure-
A/1, O.P. No.1 requested the Regional Director of DAV Institutions, Odisha Zone-I to submit its
formal offer for running of the school under the management of DAV society. Subsequently, vide
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 6
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
letter dtd.12.06.2015 under Annexure-B/1, Opp. Party No. 3 was requested to hand over the school
building and all its assets before beginning of the Academic Session 2016-17. Thereafter, Opp. Party
No. 1 entered into a fresh agreement with the management of DAV on 20.01.2016 vide
Annexure-C/1. After execution of such fresh agreement with Opp.
Party No. 5, not only Opp. Party No. 4 issued intimations to the Petitioners regarding closure of the
school run by Opp. Party No. 3 vide notice dtd.18.02.2016, but also a circular was issued by Opp.
Party No. 1 on 22.02.20216 under Annexure-E/1, informing all concerned regarding taking over of
the management of the school by the DAV Management.
4.3. It is also contended that after being issued with the notice of withdrawal on 10.07.2015 vide
Annexure-A/1, Opp. Party No. 3 vide letter dtd.12.07.2015 under Annexure-J/1, clearly intimated
that the // 11 // school has no problem to settle the outstanding dues of the teachers and staffs
engaged by St. Mary's School. But the problem is only with regard to settlement of the gratuity. After
issuing the letter dtd.12.07.2015 under Annexure-J/1, Opp. Party No. 3 raised a demand of Rs.
1,56,89,588/- from Opp. Party No. 1 vide letter dtd.16.08.2015 under Annexure-K/1. The said
demand was issued to Opp. Party No. 1 for settlement of the outstanding dues of the Petitioners and
other employees of the school because of the change of management. It is also contended that after
receipt of the demand from Opp. Party No. 3, Opp. Party No. 1 vide letter dtd.16.02.2017 under
Annexure-L/1 requested Opp. Party No. 4 to keep ready various documents for verification with
regard to the claim made by Opp. Party No. 3.
4.4. It is contended by learned counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 that in terms of the
agreement and the demand made by Opp. Party No. 3 in its letter dtd.06.08.2015 under
Annexure-K/1, the matter was settled with due payment of the amount in question in favour of Opp.
Party No. 3 for settlement of the dues of the Petitioners and other teaching and non-teaching staff,
who were earlier continuing in the school run at Deepsikha Township under the aegis of St Mary. It
is accordingly contended that Opp. Party Nos.1 & 2 has got no further liability with regard to the
claim made by the Petitioners in the present // 12 // writ petition and the demand raised by O.P.
No.3 vide Annexure-K/1 has been satisfied.
5. Mr. G. Mishra, learned Sr. Counsel along with Mr. H.S. Deo, learned counsel appearing for Opp.
Party Nos. 3 & 4 contended that in terms of the agreement executed in between the Opp. Party Nos.
1 & 3, Opp.
Party No. 3 run its school at Deepsikha Township and appointed Petitioners in the school run by
Opp. Party No. 4. It is contended that in terms of the provisions contained under Para 22 of the
agreement dt.10.11.1999 under Annexure-1, Opp. Party No. 1 when issued the notice expressing its
intention to terminate the agreement and Opp.
Party No. 5 took over the Management of the school on 10.03.2016, the services of the present
Petitioner's came to an end in terms of the stipulation contained in the order of appointment issued
in favour of the Petitioners.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 7
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
5.1. It is contended that as provided under Clause 14(a) of the agreement executed by opp. Party No.
3 with its employees, the services of all the employees appointed at St. Mary's School, Deepsikha will
come to an end on termination or expiry of the contract between NTPC and the Association of the
Handmaids of Mary, leading to the closure of St. Mary's School, Deepsikha either in toto or part
thereof. It is contended that since Opp. Party No. 1 terminated the // 13 // agreement with Opp.
Party No. 3 and the DAV Management took over the school w.e.f.10.03.2016, all the Petitioners were
issued with notices by Opp. Party Nos. 3 & 4 on different dates prior to 10.03.2016 indicating
therein that employment of the Petitioners comes to an end with the closure of St Mary's School.
5.2. It is however contended that in order to settle the legitimate dues of the Petitioners though vide
letter dtd.06.08.2015 under Annexure-K/1 to the affidavit filed by Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2, the
Management of Opp. Party No. 3 raised a demand of Rs. 1,56,59,588/-, but Opp. Party No. 1 has not
yet settled the payment in terms of the provisions contained under Clause 15 & 18 of the agreement
dtd.10.11.1999 under Annexure-1. Because of that Opp. Party No. 3 is not in a position to settle the
claim of the Petitioners.
6. Mr. D.K. Panda, learned counsel appearing for Opp. Party No. 5 on the other hand made his
submission basing on the stand taken in the counter affidavit so filed by Opp. Party No. 5. It is
contended that in terms of the agreement executed with the Opp. Party No.1, Opp. Party No. 4 while
so running the School under the aegis of Handmaids of Marry, basing on the letter issued by the
Opp. Party No. 1 on 12.06.2015, DAV Management took over the school w.e.f. the Academic Session
2016-17. After taking over the school in question // 14 // basing on the notification issued by the
DAV Management on 29.02.2016 though a no. of teaching and non-teaching staff working under
Opp. Party No. 4 participated in the selection process and some of them were also appointed by the
Management of DAV, but Petitioners never participated in the selection process and accordingly
they were not appointed after change of the Management of the school in question. It is accordingly
contended that O.P. No.5 has nothing to do with the claim of the petitioners.
7. Considering the submissions made by the learned counsel appearing for the Parties and the
demand made by Opp. Party No. 3 in its letter dtd.06.08.2015 under Annexure-K/1 to the affidavit
of Opp. Party No. 1, this Court passed the following order on 08.12.2023 and 13.12.2023 to the
following effect:-
"08.12.2023
2. In course of hearing learned counsel for the Petitioners contended that Petitioners claim be
confined with regard to payments as due and admissible to them including gratuity and provident
fund.
3. Mr. Das, learned counsel appearing for the Petitioner brought to the notice of the Court further
affidavit filed by the authorities of NTPC on 10.03.2016.
Basing on the stand taken in the affidavit dt.10.03.2016, it is contended that Handmaids of Mary
made a request to the authorities of N.T.P.C to release shortfall amount vide letter dtd.06.08.2015
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 8
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
under Annexure-K/1 to the affidavit. Subsequently vide letter dtd.16.02.2016, authorities of NTPC
requested the // 15 // Principal St. Mary School, N.T.P.C, Kahina to provide certain further
documents to consider the request so made by Handmaids of Mary.
4. In course of hearing, Mr. Tripathy, learned counsel appearing for the N.T.P.C contended that the
request as made by Handmaids Mary on 06.08.2015 has been complied by NTPC with release of the
shortfall amount. Since in the record, nothing is found as to whether basing on the request made by
Handmaids of Mary, shortfall amount has been released as contended, learned counsel for the
NTPC and Mr. Gautam Mishra, Sr. Advocate appearing for the St. Mary School are directed to
obtain instruction as to whether the amount of shortfall has been released by NTPC and so received
by St. Mary School/Handmaids Mary.
5. As requested by both the counsels, list this matter on 13.12.2023 under the heading."
Xxx xxx xxx
"13.12.2023
2. Pursuant to the order passed by this Court, Mr. B.S. Tripathy, learned counsel appearing for the
NTPC produced copy of letter dtd.01.03.2017 so issued by the Corporation to the President,
Handmaids of Marry and another letter issued by Handmaids of Mary on 30.01.2017. Basing on the
two letters, learned counsel for the Corporation contended that the short-fall amount as raised by
the Handmaids of Mary has been paid. But this Court found nothing from the communication
dtd.01.03.2017 regarding compliance of the demand so raised by Handmaids of Mary in its letter
dtd.06.08.2015.
3. Mr. Tripathy, learned counsel appearing for the NTPC prays for some time to file a
comprehensive affidavit showing compliance of the demand made by the Handmaids of Mary vide
letter dtd.06.08.2015 on the next date.
4. Mr. G. Mishra, learned Sr. Counsel appearing for the Handmaids Mary made a submission that if
the Petitioner Nos.2 & 4 will agree, // 16 // then the gratuity amount as due and admissible to them,
can be paid by way of Demand Draft in Court.
5. Mr. Tripathy, learned counsel for the NTPC is directed to file an affidavit as contended before
20.12.2023.
6. Mr. Mishra, learned Sr. Counsel is also directed to come prepared with the Demand Draft in
favour of the Petitioner Nos.2 & 4 with regard to their entitlement towards gratuity.
List this matter on 20.12.2023.
7.1. Pursuant to the order passed by this Court on 13.12.2023, a further affidavit was filed by Opp.
Party Nos. 1 & 2 on 19.12.2023. Copy of the said affidavit be kept in record. Basing on the stand
taken in the affidavit, Mr. B.S. Tripathy, learned counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2
contended that after termination of the agreement with Opp.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 9
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
Party No. 3, Opp. Party No. 2 handed over the possession of the school to O.P. No.5 on 31.03.2016.
With regard to liability of Opp. Party No. 1, as provided under Clause 13 of the agreement, Opp.
Party No. 1 is liable to compensate to the extent of short fall in the realization of fees.
It is contended that in terms of such provisions contained under Clause 13 of the agreement, Opp.
Party No. 1 has remitted an amount of Rs.3, 44,350/- on 31.03.2016 towards short fall of the tuition
fee and Rs.1, 75,000/- towards administrative charges till March, 2016 on 18.04.2016. Thereafter,
when Opp. Party No. 3 raised a further demand of Rs.25,00,000/- towards administrative charges
vide letter dtd.30.01.2017 under Annexure-R/1, Opp. Party No. 1 submitted its // 17 // reply on
01.03.2017 vide Annexure-S/1. In the said letter dtd.01.03.2017 it was clearly intimated to Opp.
Party No. 3 that the demand towards administrative charges up to March, 2016 has since been
cleared with payment of Rs.1,75,000/- on 18.04.2016 and Opp.
Party No. 1 has no further liability towards administrative charges. It is contended that after being
communicated with the letter dtd.01.03.2017 under Annexure-S/1, no further letter has been made
by Opp. Party No. 3 raising any further demand.
7.2. Mr. Tripathy lastly contended that since Petitioners are employees of Association of Handmaids
of Mary, Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 are not liable to make payment towards any claim of the Petitioners.
In support of his aforesaid submissions, learned counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 relied
on the following decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court:
1. Md. Abdul Kadir & Anr. Vs. Director General of Police, Assam & Ors., (2009) 6 SCC
611
2. National Aluminium Co. Ltd. & Ors. Vs. Ananta Kishore Rout & Ors. (2014) 6 SCC
756 7.3. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Md. Abdul Kadir in Para 15 has held as
follows:-
"15. On completion of the project or discontinuance of the scheme, those who were
engaged with reference to or in connection with such // 18 // project or scheme
cannot claim any right to continue in service, nor seek regularisation in some other
project or service. [See Bhagwan Dass v. State of Haryana [(1987) 4 SCC 634 : 1988
SCC (L&S) 24 : (1987) 5 ATC 136] , Delhi Development Horticulture Employees'
Union v. Delhi Admn. [(1992) 4 SCC 99 : 1992 SCC (L&S) 805 : (1992) 21 ATC 386] ,
Hindustan Steel Works Construction Ltd. v. Employees' Union [(1995) 3 SCC 474 :
1995 SCC (L&S) 702 : (1995) 29 ATC 592] , U.P. Land Development Corpn. v. Amar
Singh [(2003) 5 SCC 388 : 2003 SCC (L&S) 690] , Madhyamik Shiksha Parishad,
U.P. v. Anil Kumar Mishra [(2005) 5 SCC 122 :
2005 SCC (L&S) 628] , State of Karnataka v. Umadevi (3) [(2006) 4 SCC 1 : 2006
SCC (L&S) 753] , Indian Council of Medical Research v. K. Rajyalakshmi [(2007) 2
SCC 332 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 627] and Lal Mohammad v. Indian Railway
Construction Co. Ltd. [(2007) 2 SCC 513 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 725] ] In view of this
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 10
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
settled position, the appellants will not be entitled to regularisation."
7.4. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of National Aluminium Co. Ltd.
in Para 4, 6, 13, 24 & 28 to 32 has held as follows:-
"4. In the year 1984, NALCO established two schools in the townships set up by it for
its employees working in its manufacturing units at NALCO Nagar, Angul and at
Damandjodi, with a view to provide educational facility mainly to the children of its
employees from primary to +2 level though the children from neighbouring area are
also given admissions. It also provided necessary infrastructure, such as land,
building, furniture, library, laboratory equipment and other assets. The said schools
admittedly are unaided private schools.
xxx xxx xxx
6. These agreements were terminable at the instance of the parties by giving six
months' prior notice in writing to the other party. In the event of termination the
agreements, the services of the staff employed by the school were liable to be
terminated in accordance with the terms of their appointment in these schools.
xxx xxx xxx
// 19 //
13. From these facts narrated above, one can easily find out as to what are the
respective cases of both the parties. The employees of both schools filed the writ
petitions to lay the claim that they are the employees of NALCO on the ground that
real control and supervision of the schools, including the staff is that of NALCO
which has the final say in all vital matters. It was their argument that though the
appointments are made by the Managing Committees of the schools, it is on the
recommendation of the Selection Committee of which the authorities of NALCO are
the members. Further, since inception of the school, an officer in the rank of General
Manager of NALCO has been functioning as the President of the Managing
Committee, and an officer in the rank of Chief Manager/DGM (Personnel
Administration), and the DGM (Finance) are the other two members. That apart, the
building furniture/fittings and all necessary paraphernalia for running of the schools
is provided by and is the responsibility of NALCO. Even the finances are provided by
NALCO, the financial budget is approved by the Board of Director of NALCO. NALCO
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 11
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
even fixes the tuition fee. No transaction of the schools can be made without the
approval of DGM (Finance), NALCO which includes the expenditure with regard to
the salary component, provident fund, medical reimbursement, leave travel
concession, festival advance, increments, etc. Teaching and non-teaching staff of the
schools are allotted with residential quarters by NALCO. It was thus argued that
NALCO plays a decisive role in the matter of appointment of the employees as well as
in the management of the schools.
xxx xxx xxx
24. Merely because the schools are set up by NALCO or they have agreed to take care
of the financial deficits for the running of the schools, according to us, are not the
conclusive factors. Such aspects have been considered by this Court in various cases.
In RBI [RBI v. Workmen, (1996) 3 SCC 267 : 1996 SCC (L&S) 691] , question was as
to whether workers of the canteens which were // 20 // established and even
financed by RBI, were the workers of RBI. Various canteens were set up by RBI which
were being run through a cooperative society. They were established in the Bank's
premises for the benefit of its employees. The Bank was reimbursing the charges
incurred in getting various statutory licences. Even prior permission of RBI was
required to increase the strength of the employees. Holding that these canteen
workers were not the employees of RBI, the Court observed: (SCC p. 272, para 10)
"10. The Bank does not supervise or control the working of the canteens or the supply
of eatables to employees. The employees are not under an obligation to purchase
eatables from the canteen. There is no relationship of master and servant between the
Bank and the various persons employed in the canteens aforesaid. The Bank does not
carry any trade or business in the canteens. The staff canteens are established only as
a welfare measure. Similar demands made by the staff canteen employees and the
request made to the Central Government to refer the dispute for adjudication was
rejected by the Central Government and the challenge against the same before the
Calcutta High Court was unsuccessful. According to the Bank, it has no statutory or
other obligation to run the canteens and it has no direct control or supervision over
the employees engaged in the canteens. It has no right to take any disciplinary action
or to direct any canteen employee to do a particular work. The disciplinary control
over the persons employed in the canteens does not vest in the Bank nor has the
Bank any say or control regarding the allocation of work or the way in which the work
is carried out by the said employees. Sanctioning of leave, distribution of work,
maintenance of the attendance register are all done either by the Implementation
Committee (Canteen Committee) or by the Cooperative Society or by the contractor."
xxx xxx xxx
28. More significant case, having close proximity with the present one is the
judgment in S.C. Chandra v. State of Jharkhand [S.C. // 21 // Chandra v. State of
Jharkhand, (2007) 8 SCC 279 : (2007) 2 SCC (L&S) 897] . In that case Hindustan
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 12
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
Copper Ltd. (HCL), the Government of India enterprise, had established a school.
Employees of that school claimed that their real employer was HCL. Admitted facts
were that the school was established by HCL with the object of benefitting children of
the workers of HCL. Even the financial assistance was provided to the schools. The
Court, however, came to the conclusion that only by giving financial assistance HCL
did not become the employer of teachers and staff working in the school. They were
held to be the employees of the Managing Committee of the school. That part of the
discussion which has direct bearing on the present case runs as follows:-- (SCC p.
286, para 8)
"8. We have heard the learned counsel for the parties and perused the records. The basic question
before us is whether a writ of mandamus could be issued against the management of HCL. The
learned Single Judge relying on the Division Bench in an identical matter pertaining to Bharat
Coking Coal Ltd. dismissed the writ petition of the appellants. This issue was examined in an
analogous writ petition and in the aforesaid case, this issue was extensively considered as to whether
the management of the school is the direct responsibility of HCL or not. After considering the matter
in detail, the learned Single Judge relying on the aforesaid judgment found that there is no
relationship of master and servant with that of the teachers and other staff of the school with HCL as
the management of the school was done by the Managing Committee though liberal financial grant
was being made by the Corporation. By that there was no direct connection of the management of
HCL with that of the management of the school. Though through various communica-tion an
impression was sought to be given that the school is being run by HCL but in substance HCL only
used to provide financial assistance to the school but the management of the school was entirely
different than the management of HCL. Giving financial assistance does not necessarily mean that
all the teachers and staff who are working in the school // 22 // have become the employees of HCL.
Therefore, we are of the view that the view taken by the learned Single Judge appears to be correct
that there was no relationship of the management of HCL with that of the management of the school
though most of the employees of HCL were in the Managing Committee of the school. But by that no
inference can be drawn that the school had been established by HCL. The children of workers of
HCL were being benefited by the education imparted by this school. Therefore, the management of
HCL was giving financial aid but by that it cannot be construed that the school was run by the
management of HCL. Therefore, under these circumstances, we are of the opinion that the view
taken by the learned Single Judge appears to be correct."
29. From the reading of para 20 in S.C. Chandra case [S.C. Chandra v. State of Jharkhand, (2007) 8
SCC 279 : (2007) 2 SCC (L&S) 897] it can be discerned that the Managing Committee which was
managing the school was treated as an independent body. This case is relevant on the second aspect
as well viz. the claim of school employees predicate upon the financial burden that is assured by
NALCO. To that aspect we shall advert to little later in some detail.
30. No doubt, there may be some element of control of NALCO because of the reason that its
officials are nominated to the Managing Committees of the schools. Such provisions are made to
ensure that schools are run smoothly and properly by the society. It also becomes necessary to
ensure that the money is appropriately spent. However, this kind of "remote control" would not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 13
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
make NALCO the employer of these workers. This only shows that since NALCO is shouldering and
meeting the financial deficits, it wants to ensure that money is spent for rightful purposes.
31. It was argued that the Managing Committee cannot be the employer as it would lose its identity
on the termination of agreement between NALCO and SVM Society. However, even that by itself
cannot be the determinative factor. When the agreement was earlier entered into between NALCO
and CCM Trust, and staff was appointed in the // 23 // school by CCM Trust, NALCO ensured that
such staff is taken over by SVM Society. For this purpose a specific clause is provided in the
agreement between NALCO and SVM Society which reads as under:
"That if any of the parties hereto at any time wishes to terminate this arrangement, it
may do so on giving of at least six months' prior notice in writing to the other party,
of such an intention, provided that such termination shall be effective only at the
close of the academic session. Provided further that in the event of such termination,
the services of the staff employed by the school shall, subject to any agreement to the
contrary between the two parties hereto, be terminated in accordance with the terms
of their appointment in Chinmaya Vidyalaya, Damandjodi."
32. Only because SVM Society agreed to take over the employees, would not mean that NALCO
becomes the employer. On the contrary, this clause suggests that but for the intervention of NALCO,
the school staff that was engaged by CCM Trust would have been dealt with by CCM Trust. It is a
matter of record that CCM Trust runs other schools as well. In that eventuality it would have taken
these employees with themselves or retrench these employees in accordance with law. Same is the
position of SVM Society who have other schools also. However, this kind of situation is not going to
arise in the present case. We place on record the assurance given by the learned Senior Counsel
appearing for NALCO that the teaching and other staff of the two schools would not lose their jobs
even if present agreement of NALCO with SVM Society comes to an end and the management is
taken over by some other agency for running the schools. We direct that NALCO shall stand
committed by this assurance and would adhere to the same for all times to come. The position which
emerges, in view of the aforesaid assurance, is that the service tenure of these employees is
protected."
// 24 // 7.5. Learned counsel for the Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 also relied on the decision of this Court
passed in W.P.(C) No. 5441 of 2014 (Srutikanta Barik Vs. Managing Committee of Saraswati Vidya
Mandir & Ors.).
8. To the submission made by learned counsels appearing for Opp.
Party Nos. 1 & 2 as well as Opp. Party Nos. 3 & 4, learned counsel appearing for the Petitioners
contended that since in terms of the agreement executed in between Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 3,
Petitioners were duly appointed as teaching and non-teaching staff in the school run by Opp. Party
No. 3 at Deepsikha Township in the name of St. Mary's School and Petitioners since were kept out of
employment w.e.f. the Academic Session 2016-17 because of the unilateral decision taken by Opp.
Party No. 1, in terminating the agreement with Opp. Party No. 3, Petitioners because of such illegal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 14
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
action of Opp. Party No. 1, are eligible and entitled to get the benefits as prayed for in the writ
petition along with compensation.
8.1. It is contended that Petitioners since were engaged in the School of Opp. Party No. 3 in terms of
the agreement executed in between Opp.
Party Nos.1 & 2 and Opp. Party No. 3 under Annexure-1, liability with regard to the claim of the
Petitioner lies both on Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 as well as Opp. Party No. 3.
// 25 // Notwithstanding the fact that the Petitioners cannot be treated as its employees, NTPC
cannot simply wash its hands off the matter by taking the plea of change of management on the
strength of the new agreement. As already stated, such decision not being challenged cannot be
faulted with but then NTPC has bound itself by Clause 3.3 of the MOU to ensure that the existing
employees are paid with their dues and therefore, cannot wriggle out from its responsibility in this
respect.
In other words, it is the joint responsibility of NTPC as well the Society to pay all the admissible
dues of the existing employees for the earlier period. Undoubtedly, non-payment of the admissible
dues amounts to violation of the contract for which the petitioners should ordinarily approach the
common law forum for redressal of their grievances but then, this Court is conscious of the fact that
the petitioners had approached this Court when the earlier agreement was in force and much water
has flown down the bridge ever since. It would therefore, be iniquitous to relegate the petitioners to
seek appropriate remedy in the common law forum after eight years rather, the terms of the contract
being admitted, necessary directions can be issued to the parties to honor the same in letter and
spirit.
// 26 // 8.2. Mr. B.P. Das, learned counsel appearing for the Petitioners in support of his claim
relied on the following decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as of this Court:
1. Deepali Gundu Surwase Vs. Kranti Junior Adhyapak Mahavidyalaya (D.Ed.) &
Ors., (Civil Appeal No. 6767 of 2013 disposed of on 12.08.2013)
2. Kailash Singh Vs. The Managing Committee, Mayo College, Ajmer & Ors., (Civil
Appeal No. 6409 of 2017 decided on 31.08.2018)
3. Partha Sartathi Dash Vs. State of Odisha & Ors. (W.P.(C) No. 8092 of 2016)
4. Dhaneswar Nayak Vs. State of Odisha & Ors., (1986) II OLR 113
5. Harapriya Nanda Vs. State of Odisha & Ors. (W.P.C.(OA) No. 2966 of 2016 8.3.
This Court in the case of Deepali Gundi Surwase in Para 33 to 37 has held as follows:-
"33. In Novartis India Ltd. v. State of W.B. [(2009) 3 SCC 124 : (2009) 1 SCC (L&S)
595] , the services of the workman were terminated on the charge of not joining the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 15
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
place of transfer. The Labour Court quashed the termination of services on the
ground of violation of the rules of natural justice and passed an award of
reinstatement of the workman with back wages. The learned Single Judge of the High
Court dismissed the writ petition filed by the appellant but the letters patent appeal
was allowed by the Division Bench on the ground that the State of West Bengal was
not the appropriate Government for making the reference. The special leave petition
filed by the workman was allowed by this Court and the Division Bench of the High
Court was asked to decide the letters // 27 // patent appeal on merits. In the second
round, the Division Bench dismissed the appeal. This Court referred to shift in the
approach regarding payment of back wages and observed : (SCC pp. 132-33, paras
21-22) "21. There can, however, be no doubt whatsoever that there has been a shift in
the approach of this Court in regard to payment of back wages. Back wages cannot be
granted almost automatically upon setting aside an order of termination inter alia on
the premise that the burden to show that the workman was gainfully employed
during interregnum period was on the employer. This Court, in a number of decisions
opined that grant of back wages is not automatic. The burden of proof that he
remained unemployed would be on the workmen keeping in view the provisions
contained in Section 106 of the Evidence Act, 1872. This Court in the matter of grant
of back wages has laid down certain guidelines stating that therefor several factors
are required to be considered including the nature of appointment; the mode of
recruitment; the length of service; and whether the appointment was in consonance
with Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India in cases of public employment,
etc.
22. It is also trite that for the purpose of grant of back wages, conduct of the workman
concerned also plays a vital role. Each decision, as regards grant of back wages or the
quantum thereof, would, therefore, depend on the fact of each case. Back wages are
ordinarily to be granted, keeping in view the principles of grant of damages in mind.
It cannot be claimed as a matter of right."
34. In Metropolitan Transport Corpn. v. V. Venkatesan [(2009) 9 SCC 601 : (2009) 2 SCC (L&S)
719] , the Court noted that after termination of service from the post of conductor, the respondent
had acquired Law degree and started practice as an advocate. The Industrial Tribunal declared the
termination of the respondent's service by way of removal as void and inoperative on the ground
that the Corporation had not applied for approval under Section 33(2)(b) of the Industrial Disputes
Act. At one stage, the High Court stayed the // 28 // order of the Industrial Tribunal but finally
dismissed the writ petition. The workman filed application under Section 33-C(2) of the Industrial
Disputes Act claiming full back wages. The Labour Court allowed the claim of the respondent to the
extent of Rs 6,54,766. The writ petition filed against the order of the Labour Court was dismissed by
the learned Single Judge and the appeal was dismissed by the Division Bench. This Court referred to
the earlier precedents and observed :
(SCC pp. 608-09, paras 19-22) "19. First, it may be noticed that in the seventies and
eighties, the directions for reinstatement and the payment of full back wages on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 16
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
dismissal order having been found invalid would ordinarily follow as a matter of
course. But there is change in the legal approach now.
20. We recently observed in Jagbir Singh v. Haryana State Agriculture Mktg. Board
[(2009) 15 SCC 327 : (2010) 1 SCC (L&S) 545] that in the recent past there has been a
shift in the legal position and in a long line of cases, this Court has consistently taken
the view that the relief of reinstatement with back wages is not automatic and may be
wholly inappropriate in a given fact situation even though the termination of an
employee is held to be in contravention of the prescribed procedure.
21. Secondly, and more importantly, in view of the fact that the respondent was
enrolled as an advocate on 12-12-2000 and continued to be so until the date of his
reinstatement (15-6-2004), in our thoughtful consideration, he cannot be held to be
entitled to full back wages. That the income received by the respondent while
pursuing legal profession has to be treated as income from gainful employment does
not admit of any doubt. In North-East Karnataka RTC v. M. Nagangouda [(2007) 10
SCC 765 : (2008) 1 SCC (L&S) 718] this Court held that 'gainful employment' would
also include self- employment. We respectfully agree.
22. It is difficult to accept the submission of the learned Senior Counsel for the
respondent that he had no professional earnings as an advocate and except
conducting his own case, the respondent did not // 29 // appear in any other case.
The fact that he resigned from service after 2-3 years of reinstatement and
re-engaged himself in legal profession leads us to assume that he had some practice
in law after he took sanad on 12-12-2000 until 15-6-2004, otherwise he would not
have resigned from the settled job and resumed profession of glorious uncertainties."
35. In Jagbir Singh v. Haryana State Agriculture Mktg. Board [(2009) 15 SCC 327 : (2010) 1 SCC
(L&S) 545] , this Court noted that as on the date of retrenchment, Respondent 1 had worked for less
than 11 months and held : (SCC p. 335, paras 14-15) "14. It would be, thus, seen that by a catena of
decisions in recent time, this Court has clearly laid down that an order of retrenchment passed in
violation of Section 25-F although may be set aside but an award of reinstatement should not,
however, be automatically passed. The award of reinstatement with full back wages in a case where
the workman has completed 240 days of work in a year preceding the date of termination,
particularly, daily wagers has not been found to be proper by this Court and instead compensation
has been awarded. This Court has distinguished between a daily wager who does not hold a post and
a permanent employee.
15. Therefore, the view of the High Court that the Labour Court erred in granting reinstatement and
back wages in the facts and circumstances of the present case cannot be said to suffer from any legal
flaw. However, in our view, the High Court erred in not awarding compensation to the appellant
while upsetting the award of reinstatement and back wages."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 17
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
36. We may now deal with the judgment in J.K. Synthetics Ltd. v. K.P. Agrawal [(2007) 2 SCC 433 :
(2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 651] in detail. The facts of that case were that the respondent was dismissed
from service on the basis of inquiry conducted by the competent authority. The Labour Court held
that the inquiry was not fair and proper and permitted the parties to adduce evidence on the // 30
// charges levelled against the respondent. After considering the evidence, the Labour Court gave
benefit of doubt to the respondent and substituted the punishment of dismissal from service with
that of stoppage of increments for two years. On an application filed by the respondent, the Labour
Court held that the respondent was entitled to reinstatement with full back wages for the period of
unemployment. The learned Single Judge dismissed the writ petition and the Division Bench
declined to interfere by observing that the employer had wilfully violated the order of the Labour
Court. On an application made by the respondent under Section 6(6) of the U.P. Industrial Disputes
Act, 1947, the Labour Court amended the award. This Court upheld the power of the Labour Court
to amend the award but did not approve the award of full back wages.
37. After noticing several precedents to which reference has been made hereinabove, the two-Judge
Bench observed : (J.K. Synthetics case [(2007) 2 SCC 433 : (2007) 1 SCC (L&S) 651] , SCC pp.
448-50, paras 17-21) "17. There is also a misconception that whenever reinstatement is directed,
'continuity of service' and 'consequential benefits' should follow, as a matter of course. The
disastrous effect of granting several promotions as a 'consequential benefit' to a person who has not
worked for 10 to 15 years and who does not have the benefit of necessary experience for discharging
the higher duties and functions of promotional posts, is seldom visualised while granting
consequential benefits automatically. Whenever courts or tribunals direct reinstatement, they
should apply their judicial mind to the facts and circumstances to decide whether 'continuity of
service' and/or 'consequential benefits' should also be directed. ...
18. Coming back to back wages, even if the court finds it necessary to award back wages, the
question will be whether back wages should be awarded fully or only partially (and if so the
percentage). That depends upon the facts and circumstances of each case. Any income received by
the employee during the relevant period // 31 // on account of alternative employment or business
is a relevant factor to be taken note of while awarding back wages, in addition to the several factors
mentioned in Rudhan Singh [Haryana Roadways v. Rudhan Singh, (2005) 5 SCC 591 : 2005 SCC
(L&S) 716] and Uday Narain Pandey [U.P. State Brassware Corpn. Ltd. v. Uday Narain Pandey,
(2006) 1 SCC 479 : 2006 SCC (L&S) 250] . Therefore, it is necessary for the employee to plead that
he was not gainfully employed from the date of his termination. While an employee cannot be asked
to prove the negative, he has to at least assert on oath that he was neither employed nor engaged in
any gainful business or venture and that he did not have any income. Then the burden will shift to
the employer. But there is, however, no obligation on the terminated employee to search for or
secure alternative employment. Be that as it may.
19. But the cases referred to above, where back wages were awarded, related to
termination/retrenchment which were held to be illegal and invalid for non-compliance with
statutory requirements or related to cases where the Court found that the termination was
motivated or amounted to victimisation. The decisions relating to back wages payable on illegal
retrenchment or termination may have no application to the case like the present one, where the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 18
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
termination (dismissal or removal or compulsory retirement) is by way of punishment for
misconduct in a departmental enquiry, and the court confirms the finding regarding misconduct,
but only interferes with the punishment being of the view that it is excessive, and awards a lesser
punishment, resulting in the reinstatement of employee. Where the power under Article 226 or
Section 11-A of the Industrial Disputes Act (or any other similar provision) is exercised by any court
to interfere with the punishment on the ground that it is excessive and the employee deserves a
lesser punishment, and a consequential direction is issued for reinstatement, the court is not
holding that the employer was in the wrong or that the dismissal was illegal and invalid. The court is
merely exercising its discretion to award a lesser punishment.
// 32 // Till such power is exercised, the dismissal is valid and in force. When the punishment is
reduced by a court as being excessive, there can be either a direction for reinstatement or a direction
for a nominal lump sum compensation. And if reinstatement is directed, it can be effective either
prospectively from the date of such substitution of punishment (in which event, there is no
continuity of service) or retrospectively, from the date on which the penalty of termination was
imposed (in which event, there can be a consequential direction relating to continuity of service).
What requires to be noted in cases where finding of misconduct is affirmed and only the
punishment is interfered with (as contrasted from cases where termination is held to be illegal or
void) is that there is no automatic reinstatement; and if reinstatement is directed, it is not
automatically with retrospective effect from the date of termination. Therefore, where reinstatement
is a consequence of imposition of a lesser punishment, neither back wages nor continuity of service
nor consequential benefits, follow as a natural or necessary consequence of such reinstatement. In
cases where the misconduct is held to be proved, and reinstatement is itself a consequential benefit
arising from imposition of a lesser punishment, award of back wages for the period when the
employee has not worked, may amount to rewarding the delinquent employee and punishing the
employer for taking action for the misconduct committed by the employee. That should be avoided.
Similarly, in such cases, even where continuity of service is directed, it should only be for purposes
of pensionary/retirement benefits, and not for other benefits like increments, promotions, etc.
20. But there are two exceptions. The first is where the court sets aside the termination as a
consequence of employee being exonerated or being found not guilty of the misconduct. Second is
where the court reaches a conclusion that the inquiry was held in respect of a frivolous issue or petty
misconduct, as a camouflage to get rid of the employee or victimise him, and the disproportionately
excessive punishment is a result of such scheme or intention. In such cases, the // 33 // principles
relating to back wages, etc. will be the same as those applied in the cases of an illegal termination.
21. In this case, the Labour Court found that a charge against the employee in respect of a serious
misconduct was proved. It, however, felt that the punishment of dismissal was not warranted and
therefore, imposed a lesser punishment of withholding the two annual increments. In such
circumstances, award of back wages was neither automatic nor consequential. In fact, back wages
was not warranted at all."
8.4. Similarly, Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Kailash Singh in Para 29 to 36 has held as follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 19
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
"29. We cannot lose sight of the fact that the present case is not one under the
Industrial Disputes Act, 1947. This in turn would have required factual matrix to be
established in different aspects, which is not what has happened. Thus, the principles
of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 cannot be, ipso facto, imported into a factual
matrix of the present nature, for, as a consequence of the illegality in the termination
of the services of the appellants, compensation has to be granted. The methodology of
calculation would be based on the principle of wrongful termination of an employee,
under the master- servant relationship. This, in turn, would import into it the
requirement of the appellants endeavouring to mitigate their losses. In fact, in this
context, we may observe that the claim for back-wages has apparently been raised for
the first time only in the present proceedings, arising from the manner in which the
High Court dealt with the matter, where it granted some compensation.
30. The principle of awarding adequate compensation in the form of back- wages,
keeping in mind aggravating and mitigating circumstances would, thus, have to be
observed. The amount cannot be measly, nor can it be a bonanza. The High Court, in
its wisdom, awarded the compensation of five (5) years' back- wages on the last pay
drawn. Not only that, an additional benefit was conferred by providing for provident
fund and retiral dues, to be calculated on the premise as if the services would be
continued till the appellants attained the age of superannuation.
31. We have no reason to find that such an aforesaid principle can be said to be
fallacious or wrong, so as to call for our interference, except to the extent discussed
hereafter.
// 34 //
32. We are firstly of the view that it would not be appropriate to determine the
amount on the basis of the last pay and allowances drawn. The calculation should be
based on the actual pay and allowances liable to be drawn for the years in question,
dependent on the period for which this amount is to be calculated.
33. In order to better understand, and come to an appropriate figure, we had asked
both the parties to give their calculations. The Management has given its calculations
based on the impugned judgment, which includes the salary calculations for five (5)
years on the last pay and allowances drawn, while gratuity and provident fund
benefits are taken till the date of retirement. There are deductions made on account
of electricity dues, house rent and certain other smaller accounts. On the other hand,
the appellants have given their broad calculations, taking the monthly emoluments
payable in different years, right up to date, and even beyond that if the employment
was to continue, as in the case of Kailash Singh.
34. We are not going into the exactitude of the calculations, but, broadly speaking,
the final amount payable to Jeffry Jobard, as per the impugned order, would be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 20
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
approximately Rs.7.75 lakhs. If the emoluments, as opined by us as aforesaid, are
taken into account, for five (5) years, it would be approximately Rs.9.75 lakhs. In the
case of Kailash Singh, the amount as per the calculations of the Management would
be approximately Rs.21 lakhs, while calculated as aforesaid would be approximately
in the same range.
35. On having carefully examined the aforesaid issue and the calculations before us,
we are inclined to enhance it a little more, and grant damages in the form of salary
and allowances payable for a period of eight (8) years, of the actual amounts, in both
the cases, after adding the respective provident fund amounts and other retiral dues
while simultaneously deducting electricity, water and occupation charges, etc., as
calculated by the management, as per the impugned order of the Division Bench. To
put a quietus to this long-drawn dispute, we have quantified and fixed the amounts.
The net impact is an all-inclusive compensation of Rs. 25 lakhs, in the case of Kailash
Singh and Rs. 18 lakhs in the case of Jeffry Jobard. Needless to say, the amount of
Rs.5 lakhs, already paid to the appellants, in pursuance to the directions of this
Court, is liable to be adjusted from the said amounts payable.
36. We are not inclined to grant future salary and allowances to Kailash Singh,
merely because he has not been granted reinstatement, with further years of his
service still remaining. In fact, in O.P. Bhandari v. Indian Tourism Development
Corporation Ltd.,17 this plea of paying future salary and allowances, in cases of such
non- reinstatement of an employee, was rejected as it would amount to // 35 //
conferring a bonanza on an employee, and would not lead to compensation per an
acceptable formula."
8.5. This Court in the case of Partha Sarathi Dash in Para 11 has held as follows:-
"11. This by itself shows that the Petitioner was never terminated from service nor
was allowed to work. The plea of abolition of the post or of treating the Petitioner as a
surplus staff has not found favour with this Court in the earlier Writ Petition. Law is
well settled that where an employee is willing to work but is prevented by the
employer to do so unlawfully, he cannot be blamed much less denied his legitimate
benefits such as salary etc. by invoking the principle of no work no pay. Law is well
settled that the principle of 'no work no pay' is not absolute as was held by the Apex
Court in the case of Commissioner, Karnataka Housing Board vrs. C. Muddaiah;
reported in MANU/SC/7890/2007: (2007) 7 SCC 689 and also in Union Territory of
Dadra & Nagar Haveli V. Gulabhia M. Lad; reported in MANU/SC/0304/2010:
(2010) 5 SCC 775. Thus, there is no way by which the Petitioner can be deprived of
his legitimate dues for the period during which he was wrongfully refused
employment."
8.6. This Court in the case of Dhaneswar Nayak in Para 7 has held as follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 21
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
"7. Even accepting the plea of opp. party No. 3 that study leave was refused to the
petitioner and that he was in know of the same and yet he got himself relieved to join
the training course does not help the opp. party No. 3 in any manner. The petitioner
admittedly held an appointment in the school. His service was statutorily protected
under the provision of the Orissa Education Act, 1969 and could not have been
terminated except with the prior approval of the Inspector of Schools as required und
Section 10-A of the Act. Refusal to allow the // 36 // petitioner to join his former post
after completion of the training would amount to termination of his service from the
school, yet his service cannot determinate simpliciter without the prior approval of
the Inspector of Schools. It is open to the Managing Committee to proceed
departmentally against the teacher concerned and impose suitable punishment upon
him following the procedures prescribed under Rule 22 or Rule 23 of the Orissa
Education (Recruitment and Conditions of Service of Teachers and Members of the
Staff of Aided Educational Institutions) Rules, 1974. But, however, short of such a
proceeding the service of a teacher cannot be terminated without following the
provisions of Section 10-A of the Orissa Education Act which requires the prior
approval of the Inspector of Schools for the purpose. Not allowing a teacher to join
back his former post after training amounts to termination of service as has also been
decided by this Court in the case of Upendra Pradhan v. Secretary, Jagartnath Prasad
M.S. School and Ors. I.L.R. 1976. Cut 1047 The petitioner in that case had been
relieved from the post of Headmaster to undergo training but after completion of the
training was not allowed to join the post of Headmaster but was directed to join as an
Assistant teacher. It was held that this amounted to termination of service of the
petitioner from the post of Headmaster and that such termination was illegal and
inoperative, in view of the provisions of Section 7 of Orissa Act 17 of 1974. The matter
again came up for decision in the case of Duryodhan Tarai and Anr. v. Managing
Committee of Patrisahi M.E. School and Ors. reported in I.L.R. 1978(2) Cut where
under almost similar circumstances the refusal to allow the teachers to re-join the
school was treated as violative of Section 10-A of the Orissa Education Act. In another
unreported case, OJC. No. 664 of 1976, decided on 26- 4-1978, the Court even went
still further. It was a case where a teacher of an aided educational school was selected
to undergo B. Ed. training and applied to the Managing Committee for appropriate
study leave. The request was rejected, his service was terminated, and in the vacancy
caused due to termination of service // 37 // another person was appointed. After the
teacher completed the training he reported to duty, but his joining report was not
accepted. The approval of the Director, Public Instruction (S) had not been obtained
for such termination of service as required, by the amending Act of 1974. it was held
that the order was illegal and the petitioner was bound to be taken back In service."
8.7. This Court in the case of Harapriya Nanda in Para 5, 5.1 & 5.2 has held as follows:-
"5.Taking into account the submissions made by the learned Addl. Government
Advocate, Mr. Roy, learned counsel appearing for the Petitioner contended that since
due to the admitted latches of the Opposite Parties, the Petitioner was deprived from
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 22
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
being appointed as a Stipendiary Engineers in the year 1994 and her claim was never
considered in spite of several approaches, the Petitioner in view of such illegalities
meted out to her, entitled to get suitable compensation as deem fits and proper by
this Court for such admitted negligence on the part of the Opposite Parties in keeping
her out of employment.
Learned counsel for the Petitioner relies on a decision of this Court reported in
1998(I) OLR-108 and another decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of
Rabindranath Ghosal vrs Calcutta University & Others reported in (2002) 7 SCC-478.
5.1. Hon'ble Apex Court in Para-9 of the case in Rabindranath Ghosal has held as
follows:-
"9. The Courts having the obligation to satisfy the social aspiration of the citizens have to apply the
tool and grant compensation as damages in a public law proceedings. Consequently when the Court
moulds the relief in proceedings under Articles 32 and 226 of the Constitution seeking enforcement
or protection of fundamental rights and grants compensation, it does so under the public law by way
of penalising the wrongdoer and fixing the liability for the public wrong on the State which has
failed in its public duty to protect the fundamental rights of the citizens. But it would not be correct
to assume that every minor infraction of public duty by every public officer would commend the
Court to grant compensation in a petition under Articles 226 // 38 // and 32 by applying the
principle of public law proceeding. The Court in exercise of extraordinary power under Articles 226
and 32 of the Constitution, therefore, would not award damages against public authorities merely
because they have made some order which turns out to be ultra vires, or there has been some
inaction in the performance of the duties unless there is malice or conscious abuse. Before
exemplary damages can be awarded it must be shown that some fundamental right under Article 21
has been infringed by arbitrary or capricious action on the part of the public functionaries and that
the sufferer was a helpless victim of that act".
5.2. Mr. Ray, also relies on another decision of the High Court of Gujarat passed in the case of
Nilubahen Gordhanbhai Machhi vrs. State of Gujarat. In Para-16 and 19.6 has held as follows:-
"16. Furthermore, insofar as the submissions on behalf of the State that a candidate
does not get an indefeasible right merely on account of name of the said candidate
figuring in the select/waiting list, in the considered opinion of this Court, the State
cannot be heard to submit the said contention more particularly when the State itself
had recommended for operating the waiting list, which had been turned down by the
GPSC. In any case, in the considered opinion of this Court, the proposition that a
candidate whose name appearing in the select list does not get an indefeasible right
for appointment is not a completely unqualified proposition, rather such proposition
has been clarified by the Hon'ble Apex Court by holding that the State cannot act in
an arbitrary manner and the decision not to fill up vacancies has to be taken bona
fide for appropriate reasons. This Court at this stage proposes to refer to the decision
of the Constitutional Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court in case of Shankarsan Dash Vs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 23
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
Union of India, reported in (1991) 3 SCC 47. Paragraphs 7 and 8 of the said decision
being relevant for the purpose are reproduced herein below for benefit:-
"7. It is not correct to say that if a number of vacancies are notified for appointment
and adequate number of candidates are found fit, the successful candidates acquire
an indefeasible right to be appointed which cannot be legitimately denied. Ordinarily
the notification merely amounts to an invitation to qualified candidates to apply for
recruitment and on their selection they do not acquire any right to the post. Unless
the relevant recruitment rules so indicate, the State is under no legal duty to fill up all
or any of the vacancies. However, it // 39 // does not mean that the State has the
licence of acting in an arbitrary manner. The decision not to fill up the vacancies has
to be taken bona fide for appropriate reasons. And if the vacancies or any of them are
filled up, the State is bound to respect the comparative merit of the candidates, as
reflected at the recruitment test, and no discrimination can be permitted. This correct
position has been consistently followed by this Court, and we do not find any
discordant note in the decisions in State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander Marwaha
and Others, [1974] 1 SCR 165; Miss Neelima Shangla v. State of Haryana and Others,
[1986] 4 SCC 268 and Jitendra Kumar and Others v. State of Punjab and Others,
[1985] 1 SCR 899.
8. In State of Haryana v. Subhash Chander Marwaha and Others, (supra) 15
vacancies of Subordinate Judges were advertised, and out of the selection list only 7,
who had secured more than 55% marks, were appointed, although under the relevant
rules the eligibility condition required only 45% marks. Since the High Court had
recommended earlier, to the Punjab Government that only the candidates securing
55% marks or more should be appointed as Subordinate Judges, the other candidates
included in the select list were not appointed. They filed a writ petition before the
High Court claiming a right of being appointed on the ground that vacancies existed
and they were qualified and were found suitable. The writ application was allowed.
While reversing the decision of the High Court, it was observed by this Court that it
was open to the Government to decide how MANY appointments should be made and
although the High Court had appreciated the position correctly, it had ``somehow
persuaded itself to spell out a right in the candidates because in fact there were 15
vacancies''. It was expressly ruled that the existence of vacancies does not give a legal
right to a selected candidate. Similarly, the claim of some of the candidates selected
for appointment, who were petitioners in Jitendra Kumar and Others v. State of
Punjab and Others, was turned down holding that it was open to the Government to
decide how many appointments would be made. The plea of arbitrariness was
rejected in view of the facts of the case and it was had that the candidates did not
acquire any right merely by applying for selection or even after selection. It is true
that the claim of the petitioner in the case of Miss Neelima Shangla v. State of
Haryana was allowed by this Court but, not on the ground that // 40 // she had
acquired any right by her selection and existence of vacancies. The fact was that the
matter had been referred to the Public Service Commission which sent to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 24
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
Government only the names of 17 candidates belonging to the general category on the
assumption that only 17 posts were to be filled up. The Government accordingly made
only 17 appointments and stated before the Court that they were unable to select and
appoint more candidates as the Commission had not recommended any other
candidate. In this background it was observed that it is, of course, open to the
Government not to fill up all the vacancies for a valid reason, but the selection cannot
be arbitrarily restricted to a few candidates notwithstanding the number of vacancies
and the availability of qualified candidates; and there must be a conscious application
of mind by the Government and the High Court before the number of persons
selected for appointment is restricted. The fact that it was not for the Public Service
Commission to take a decision in this regard was emphasised in this judgment. None
of these decisions, therefore, supports the appellant".
xxx xxx xxx 19.6. Since this Court has come to a conclusion that the petitioners were
forced to approach this Court on account of GPSC relying upon a Circular of the
Government or on such portion of the Circular which has been declared to be
arbitrary and violative of Article 14 and 16 of the Constitution, therefore, the
respondent No.2 GPSC is required to be saddled with costs, which would be payable
to the petitioners. Costs quantified at Rs.25,000/- in each of the petitions is imposed
upon GPSC, which shall be paid by GPSC through the Registry of this Court to the
respective petitioners".
9. I have heard Mr. B.P. Das, learned counsel appearing for the Petitioner, Mr. B.S. Tripathy,
learned counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2, Mr. G. Mishra, Sr. Counsel appearing for Opp.
Party Nos.
3 & 4 along with Mr. H.S. Deo and Mr. D.K. Panda, learned counsel appearing for Opp. Party No. 5.
On the consent of all the Parties the // 41 // matter was finally heard at the stage of admission with
due exchange of pleadings and disposed of vide the present common order.
10. Having heard learned counsel appearing for the Parties and after going through the materials
available on record, this Court finds that pursuant to the agreement executed by Opp. Party No. 1
with Opp.
Party No. 3 on 10.11.1999, Petitioners herein were appointed as teaching and non-teaching staff in
the school run by Opp. Party No. 3 in Deepsikha Township in the name and style of St. Mary's
School, Deepsikha Township, Kanhia-O.P. No.4.
10.1. After going through different clauses of the agreement dtd.10.11.1999 under Annexure-1, this
Court finds that even though the school is run by Opp. Party No. 3, but Opp. Party No. 1 has
pervasive control over the management of the school in question. As further found from the
agreement, Opp. Party No. 1 was required to compensate the short fall amount towards salary of the
teaching and non-teaching staff of the School and the salary is to be paid as per the scale prescribed
by the Govt. of India as per CBSE pattern. Since in terms of the agreement executed under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 25
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
Annexure-1, Opp. Party No. 1 was having pervasive control over the management of the school so
run by Opp. Party No. 3 and because of the termination of the agreement with Opp. Party No. 3 so
issued vide notice dtd.12.06.2015, Petitioners // 42 // on the face of the interim order passed by this
Court on 23.11.2015 were deprived to continue either in the school of Opp. Party No. 3 or in the
school run by Opp. Party No. 5 w.e.f. the Academic Session 2016-
17. Placing reliance on the decisions so relied on by the learned counsel appearing for the
Petitioners, this Court is of the view that Petitioners taking into account their long continuance in
the school prior to the Academic Session 2016-17 are eligible and entitled to get the salary as due
and admissible in terms of Para 18 of the agreement dtd.10.11.1999 under Annexure-1.
10.2. Petitioners are also eligible and entitled to get the benefit of gratuity and provident fund as
well as other admitted dues for their continuance in the school run by Opp. Party No. 3. But since in
terms of the agreement executed under Annexure-1, Opp. Party No. 1 was acting as the Principal
employer having pervasive control over the Management of the School run by Opp. Party No. 3 and
as per Para 3.3 of the MOU signed in between Opp. Party No. 1 and Opp. Party No. 5, this Court
directs Opp. Party Nos. 1 and 3 to release the differential salary of the Petitioners as due and
admissible for the period Petitioners continued in the School of Opp. Party No. 3 in terms of Para 18
of the agreement. Petitioners are also eligible and entitled to get the benefit of gratuity and
provident fund dues as due and admissible to be paid by // 43 // Opp. Party Nos. 1 and 3. However,
taking into account the fact that because of the unilateral action of Opp. Party No. 1, Petitioners
were not allowed to continue w.e.f. the Academic Session 2016-17 and they lost their livelihood
because of such action, this Court placing reliance on the decision of this Court in the case of
Harapriya Nanda as cited (supra), held the Petitioners entitled to get compensation amount of Rs.
5,00,000/- each to be paid by Opp. Party No. 1.
10.3. This Court accordingly directs Opp. Party No. 1 to release the compensation amount of Rs.
5,00,000/- to each of the Petitioners and further direct Opp. Party Nos. 1 and 3 to release
differential salary in terms of Para 18 of the agreement dt.10.11.1999 under Annexure-1 for the
period Petitioners continued under Opp. Party No. 3 and 4. This Court also directs Opp. Party Nos. 1
& 3 to release the gratuity, provident fund dues as due and admissible to the Petitioners. The entire
amount as due and admissible and as directed be released in favour of the Petitioners by Opp. Party
Nos. 1 & 3 within a period of three (3) months from the date of receipt of this order.
11. The writ petition is accordingly disposed of.
(Biraja Prasanna Satapathy)
Digitally Signed Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Signed by: SNEHANJALI PARIDA th
Dated the 4 of April, 2024/Sneha
Designation: Sr. Stenographer
Reason: Authentication
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 26
Manoranjan Patnaik & Ors vs National Thermal Power .... Opposite ... on 4 April, 2024
Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Date: 04-Apr-2024 19:17:43
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59245130/ 27
