Manoj Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 August, 2019
Manoj Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27
August, 2019
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2019 MP 933
Author: Rajeev Kumar Dubey
Bench: Rajeev Kumar Dubey
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
CRR.2971/2019
(Manoj Kumar Pandey Vs. State of M.P.)
1
Jabalpur, Dated : 27.08.2019
Shri S.K. Jaiswal, counsel for the applicant.
Mrs. Nalini Gurung, P.L. for the respondent / State.
This petition has been filed under Section 397/401 of Cr.P.C. against the order dated 12.06.2019
passed by Special Judge, Special Court under Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985
(hereinafter referred to as "NDPS Act") Rewa in Special Case No.9/2019, whereby learned Special
Judge rejected the applicant's application filed u/S.457 / 451 of Cr.P.C to get the interim custody of
the Mahendra Scorpio Jeep bearing registration No. MP/17- CA/5835, seized by the Police Station
Chorhata, District Rewa in Crime No.46/2019 registered for the offence Punishable under Section 8,
20, 25, 25A of the NDPS Act.
2. Brief facts of the case which are relevant to the disposal of this petition are that on 21/1/2019 on
the information of informant that illegal ganja was being transported from Maihar to Rewa by a
truck bearing registration No.MP-20-HB-3344. On that Virendra Singh Parihar Sub-Inspector of
Police Station Churhata along with other members of the police force went to bypass road Rewa,
where they waited for the truck, at around 12:50, he saw that said truck bearing registration
No.MP-20-HB-3344 was coming from Bela side and one white colour Scorpio Jeep bearing
registration No.MP-17- CA-5835 was also coming in front of the truck. The truck was being driven
by the co-accused Veer Singh, Garvinder Singh and Mukesh was also travelling in the said truck. The
Scorpio Jeep bearing registration No.MP-17-CA-5835 was being driven by the applicant Manoj and
co-accused Ramlal was travelling in that jeep. He intercepted Both the vehicles. In search of the
truck, 10 quintals 50 gram ganja worth of Rupees One Crore was found which was illegally being
carried in the truck. On interrogation, co-accused Veer Singh informed the police that he took that
ganja to deliver it to the coaccused Ramlal Jaiswal. After investigation police filed the charge THE
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Manoj Kumar Pandey Vs. State of M.P.) sheet and on that
charge sheet Special Case No. 9/2019 was registered which is pending before Special Judge Rewa
(notified under NDPS Act). During pendency of the case, the applicant, who is the registered owner
of the said vehicle filed an application under Section 457 /451 of Cr.P.C. before Special Judge Rewa
for getting interim custody of the said vehicle. The learned Special Judge rejected the application
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131132326/ 1
Manoj Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 August, 2019
vide order dated 12.06.2019. Being aggrieved by that order, applicant filed this petition.
3. Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that applicant is the registered owner of the
Mahendra Scorpio jeep bearing registration No. MP/17-CA/5835, so he is entitled to get the custody
of said vehicle. He further submitted that learned Special Judge committed mistake in rejecting the
prayer of the applicant and not giving the said vehicle in custody. In this regard, counsel has relied
on the Apex Court judgment passed in the case of Sunderbhai Ambalal Desai vs. State of Gujarat
(2002)10 SCC 283, whereby the Court held that whatever be the situation, it is of no use to keep
seized vehicle at Police Stations for long period. It is for the Magistrate to pass appropriate orders
immediately by taking bond and guarantee as well as security for return of said vehicle, if required
at any point of time. Hence counsel prayed that the application be allowed.
4. On the contrary, learned counsel for the respondent/State has opposed the submissions of
learned counsel for the applicant and has submitted that the said vehicle was seized for carrying
illegal Ganja under the NDPS Act, therefore, looking to the provisions of Section 52A of the NDPS
Act and the Notification dated 16/01/2015 in which it is mentioned that seized conveyance will also
be disposed of by the Drug Disposal Committee learned trial Court has rightly rejected the
applicant's application.
5. This Court has gone through the record and arguments put forth by both the parties. It appears
from the record that learned Special Judge rejected the applicant's prayer only on the ground that as
per the THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Manoj Kumar Pandey Vs. State of M.P.)
notification dated 16/01/2015 issued by the Central Government under Section 52A of the Act, all
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances seized under the
NDPS Act shall be disposed of by the Drugs Disposal Committee and according to Sub-rule (5) of the
Rule 9 of the said notification, seized vehicles can be disposed off by the Committee through
auction. If the vehicle is given in the interim custody to the applicant, then the proceedings of the
Drug Disposal Committee will be hampered. But the reasons assigned by the learned Special Judge
for rejecting the applicant's application does not appear to be correct.
6. The relevant provisions of the NDPS Act and the notification dated 16/01/2015 reads as under:-
"Section 52A as amended by Act 16 of 2014, deals with disposal of seized drugs and
psychotropic substances. It reads:-
"Section 52A : Disposal of seized narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances.
(1) The Central Government may, having regard to the hazardous nature,
vulnerability to theft, substitution, constraint of proper storage space or any other
relevant consideration, in respect of any narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances,
controlled substances or conveyances, by notification in the Official Gazette, specify
such narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyance or
class of narcotic drugs, class of psychotropic substances, class of controlled
substances or conveyances, which shall, as soon as may be after their seizure, be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131132326/ 2
Manoj Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 August, 2019
disposed of by such officer and in such manner as that Government may, from time
to time, determine after following the procedure hereinafter specified. (2) Where any
narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances has
been seized and forwarded to the officer-in-charge of the nearest police station or to
the officer empowered under section 53, the officer referred to in sub-section (1) shall
prepare an inventory of such narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled
substances or conveyances containing such details relating to their description,
quality, quantity, mode of packing, marks, numbers or such other identifying
particulars of the narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, controlled substances or
conveyances or the packing in which they are packed, country of origin and other
particulars as the officer referred to in sub-section (1) may consider relevant to the
identity of narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances, THE HIGH COURT OF
MADHYA PRADESH (Manoj Kumar Pandey Vs. State of M.P.) controlled substances
or conveyances in any proceedings under this Act and make an application, to any
Magistrate for the purpose of-
(a) certifying the correctness of the inventory so prepared; or
(b) taking, in the presence of such Magistrate, photographs of "such drugs,
substances or conveyances and certifying such photographs as true; or
(c) allowing to draw representative samples of such drugs or substances, in the
presence of such Magistrate and certifying the correctness of any list of samples so
drawn.
(3) When an application is made under sub-section (2), the Magistrate shall, as soon
as may be, allow the application.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872)
or the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), every court trying an offence
under this Act, shall treat the inventory, the photographs of [narcotic drugs,
psychotropic substances, controlled substances or conveyances] and any list of
samples drawn under sub-section (2) and certified by the Magistrate, as primary
evidence in respect of such offence.]"
Sub Clause 5 of clause 9 of Notification dated 16.01.2015 in which the provision has been made for
disposal of the narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, controlled substances or the
conveyances under Section 52A of the NDPS Act provides as under:-
(5) Narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and controlled substances having
legitimate medical or industrial use, and conveyances shall be disposed of in the
following manner:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131132326/ 3
Manoj Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 August, 2019
(a) narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and controlled substances which are in
the form of formulations and labeled in accordance with the provisions of the Drugs
and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the rules made thereunder may be sold, by
way of tender or auction or in any other manner as may be determined by the Drug
Disposal Committee, after confirming the composition and formulation from the
licensed manufacturer mentioned in the label, to a person fulfilling the requirements
of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of 1940) and the Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985) and the rules and orders made
thereunder, provided that a minimum of 60% of the shelf Psychotropic Substances
Rules, 1985.life of the seized formulation remains at the time of such sale;
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Manoj Kumar Pandey Vs. State of M.P.)
(b) narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and controlled substances seized in the form of
formulations and without proper labeling shall be destroyed;
(c) narcotic drugs, psychotropic substances and controlled substances seized in bulk form may be
sold by way of tender or auction or in any other manner as may be determined by the Drug Disposal
Committee, to a person fulfilling the requirements of the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of
1940) and the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985), and the rules and
orders made thereunder, after confirming the standards and fitness of the seized substances for
medical purposes from the appropriate authority under the Drugs and Cosmetics Act, 1940 (23 of
1940) and the rules made thereunder;
(d) controlled substances having legitimate industrial use may be sold, by way of tender or auction
or in any other manner as may be determined by the Drug Disposal Committee, to a person fulfilling
the requirements of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1985 (61 of 1985) and the
rules and orders made thereunder;
(e) seized conveyances shall be sold off by way of tender or auction as determined by the Drug
Disposal Committee.
7. Sections 60(3) and 63 of NDPS Act also have relevance to the issue involved in this case for
determination. Section 60(3) and Section 63 of the NDPS Act reads as follows:-
"60. Liability of illicit drugs, substances, plants, articles and conveyances to
confiscation.-
(1) xxxxx (2) xxxxx (3) Any animal or conveyance used in carrying any narcotic drug
or psychotropic substance, or any article liable to confiscation under sub-section (1)
or sub-
section (2) shall be liable to confiscation, unless the owner of the animal or conveyance proves that
it was so used without the knowledge or connivance of the owner himself, his agent, if any, and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131132326/ 4
Manoj Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 August, 2019
person-in-charge of the animal or conveyance and that each of them had taken all reasonable
precautions against such use.
63. Procedure in making confiscation.- (1) In the trial of offences under this Act, whether the
accused is convicted or THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Manoj Kumar Pandey Vs.
State of M.P.) acquitted or discharged, the court shall decide whether any article or thing seized
under this Act is liable to confiscation For Subsequent orders under section 60 or section 61 or
section 62, and, if it decides that the article is so liable, it may order confiscation accordingly.
(2) Where any article or thing seized under this Act appears to be liable to confiscation under section
60 or section 61 or section 62, but the person who committed the offence in connection therewith is
not known or cannot be found, the court may inquire into and decide such liability, and may order
confiscation accordingly:
Provided that no order of confiscation of an article or thing shall be made until the
expiry of one month from the date of seizure, or without hearing any person who may
claim any right thereto and the evidence, if any, which he produces in respect of his
claim:
Provided further that if any such article or thing, other than a narcotic drug,
psychotropic substance [or controlled substance] the opium poppy, coca plant or
cannabis plant is liable to speedy and natural decay, or if the court is of opinion that
its sale would be for the benefit of its owner, it may at any time direct it to be sold;
and the provisions of this sub- section shall, as nearly as may be practicable, apply to
the net proceeds of the sale."
8. From the perusal of the above-mentioned provisions of NDPS Act and the
Notification, it emerges that earlier in the Act there were no provisions regarding the
pre-trial disposal of the seized narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. The
storage of seized narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances up to the final
conclusion of the trial of the cases created many problems. Section 52-A(1) of the
NDPS Act, 1985 empowers the Central Government to prescribe by a notification the
procedure to be followed for seizure, storage and THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH (Manoj Kumar Pandey Vs. State of M.P.) disposal of drugs and
psychotropic substances. So to counter the problems like vulnerability to theft,
substitution, constraints of proper storage space and other relevant problems the
Central Government in the exercise of that power has issued said notification, which
prescribes the procedure of pre-trial disposal and destruction of seized narcotic
drugs, psychotropic substances and conveyance.
9. However the legislature has not given any power to the Drugs Disposal Committee
to decide the claim of a person who place claims on the conveyance (vehicle) seized
under the provisions of NDPS Act for illegal transporting of any narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances, as given by the legislature to the special court under section
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131132326/ 5
Manoj Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 August, 2019
60 and 63 of the Act. Where a person claims for release the vehicle seized under the
provisions of NDPS Act for illegal transportation of any narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances there are no provisions in the notification to decide that
claim. So, in that case, the provisions of Section 60 & 63 of the NDPS Act would
prevail on the provisions of the notification issued by the central government under
Section 52A of the NDPS Act.
According to the provisions of Section 60 & 63 of the NDPS Act, seized conveyance cannot be
disposed of without deciding the claim of the person who claimed that conveyance and the power to
decide the claim of such a person is only given by the legislature to special court under Section 60 &
63 of the NDPS Act. In Sections 52 and 52A of NDPS Act, the word 'confiscation' is not used because
the trial is yet to come and it is the discretion of the trial Court "to confiscate or not to confiscate"
the conveyance seized under the NDPS Act as per the legal provisions.
10. Although Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Union of India v. Mohanlal, (2016) 3 SCC 379
held "No sooner the seizure of any narcotic drugs and psychotropic and controlled substances and
conveyances is affected, the same shall be forwarded to the THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH (Manoj Kumar Pandey Vs. State of M.P.) officer in charge of the nearest police station or
to the officer empowered under Section 53 of the Act. The officer concerned shall then approach the
Magistrate with an application under Section 52- A(2) of the Act, which shall be allowed by the
Magistrate as soon as may be required under sub-section (3) of Section 52-A, as discussed by us in
the body of this judgment under the heading "seizure and sampling".
11. But in that judgment Apex Court has not dealt with the provisions of Section 60(3) and 63 of the
NDPS Act and has not held that where a person claims to the conveyance seized under the
provisions of NDPS Act for illegal transporting of any narcotic drugs, psychotropic or controlled
substances, the committee has the power to dispose of the said vehicle before decision of his claim
by the concerned special judge. So in the considered opinion of this court, the ultimate effect of the
provisions of the Section 60 & 63 of the NDPS Act is that where a person claims to get a vehicle
seized under the provisions of NDPS Act, for illegal transporting of any contraband, the committee
cannot dispose that vehicle unless the claim of the person is decided by the concerned court. The
disposal of conveyance in terms of the Para-9(5)(e) by the committee is only possible after the
confiscation proceeding is complete. As also held by the single bench of Tripura High Court in the
Case of Sri Sankar Das Vs The State of Tripura criminal petition No.9 of 2018 Judgement dated 16th
March of 2018
12. On perusal of the provisions of Section 60(3) and Section 63 of the NDPS Act, as mentioned
above it is clear that the conveyance seized under the NDPS Act shall be liable to confiscation only
when the owner of the conveyance who was given an opportunity by the Court could not prove that
the conveyance was used without his knowledge or connivance. The Court will have to decide
whether a vehicle seized under the NDPS Act is liable to confiscation only on conclusion of the trial.
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Manoj Kumar Pandey Vs. State of M.P.)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131132326/ 6
Manoj Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 August, 2019
13. There is no provision in the NDPS Act to restrict the power of the trial Court to release the
vehicle in interim custody. It has been held by this Court in the case of Pandurang Kadam vs State of
M.P. 2005 (2) ANJ MP 351, that notwithstanding the fact that the vehicle is liable to be confiscated
under Section 60 of the NDPS Act, it may be released in interim custody in appropriate cases. Thus,
interim custody should not be denied to the owner of the vehicle, simply because it is liable to be
confiscated under Section 60 of the NDPS Act.
14. There is no evidence on record to show that police seized any illegal ganja from that vehicle,
police only on that basis that said vehicle was going ahead of the truck from which said illegal ganja
was seized, seized that vehicle. There is also no evidence on record to show that applicant has a
criminal past and he was involved in similar crimes in the past too. If the seized vehicle is kept lying
at the Police Station, the value of the said vehicle would be diminished and its parts would be
damaged. So in the considered opinion of this court learned Special Judge committed mistake in
rejecting the applicant's application to get the interim custody of the vehicle.
15. Hence, petition is allowed and it is directed that the said Mahendra Scorpio vehicle bearing
registration No. MP/17-CA/5835 seized in Crime No. 46/2019 registered at Police Station Chorhata
for the offence Punishable under Section 8, 20, 25, 25A of NDPS Act be released in favour of
applicant registered owner of the vehicle on the following terms and conditions :-
1. The applicant Manoj Kumar Pandey S/o Shri Chandrashekhar Pandey shall furnish
Supurdiginama to the sum of Rs.5,00,000/-
(Rupees Five Lacs Only) and the surety of the like amount to the satisfaction of the trial Court for
releasing the vehicle in question.
2. The applicant shall also furnish an undertaking that he shall produce the vehicle in question as &
when required during the trial.
THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Manoj Kumar Pandey Vs. State of M.P.)
3. The applicant shall not alienate the same or make use of such vehicle for any unlawful purpose
during pendency of the case.
4. An undertaking shall also be given by the applicant that the nature of the vehicle in question shall
not be changed without prior permission of this Court.
It is further directed that before releasing the vehicle in interim custody of the applicant, the S.H.O.
of concerning police station shall get photographs seized 18 x 12 inches of the concerned vehicle
taken from all sides and also the photographs showing engine number and chassis number. Such
photographs shall be filed in the trial Court to be kept along with the record.
With the aforesaid directions, this petition stands disposed of. Certified copy as per rules.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131132326/ 7
Manoj Kumar Pandey vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 27 August, 2019
(Rajeev Kumar Dubey) Judge (ra)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/131132326/ 8
