Mansingh And Another vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
Mansingh And Another vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:15584
Court No. - 66
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 481 of 2025
Applicant :- Mansingh And Another
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Noor Muhammad,Yogesh Kumar Srivastava
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Sameer Jain,J.
1. Supplementary affidavit filed by the applicants is taken on record.
2. Learned counsel for the applicants submitted that due to mistake earlier bail of the applicants
could not be dismissed by the court concerned for the offense under Section 3/21 B.U.D.S. Act but
now order dated 26.11.2024 passed by the court concerned has been corrected, therefore, he may be
permitted to make necessary corrections in the prayer clause of the instant bail application.
3. Learned AGA is having no objection.
4. In view of the above, learned counsel for the applicants is permitted to make necessary
corrections in the prayer clause of the instant bail application during the course of date itself.
5. Heard Sri Yogesh Kumar Srivastava, learned counsel for the applicants and Sri Shatrughna Yadav,
learned AGA for the State-respondent.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191901615/ 1
Mansingh And Another vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
6. The instant application has been filed seeking release of the applicants on bail in Case Crime No.
261 of 2024, under Sections 111, 61(2), 318, 336(3), 340(2), 351(3) BNS and 3/21 B.U.D.S. Act,
Police Station- Talbehat, District- Lalitpur, during pendency of the trial in the court below.
7. Learned counsel for the applicant submitted that applicants were not named in the FIR and as per
FIR, the LUCC company after receiving money from the investor duped them and did not return
their amount but during investigation, applicants have been made accused in the present matter on
the ground that they were one of the agents in LUCC company.
8. He further submitted that merely being agent of company, applicants cannot be held liable, if
subsequently company failed to repay the amount to its investors.
9. He further submitted that even arrest of Sri Manvendra Dwivedi, the Chairman of LUCC
company, has been stayed by this Court vide order dated 18.11.2024 passed in Criminal Misc. Writ
Petition No. 15711 of 2024.
10. He further submitted that applicants are petty agents of the company and they were not having
any concern with the working of the company.
11. He further submitted that applicants were not having any previous criminal history but
subsequent to the present matter, they were made accused in as many as 10 cases with similar
allegations and criminal history of the applicants has been explained in the instant bail application.
12. He further submitted that, however, in the present matter applicants have also been challenged
for the offense under Section 111 BNS i.e. for organized crime but there is no evidence of organized
crime against the applicants and merely on the basis of subsequent criminal history and the fact that
they are one of the agent of the company, it cannot be said that applicants involved in commission of
offense of organized crime.
13. He further submitted that except the offense under Section 111 BNS i.e. for organized crime, all
the other offenses are tribal by Magistrate-I Class and in the present matter, applicants are in jail
since 23.08.2024 i.e. for last more than four months.
14. Per contra, learned AGA, however, opposed the prayer for bail but could not dispute the
argument on facts advanced by learned counsel for the applicants.
15. I have heard both the parties and perused the record of the case.
16. From the record, it reflects that applicants were not named in the FIR and during investigation,
they were made accused in the present matter on the ground that they were also one of the agents in
LUCC company. From the record, it also reflects that being agents of the company, applicants
deposited money of the investors in the company but after that company failed to repay the amount
of its investors and considering this fact, the argument advanced by learned counsel for the
applicants that being agent of the company, applicants cannot be held liable, if subsequently
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191901615/ 2
Mansingh And Another vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
company failed to repay the amount to its investors, cannot be completely ruled out.
17. Further, however, apart from the present case, applicants are having criminal history of 10 other
cases but it appears that applicants were not having any previous criminal history and subsequent to
the present case, they have been made accused in all these cases on the basis of similar allegation.
18. Further, in the present matter, however, applicants have also been challaned for the offense
under Section 111 BNS i.e. for organized crime but it appears that there is no cogent evidence against
them on record with regard to offense under Section 111 BNS.
19. Further, except the offense under Section 111 BNS, all the other offenses are triable by
Magistrate-I Class.
20. Further, in the present matter, applicants are in jail since 23.08.2024 i.e. for last more than 5
months.
21. Further, record also suggests that arrest of Sri Manvendra Dwivedi, the Chairman of LUCC
company, has been stayed by Division Bench of this Court.
22. Therefore, considering the facts and circumstances of the case discussed above, in my view
applicants are entitled to be released on bail.
23. Accordingly, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the instant bail
application is allowed.
24. Let the applicants- Mansingh and Ashok Ahirwar be released on bail in the aforesaid case on
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court
concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) The applicants shall appear before the trial court on the dates fixed, unless his
personal presence is exempted.
(ii) The applicants shall not directly or indirectly, make inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or any police officer or tamper with the
evidence.
(iii) The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal and anti-social activitys.
25. In case of breach of any of the above condition, the prosecution will be at liberty to move an
application before this Court for cancellation of the bail of the applicant.
26. It is clarified that the observations made herein are limited to the facts brought in by the parties
pertaining to the disposal of bail application and the said observations shall have no bearing on the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191901615/ 3
Mansingh And Another vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
merits of the case during trial.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025 KK Patel
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191901615/ 4
