Mansi Shukla vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. ... on 31 January, 2025
Mansi Shukla vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. ... on 31 January,
2025
Author: Alok Mathur
Bench: Alok Mathur
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:7007
Court No. - 6
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 5608 of 2024
Petitioner :- Mansi Shukla
Respondent :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Panchayati Raj Deptt. Lko. And Another
Counsel for Petitioner :- Sanjay Kumar Srivastava,Akshat Kumar
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Alok Mathur,J.
1. Heard Shri Sanjay Kumar Srivastava, learned counsel for the petitioner and learned Standing
Counsel appearing for the State.
2. The present petitioner has been filed for the following relief:
"i. Issue a writ, order or direction, in the nature of certiorari quashing the impugned
order dated 22/05/2024 passed by the opposite party No.2 contained as Annexure
No.1 to the writ petition.
ii. Issue a writ, order or direction in the nature of mandamus commanding the
opposite party No.2 to give compassionate appointment to the petitioner on a
suitable post in the department/office of District Panchayat Raj, Unnao, forthwith.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195425275/ 1
Mansi Shukla vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. ... on 31 January, 2025
iii. Issue such other appropriate writ, direction or order which this Hon'ble Court
may deem just and proper in the circumstances of the case.
iv. Allow the writ petition with costs."
3. Learned Counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the father of the petitioner, late Shri
Bhalesh Kumar was appointed on the post of Safai Karmachaari on 29.09.2008 after regular
selection, and subsequently, his services were regularized vide order dated 15.12.2015 with effect
from 21.05.2014. He has further submitted that father of the petitioner unfortunately died on
28.08.2023 during his service leaving behind his wife, namely, Smt. Mamta and three daughters,
namely Smt. Shruti, Smt. Mansi (petitioner) and Smt. Tanish Shukla. Petitioner, being a married
daughter, had applied for being granted compassionate appointment under the Uttar Pradesh
Government Servants Dying-in-Harness Rules, 1974 (hereinafter referred to as the "Rules, 1974")
considering the fact that despite being married, the petitioner was dependent upon her father as her
husband is a physically challenged person, and accordingly, she was duly qualified and eligible for
being appointed under the Rules, 1974. He has next submitted that though the definition of family,
as provided under rules, 1974, did not include married daughter, but after consideration by this
Court in this regard in the case of Smt. Vimla Srivastava and Ors. Vs. State of UP and Ors., Writ-C
No.60881 of 2015, the State of UP has amended the definition of family and now it would also
include 'married daughter' in the definition. He has vehemently submitted that as the respondents
were not considering the claim of the petitioner for appointment under the Rules, 1974, the
petitioner approached this Court on the previous occasion by filing a petition bearing Writ Petition
No.3067 of 2024; Mansi Shukla Vs. State of UP and Anr. which was disposed of by this Court by
means of order 22.04.2024, directing the respondents to decide the representation of the petitioner
by reasoned and speaking order in accordance with law. It is in compliance of the direction of this
Court, the respondents have considered the representation of the petitioner which has been assailed
by the petitioner in the present case, whereby they have rejected the representation of the petitioner.
4. Learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that one of the main grounds canvassed by the
petitioner is that the respondents have not considered the claim of the petitioner that a married
daughter is included in a definition of family, and consequently, she would be entitled to the
benefited under the Rules, 1974. While rejecting the representation of the petitioner, they have held
that the petitioner being a married daughter is not entitled to get compassionate appointment under
the Rules, 1974, and consequently rejected the representation.
5. Learned counsel for the petitioner, while assailing the impugned order dated 22.05.2024, has
submitted that the aforesaid judgment is illegal, arbitrary and contrary to the judgment given by
Division Bench of this Court in the case of Smt. Vimla Srivastava (supra), wherein this Court has
clearly held that a married daughter would be included in the definition of family and consequently
would be liable to be considered for compassionate appointment. He has further submitted that the
entire basis and reasoning of the aforesaid order is erroneous, illegal and arbitrary. Accordingly,
same is liable to be set aside and further prayed for a direction to the respondents to appoint the
petitioner on the suitable post under the Rules, 1974.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195425275/ 2
Mansi Shukla vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. ... on 31 January, 2025
6. Learned Standing Counsel has opposed to prayer of the petitioner but he could not dispute the
submissions made by learned counsel for the petitioner.
7. Considering the submissions of the counsel for the petitioner and having perused the record, it is
noticed that petitioner is a married daughter of the deceased Government servant who was working
on the post of Safai Karmchari in the Panchayati Raj Department and had died on 28.08.2023 while
being in service. Though, there were other family members who could have claimed compassionate
appointment under the Rules, 1974 but it seems that it is the petitioner who moved an appropriate
application for being appointed under the Rules, 1974. It is on the interference of this Court that the
respondents proceeded to consider the case of the petitioner for compassionate appointment and
have rejected the representation solely on the ground that the petitioner being a married daughter
cannot be included in the definition of family and consequently cannot be appointed under the
Rules, 1974. The question therefore with regard to the entitlement of the petitioner being a married
daughter is no longer res integra, inasmuch as, the said issue stands concluded by the Division
Bench of this Court in the case of Smt. Vimla Srivastava (supra).
8. This Court has observed the following while allowing the aforesaid writ petition :
"During the course of submissions, our attention was also drawn to the judgment
rendered by a learned Single Judge of this Court in Mudita vs. State of U.P. 3. The
learned Single Judge while proceeding to deal with an identical issue of the right of a
married daughter to be considered under the Dying-in-Harness Rules observed that a
married daughter is a part of the family of her husband and could not therefore be
expected to continue to provide for the family of the deceased government servant.
The judgment proceeds on the premise that marriage severs all relationships that the
daughter may have had with her parents: In any case it shuts out the consideration of
the claim of the married daughter without any enquiry on the issue of dependency. In
the view that we have taken we are unable to accept or affirm the reasoning of the
learned Single Judge and are constrained to hold that Mudita does not lay down the.
correct position of the law.
In conclusion, we hold that the exclusion of married daughters from the ambit of the
expression "family" in Rule 2 (c) of the Dying-in-Harness Rules is illegal and
unconstitutional, being violative of Articles 14 and 15 of the Constitution.
We, accordingly, strike down the word 'unmarried' in Rule 2 (c) (iii) of the
Dying-in-Hamess Rules. • In consequence, we direct that the claim of the petitioners
for compassionate appointment shall be reconsidered. We clarify that the competent
authority would be at liberty to consider the claim for compassionate appointment on
the basis of all the relevant facts and circumstances and the petitioners shall not be
excluded from consideration only on the ground of their marital status.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195425275/ 3
Mansi Shukla vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. ... on 31 January, 2025
The writ petitions shall, accordingly, stand allowed: There shall be no order as to
costs."
9. Accordingly, there is no diversion in the view that the petitioner being a married daughter would
be entitled to be considered for appointment under the Rules, 1974 and the very basis of the order
dated 22.05.2024 is erroneous, illegal and deserves to be set aside.
10. In light of the above, the present writ petition is allowed and impugned order dated 22.05.2024
is hereby quashed. Respondents are directed to reconsider the application of the petitioner for
appointment on compassionate ground under the Rules, 1974 and pass necessary order within a
period of four weeks and no more from the date of production of certified copy of this order.
11. The petitioner also undertakes to cooperate in the proceedings.
(Alok Mathur,J.) Order Date :- 31.1.2025 V. Sinha
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/195425275/ 4
