Manvendra vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
Manvendra vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
Author: Rajeev Misra
Bench: Rajeev Misra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:14844
Court No. - 71
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 44567 of 2024
Applicant :- Manvendra
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Bindeshwari Prasad Mishra,Satyendra Narayan Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Rajeev Misra,J.
Heard Mr. B.P. Mishra, the learned counsel for applicant and the learned A.G.A. for State.
Perused the record.
Applicant- Manvendra who is a charge sheeted accused has approached this Court by means of
present application under section 482 Cr.P.C. with the following prayer:
"It is therefore, most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may graciously be
pleased to allow this application and quash the entire proceeding of Session Trial No.
82 of 2022 (State Vs. Manvendra) arising out of the Case Crime No. 298 of 2021,
under section 376,"5B I.P.C., Police Station Nauhjheel, District Mathura, pending in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160113870/ 1
Manvendra vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
the court learned Additional Sessions Judge/Fast Track Court Mathura in the light
compromise dated 12.08.2024 arrived between the parties in the aforesaid case.
It is further prayed that this Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to stay the further
proceeding of Session Trial No. 82 of 2022 (State Vs. Manvendra) arising out of the
Case Crime No. 298 of 2021, under section 376, *504).P.C., Police Station Nauhjheel,
District Mathura, pending in the court learned Additional Sessions Judge/Fast Track
Court Mathura in the light compromise dated 12.08.2024 arrived between the parties
and further be pleased to pass any suitable order which this Hon'ble Court deem fit
and proper in the facts and circumstances of the case."
Learned counsel for applicant submits that during pendency of above mentioned Sessions Trial,
parties amicably settled their dispute out side the Court. On the basis of settlement arrived at
between the parties, a compromise application dated 12.8.2024 was filed before Court below which
was also supported by the affidavit of prosecutrix. On the aforesaid premise, the learned counsel for
applicant submits that since the dispute between the parties is a purely private dispute, in which
parties have entered into compromsie, therefore, no useful purpose shall be served in prolonging the
criminal procution of applicant present proceedings. He, therefore, submits that present application
is therefore liable to be allowed.
Per contra, the learned A.G.A. has vehemently opposed the present application. Referring to the
judgement of Supreme Court in Rampal Vs. State of Haryana, AIR online 2019 SC 1716 he submits
that in view of aforesaid judgement, no compromise can be entered into by the parties in matters
relating to rape and sexual assault. As such, the proceedings of above mentioned Sessions Trial
cannot be terminated by this Court on the basis of compromise entered into by the parties. Learned
A.G.A. further submits that since no such development has taken place on the basis of which
criminality alleged to have committed by applicant can be said to be washed of, therefore, no
interference is warranted by this Court in present application. At this juncture reference be made to
the judgement of Supreme Court in K. Dhandapani Vs. State by the Inspector of Police, 2022 SCC
OnLine SC 1056. Since the judgement is a short one therefore the same is reproduced in its entirety:
""1. Leave granted.
2. The appellant who is the maternal uncle of the prosecutrix belongs to Valayar
community, which is a most backward community in the State of Tamilnadu. He
worksas a woodcutter on daily wages in a private factory. FIR was registered against
him forcommitting rape under Sections 5(j)(ii) read with Section 6, 5(I) read with
Section 6 and 5(n) read with Section 6 of Protection of Child from Sexual Offences
(POCSO) Act, 2012. He was convicted after trial for committing the said offences and
sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for a period of 10 years by the Sessions
Judge, Fast Track Mahila Court, Tiruppur on 31.10.2018. The High Court, by an
order dated 13.02.2019, upheld the conviction and sentence. Aggrieved thereby, the
appellant has filed this appeal.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160113870/ 2
Manvendra vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
3. Mr. M.P. Parthiban, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, submitted that
allegation against him was that he had physical relations with the prosecutrix on the
promise of marrying her. He stated that, in fact, he married the prosecutrix and they
have two children. 4. The appellant submitted that this Court should exercise its
power under Article 142 of the Constitution and ought to do complete justice and it
could not be in the interest of justice to disturb the family life of the appellant and the
prosecutrix.
5. After hearing the matter for some time on 08th March, 2022, we directed the
District Judge to record the statement of the prosecutrix about her present status.
The statement of the prosecutrix has been placed on record in which she has
categorically stated that she has two children and they are being taken care of by the
appellant and she is leading a happy married life.
6. Dr. Joseph Aristotle S., learned counsel appearing for the State, opposed the grant
of any relief to the appellant on the ground that the prosecutrix was aged 14 years on
the date of the offence and gave birth to the first child when she was 15 years and
second child was born when she was 17 years. He argued that the marriage between
the appellant and the prosecutrix is not legal. He expressed his apprehension that the
said marriage might be only for the purpose of escaping punishment and there is no
guarantee that the appellant will take care of the prosecutrix and the children after
this Court grants relief to him.
7. In the peculiar facts and circumstances of this case, we are of the considered view
that the conviction and sentence of the appellant who is maternal uncle of the
prosecutrix deserves to be set aside in view of the subsequent events that have been
brought to the notice of this Court. This Court cannot shut its eyes to the ground
reality and disturb the happy family life of the appellant and the prosecutrix. We have
been informed about the custom in Tamilnadu of the marriage of a girl with maternal
uncle.
8. For the aforesaid mentioned reasons, the conviction and sentence of the appellant
is set aside in the peculiar facts of the case and shall not be treated as a precedent.
The appeal is accordingly, disposed of. Pending application(s), if any, shall stand
disposed of.
9. In case, the appellant does not take proper care of the prosecutrix, she or the State
on behalf of the prosecutrix can move this Court for modification of this Order."
When confronted with above, the learned counsel for applicant could not overcome the same.
Having heard the learned counsel for applicant, the learned A.G.A. for State and upon perusal of
record, this Court finds that the preliminary objection raised by the learned A.G.A. in opposition to
this application is clearly borne out from the record and furthermore the same could not be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160113870/ 3
Manvendra vs State Of U.P. And Another on 31 January, 2025
dislodged by the learned counsel for applicant, with reference to the record at this stage. As such, no
good ground exists to entertain the present application.
In view of above, this application fails and is liable to be dismissed.
It is accordingly dismissed.
Order Date :- 31.1.2025 Arshad
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/160113870/ 4
