Mariano Fernandes vs M/S Rama Builders on 28 December, 2023
Mariano Fernandes vs M/S Rama Builders on 28 December, 2023
Author: Rajnesh Oswal
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 15.12.2023
Pronounced on: 28.12.2023
CRM(M) No. 1002/2022
1. Mariano Fernandes .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
S/O Mr. Constanico Fernandes,
R/O 1st Floor, Raghunath Building
Opposite Auto, Vasko-da-Gama,
Mormungao, South Goa, Goa.
Through: Mr. Navyug Sethi, Advocate.
Vs
1. M/s Rama Builders, ..... Respondent(s)
Near J&K Bank, Paloura Top Jammu,
Th. Proprietor, Anil Gupta, S/O Ram Lal
Gupta, R/O Ward No. 59, Paloura Top,
Jammu
Through: Mr. Varun Raina, Advocate.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The petitioner has filed the present petition for quashing the criminal proceedings arising out of
complaint titled "Rama Builders Vs. Mariano Fernandes" pending before the court of learned 2nd
Additional Munsiff, Jammu (hereinafter to be referred as „the trial court(cid:129)) and also for quashing the
order dated 09.02.2021 whereby the process has been issued by the learned trial court against the
petitioner for commission of offence under section 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act, 1881.
2. It is stated that Mr. Tarkeshwar Gupta who has been cited as witness in the complaint has already
filed a suit against the petitioner which is pending before the court of learned Civil Judge, Senior
Division at Mapusa, Goa and in order to create pressure upon the petitioner the complaint has been
filed by the respondent in connivance with Tarkeshwar Gupta and his father Sanjay Gupta, who also
has been cited as one of the witnesses in the complaint. The respondent had forcibly snatched this
cheque from the petitioner and filed a complaint against the petitioner, in respect of which the
petitioner had already filed a complaint dated 29.05.2020 with the Deputy Superintendent of Police,
Porovorim, Goa.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54957240/ 1
Mariano Fernandes vs M/S Rama Builders on 28 December, 2023
3. The petitioner has sought the quashing of the complaint as well as order dated 09.02.2021 on the
following grounds:
(i) That the cheque was issued by M/s "Ocean Pearl Fisheries" and not by the
petitioner in his personal capacity, as such, the petitioner cannot be held liable in
respect of the dishonour of cheque issued by the "M/s Ocean Pearl Fisheries".
(ii) That the respondent had forcibly taken the cheque from the petitioner in respect
of which he had already filed a complaint with the Deputy Superintendent of Police,
Porovorim, Goa.
(iii) That the complaint has been filed by the respondent in connivance with
Tarkeshwar Gupta, who has already filed a suit against the petitioner, which is sub
judice before the court of learned Civil Judge, Senior Division at Mapusa, Goa.
Tarkeshwar Gupta and well as his father Sanjay Gupta figure as witnesses in the list
of witnesses submitted by the respondent.
(iv) That the requirements of the Section 141 of Negotiable Instrument Act are not
fulfilled, as the cheque was issued in the name of M/s Ocean Pearl Fisheries and M/s
Ocean Pearl Fisheries has not been arrayed as accused.
(v) That the cheque was rejected by the bank on 26.06.2020 and legal notice was
received by the petitioner on 02.08.2020 although the same was allegedly sent by the
complainant/respondent on 22.07.2020, therefore, the complaint is not
maintainable as the petitioner has not adhered to the timeline as provided under
Section 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act.
4. Mr. Navyug Sethi, learned counsel for the petitioner vehemently argued that the cheque was
issued by M/s Ocean Pearl Fisheries and without arraying the M/s Ocean Pearl Fisheries, the
complaint could not have been filed against the petitioner. He further argued that the complaint is
required to be quashed as the petitioner had already approached the Deputy Superintendent of
Police in respect of snatching of cheque by the respondent. He also argued that the order impugned
has been passed by the learned trial court without following the mandate of section 202 Cr.P.C.
Learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the judgment of High Court of Punjab and
Haryana in case titled "Sardar Bhupinder Singh Vs. M/s Green Feeds Through its Partner Vipin
Kumar"
bearing CRM-M-54111-2021 decided on 26.08.2022.
5. Per contra, Mr. Varun Raina, learned counsel for the respondents vehemently argued that the
provisions as contained in Section 141 Negotiable Instrument Act are not applicable where the
cheque is issued by the owner of proprietary concern, as the proprietary concern has no
independent existence other than the owner of the proprietary concern. He further submitted that
the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner amounts to defence of the petitioner,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54957240/ 2
Mariano Fernandes vs M/S Rama Builders on 28 December, 2023
which the petitioner can raise during the course of trial before the Magistrate. He placed reliance
upon the judgment of the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court of India in case titled "Raghu Lakshmi Naraan
Vs. Fine Tubes", 2007 AIR (SC) 1634 and Sunil Todi vs. State of Gujarat, AIR 2022 SC 147.
6. Heard and perused the record.
7. A perusal of the record reveals that the respondent had filed a complaint against the petitioner
being the proprietor of the M/s Ocean Pearl Fisheries in respect of dishonour of cheque amounting
to Rs. 23 Lacs due to difference in signatures of the drawer of the cheque, as is evident from the
memo dated 26.06.2020 issued in favour of the respondent by the bank. The contention of the
petitioner is that the proprietary concern was required to be arrayed as an accused in terms of
Section 141 of Negotiable Instrument Act. Section 141 of Negotiable Instrument Act is reproduced as
under:
"141. Offences by companies.--
(1) If the person committing an offence under section 138 is a company, every person
who, at the time the offence was committed, was in charge of, and was responsible to,
the company for the conduct of the business of the company, as well as the company,
shall be deemed to be guilty of the offence and shall be liable to be proceeded against
and punished accordingly: Provided that nothing contained in this sub-section shall
render any person liable to punishment if he proves that the offence was committed
without his knowledge, or that he had exercised all due diligence to prevent the
commission of such offence: 6[Provided further that where a person is nominated as
a Director of a company by virtue of his holding any office or employment in the
Central Government or State Government or a financial corporation owned or
controlled by the Central Government or the State Government, as the case may be,
he shall not be liable for prosecution under this Chapter.] (2) Notwithstanding
anything contained in sub-section (1), where any offence under this Act has been
committed by a company and it is proved that the offence has been committed with
the consent or connivance of, or is attributable to, any neglect on the part of, any
director, manager, secretary or other officer of the company, such director, manager,
secretary or other officer shall also be deemed to be guilty of that offence and shall be
liable to be proceeded against and punished accordingly. Explanation.--For the
purposes of this section,
--
(a) "company" means any body corporate and includes a firm or other association of
individuals; and
(b) "director", in relation to a firm, means a partner in the firm."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54957240/ 3
Mariano Fernandes vs M/S Rama Builders on 28 December, 2023
8. A mere perusal of the Section 141 of Negotiable Instrument Act would reveal that the same is
applicable to the Companies and further the explanation appended to the Section defines Company
as a body corporate and includes a firm or other association of individuals.
9. This Court is of the considered view that a proprietary concern has no independent existence
other than the proprietor thereof. The Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in case titled "Raghu
Lakshminarayanan Vs. Fine Tubes" reported as 2007 (5) SCC 103 has observed that there is
distinction between the proprietary concern and partnership firm and the proprietary concern
would not fall within the category of company or a firm. The relevant portion of the judgment is
extracted as under:
"12. We keeping in view the allegations made in the complaint petition, need not
dilate in regard to the definition of a „Company(cid:129) or a „Partnership Firm(cid:129) as
envisaged under Section 34 of the Companies Act, 1956 and Section 4 of the Indian
Partnership Act, 1932 respectively, but, we may only note that it is trite that a
proprietary concern would not answer the description of either a Company
incorporated under the Indian Companies Act or a firm within the meaning of the
provisions of the Section 4 of the Indian Partnership Act.
10. In view of the above judgment, the judgment relied upon by the learned counsel for the
petitioner in "Sardar Bhupinder Singh Vs. M/s Green Feeds Through its Partner Vipin Kumar" is
not applicable.
11. The other contention raised by the learned counsel for the petitioner was that the petitioner had
lodged a complaint in respect of snatching of cheque by the respondent before the Deputy
Superintendent of Police concerned and also that the complaint has been filed by the respondent in
connivance with Tarkeshwar Gupta and his father Sanjay Gupta to pressurize him as the said
Tarkeshwar Gupta has filed the suit against the petitioner in Goa.
12. Without commenting upon the merits of the contentions raised by the petitioner, this Court is of
the considered view that these are the facts which amount to defence of the accused, which the
petitioner may raise during the course of trial and it is for the learned trial court to accept the
defence or reject the defence of the petitioner. This Court while exercising jurisdiction under Section
482 Cr.P.C. cannot examine the disputed questions of fact, more particularly the defence of the
accused while examining the validity of the order of issuance of process against the accused and the
maintainability of the complaint. The complaint under Section 138 NI Act, no doubt can be quashed
when it suffers from legal lacunae but not on the factual issues those are to be adjudicated upon only
during the course of trial. Reliance is placed upon the decision of Apex Court in case titled
Rajeshbhai Muljibhai Patel v. State of Gujarat, reported in (2020) 3 SCC 794, the relevant para is
reproduced as under:
22. The High Court, in our view, erred in quashing the criminal case in CC No. 367 of
2016 filed by Appellant 3 Hasmukhbhai under Section 138 of the NI Act. As pointed
out earlier, Yogeshbhai has admitted the issuance of cheques. When once the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54957240/ 4
Mariano Fernandes vs M/S Rama Builders on 28 December, 2023
issuance of cheque is admitted/established, the presumption would arise under
Section 139 of the NI Act in favour of the holder of cheque that is the complainant
Appellant 3. The nature of presumptions under Section 139 of the NI Act and Section
118(a) of the Evidence Act are rebuttable. Yogeshbhai has of course, raised the
defence that there is no legally enforceable debt and he issued the cheques to help
Appellant 3 Hasmukhbhai for purchase of lands. The burden lies upon the accused to
rebut the presumption by adducing evidence. The High Court did not keep in view
that until the accused discharges his burden, the presumption under Section 139 of
the NI Act will continue to remain. It is for Yogeshbhai to adduce evidence to rebut
the statutory presumption. When disputed questions of facts are involved which need
to be adjudicated after the parties adduce evidence, the complaint under Section 138
of the NI Act ought not to have been quashed by the High Court by taking recourse to
Section 482 CrPC. Though, the Court has the power to quash the criminal complaint
filed under Section 138 of the NI Act on the legal issues like limitation, etc. criminal
complaint filed under Section 138 of the NI Act against Yogeshbhai ought not to have
been quashed merely on the ground that there are inter se disputes between
Appellant 3 and Respondent 2. Without keeping in view the statutory presumption
raised under Section 139 of the NI Act, the High Court, in our view, committed a
serious error in quashing the criminal complaint in CC No. 367 of 2016 filed under
Section 138 of the NI Act.
(Emphasis added)
13. The contention though not argued but raised in the petition that the respondent has not adhered
to the timeline prescribed by the Section 138 of Negotiable Instrument Act is misconceived because
as per the own admission of the petitioner, notice was issued by the respondent on 22.07.2020
where as the cheque was dishonoured on 26.06.2020, as the notice of demand of amount in lieu of
dishonoured cheque has to be issued within the period of 30 days from the date of receipt of
information in respect of dishonour of the cheque from the Bank. In view of what has been said and
discussed above, this Court finds that there is no merit in the contentions raised by the petitioner, as
such, the same are rejected.
14. However, a perusal of the record file reveals that on 09.02.2021 learned counsel for the
complainant had filed original documents as well as the preliminary statement of the complainant
and after perusing the statement of the complainant and material placed on record, the learned trial
court issued the process against the petitioner. From the record, it is evident that the petitioner is
resident of Goa i.e. beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the learned trial court. Under such
circumstances, it was incumbent on the part of the learned trial court to have resorted to the
provisions contained in Section 202 Cr.P.C. by holding an enquiry himself or directing an
investigation to be made by a Police Officer or by such other person which he thinks fit for the
purpose of deciding whether or not there exists sufficient ground for proceeding. The learned trial
court has not complied with the provisions contained in Section 202 Cr.P.C. In Re: Expeditious Trial
of Cases under Section 138 of N.I. ACT 1881, the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court has issued certain
guidelines for expeditious disposal of cases under Negotiable Instruments Act and the relevant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54957240/ 5
Mariano Fernandes vs M/S Rama Builders on 28 December, 2023
guidelines are extracted as under:
1) x x x x x
2) Inquiry shall be conducted on receipt of complaints under Section 138 of the Act to
arrive at sufficient grounds to proceed against the accused, when such accused
resides beyond the territorial jurisdiction of the court.
3) For the conduct of inquiry under Section 202 of the Code, evidence of witnesses on
behalf of the complainant shall be permitted to be taken on affidavit. In suitable
cases, the Magistrate can restrict the inquiry to examination of documents without
insisting for examination of witnesses.
4. x x x x x x
5. x x x x x x
6. x x x x x x
7. x x x x x x
8. x x x x x x"
15. Further in an identical situation, the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court of India in
Vishwakalyan Multistate Credit Co Op Society ltd. vs. Oneup Entertainment Private
Limited, 2023 Legal Eagle 839, has directed the Magistrate to proceed with inquiry
under Section 202 Cr.P.C, when the Magistrate had issued the process against the
accused for commission of offence under section 138 NI Act without proceeding in
terms of section 202 Cr.P.C, who was not residing within the territorial jurisdiction of
the Court. Relevant portion is extracted as under:
"We may note here that as far as complaints under Section 138 of the NI Act are
concerned, this Court in Suo Motu Writ Petition (Criminal)No.2 of 2020 in the case
of "In Re : Expeditious Trial of Cases Under Section 138 of N.I.Act, 18811" has laid
down the guidelines. In clause (3) of paragraph 24 of the said decision, the
Constitution Bench has directed as under:
"3) For the conduct of inquiry under Section 202 of the Code, evidence of witnesses
on behalf of the complainant shall be permitted to be taken on affidavit. In suitable
cases, the Magistrate can restrict the inquiry to examination of documents without
insisting for examination of witnesses."
We, therefore, modify the impugned judgment and direct the Trial Court to proceed from the stage
of Section 202 of the CRPC. While doing so, the learned Magistrate will be guided by the direction
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54957240/ 6
Mariano Fernandes vs M/S Rama Builders on 28 December, 2023
issued by the Constitution Bench which is reproduced above."
16. In view of the above, this Court is of the considered view that the order dated 09.02.2021 is not
sustainable in the eyes of law and accordingly, the same is quashed. The learned trial court shall
proceed in terms of Section 202 Cr.P.C. as per the mandate of the directions issued by the Hon(cid:129)ble
Apex Court as mentioned above. The Magistrate shall pass appropriate order with in the period of
30 days from the date copy of this order is made available to the learned trial court. Registry to send
the copy of the order to the learned trial court forthwith.
17. Disposed of.
(RAJNESH OSWAL) JUDGE Jammu 28.12.2023 Sahil Padha Whether the order is speaking:
Yes/No. Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/54957240/ 7
