Maridhas vs State: Rep. By on 23 December, 2021
Maridhas vs State: Rep. By on 23 December, 2021
Author: G.R.Swaminathan
Bench: G.R.Swaminathan
CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED : 23.12.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE G.R.SWAMINATHAN
Crl.O.P.(MD)No.20560 of 2021
and
CRL.MP(MD)No.11714 of 2021
Maridhas ... Petitioner / Sole Accused
Vs.
1. State: Rep. By,
The Inspector of Police,
Melapalayam police station,
Tirunelveli, Tirunelveli District.
(Crime No.136 of 2020) ... 1st Respondent
2. Mohammed Kader Meeran ... 2nd Respondent /
Defacto Complainant
Prayer: Criminal Original petition is filed under Section 482 of Cr.P.C, to
call for the records relating to First Information Report in Crime No.136
of 2020 on the file of the first respondent and quash the same.
For Petitioner : Mr.Anantha Padmanabhan,
Mr.K.Govindarajan,
Mr.M.Karthikeyavenkatachalapathy.
For R-1 : Mr.R.Shunmugasundaram,
Advocate General, assisted by,
Mr.T.Senthilkumar,
Additional Public Prosecutor.
For R-2 : Mr.A.Raja
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
1/19
(cid:12) CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4022034/ 1
Maridhas vs State: Rep. By on 23 December, 2021
ORDER
This criminal original petition has been filed for quashing the First Information Report in Crime
No.136 of 2020 registered on the file of the Inspector of Police, Melapalayam police station,
Tirunelvlei District for the offences under Sections 292A, 295A and 505(2) of I.P.C.
2.The defacto complainant is the second respondent herein. He is a member of Tamil Nadu Muslim
Munnetra Kazhagam. After watching the video uploaded by the petitioner on the YouTube platform
on 03.04.2020 at 11.00 PM, he lodged information before the first respondent on the next day
leading to registration of the impugned FIR. In his complaint, the second respondent alleged that
the petitioner had falsely spoken that the attendees of Tablighi Jamaat conference held in March
2020 at New Delhi were spreading Covid-19 ; he also insulted Islam with an intention to create
ill-will and discord between Muslims and non-Muslims.
3.The learned counsel appearing for the petitioner reiterated the contentions set out in the
memorandum of grounds and contended that the petitioner as a responsible YouTuber and
commentator on current affairs had merely exercised his right to free speech. According to him, the
petitioner had not committed any of the offences set out in the FIR.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021
4.The learned Advocate General called upon this Court to bear in mind the conduct of the petitioner.
The petitioner after obtaining anticipatory bail from the Principal Sessions Court, Tirunelveli, did
not surrender and execute sureties. That is why, he has been arrested. The first respondent had filed
an application for taking the petitioner to police custody. The jurisdictional magistrate is actively
seized of the petition. Investigation commenced only recently. This Court may therefore allow the
legal process to take its normal course. The petitioner is a prominent social media personality. He
ought to have been responsible while putting out his views. The video presentation runs to twenty
seven minutes. The petitioner has used potentially provocative expressions. It is not necessary that
public tranquility must have been actually disturbed as a result of the petitioner's act. It is enough if
it is shown that there was a likelihood of breach of peace. He relied on the decision of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court reported in (2021) 1 SCC 1 (Amish Devgan vs. Union of India).
5.The learned counsel appearing for the defacto complainant apart from adopting the stand of the
learned Advocate General added that the complaint makes out the offences under Section 153 A of
IPC and Section 54 of the Disaster Management Act, 2005. According to
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021 him, the petitioner had
conducted himself with scant regard for truth. He tried to create a false alarm as if because of the
attendees of the aforesaid conference, the pandemic would sweep the entire country. The
presentation of the petitioner was replete with references to Islam and terrorism. Any normal
person watching the video would develop feelings of ill-will and hatred towards Muslims. The
Constitution of India imposes a duty on the citizens to uphold the pluralistic character of the society.
The defacto complainant had only fulfilled this duty by lodging the impugned complaint. He called
for dismissal of the quash petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4022034/ 2
Maridhas vs State: Rep. By on 23 December, 2021
6.I carefully considered the rival contentions and went through the materials on record.
7.Only in the second half of March, 2020, the nation became aware of the attack of Covid-19
pandemic. The Government of India announced stiff lock down measures. Life came to a complete
standstill. Congregations and meetings were totally banned. When it became known that a huge
conference was held at Nizamuddin Markaz, New Delhi in March 2020 and that it was attended by
delegates from all over the world and that many of them were still staying huddled in the Markaz
campus and elsewhere, there was a hysterical reaction all over https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021 the country including the media. Delegates from across India
including Tamil Nadu had attended the conference and returned to their respective states. The
desperate state governments and local administrations made fervent appeals to the returnees to
report before the nearest health centres for testing. I can take judicial notice of the fact that many
such returnees did test positive and were quarantined.
8.The Tablighi event was uniformly characterized as a super- spreader. As a prominent
commentator dealing with current affairs, the petitioner in his YouTube channel spoke on the
subject. It is this that has given rise to the impugned prosecution. The transcript of the entire video
has been made available. I carefully went through the same. I am now called upon to determine
whether the content constitutes the offences set out in the complaint.
9.Section 292A of IPC is as follows :
“292-A. Printing, etc., of grossly indecent or scurrilous matter or matter intended for
blackmail.
- Whoever, -
(a) prints or causes to be printed in any newspaper, periodical or circular, or exhibits
or causes to be exhibited, to public view or distributes or causes
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021 to be
distributed or in any manner puts into circulation any picture or any printed or
written document which is grossly indecent, or in scurrilous or intended for
blackmail; or
(b) sells or lets for hire, or for purposes of sale or hire makes, produces or has in his
possession, any picture or any printed or written document which is grossly indecent
or is scurrilous or intended for blackmail; or
(c) conveys any picture or any printed or written document which is grossly indecent
or is scurrilous or intended for blackmail knowing or having reason to believe that
such picture or document will be printed, sold, let for hire distributed or publicly
exhibited or in any manner put into circulation; or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4022034/ 3
Maridhas vs State: Rep. By on 23 December, 2021
(d) takes part in, or receives profits from, any business in the course of which he
knows or has reason to believe that any such newspaper, periodical, circular, picture
or other printed or written document is printed, exhibited, distributed, circulated,
sold, let for hire, made, produced, kept, conveyed or purchased; or
(e) advertises or makes known by any means whatsoever that any person is engaged
or is ready to engage in any act which is an offence under this section, or that any
such newspaper, periodical, circular, picture or other printed or written document
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021 which is grossly
indecent or is scurrilous or intended for blackmail, can be procured from or through
any person; or
(f) offers or attempts to do any act which is an offence under this section, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to
two years, or with fine, or with both:
Provided that for a second or any subsequent offence under this section, he shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which shall not be less
than six months and not more than two years.
Explanation I - For the purposes of this section, the word “scurrilous” shall be
deemed to include any matter which is likely to be injurious to morality or is
calculated to injure any person:
Provided that it is not scurrilous to express in good faith anything whatever
respecting the conduct of-
(i) a public servant in the discharge of his public functions or respecting his character
so far as his character appears in that conduct and no further; or
(ii) any person touching any public question, and respecting his character, so far as
his character appears in that conduct and no further.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021 Explanation II – In deciding
whether any person has committed an offence under this section, the court shall have regard, inter
alia, to the following considerations-
(a) The general character of the person charged, and where relevant, the nature of his
business;
(b) the general character and dominant effect of the matter alleged to be grossly
indecent or scurrilous or intended for blackmail;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4022034/ 4
Maridhas vs State: Rep. By on 23 December, 2021
(c) any evidence offered or called by or on behalf of the accused person as to his
intention in committing any of the acts specified in this section. -
Tamil Nadu Act 25 of 1960, Section 3 (w.e.f.
9.11.1960). Substituted by Tamil Nadu Act 30 of 1984. Inserted ibid.” This provision will be
attracted only if the offending video contains statements or materials which are grossly indecent, or
scurrilous or intended for blackmail. “Indecent” relates to something morally offensive because it
involves sex or being naked. “Scurrilous” means something that is very rude and insulting and
intended to damage somebody's reputation. “Blackmail” refers to the crime of demanding money
from a person by threatening to make a revelation about him. I have relied on the meanings
assigned to the said expressions in https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF
2021 Oxford Advanced Learner's Dictionary. One can very easily come to the conclusion that the
primary object of Section 292A of IPC is to come down heavily on what is known in common
parlance as “Yellow Journalism”. Bona fide expressions of opinions on public questions or issues of
public importance cannot be construed as scurrilous. I fail to understand as to how such a provision
can be invoked in this case.
10.Section 295A of IPC is as follows :
“295A.Deliberate and malicious acts intended to outrage religious feelings of any
class by insulting its religion or religious beliefs.— Whoever, with deliberate and
malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings of any class of citizens of India,
by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by visible representations or
otherwise, insults or attempts to insult the religion or the religious beliefs of that
class, shall be punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which
may extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.” The constitutionality of this
Section was considered in the decision reported in AIR 1957 SC 620 (Ramji Lal Modi
vs. State of U.P). It was held therein that the provision does not penalize any and
every act of insult to or attempt to insult the religion or the religious beliefs of a
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021 class of citizens
but it penalizes only those of acts of insults to or those varieties of attempts to insult
the religion or the religious beliefs of a class of citizens, which are perpetrated with
the deliberate and malicious intention of outraging the religious feelings of that class.
Insults to religion offered unwittingly or carelessly or without any deliberate or
malicious intention to outrage the religious feelings of that class do not come within
the section.
In the case on hand, the petitioner has nowhere targeted Islam or the religious beliefs
of Muslims as a class. In fact, the petitioner has given several disclaimers in his video.
He repeatedly cautioned the viewers that his presentation should not be
misconstrued as criticism of Muslims. There is no reference to religion even in the
remotest sense of the term in the video in question. By no stretch of imagination
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4022034/ 5
Maridhas vs State: Rep. By on 23 December, 2021
could Section 295A of IPC have been invoked.
11.The next question that falls for consideration is whether the ingredients of Section 505 (2) of IPC
are present. The said provision reads as follows :
“Statements creating or promoting enmity, hatred or ill-will between classes —
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021 Whoever
makes, publishes or circulates any statement or report containing rumour or
alarming news with intent to create or promote, or which is likely to create or
promote, on grounds of religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or
community or any other ground whatsoever, feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will
between different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or
communities, shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to three years,
or with fine, or with both.” The counsel for the defacto complainant wanted to invoke
Section 153A. The said provision is as follows :
“Promoting enmity between different groups on grounds of religion, race, place of
birth, residence, language, etc., and doing acts prejudicial to maintenance of
harmony — (1) Whoever— (a) by words, either spoken or written, or by signs or by
visible representations or otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote, on grounds of
religion, race, place of birth, residence, language, caste or community or any other
ground whatsoever, disharmony or feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between
different religious, racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, or
(b) commits any act which is prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony between
different religious, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF
2021 racial, language or regional groups or castes or communities, and which
disturbs or is likely to disturb the public tranquillity, or
(c) organizes any exercise, movement, drill or other similar activity intending that the
participants in such activity shall use or be trained to use criminal force or violence or
knowing it to be likely that the participants in such activity will use or be trained to
use criminal force or violence, or participates in such activity intending to use or be
trained to use criminal force or violence or knowing it to be likely that the
participants in such activity will use or be trained to use criminal force or violence,
against any religious, racial, language or regional group or caste or community and
such activity for any reason whatsoever causes or is likely to cause fear or alarm or a
feeling of insecurity amongst members of such religious, racial, language or regional
group or caste or community, shall be punished with imprisonment which may
extend to three years, or with fine, or with both.
In Manzar Sayeed Khan and Ors. vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors (2007) 5 SCC 1, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court held as follows :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4022034/ 6
Maridhas vs State: Rep. By on 23 December, 2021
“16.Section 153A of IPC, as extracted hereinabove, covers a case where a person by words, either
spoken or written, or by signs or by visible https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO.
20560 OF 2021 representations or otherwise, promotes or attempts to promote, disharmony or
feelings of enmity, hatred or ill-will between different religious, racial, language or regional groups
or castes or communities or acts prejudicial to the maintenance of harmony or is likely to disturb the
public tranquility. The gist of the offence is the intention to promote feelings of enmity or hatred
between different classes of people. The intention to cause disorder or incite the people to violence is
the sine qua non of the offence under Section 153A of IPC and the prosecution has to prove prima
facie the existence of mens rea on the part of the accused. The intention has to be judged primarily
by the language of the book and the circumstances in which the book was written and published.
The matter complained of within the ambit of Section 153A must be read as a whole. One cannot rely
on strongly worded and isolated passages for proving the charge nor indeed can one take a sentence
here and a sentence there and connect them by a meticulous process of inferential reasoning.
17. In Ramesh Chotalal Dalal v. Union of India and : [1988]2SCR1011 , this Court held that TV serial
"Tamas" did not depict communal tension and violence and the provisions of Section 153A of IPC
would not apply to it. It was also not prejudicial to the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021 national integration falling under Section 153B of IPC.
Approving the observations of Vivian Bose, J. in Bhagvati Charan Shukla v. Provincial Government
AIR 1947 Nagpur 1, the Court observed that the effect of the words must be judged from the
standards of reasonable, strong-minded, firm and courageous men, and not those of weak and
vacillating minds, nor of those who scent danger in every hostile point of view. It is the standard of
ordinary reasonable man or as they say in English Law, "the man on the top of a clapham omnibus.
18.Again in Bilal Ahmed Kaloo v. State of A.P. 1997CriLJ4091, it is held that the common feature in
both the Sections, viz., Sections 153A and 505(2), being promotion of feeling of enmity, hatred or
ill-will "between different" religious or racial or linguistic or regional groups or castes and
communities, it is necessary that at least two such groups or communities should be involved.
Further, it was observed that merely inciting the feeling of one community or group without any
reference to any other community or group cannot attract either of the two Sections.” The
petitioner's video does not involve two groups at all. There is no reference to religion, race, place of
birth, residence, language, caste or https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF
2021 community. The Hon'ble Supreme Court had clearly held that unless one group is sought to be
pitted against the other on the aforementioned grounds, the penal provisions are not at all attracted.
It is on this ground Amish Devgan case relied on by the respondents is distinguishable. The religious
element was so obvious in the said case. Even in Amish Devgan, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held
that the question of intent would be relevant. The petitioner's intention was that the spread of the
pandemic must be stopped. He wanted the persons who attended the conference to co-operate with
the administration and the health workers. “Contact tracing” was then a new addition to the
national vocabulary. The cyber cell of the state police was effectively deployed to trace not only the
attendees of the conference but also everyone else who came in contact with them. The petitioner
nowhere spoke in a divisive manner. In fact, he did not even challenge the ideology of Tablighi
Jamaat which has now been proscribed as a terrorist organization by Saudi Arabian Government.
He was directing his criticism only at a section of the attendees. One cannot lose sight of the fact that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4022034/ 7
Maridhas vs State: Rep. By on 23 December, 2021
India is seen as a soft target by global terror networks. That a number of persons have been misled
in the name of religion and turned terrorists is a reality. Terrorism can take any form. When
pandemic struck, it was seen as another form of bio-warfare. Such https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021 reports were very much made even in the mainstream media.
Therefore, the petitioner cannot be blamed or faulted for having voiced his apprehensions. The
petitioner held aloft icons such as Shri.Azim Premji. This shows that the petitioner never intended
to cause any feeling of alienation in the Muslim community. A reading of the entire transcript of the
video in question gives an impression that the petitioner wanted everyone to stand together with the
administration in a time of grave health emergency.
12.The petitioner as a YouTuber actively commenting on current issues is entitled to the protection
of Article 19(1)(a) of the Constitution. The petitioner has relied solely on the news resources then
available in the public domain. Criticism of an organization cannot be taken as a criticism of a
community. Tablighi Jamaat cannot be equated with Islam. It is a religious organization professing
particular goals. No one can deny that Tablighi Jamaat came under severe and harsh criticism for its
reckless and irresponsible conduct during March 2020. There are established reports that its
puritanical and revivalistic project prepares the ground for islamic radiclation. Probably that is why
even Saudi Arabia has recently banned it as a terrorist organization.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021
13.In Vinod Dua vs. Union of India (UOI) and Ors. AIR 2021 SC 3239, the Hon'ble Supreme Court
clarified that every journalist will be entitled to protection in terms of Kedar Nath Singh as every
prosecution under Section 124A IPC and 505 IPC must be in strict conformity with the scope and
ambit of the said Sections as explained in, and completely in tune with the law laid down therein.
After so holding, the Hon'ble Supreme Court quashed the FIR registered against the petitioner by
invoking Article 32 of the Constitution of India.
14.The petitioner was granted anticipatory bail in this case. Due to the pandemic-induced lockdown,
the petitioner did not surrender and execute sureties. This has been taken advantage of by the state
police. The petitioner is under arrest. In these circumstances, since the liberty of the petitioner was
involved, the quash petition was taken up for disposal. The prosecution was sought to be sustained
by none other than the learned Advocate General of the State. The counsel for the defacto
complainant also argued elaborately. After a careful consideration of the rival submissions, I come
to the conclusion that none of the ingredients of any of the offences are present in this case. The very
registration of the impugned FIR is illegal and it stands quashed.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021
15.The criminal original petition stands allowed. Connected miscellaneous petition is closed.
23.12.2021 Index : Yes / No Internet : Yes/ No skm Note : Issue order copy today.
Note: In view of the present lock down owing to COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the order may
be utilized for official purposes, but, ensuring that the copy of the order that is presented is the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4022034/ 8
Maridhas vs State: Rep. By on 23 December, 2021
correct copy, shall be the responsibility of the advocate/litigant concerned.
To:
1.The Inspector of Police, Melapalayam police station, Tirunelveli, Tirunelveli
District.
2.The Additional Public Prosecutor, Madurai Bench of the Madras High Court,
Madurai.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis CRL.O.P.(MD)NO. 20560 OF 2021 G.R.SWAMINATHAN, J.
skm Crl.O.P.(MD)No.20560 of 2021 and CRL.M.P.(MD)No.11714 of 2021 23.12.2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4022034/ 9
