Masrur Ahmad (In Fir Masroof Ahmad ) vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. on 3 March, 2025
Masrur Ahmad (In Fir Masroof Ahmad ) vs State Of U.P. Thru.
Prin. Secy. Home Lko. on 3 March, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:12679
Court No. - 15
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION U/S 438 CR.P.C. No. - 257 of 2025
Applicant :- Masrur Ahmad (In Fir Masroof Ahmad )
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko.
Counsel for Applicant :- Dileep Singh,Pravin Kumar Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Dadu Ram Shukla (D.R. Shukla )
Hon'ble Shree Prakash Singh,J.
Rejoinder affidavit filed today by counsel for the applicant is taken on record.
Heard counsel for the applicant, Sri D.R. Shukla, counsel for the complainant, learned AGA for the
State and perused the record.
The instant application under section 438 of Cr.P.C. has been filed for anticipatory bail in Case
Crime No. 148 of 2023, under sections 419, 420, 467, 468, 471 and 120-B of IPC Police Station-
Kotwali Nagar District- Gonda.
As per the prosecution story, it is alleged that the applicant being a mafia was involved in
committing the offence, as a forged will deed was prepared in collusion with the present applicant
including the other co-accused persons and as such, the applicant has committed cheat and fraud.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62542229/ 1
Masrur Ahmad (In Fir Masroof Ahmad ) vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. on 3 March, 2025
The contention of learned counsel for the applicant is that the applicant is innocent and has falsely
beenplanted in the first information report due to ulterior motive. He submits that bald allegation is
leveled against the applicant that he is a land mafia though, the prosecution has prima facie failed to
substantiate the charges. He submits that the applicant is neither executor or receiver of the will
deed nor he is the marginal witness of the same and even there is no evidence that he is anyway
beneficiary of the will deed in question. He added that uptill date, the police has also failed to collect
any cogent evidence that the applicant is involved in committing offence except apart, the story
cooked up while narrating the first information report against him. He also submits that this is a
case where, without any evidence, the applicant is being harassed even then the applicant is
cooperating in the investigation proceedings and there is no complaint against him that he has ever
threatened the witness or tampered the evidences. He also submits that the applicant has nine cases
criminal history which have been explained in the bail application as well in the rejoinder affidavit
and added that the applicant undertakes that he will always remain present before the Investigating
Officer, as and when required. Adding his arguments, he submits that no further custodial
interrogation is required in the event that the applicant is presenting himself before the
Investigating Officer and is according all cooperation. Concluding his arguments, he submits that
even after the aforesaid, the police is adamant to arrest the applicant and as such, he may be
enlarged on anticipatory bail.
Sri D.R. Shukla, counsel appearing for the complainant has opposed the contentions aforesaid and
submits that the applicant is very well involved in committing offence as he had changed his stand
thrice and had fixed the name plate over the property in question. He also submits that there are
documentary evidence against the applicant and there are nine cases criminal history and as such,
he is not entitled for any relief.
In support of his contentions, he has placed reliance on the judgment rendered in the case of Neeru
Yadav versus State of U.P. reported in AIR 2015 Supreme Court 3703 and submitted that there are
criminal antecedent of the accused/applicant and that cannot be ignored as is held by the Apex
Court.
It is noticeable here that the Apex Court has held in case reported in (2020) 11 SCC 648 (Prabhakar
Tewari vs The State Of Uttar Pradesh) that the merely pendency of the cases would not be the basis
so as to consider the bail of an accused, thus, the abovesaid argument of counsel for the complainant
has no force.
He again has placed a judgment reported in (2016) 1 SCC 146 (Sudhir versus state of Maharashtra
and Another) and has submitted that Apex Court has held that in cases of misappropriation of
public funds and corruption, there are requirement of custodial interrogation and therefore, the case
of the applicant is covered with the ratio of judgment above-said.
This Court has also examined the contentions of counsel for the complainant and has gone through
the judgment of the Apex Court wherein, it is apparent that the Apex Court has decided the case
while dealing with the matter of misappropriation of public funds and therefore, the ratio of the
judgment above-said would not apply in the present matter.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62542229/ 2
Masrur Ahmad (In Fir Masroof Ahmad ) vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. on 3 March, 2025
Again a case has also been referred which is reported in 1985 2 SCC 597(Pokar Ram versus State of
Rajasthan and Others), wherein, it has been been held by the Apex Court that application for
anticipatory bail moved by a person, accused of committing murder by fire arm is a serious
consequence and the Court should be cautious enough while deciding the anticipatory bail
application in such matters, whereas, the factual matrix of the present case is altogether different
and the applicant is neither the executor, receiver nor the marginal witness of the will deed in
question and therefore, the ratio of the abovesaid judgment would also not apply in the present case.
Learned A.G.A. appearing for the State has supported the version of counsel for the complainant
and submits that the applicant is not entitled for any relief, but he could not dispute the fact that the
applicant is cooperating in the investigation proceedings.
Having heard learned counsels for the parties and after perusal of material placed on record, it
transpires that the applicant is neither executor, receiver nor the marginal witness of the will deed in
question; prima facie, the counsel for the complainant and A.G.A. have also failed to substantiate
their arguments that the applicant is anyway beneficiary as per the allegation made in the first
information report or any evidence collected thereof; This Court has also taken note of fact that the
criminal history of the applicant has been explained and so far as the allegation made in the present
first information report is concerned i.e. primafacie is not substantiated by any documentary
evidence yet and the ingredients of the offences as is charged against the applicant do not prima
facie, attract in this case. It is also noticeable that the applicant is cooperating in the investigation
proceedings as the same could not be disputed by counsel for the State and the applicant has
undertaken that he will further cooperate in the investigation and at this stage no further custodial
interrogation is seems to be required.
Considering the aforesaid submission and discussions, the instant interim anticipatory bail is hereby
granted to the applicant namely, Masrur ahmad (In Fir Masroof Ahmad) till disposal of the trial
subject to the following conditions:-
(i) that the applicant shall make himself available for interrogation by a police officer
as and when required;
(ii) that the applicant shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade them
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence;
(iii) that the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the
court'
(iv) that the applicant shall appear before the trial court on each date fixed, unless
personal presence is exempted; and
(v). that the applicant shall not pressurize/ intimidate the prosecution witness.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62542229/ 3
Masrur Ahmad (In Fir Masroof Ahmad ) vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. on 3 March, 2025
In case of default, it would be open for the investigating agency to move application for vacation of
this protection.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 Mayank
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/62542229/ 4
