Master X Th. Shah Wali vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
Master X Th. Shah Wali vs State Of J&K And Another on 10
March, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 28.02.2023
Pronounced on: 10.03.2023
Crl.A(S) No. 2/2022
Master X th. Shah Wali .....Appellant(s)/ Petitioner(s)
Through: - Mr. Rakesh Chargotra. Advocate
Vs.
State of J&K and another ...Respondent(S)
Through: - Mr. Vishal Bharti, Dy. AG
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1) The appellant has filed the instant appeal under Section 101 (5) of the Juvenile Justice (Care and
Protection of Children) Act, 2015 (hereinafter to be referred as the JJ Act) challenging order dated
17.03.2022 passed by learned Principal Sessions Judge, Samba, whereby the learned Sessions Judge
has after entertaining a revision petition against order of the Juvenile Justice Board, Samba
granting bail to the appellant, set aside the said order.
2) It appears that on 12.01.2021 at about 6. AM, while the victim lady aged about 65 years was
walking on the road side, she was overpowered by three accused persons and was raped by them one
after the other. Accordingly, FIR No. 08/2021 for offences under Sections 376-D, 366, 506, 323 and
212 IPC was registered with the Police Station, Vijaypur and the investigation was set into motion.
After conducting the investigation, the aforesaid offences were found established against accused,
Mohd. Anwar, Showkat Ali, Mohd Din, Mushtaq Ahmad, Fareed Ahmad and the petitioner herein.
Charge sheet against the adult accused was laid before the Principal Sessions Judge, Samba,
whereas supplementary charge sheet against the petitioner, who happens to be a juvenile, was laid
before the Juvenile Justice Board, Samba.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63826515/ 1
Master X Th. Shah Wali vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
3) It appears that the petitioner herein filed an application for grant of bail before the Juvenile
Justice Board, Samba and he was granted interim bail in terms of order dated 10.03.2021 passed by
the Juvenile Justice Board and the said interim bail was made absolute on 22.03.2021. It is
pertinent to mention here that the respondents had moved an application for cancellation of the bail
before the Juvenile Justice Board, Samba and the said application was also dismissed by the
Juvenile Justice Board in terms of the order dated 22.03.2021. Both the aforesaid orders came to be
challenged by the respondent by way of a revision petition before the learned Principal Sessions
Judge, Samba (Children's Court) and vide the impugned order, the petition was allowed and the
orders passed by the Juvenile Justice Board, Samba were set aside.
4) The petitioner has challenged the impugned order primarily on the ground that the Principal
Sessions Judge, Samba, while exercising the powers of the Children's Court or of a Sessions Judge
did not possess the power of revision in terms of the provisions contained in the Juvenile Justice Act
and as such, the impugned order passed by the learned Principal Sessions Judge, Samba is without
any jurisdiction. It has further been contended that the learned Principal Sessions Judge, Samba has
set aside the order of the Juvenile Justice Board without assigning any reasons.
5) I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
6) Learned counsel for the petitioner while addressing his arguments has reiterated his contentions
made in the petition. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent has submitted that the
petitioner, even though, a juvenile, has been found involved in a dastardly crime of gang rape of a 65
years old lady, as such, he does not deserve the concession of bail.
7) Before testing the rival contentions made by the learned counsel for the parties, it would be apt to
notice the legal position with regard to the maintainability of the revision petition against an order
granting bail by the Juvenile Justice Board. In this regard, certain provisions of JJ Act need to be
noticed.
8) Section 1 (4) of the JJ Act gives overriding effect to the provisions of the JJ Act. It reads as under:
"1(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other law for the time being in
force, the provisions of this Act shall apply to all matters concerning children in need
of care and protection and children in conflict with law, including --
(i) apprehension, detention, prosecution, penalty or imprisonment, rehabilitation
and social reintegration of children in conflict with law, ;
(ii) procedures and decisions or orders relating to rehabilitation, adoption,
re-integration, and restoration of children in need of care and protection."
9) From a perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that the provisions of Juvenile Justice Act
would apply to all matters concerning the children in need of care and protection and children in
conflict with law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63826515/ 2
Master X Th. Shah Wali vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
10) So far as the powers of appeal and revision are concerned, the same are provided under Sections
101 and 102 of the JJ Act, which read as under:
"101. Appeal.-- (1) Subject to the provisions of this Act, any person aggrieved by an
order made by the Committee or the Board under this Act may, within thirty days
from the date of such order, prefer an appeal to the Children's Court, except for
decisions by the Committee related to Foster Care and Sponsorship After Care for
which the appeal shall lie with the District Magistrate:
Provided that the Court of Sessions, or the District Magistrate, as the case may be,
may entertain the appeal after the expiry of the said period of thirty days, if it is
satisfied that the appellant was prevented by sufficient cause from filing the appeal in
time and such appeal shall be decided within a period of thirty days.
(2) An appeal shall lie against an order of the Board passed after making the
preliminary assessment into a heinous offence under section 15 of the Act, before the
Court of Sessions and the Court may, while deciding the appeal, take the assistance of
experienced psychologists and medical specialists other than those whose assistance
has been obtained by the Board in passing the order under the said section.
(3) No appeal shall lie from,--
(a) any order of acquittal made by the Board in respect of a child alleged to have
committed an offence other than the heinous offence by a child who has completed or
is above the age of sixteen years; or
(b) any order made by a Committee in respect of finding that a person is not a child in
need of care and protection.
(4) No second appeal shall lie from any order of the Court of Session, passed in
appeal under this section.
(5) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Children's Court may file an appeal
before the High Court in accordance with the procedure specified in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.
102. Revision.--The High Court may, at any time, either on its own motion or on an application
received in this behalf, call for the record of any proceeding in which any Committee or Board or
Children's Court, or Court has passed an order, for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the legality or
propriety of any such order and may pass such order in relation thereto as it thinks fit:
Provided that the High Court shall not pass an order under this section prejudicial to
any person without giving him a reasonable opportunity of being heard."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63826515/ 3
Master X Th. Shah Wali vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
11) From a perusal of the afore noted provisions, it is clear that any person aggrieved
of the order of the Juvenile Justice Board made under the Act has a right to prefer an
appeal before the Children's Court within a period of thirty days. It further provides
that no such appeal lies from the order of Court of Sessions passed in an appeal. Sub
Section (5) quoted above, provides that any person aggrieved by an order of the
Children's Court has right to file appeal before the High Court in accordance with the
procedure specified in the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973. Children's Court as per
Section 2(20) of the JJ Act means a Court established under the Commissions for
Protection of Child Rights Act, 2005 or a Special Court under the POCSO Act 2002.
In the absence of these special Courts, it means the Court of Sessions having the
jurisdiction
12) The revisional powers in terms of Section 102 of the JJ Act have been vested with
the High Court and no such power is vested with the Court of Sessions or Children's
Court. As already noted that Section 1(4) of JJ Act gives an overriding effect to the
provisions contained in said Act. Besides this, Section 5 of the Cr. P.C. provides that
nothing in the Code can affect any special or local law or any special jurisdiction or
power conferred by any other law in the absence of the provision to the contrary,
meaning thereby that the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure would not
apply to a matter which is covered by provisions contained in the JJ Act.
13) As already noted, the power of revision has been vested with the High Court in
terms of Section 102 of the JJ Act. The Court of Sessions or the Children's Court has
not been vested with such powers under the said Act.
Thus, the applicability of provision relating to the revision i.e. Section 397 of Cr.P.C. has been ousted
by Section 1 (4) of JJ Act, read with Section 5 Cr.P.C. because the matters relating to the revision are
provided for in the JJ Act, which is a special legislation.
14) In view of the above, the learned Sessions Judge either in her capacity as Sessions Court or in
her capacity as Children's Court has grossly fallen into an error by entertaining a revision petition
against the order of the Juvenile Justice Board. Although, in the title of the impugned
"revision/appeal" has been mentioned, yet the petition before the Session Judge has been registered
as a revision petition and the learned Sessions Judge has treated it as a revision petition which is
clear from the reference to the provisions contained in Section 397 of Cr.PC. in the impugned order.
In fact, it has been specifically stated in the impugned order that revision petition is allowed. This
clearly goes on to show that the learned Sessions Judge has, while passing the impugned order,
exercised its revisional jurisdiction, which was not vested with her in terms of the provisions of the
JJ Act. In view of the overriding effect of the provision of the JJ Act, the learned Sessions Judge
could not have invoked the provisions of Cr.P.C. to exercise revisional powers. The impugned order
being without jurisdiction, is liable to be set aside on this ground alone.
15) It has been contended by the learned counsel for the respondents that in the instant case, the
learned Sessions Judge has, in her capacity as Children's Court, exercised appellate jurisdiction in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63826515/ 4
Master X Th. Shah Wali vs State Of J&K And Another on 10 March, 2023
terms of Section 101 of the JJ Act. The argument appears to be misconceived because the order
impugned cannot be termed to have been passed in exercise of the appellate jurisdiction as the
limitation for filing appeal against the order passed by the Juvenile Justice Board is 30 days and
unless this period is extended by the appellate court, the appeal cannot be entertained. In the
impugned order, it is no where mentioned that the delay in filing of the appeal has been condoned,
when admittedly the order of the Juvenile Justice Board had been called into question after the
expiry of 30 days. This clearly goes on to show that the learned Sessions Judge has entertained the
petition as a revision petition and not as an appeal. Therefore, the contention of the learned counsel
for the respondents that because the learned Sessions Judge has exercised the appellate jurisdiction,
as such, the instant appeal is not maintainable because it amounts to second appeal against the
order of Sessions Judge, is without any merit.
16) Apart from the above, if we have a look at the impugned order passed by the learned Sessions
Judge, no reasoning much less a sound reasoning has been given by her for setting aside the order of
the Juvenile Justice Board. Merely repeating the contentions of the parties and quoting the case law
and the provisions of law, does not make an order well reasoned. While passing a judgment, a Court
is expected to apply the statutes and precedents to the facts of that particular case and record a brief
discussion in the judgment in this behalf. The learned Sessions Judge has not recorded any ground
for coming to the conclusion that the order of the Board is not in accordance with law. Even though,
the impugned order is running into twelve pages, but it is devoid of any reasons. Such an order
cannot be sustained in the eyes of law.
17) For the foregoing reasons, the petition is allowed and the impugned order dated 17.03.2022
passed by learned Principal Sessions Judge, Samba is set aside and the petitioner is directed to be
released on bail in accordance with the directions dated 10.03.2021, read with directions dated
22.03.2021 passed by the Juvenile Justice Board, Samba.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 10.03.2023 Karam Chand/Secy.
Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63826515/ 5
