Mathivanan vs The Inspector Of Police on 17 December, 2021
Mathivanan vs The Inspector Of Police on 17 December, 2021
Author: G.R.Swaminathan
Bench: G.R.Swaminathan
1 Crl OP(MD)No.18337 of 2021
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 17.12.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE G.R.SWAMINATHAN
Crl OP(MD)No.18337 of 2021
and
Crl MP(MD)No.10063 of 2021
Mathivanan ... Petitioner
vs.
1.The Inspector of Police,
Vadipatty Police Station,
Madurai District.
(Crime No.415 of 2021)
2.D.Balasubramaniyan
Sub Inspector of Police,
Vadipatty Police Station,
Madurai District.
3.The Inspector of Police,
Cyber Crime Police Station,
Madurai City. ... Respondents
(R3 suo motu impleaded vide
order dated 24.11.2021)
Prayer: Criminal Original Petition filed under Section 482 of Cr.Pc,
to call for the entire records of the FIR in Crime No.415 of 2021 on
the file of the first respondent police station and quash the same as
illegal insofar as the petitioner herein is concerned.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
1/12
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101763592/ 1
Mathivanan vs The Inspector Of Police on 17 December, 2021
(cid:12) 2 Crl OP(MD)No.18337 of 2021
For Petitioner : Mr.Henri Tiphagne
For Respondents : Mr.T.Senthil Kumar,
Additional Public Prosecutor.
ORDER
Jug Suraiya, Bachi Karkaria, E.P.Unny and G.Sampath ... if any one of them, or for that matter any
satirist or cartoonist had authored this judgement, they would have proposed a momentous
amendment to the Constitution of India to incorporate sub-clause
(l) in Article 51-A. Article 51-A states that it shall be the duty of every citizen of India-
“(a)to abide by the Constitution and respect its ideals and institutions, the National Flag and the
National Anthem;
(b)to cherish and follow the noble ideals which inspired our national struggle for freedom;
(c)to uphold and protect the sovereignty, unity and integrity of India;
(d)to defend the country and render national service when called upon to do so;
(e)to promote harmony and the spirit of common brotherhood amongst all the people of India
transcending religious, linguistic and regional or sectional diversities; to renounce practices
derogatory to the dignity of women;
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(f)to value and preserve the rich heritage of our composite culture;
(g)to protect and improve the natural environment including forests, lakes, rivers and wild life, and
to have compassion for living creatures;
(h)to develop the scientific temper, humanism and the spirit of inquiry and reform;
(i)to safeguard public property and to abjure violence;
(j)to strive towards excellence in all spheres of individual and collective activity so that the nation
constantly rises to higher levels of endeavour and achievement;
(k)who is a parent or guardian to provide opportunities for education to his child or, as the case may
be, ward between the age of six and fourteen years.” To this, the hypothetical author would have
added one more fundamental duty - duty to laugh. The correlative right to be funny can be mined in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101763592/ 2
Mathivanan vs The Inspector Of Police on 17 December, 2021
Article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution of India (the use of crypto vocabulary to be forgiven). Being
funny is one thing and poking fun at another is different altogether.
2.“Laugh at what?” is a serious question. This is because we have holy cows grazing all over from
Varanasi to Vadipatty. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis One dare not poke fun at them. There is
however no single catalogue of holy cows. It varies from person to person and from region to region.
A real cow, even if terribly underfed and emaciated, shall be holy in Yogi's terrain. In West Bengal,
Tagore is such an iconic figure that Khushwant Singh learnt the lesson at some cost. Coming to my
own Tamil Desh, the all-time iconoclast “Periyar” Shri.E.V.Ramasamy is a super-holy cow. In
today's Kerala, Marx and Lenin are beyond the bounds of criticism or satire. Chhatrapati Shivaji and
Veer Savarkar enjoy a similar immunity in Maharashtra. But all over India, there is one ultimate
holy cow and that is “national security”.
3.The petitioner herein is an important office-bearer of a not-so-important political party. CPI (ML)
is now an over-ground organization which contests elections also. Paper warriors are also entitled to
fantasise that they are swadeshi Che Guevaras.
4.On 16.09.2021, the petitioner herein went on a sightseeing pleasure trip with his daughter and
son-in-law to Sirumalai hills. He put out the photographs taken on the occasion in his Facebook
page. He gave the caption “Jg;ghf;fp gapw;rpf;fhf https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis rpWkiy gazk;!”
(Trip to Sirumalai for shooting practice). Revolutionaries, whether real or phoney, are not usually
credited with any sense of humour (or at least this is the stereotype). For a change, the petitioner
tried to be funny. Perhaps it was his maiden attempt at humour.
5.Vadipatty Police did not find it to be a joke. They thought the petitioner was making preparations
to wage war against the State. They registered a case in Crime No.415 of 2021 against the petitioner
for the offences under Sections 120B, 122, 505(1)(b) and 507 of IPC. They did not stop at that. They
arrested the petitioner and produced him before the jurisdictional magistrate for remanding him to
custody. Mercifully, Mr.M.C.Arun, the Judicial Magistrate, Vadipatty, had the good sense to refuse
remand. Bearing in mind the principles laid down in State v. Nakeeran Gopal (2019 SCC OnLine
Mad 42), he passed a detailed rejection order. I wish other magistrates in the State of Tamil Nadu
act likewise. Remand can never be made for the asking. The police and the prosecution will seek
remand in every case. It is for the magistrate to satisfy herself that the arrestee deserves to be
remanded. Requests for remand must be https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis decided on the
touchstone of Section 41 of Cr.Pc and Article 21 of the Constitution. Thanks to the judicious conduct
so well exhibited by Shri.M.C.Arun (the Judicial Magistrate, Vadipatty), the petitioner escaped
incarceration by a whisker.
6.This criminal original petition has been filed to quash the FIR itself. The learned counsel for the
petitioner reiterated all the contentions set out in the memorandum of grounds and submitted that
the very registration of the impugned FIR is an abuse of legal process. Per contra, the learned
Additional Public Prosecutor appearing for the respondents submitted that no case for quashing has
been made out.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101763592/ 3
Mathivanan vs The Inspector Of Police on 17 December, 2021
7.I carefully considered the rival contentions and went through the materials on record. For an act
to constitute a crime, there are four stages, i)intention, ii)preparation, iii)attempt and
iv)accomplishment. While penal laws intervene only at the third and fourth stages normally, even
preparation is made an offence in certain cases. Section 399 of IPC is one such provision. Section
122 IPC is another. Any penal provision has to be strictly construed. Application of the provisions
which penalize even https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis preparation must meet a higher threshold.
8.Section 122 of IPC is as follows :
“122.Collecting arms, etc., with intention of waging war against the Government of
India.- Whoever collects men, arms or ammunition or otherwise prepares to wage
war with the intention of either waging or being prepared to wage war against the
[Government of India], shall be punished with [imprisonment for life] or
imprisonment of either description for a term not exceeding ten years, [and shall also
be liable to fine].” To wage war would require several steps and crossing of stages.
There has to be mobilisation of men as well as accumulation of arms and
ammunition. That would require a concerted effort. Each individual who is a party to
the conspiracy to wage war may be allotted a particular task. One may be tasked with
collecting men, another with arms and the third with ammunition. The expression
“otherwise prepares” in this context should not be construed on the application of the
principle of ejusdem generis. A person may be engaged in fund-raising. Another may
be responsible for providing reinforcements. Some may be engaged in making
logistical arrangements. Some may be engaged in the intellectual front. There could
be several dimensions. All of them https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis would fall
within the scope of “otherwise prepares”. But as already held, when it comes to
application of the provision to concrete facts, courts will apply a higher threshold.
9.Now let us see what the petitioner did. Except giving the title mentioned above to the photographs
amateurishly taken on the occasion of his trip to Sirumalai hills, the petitioner has done nothing
else. The petitioner is aged 62 years. His daughter is standing next to him. His son-in-law is also
seen in the photograph. Four other photographs capturing the scenic beauty of the place have also
been posted. No weapon or proscribed material was recovered from the petitioner. The petitioner
neither intended to wage war nor did he commit any act towards preparation therefor.
10.Section 505(1)(b) of IPC is as follows :
“Whoever makes, publishes or circulates any statement, rumour or report,
(a)...
(b) with intent to cause, or which is likely to cause, fear or alarm to the public, or to
any section of the public whereby any person may be induced to commit an offence
against the State or against the public tranquility;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101763592/ 4
Mathivanan vs The Inspector Of Police on 17 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(c)....
shall be punished with imprisonment which may extend to [three years], or with fine, or with both.”
This provision also can be invoked only if the offending act induces or is likely to induce any person
to commit an offence against the State or against the public tranquility. In this case, the photographs
with the aforesaid caption was posted only in the petitioner's Facebook page. Any normal and
reasonable person coming across the Facebook post would have laughed it off.
11.Section 507 of IPC is as follows :
“507.Criminal intimidation by an
anonymous communication.—Whoever commits
the offence of criminal intimidation by an
anonymous communication, or having taken
precaution to conceal the name or abode of the person from whom the threat comes, shall be
punished with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend to two years, in
addition to the punishment provided for the offence by the last preceding section.” Invocation of this
provision makes me laugh. Section 507 IPC can https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis be invoked only if
the person sending the communication had concealed his identity. The communication must be
anonymous. In this case, the petitioner had posted the photographs along with the caption in his
Facebook page. He has not concealed his identity. There is nothing anonymous about the act in
question.
12.None of the ingredients set out in Section 122, 505(1)
(b) and Section 507 are present in this case. Section 120 B of IPC cannot be invoked for two reasons.
Firstly, the petitioner is the sole accused. To constitute the offence of conspiracy, there must be a
meeting of two or more minds. One cannot conspire with oneself. Secondly, conspiracy is hatched to
commit an offence mentioned in the Section. When the ingredients of the primary offences have
been shown to be non-existent, the prosecution cannot hang on to Section 120B IPC alone.
13.The very registration of the impugned FIR is absurd and an abuse of legal process. It stands
quashed. The criminal original petition is allowed. Connected miscellaneous petition is closed.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
17.12.2021
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101763592/ 5
Mathivanan vs The Inspector Of Police on 17 December, 2021
Index : Yes / No
Internet : Yes/ No
skm
Note: In view of the present lock down owing to COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the order may
be utilized for official purposes, but, ensuring that the copy of the order that is presented is the
correct copy, shall be the responsibility of the advocate/litigant concerned.
To:
1.The Inspector of Police, Vadipatty Police Station, Madurai District.
(Crime No.415 of 2021)
2.The Inspector of Police, Cyber Crime Police Station, Madurai City.
3.The Judicial Magistrate, Vadipatty.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis G.R.SWAMINATHAN, J.
skm and 17.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101763592/ 6
