Matilda D Lima Late G.L.D Lima vs Khaja Bee W/O Late S Abdul Rasheed on 3 February, 2022
Matilda D Lima Late G.L.D Lima vs Khaja Bee W/O Late S Abdul
Rasheed on 3 February, 2022
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
DHARWAD BENCH
DATED THIS THE 3RD DAY OF FEBRUARY 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SACHIN SHANKAR MAGADUM
RSA.NO.5858/2012 (PI)
BETWEEN
1. MATILDA D LIMA LATE G.L.D LIMA,
AGE: 73 YEARS,
2. SUNITHA JOYCE D'LIMA W/O LATE KIRAN D'LIMA,
AGE: 39 YEARS, OCC: HOUSE WIFE,
R/O: VAILANKINI VILLA, CHURCH ROAD,
KONDAPURAM, DIST: UDUPI.
3. SHERWIN KELTH D'LIMA
S/O LATE KIRAN D'LIMA,
AGE: 16 YEARS, MINOR,
4. SAMUEL ALOSIUS D'LIMA S/O LATE KIRAN D'LIMA,
AGE: 4 YEARS, MINOR,
APPELLANTS 3 AND 4 ARE MINOR
REPTD., BY MOTHER AND NATURAL GUARDIAN SUNITHA
JAYCE D'LIMA W/O LATE KIRAN D'LIMA ,
AGE: 39 YEARS, OCC: HOUSE WIFE,R/O: VAILANKINI VILLA,
CHURCH ROAD,KONDAPURAM, DIST: UDUPI.
... APPELLANTS
(BY SRI.ANANDKUMAR A.MAGADUM, SMT.ARCHANA MAGADUM AND
SRI. A.P.MURARI, ADVS.)
AND
1. KHAJA BEE W/O LATE S ABDUL RASHEED,
AGE: 93 YEARS,
2
2. S IQUBAL HUSSAN
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122857811/ 1
Matilda D Lima Late G.L.D Lima vs Khaja Bee W/O Late S Abdul Rasheed on 3 February, 2022
S/O LATE S ABDUL RASHEED,
AGE: 68 YEARS,
3. S ABDUL HYE
S/O LATE S ABDUL RAZAK,
AGE: 66 YEARS,
4. SULTHAN SALLAUDDIN
S/O LATE ABDUL RAZAK,
AGE: 66 YEARS,
ALL ARE R/O: DOOR NO. 211,
7TH WARD,
PARTHAKANDAKANI STREET,
BRUCEPET,BELLARY.
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI.K.RAGHAVENDRA RAO & SMT.V.VIDYA, ADVS. FOR R1 & R2,
R3 SERVED; R4 APPAL DISMISSED)
THIS APPEAL IS FILED UNDER 100 OF C.P.C., AGAINST THE
JUDGEMENT & DECREE DTD:17.03.2012 PASSED IN R.A.N0.142/2009
ON THE FILE OF THE PRESIDING OFFICER, FAST TRACK COURT -III
AT HOSPET, DISMISSING THE APPEAL FILED AGAINST THE
JUDGMENT DTD:06.08.2009 AND THE DECREE PASSED IN O.S.
NO.30/2007 ON THE FILE OF THE CIVIL JUDGE (SR.DVN), AT
KUDLIGI, DISMISSING THE SUIT FILED FOR PERMANENT
INJUNCTION.
THIS APPEAL COMING ON FOR ADMISSION THIS DAY, THE
COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
3
JUDGMENT
This captioned regular second appeal is filed by unsuccessful plaintiffs being aggrieved by the
concurrent judgment and decree of the courts below wherein both the courts below have dismissed
the suit filed by the appellants/plaintiffs.
2. Brief facts of the case are that:
Appellants/plaintiffs filed a bare suit for injunction in O.S.No.30/2007. The
appellants/plaintiffs contended that suit schedule properties were originally owned
by one Soudagar Abdul Razaak Saheb. The appellants/plaintiffs further contended
that said Soudagar Abdul Razaak died leaving behind his children who are co-owners
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122857811/ 2
Matilda D Lima Late G.L.D Lima vs Khaja Bee W/O Late S Abdul Rasheed on 3 February, 2022
of the suit schedule property. The appellants/plaintiffs further contended that said
Soudagar Abdul Razaak died on 22.09.1990. The appellants/plaintiffs contended that
due to difference in the family, a suit came be filed in O.S.No.17/1976 pertaining to
the suit schedule property and also other properties. The appellants/plaintiffs claim
that present suit property was allotted to Abdul Rasheed's share pursuant to a
compromise recorded in the suit stated supra. In terms of compromise, Abdul
Rasheed was appointed as receiver of the suit schedule properties. The
appellants/plaintiffs have further contended that said Abdul Rasheed with the
concurrence of his brothers obtained a mining lease on 04.04.1986 and later he
entered into an agreement on 15.09.1986 with defendant No.5 thereby authorizing
defendant No.5 to carryout mining operations on behalf of family of Abdul Rasheed.
The appellants/plaintiffs have further contended that Power of Attorney dated
14.9.1986 in favour of defendant No.5 was coupled with interest. The
appellants/plaintiffs contended that due to unavoidable circumstances, defendant
No.5 was not in a position to personally carryout acts, he was not in a position to
invest money for mining purpose.
Therefore, the appellants/plaintiffs claim that they thought of appointing suitable agent and
accordingly, appointed husband of plaintiff No.1 and father of plaintiff No.2 as his agent and
executed Power of Attorney on 17.10.1986. Therefore, the appellants/plaintiffs contended that it is
in terms of authorization given by deceased defendant No.5 during his lifetime, the suit schedule
property was delivered to the present plaintiff.
3. The grievance of the appellants/plaintiffs is that in spite of specific demand and requests, the
original licencee i.e., Abdul Rasheed failed to secure permission from the forest department to
carryout mining operations and in between Abdul Rasheed died leaving behind defendant Nos.1 and
2 as his legal heirs. It is also contended that husband of plaintiff No.1 also died on 26.12.2004.
Therefore, the present appellants/plaintiffs were stepped into the shoes of G.L.D'Lima and
requested the defendants to perform their part of agreement. The appellants/plaintiffs further
contended that they are ever ready and willing to perform their part of obligation under the
agreement executed by late Abdul Rasheed. The present suit is filed on an apprehension that
defendants are negotiating with private parties by suppressing the agreement dated 15.09.1986
executed in favour of defendant No.5.
4. On receipt of summons, respondent Nos.1 and 2 appeared and contested the proceedings and
stoutly denied the entire averments made in the plaint. Respondent Nos.1 and 2 specifically
disputed the alleged authorization given by defendant No.5 in favour of husband of plaintiff No.1 as
per Ex.P6. Respondent Nos.1 and 2/defendant Nos.1 and 2 further specifically contended that Power
of Attorney if any executed by defendant No.5 in favour of husband of plaintiff No.1 would stand
terminated on account of death of defendant No.5 and also on account of death of husband of
plaintiff No.1 in whose favour the authorization was given by defendant No.5 under Ex.P6. The trial
court having assessed oral and documentary evidence has answered issue Nos.1 and 2 in the
negative by recording a categorical finding that appellants/plaintiffs have failed to prove their lawful
possession over the suit schedule property. Infact having examined ocular evidence of P.W.1, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122857811/ 3
Matilda D Lima Late G.L.D Lima vs Khaja Bee W/O Late S Abdul Rasheed on 3 February, 2022
trial court found that plaintiffs are totally ignorant about the transaction between the original
mining lessee namely, Abdul Rasheed in whose favour the mining lease was issued. The trial court
was also of the view that Abdul Rasheed was not the absolute owner of the property. Further, the
trial court has taken judicial note of admission given by P.W.1 wherein he has admitted in
unequivocal terms that his father was not conducting mining operations in the suit schedule
property as he was not allowed to carryout mining operations. Therefore, in this background, the
trial court was of the view that the ingredients to seek injunction is to establish lawful possession as
on the date of the suit and burden is also on the plaintiff to prove alleged interference. Both these
elements were found missing by the trial court. Therefore, the trial court proceeded to dismiss the
suit.
5. The present appellant preferred an appeal before the first appellate court. The first appellate court
having independently assessed oral and documentary evidence on record found that both Abdul
Rasheed who had authorized defendant No.5 under Ex.P3 and also husband of plaintiff No.1 who
was authorized by defendant No.5 under Ex.P6 are no more. The first appellate court having
meticulously examined the material on record also found that the plaintiff who is examined as P.W.1
was not at all aware of the earlier transactions and therefore, the first appellate court has also come
to the conclusion that plaintiffs are not in lawful possession of the suit schedule property. On these
set of reasoning, the first appellate court has proceeded to dismiss the appeal.
6. It is against these concurrent judgments and decree of the courts below, the present appeal is
filed.
7. Learned counsel for the appellants would vehemently argue and contend before this court that
General Power of Attorney executed by Abdul Rasheed in favour of defendant No.5 on 15.09.1986
was coupled with interest and therefore, death of principal would not in itself terminate the GPA, as
it was coupled with interest and would clearly fall within the domain of Section 202 of the Indian
Contract Act. She would further argue and contend before this court that though there is further
delegation by defendant No.5 by executing GPA in favour of husband of plaintiff No.1 as per Ex.P6,
the said authorization would not be invalid, as it was ratified by Abdul Rasheed during his lifetime.
On these two grounds, she would submit to this court that both the courts below have not examined
clinching evidence, which is placed on record by the plaintiffs. Therefore, she requests this court
that substantial question of law would arise in the present case on hand and warrant interference at
the hands of this court.
8. However, learned counsel for the respondents repelling the contentions canvassed by the counsel
appearing for the appellants would submit to this court that original principal who authorized
defendant No.5 under Ex.P3 has died on 22.09.1990. She would further vehemently argue and
contend before this court that rebuttal clinching evidence let in by the respondents/defendants
would clearly indicate that husband of plaintiff No.1 was never put in possession over the property
in question. She would brought to the notice of this court that authorization given by Abdul Rasheed
in favour of defendant No.5 would automatically stands terminated on account of death of Abdul
Raheed. Further, the authorization given by defendant No.5 in favour of husband of plaintiff No.1
would also stands terminated. In this background, she would submit to this court that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122857811/ 4
Matilda D Lima Late G.L.D Lima vs Khaja Bee W/O Late S Abdul Rasheed on 3 February, 2022
appellants/plaintiffs have no legal right to lay claim over the suit schedule property. She would
further submit to this court that both the courts have held that appellants/plaintiffs are not in lawful
possession and therefore, the said finding cannot be interfered with under Section 100 of CPC.
9. Heard the learned counsel for the appellants, learned counsel for the respondents and pursed the
judgments under challenge.
10. Original principal who authorized defendant No.5 under Ex.P3 died on 22.09.1990. Defendant
No.5 based on Ex.P3 has further executed GPA in favour of husband of plaintiff No.1 who is also
reported to be dead and he died on 26.12.2004. Though learned counsel for the appellants has
vehemently argued and contended that Ex.P3 is coupled with interest however, on perusal of the
same, this court would find that under Ex.P3 Abdul Rasheed has authorized defendant No.5 to
carryout mining operations. The terms of agreement clearly indicate that defendant No.5 was
required to carryout mining and secure contract for sale of iron and manganese ore for maximum
quantity in his own account. Under Clause 4 of the agreement, defendant No.5 was also required to
supply iron ore and manganese after mining and transport at his own cost and thereafter pay the
mine owner, consideration at Rs.5/- per tonne. Defendant No.5 was also required to pay the
government royalty after carrying out mining. Defendant No.5 was also authorized to collect and
receive payment for having supplied the mined ore under the contract. He was also authorized to
receive entire payment. If these terms and conditions are meticulously examined, this court would
find that GPA was not coupled with interest. There is no substantial investment which would bring
the contract under Section 202 of Contract Act. Under Ex.P3, defendant No.5 was required to
carryout mining, supply the same, collect payment and then share the revenue with the mining
licencee i.e., Abdul Rasheed. Therefore, strictly speaking, the terms and conditions under Ex.P3 do
not indicate that it was coupled with interest. Defendant No.5 would incur expenses only after
carrying mining. In the present case on hand, defendant No.5 never commenced with the mining in
terms of Ex.P3. On the contrary, defendant No.5 has further executed GPA in favour of husband of
plaintiff No.1. All these significant details would give an indication that authorization were not
coupled with interest and therefore, neither defendant No.5 nor husband of plaintiff No.1 could have
asserted any right pursuant to death of Abdul Rasheed who died on 22.09.1990. It is in this
background, the contention raised by the appellants/plaintiffs cannot be acceded to and the same is
not at all tenable.
11. Even otherwise, under Ex.P3, Abdul Rasheed executed GPA in favour of defendant No.5, which is
dated 15.09.1986. The period fixed under the agreement was 20 years. Therefore, by efflux of time
Ex.P3 automatically stands terminated in the year 2006. The material on record would also indicate
that original lessee has failed to secure permission from the forest department. Material on record
also indicate that defendant No.1 has made efforts to obtain permission from the concerned
department including forest department and these attempts were made somewhere in 2006. The
evidence of P.W.1 would also give an impression that plaintiffs are not at all in lawful possession. No
documents are produced to demonstrate that pursuant to Ex.P6, they have commenced with mining
and they were in physical possession of the suit schedule property. Both the courts below have
exhaustively dealt with the rival contentions of the parties and have concurrently held that
appellants/plaintiffs are not in lawful possession of the suit schedule properties.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122857811/ 5
Matilda D Lima Late G.L.D Lima vs Khaja Bee W/O Late S Abdul Rasheed on 3 February, 2022
12. In a bare suit for injunction the courts are only required to examine as to whether plaintiff is in
lawful possession and whether there is an alleged interference by the other side. If these two
ingredients are not satisfied, it is well within the jurisdiction of the courts to decline the grant
discretionary relief of perpetual injunction. Both the courts below have dealt with this issue and
have come to the conclusion that appellants/plaintiffs are not in lawful possession. Therefore, this
disputed question of fact cannot be re-examined under Section 100 of CPC.
The appeal is devoid of any merits is accordingly, dismissed.
SD/-
JUDGE MBS/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122857811/ 6
