Maya Mir vs Ut Of J & K& Ors on 12 June, 2023
Maya Mir vs Ut Of J & K& Ors on 12 June, 2023
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
ATJAMMU
WP (Crl) No. 79/2022
CrlM Nos.7044/2022
& 7045/2023
Reserved on: 07.06.2023
Pronounced on: 12.06.2023
Maya Mir .....Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. Irfaan Khan, Advocate.
v/s
UT of J & K& Ors. .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. Suneel Malhotra, GA
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.A.CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Divisional Commissioner, Jammu (hereinafter called 'Detaining Authority') in exercise of powers
under Section 3 the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substance Act
1988 (PIT NDPS Act) r/w SRO 247 of 1998 dated 27.07.1998, passed the detention Order No.
PITNDPS 12 of 2022 dated 12.09.2022 (for short 'impugned order'), in terms whereof the petitioner
namely Maya Mir W/O Late Anwar Mir R/O Jhuggi, Near Railway Station Katra District Reasi (for
short 'detenue'), has been detained.
2. The impugned detention order has been challenged through the medium of the instant petition,
being in breach of the provisions of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India read with provisions of
PIT NDPS Act.
3. It is being pleaded in the petition that the detention order so passed against the petitioner is
illegal and arbitrary as the petitioner has not been afforded opportunity to make effective
representation against her detention because the documents supplied to her were illegible and
terribly unreadable, which shows the callousness and non-application of mind on the part of the
detaining authority-respondent No.2; that the detaining authority has not mentioned a word in the
detention order with regard to the satisfaction drawn by it as to how it has come to the conclusion of
passing the detention order. Furthermore, it is stated that the petitioner has not committed any
offence nor she is involved in the commission of any offence under the NDPS Act which pose a
serious threat to the health and welfare of the people, but the respondents without the application of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105977353/ 1
Maya Mir vs Ut Of J & K& Ors on 12 June, 2023
mind and without considering the material on record had issued and passed the impugned
detention order which is illegal, unjustified, unwarranted under law and as such the same is liable to
be quashed. It is also the submission of learned counsel for the detenue that the order of detention
and the connected documents annexed with the petition clearly show violation of right of the
detenue guaranteed in terms of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India and the provisions of PIT
NDPS Act.
4. Respondents in their counter affidavit have stated that the detenue was ordered to be detained
under the provisions of Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotics Drugs and Psychotropic Substances
Act, 1988 and had she been let free there would have been every likelihood of her re-indulging in
criminal activities. It is also being stated that the petitioner is involved in numerous criminal
activities/drug peddler/habitual smuggler engaged in the sale and purchase of illicit traffic in
narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances, which poses a serious threat to the lives of young
generation of the country and even to the economy of the UT. It is further submitted that the
repeated and continuous involvement of the detenue, in the illicit trafficking of drugs and
psychotropic substances and his disrespectful attitude towards the substantive law, it has become
inevitable to detain her preventively.
5. Learned counsel for the detenue, while being heard, making reference to the grounds of
detention, would argue that on a cursory look on the same it is manifest that same are vague,
besides replica of the dossier. It is also submitted that the Detaining Authority, on the basis of
dossier submitted by Senior Superintendent of Police, Reasi, without application of mind and
without evaluating the allegations made against the detenue in the said dossier, though copy of
which was provided to the detenue but being an illiterate woman was not made to understand about
her preventive detention, proceeded to pass impugned detention order, whereby the detenue has
been detained and directed to be lodged at District Jail, Jammu. It is also submitted that the
Detaining Authority has not mentioned in the detention order that the detenue has right to make
representation against the order of detention and has supplied the copies of the documents/FIRs
and material relied upon by the Detaining Authority which are neither legible nor readable
documents, so that the petitioner was preventive in making effective and meaningful representation
against the detention order to the government, as such, the detention order is liable to be quashed.
6. Learned counsel for the respondents, ex adverso, submits that the record reveals that there is no
vagueness in the grounds of detention. All the procedural safeguards prescribed under Act and the
rights guaranteed to the detenue under the Constitution have strictly been followed in the instant
case. The detenue has been furnished all the material, as was required, and was also made aware in
Hindi of her right to make representation to the detaining authority as well as government, against
her detention.
7. Heard learned counsel for both the sides at length and considered the detention record.
8. The right of personal liberty is most precious right guaranteed under the Constitution. It has been
held to be transcendental, inalienable and available to a person. A person is not to be deprived of
his/her personal liberty except in accordance with procedures established under law and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105977353/ 2
Maya Mir vs Ut Of J & K& Ors on 12 June, 2023
procedure as laid down in Maneka Gandhi v. Union of India (1978 AIR SC
597), is to be just and fair. The personal liberty may be curtailed, where a person faces a criminal
charge or has been convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment. Where a person is facing
trial on a criminal charge and is temporarily deprived of his/her personal liberty because of the
criminal charge framed against him/her, has an opportunity to defend himself/herself and to be
acquitted of the charges in case the prosecution fails to bring home his/her guilt. Where such a
person is convicted of the offence, he/she still has the satisfaction of having been given adequate
opportunity to contest the charge and also adduce evidence in his/her defence.
9. Nevertheless, framers of the Constitution have, by incorporating Article 22 (5) in the
Constitution, left room for detention of a person without a formal charge and trial and without such
person having been held guilty of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment by a competent court.
The object is to save the society from activities that are likely to deprive a large number of people of
their right to life and personal liberty. In such a case it would be dangerous for the people at large, to
wait and watch as, by the time ordinary law is set into motion, the person having dangerous designs,
would execute his/her plans, exposing the general public to risk and cause colossal damage to life
and property. It is, therefore, necessary to take preventive measures and prevent the person bent
upon perpetrating mischief from translating his/her ideas into action. Article 22(5) Constitution of
India therefore leaves scope for enactment of preventive detention law.
10. The Hon'ble Apex Court in the judgment rendered in the case of "Hardhan Saha v. State of W.B"
[(1975) 3 SCC 198], has succinctly pointed out difference between preventive and punitive detention
in the following words:
"The essential concept of preventive detention is that the detention of a person is not
to punish him for something he has done but to prevent him from doing it. The, basis
of detention is the satisfaction of the executive of a reasonable probability of the
likelihood of the detenu acting in a manner similar to his past acts and preventing
him by detention from doing the same. A criminal conviction on the other hand is for
an act already done which can only be possible by a trial and legal evidence. There is
no parallel between prosecution in a Court of law and a detention order under the
Act. One is a punitive action and the other is a preventive act. In one, case a person is
punished to prove his guilt and the standard is proof beyond reasonable doubt
whereas in preventive detention a man is prevented from doing something which it is
necessary for reasons mentioned in section 3 of the Act to prevent."
11. The conceptual framework of preventive detention has been reiterated in "Khudiram Das v. State
of W.B", [(1975) 2 SCR 832], as under:
"The power of detention is clearly a preventive measure. It does not partake in any
manner of the nature of punishment. It is taken by way of precaution to prevent
mischief to the community. Since every preventive measure is based on the principle
that a person should be prevented from doing something which, if left free and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105977353/ 3
Maya Mir vs Ut Of J & K& Ors on 12 June, 2023
unfettered, it is reasonably probable he would do, it must necessarily proceed in all
cases, to some extent, on suspicion or anticipation as distinct from proof."
12. In "Naresh Kumar Goyal v. Union of India", [(2005) 8 SCC 276], the Court observed:
"It is trite law that an order of detention is not a curative or reformative or punitive
action, but a preventive action, avowed object of which being to prevent the
anti-social and subversive elements from imperilling the welfare of the country or the
security of the nation or from disturbing the public tranquillity or from indulging in
smuggling activities or from engaging in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and
psychotropic substances etc. Preventive detention is devised to afford protection to
society. The authorities on the subject have consistently taken the view that
preventive detention is devised to afford protection to society. The object is not to
punish a man for having done something but to intercept before he does it, and to
prevent him from doing so."
13. The detention record, as produced, reveals that the detenue was involved in following cases
registered at Police Station, Katra vide:-
(i) FIR No. 205/2021 U/S 8/20 NDPS Act.
(ii) FIR No. 130/2022 U/S 8/20 NDPS Act.
Involvement of the detenue in the aforementioned cases appears to have heavily weighed with the
detaining authority while passing detention order. Even in aforementioned two FIRs of Police
Station, Katra, the charge sheet are presented before the court of Principal Sessions Judge, Reasi
and the cases are pending adjudication before the learned Principal Sessions Judge, Reasi.
Detention record would further show that detenue was arrested in pursuance of these two FIRs but
was granted bail by the court in both the cases.
14. Perusal of detention record reveals that detenue at the time of execution of detention was
provided copy of the detention order, copy of the grounds of detention and other material. The
detenue, as record would reveal, was also informed as regards making of representation against the
detention order if she so desired, both to detaining authority and Government.
15. The grounds of detention are definite, proximate and free from any ambiguity. The detenue has
been informed with sufficient clarity what actually weighed with the detaining authority while
passing detention order. The detaining authority has narrated facts and figures that made it to
exercise its powers under Section 3 of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in Narcotic Drugs and
Psychotropic Substance Act, 1988, and record subjective satisfaction that detenue was required to be
placed under preventive detention in order to prevent her from committing any of the acts within
the meaning of illicit traffic. The detaining authority has informed detenue that she is an accused in
two cases, involving illegal trafficking of narcotic substances, which poses serious and great threat to
the society particularly/especially young generation. So viewed, the detenue is not to be heard
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105977353/ 4
Maya Mir vs Ut Of J & K& Ors on 12 June, 2023
saying that any of her Constitutional and Statutory rights have been violated while detention order
in question was slapped on her and thereafter executed.
16. The instant case relates to illicit trafficking of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances. The
drug problem is a serious threat to public health, economy and growth of humanity. Our global
community is facing serious consequences of drug abuse and it undermines the socio- economic and
political stability and sustainable development. Besides, it also distorts the health and fabric of the
society and it is considered to be the originator for petty offences as well as heinous crimes like
smuggling of arms & ammunition and money laundering. The involvement of various terrorist
groups and syndicates in drug trafficking leads to threat to the national security and sovereignty of
States by the way of Narco-terrorism. The drug trafficking and abuse has continued its significant
toll on valuable human lives and productive years of many persons around the globe. With the
growth and development of world economy, drug traffickers are also seamlessly trafficking various
type of drugs from one corner to other ensuring the availability of the contrabands for vulnerable
segment of the society who fall into the trap of drug peddlers and traffickers. Due to India's close
proximity with major opium growing areas of the region, India is facing serious menace of drug
trafficking and as a spill- over effect, drug abuse especially among the youth is a matter of concern
for us.
17. In view of the foregoing discussion, it is clearly disclosed that it is not the number of acts that are
to be determined for detention of an individual but it is impact of the act which is material and
determinative. In the instant case the act of detenue relates to drug trafficking, which has posed
serious threat, apart from health and welfare of the people, to youth, most particularly unemployed
youth, to indulge in such acts, ramifications thereof would be irreversible and unimaginable.
Petitioner has not been able to convincingly point out violation of any statutory or constitutional
provisions.
18. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and discussion made hereinabove, the
petition is found to be devoid of any merit and substance and is liable to be rejected. The petition is,
thus, dismissed and the impugned order relating to preventive detention of the petitioner is upheld.
19. Detention record, as produced, be returned to the learned GA.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge JAMMU 12.06.2023 Raj Kumar Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/105977353/ 5
