Mehran Ajmal vs Ut Of Jammu And Kashmir And Others on 16 September, 2023
Mehran Ajmal vs Ut Of Jammu And Kashmir And Others on 16
September, 2023
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
LPANo. 120/2022
Reserved on 13.09.2023.
Pronounced on 16 .09.2023
Mehran Ajmal ..... appellants (s)
Through :- Mr. Rajat Sudan Advocate.
V/s
UT of Jammu and Kashmir and others
Through :- Mr Sumeet Bhatia GA.
Mr. Arjun Pathania Advocate
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Sanjeev Kumar, J.
1 This intra-Court appeal by the appellant is directed against a judgment dated 29.10.2022 passed
by the learned Single Judge of this Court ["the Writ Court"] in WP(C) No. 458/2022 titled „Mehran
Ajmal vs. UT of Jammu and Kashmir and others. Before we advert to the grounds of challenge urged
by learned counsel for the appellant, we deem it appropriate to set out the material facts germane to
the disposal of controversy raised in this appeal.
2. The appellant being aspirant for MBBS admission participated in NEET-UG 2021 examination
under Roll No.250101044 and secured 481 marks. The appellant is an outstanding sportsperson and
has been awarded rank 12 by the J&K Sports Council in the sports category as per the norms
contained in Government Order No.808-GAD of 2008 dated 17.06.2008. It is submitted that the
ranking in the sports category was prepared by the J&K Sports Council strictly in terms of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59801284/ 1
Mehran Ajmal vs Ut Of Jammu And Kashmir And Others on 16 September, 2023
Government Order dated 17.06.2008 (supra) under which merit for ranking is calculated by giving
60% weight-age to the merit obtained by the candidate in the test conducted by the selection agency
and 40% weight- age to the level of sports participation.
3 The grievance, as projected by the appellant before the Writ Court was that the
respondent-BOPEE resorted to and adopted an irrational and illogical criteria and granted
admission to the candidates in the category of candidates possessing outstanding proficiency in
sports ["sports category"] on the basis of inter-se merit of the candidates obtained in the NEET-UG
examination only. It was, thus, submitted before the Writ Court that the selection of candidates
under „sports category(cid:129) made by the respondent- BOPEE was contrary to and in violation of clear
and unequivocal provisions of Government Order dated 17.06.2008 (supra).
4 In the reply affidavit filed by the BOPEE in opposition to the writ petition, it was pleaded that with
a view to giving effect to the reservation provided in favour of various categories including the sports
category, the respondent-BOPEE strictly followed the J&K Reservation Act, 2004 and the rules
framed thereunder. In the instant case also, it was contended, the candidates, who intended to
participate in counseling under sports category were informed through J&K Sports Council for
submission of their certificates of achievements for accord of sports points by the Sports Council. As
a consequence thereof, the respondent-BOPEE prepared a provisional rank-wise list of sports
category candidates by giving due consideration to the Government Order dated 17.06.2008
(supra). The said provisional list was published in the official website of the BOPEE vide
Notification No.159- BOPEE of 2021 dated 30.12.2021 for inviting objections, if any, from the
aggrieved candidates. The list was ultimately finalized and published vide Notification No.
001-BOPEE of 2022 dated 05.01.2022.
5 It was the stand taken by the respondent-Board before the Writ Court that sports list so published
was only for determination of eligibility under sports category and was not meant to be
determinative of allotment of seats to such candidates on the basis of their ranking in sports
category. It was, thus, submitted that the ultimate selection for admission to various professional
courses, like MBSS and BDS was made strictly on the basis of merit secured by the candidates in the
NEET-UG examination conducted by National Testing Agency ["NTA"]. The respondent-BOPEE
admitted that having regard to the merit of the appellant in the NEET-UG examination and points
awarded being a person having proficiency in sports, he was placed at overall rank No.12 and
amongst the male candidates, he stood at S.No.6. However, it was submitted that this ranking in the
category of sports person was only for the purpose of short listing the candidates in the said category
for admission. The admission to the undergraduate courses like MBSS/BDS was to be made purely
on the basis of marks obtained in the NEET-UG examination. This is so provided under the
Regulations on Graduate Medical Education, 1997 ["the Regulations of 1997"] issued by the Medical
Council of India, in exercise of powers conferred by Section 33 of the Indian Medical Council Act,
1956.
6. The writ petition was considered by the Writ Court and having regard to the rival contentions of
the parties and the material on record, the Writ Court came to a conclusion that the appellant did
not have a case to maintain the petition and the grievance raised by him against the selection of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59801284/ 2
Mehran Ajmal vs Ut Of Jammu And Kashmir And Others on 16 September, 2023
candidates under sports category, in particular, selection of respondent No.5 was not tenable on
merits. The writ petition was, accordingly, dismissed in terms of the judgment impugned in this
appeal.
7. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, we are of the
considered view that the judgment passed by the Writ Court is correct in law and on facts and the
view taken by the Writ Court is unexceptionable.
8. Indisputably, the reservation in appointment, promotion and admission to the professional
courses in the UT of Jammu and Kashmir is governed by the J&K Reservation Act, 2004 ["Act of
2004"] and the J&K Reservation Rules 2005 ["Rules of 20005"] framed thereunder. Chapter-IV of
the Act of 2004 deals with reservation in professional institutions. Section 9 of the Act of 2004,
which is relevant for our purpose, is set out below:
"9. Reservation in professional institutions.
(1) The Government 1[shall reserve seats in the Professional Institutions for
candidates belonging to,--
(a) reserved categories and such other classes or categories as may be notified from
time to time ; and
(b) economically weaker sections :] Provided that 2[the total percentage of
reservation provided in clause (a) shall in no case exceed 50 :
[Provided further that the reservation in Professional Institutions in favour of the
persons belonging to economically weaker sections shall be in addition to the existing
reservation provided in this sub-section and shall be subject to a maximum of ten
percent of the seats in each category.] (2)The Government shall prescribe the
percentage for each category in admission in the Professional Institutions:
Provided that different percentage may be prescribed for different courses :
Provided further that 50 of the seats in each category including open category for
admission to MBBS and BBS, shall be selected from amongst female candidates
belonging to such category :
Provided also that the seats in any reserved category, which cannot be filled for want
of candidates belonging to that category, shall be filled from amongst the candidates
belonging to open merit category".
9. From a reading of Section 9, it would clearly transpire that the Government is
obligated to reserve seats in professional institutions for candidates belonging to
reserved categories and such other classes and categories as may be notified from
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59801284/ 3
Mehran Ajmal vs Ut Of Jammu And Kashmir And Others on 16 September, 2023
time to time providing further that the total percentage of reservation shall in no case
exceed 50%. The Government is also mandated to prescribe percentage of each
category in admission in the professional institutions, with further stipulation that
50% of the seats in each category including open category for admission to MBBSS
and BDS shall be filled up by selection from amongst female candidates belonging to
such category. There is, however, no concept of carrying forward of the seats in case
of non-availability of candidates in a particular category. To give effect to this
provision in the Act of 2004, the Government has issued the Rules of 2005.
10. Part-IV of the Rules of 2005 deals with reservation in professional institutions.
Apart from making reservation in various reserved categories, like SC, ST and socially
and educationally backward classes in terms of Rule 13 of Rules of 2005, there is a
reservation provided in favour of other categories of permanent residents of the State
under Rule 14. For quick reference, we reproduce Rule 14 herein below:
"14. Other reservation- In addition to the reservations specified in rule 13, the
following reservation is also made in favour of the following categories of the
permanent Residents of the State to the extent shown against each:
(a) Children of Defence Personal- 3%
(b) Children of Para-military Forces and State police personnel-
1%
(c) Candidates possessing outstanding proficiency in sports- 2% 11 From a perusal of clause (c) of
Rule 14, it is evident that 2% of the seats in the professional courses are earmarked for candidates
possessing outstanding proficiency in sports. The Act of 2004 and the Rules framed thereunder,
more particularly, those reproduced hereinabove, treat a person possessing outstanding proficiency
in sports as a class. There is no further classification within the class, like more outstanding
proficiency in sports or less outstanding proficiency in sports.
12 How proficiency in sports is to be determined is laid down by the Government by issuing J&K
Certification of Outstanding Proficiency in Sports Rules, 2008 ["Rules of 2008"]. Rule 3 of the said
Rules, which are indeed non-statutory in nature, lays down as under:
"3.Eligiblity for claiming benefit under the sports category:
Such candidates alone shall be eligible for consideration for selection to professional
institutes in the State under the sports category who append the certificate issued
under these rules within the form submitted by him in pursuance of the
advertisement notice issued by the authority competent to invite applications for
making selections to the professional institutions in the State:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59801284/ 4
Mehran Ajmal vs Ut Of Jammu And Kashmir And Others on 16 September, 2023
(1) Provided that for the purposes of determination of the merit under sports
category for selection to professional courses at Post Graduate/Graduate/Diploma
level etc. 60% weight-age shall be given to the merit obtained by the candidates in the
test conducted by the selection agency and 40% weight-age shall be given to the level
of sports participation.
13 True it is that from a reading of Rule 3 of Rules of 2008, it come out that for determination of
merit of a candidate under sports category for selection to professional courses at Post
Graduate/Graduate/Diploma level etc., 60% weight-age shall be given to the merit obtained by the
candidate in the test conducted by the selection agency and 40% weight-age to the level of sports
participation.
14 The definition of a „candidate possessing outstanding proficiency(cid:129) is given in Section 2(A) of
Rules of 2008 which we reproduce hereunder:
"2(A) Candidates possessing Outstanding Proficiency, means-
(i) A person who has represented India at Olympic Games, Asian Games, SAARC
Games, Common Wealth Games or other officially recognized Test Matches/Wor1d
Cup Competition in any of the games/sports mentioned in Schedule I annexed here
to; or
(ii) A person who has participated and secured one of the first three positions in the
individual events or was a member of the team which obtained first or 2nd position
or has participated twice or more in the same discipline in the National
Championship or Junior or Senior events in any sports or games as mentioned in the
Schedule I annexed to these rules for such of the courses where the prescribed
qualification is 10+2:
Provided that for selection to such of the courses where prescribed qualification is
Matric, participation in Sub- Junior National events shall be sufficient.
(iii) The events in which the proficiency is to be determined in terms of sub clause (ii)
are as follows:
(a) National School Games held under the auspices of School Games Federation of
India; or
(b) Mini National Championship under respective Federations; or
(c) All India Rural Sports Tournaments under Sports Authority of India; or
(d) Women Sports Competitions under Sports Authority of India; or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59801284/ 5
Mehran Ajmal vs Ut Of Jammu And Kashmir And Others on 16 September, 2023
(e) Federations Cups/All India Open Tournaments under respective Federations; or
(f) Vijay Hazare Tournament: or
(g) Vijay Merchant Tournament; or
(h) Ranji Trophy Tournament; or
(i) National Championship under respective Federations; or
(j) National Sub-Junior Championship under respective Federations (for courses
where prescribed qualification is Matric only); or
(k) C. K. Naidoo Trophy cricket tournament (under 22"
15. Any candidate who qualifies to be a person possessing outstanding proficiency as defined under
Section 2(A) is to be issued the certificate of outstanding proficiency. It is, thus, the Rule 3 of Rules
of 2008 which has triggered the controversy raised by the appellant in the writ petition and
re-agitated before us.
16 Learned counsel for the appellant submits that in the case of sports category, the merit for
selection to the professional courses, like MBBS/BDS is required to be determined under Rule 3 of
the Rules of 2008 and that it was so determined by the Board. The grievance of the appellant is,
however, that the merit so determined in terms of Rule 3 was not considered while framing the final
select list of the candidates under sports category to be admitted to the professional courses, like
MBBS/BDS. The argument of learned counsel, at the first blush, appeared to have substance and
merit, but on a close scrutiny, we found that the same was not tenable in view of the Regulations of
1997 framed by the Medical Council of India["MCI Regulations"], in exercise of powers conferred by
Section 33 of the Indian Medical Council Act, 1956. Needless to state that the standards of medical
education in the entire country including the UT of Jammu and Kashmir are required to be
maintained by the Medical Council of India constituted under the Indian Medical Council Act,
1956.As is held in the case of Dr. Preety Srivastava vs. State of MP and others, AIR 1999 SC 2894,
these regulations are binding on all the authorities and have overriding effect on the contrary rules,
regulations or the executive instructions, if any, issued by any State or UT. It is, thus, beyond any
scope of discussion that in the case of conflict, MCI Regulations shall prevail over any statutory or
non-statutory Rules/order of the State/UT Government. 17 Having held thus, we proceed to
examine the relevant Regulation which is strongly relied upon by the respondent-BOPEE to justify
the preparation of select list based only on the merit obtained by the candidates having proficiency
in sports in NEET-UG examination conducted by the NTA . In terms of Regulation 5(5)(v), it is
clearly laid down that all admission to MBBS course within the respective categories shall be based
solely on marks obtained in the NEET-UG examination. Obviously, all categories would include the
category of persons having proficiency in sports. This Regulation overrides the provision of Rules of
2008 to the extent the Rules of 2008 provide that for selection to any professional course, the merit
amongst the sports persons with outstanding proficiency in sports is to be determined by allocating
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59801284/ 6
Mehran Ajmal vs Ut Of Jammu And Kashmir And Others on 16 September, 2023
60% weight-age to the merit obtained in the test conducted by the selection agency and 40% to the
level of sports participation. 18 We,therefore, do not find any illegality or impropriety having been
committed by the respondent-BOPEE in not adhering to the prescription contained in Rule 3 of
Rules of 2008 and instead complying strictly the directive contained in the MCI Regulations. It is,
however, very surprising to note that, though the respondent-BOPEE feels bound by the MCI
Regulations and prepares the select list for admission to MBBS course strictly on the basis of merit
of the candidates obtained in the NEET-UG examination, yet it adopts the criteria laid down in Rule
3(1) of Rules of 2008 for the purpose of short- listing the candidates belonging to the category of
persons with proficiency in sports. By doing so, the respondent-BOPEE, many a times, may not and
does not short-list a candidate on the basis of his overall merit in the sports category determined on
the basis of 60:40 formula contained in Rule 3(1) of Rules of 2008 despite the said person having a
very higher score in the NEET- UG examination than those who ultimately find place in the select
list. This is indeed an anomalous situation created by such approach adopted by the BOPEE. Once,
as per the MCI Regulations, the selection for admission to professional course of MBSS is required
to be made on the basis of merit obtained by the candidates in the NEET UG examination, there is
no point or justification to adopt a different yardstick for short-listing the candidates particularly
when adoption of different yardstick is likely to do injustice with the candidates who have higher
score in the NEET UG, but have got lesser points on account of their level of sports participation,
though they are certified to be persons having outstanding proficiency in sports.
19. Once the competent Authority under the Rules of 2008 certifies a candidate to be a person with
outstanding proficiency determined under Section 2(A), all persons so certified would form a single
class and would, therefore, be eligible to seek consideration for selection to MBBS/BDS course in
the UT of Jammu and Kashmir and Ladakh under sports category. The short-listing, if required,
should ordinarily be resorted to on the basis of the merit in the NEET UG examination.
20 We could have definitely set right the manner in which the 60:40 formula has been adopted for
short-listing of persons in the sports category and issued appropriate directions accordingly, but, in
the case on hand, we find that the appellant is a person who was shortlisted under sports category
and was considered along with either eligible candidates shortlisted, though by not applying the
correct criteria or yardstick. The appellant, therefore, cannot be permitted to raise any grievance on
this score. Had a candidate not short-listed on the basis of 60:40 formula approached this Court,
perhaps, our order would have been different.
21 Learned counsel for the appellant while drawing out attention to the selection made prior to and
after the selection in question, brought to our notice that the respondent-BOPEE by short-listing the
candidates on the basis of 60:40 formulate contained in Rule 3(1) of Rules of 2008 did not shortlist
the candidates who were having higher score in the NEET UG examination than those who were
ultimately selected for admission to MBBS course. This anomaly, as we have noticed, has existed
because of the poor understanding by the respondents of the entire issue. It is high time that the
Government rises to the occasion and clearly provides that 60:40 formula as contained in Rule 3(1)
of Rules of 2008 shall not be applicable to the selection for admission to MBBS course which is
regulated by the MCI regulations. It is enough for the competent authority under the Rules of 2008
to issue a certificate in favour of a candidate of outstanding proficiency in sports determined under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59801284/ 7
Mehran Ajmal vs Ut Of Jammu And Kashmir And Others on 16 September, 2023
Rule 2(A) of the Rules of 2008.The short-listing and selection for admission to MBBS course can be
done by the BOPEE as per norms prescribed in the MCI Regulations.
22 For whatever is stated and discussed above, we find no merit in this appeal and the same is,
accordingly, dismissed.
(PUNEET GUPTA) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
Jammu
16 .09.2023
Sanjeev Whether order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59801284/ 8
