Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August,
2023
Author: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
Bench: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
S. No. 114
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP(C) No. 2039/2022
CM No. 5594/2022
Reserved on: 18.08.2023
Pronounced on : 23.08.2023
Mian Khan and others ....Petitioners/Appellant(s)
Through :- Mr.C.M. Koul, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. A.R. Bhat, Advocate
V/s
UT of J&K and others ....Respondent(s)
Through :- Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
Mr. Ravinder Gupta, AAG
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE WASIM SADIQ NARGAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
, PRAYER:
01. The petitioners, through the medium of the instant petition are seeking writ in the
nature of Mandamus commanding the respondents to evaluate, compute and
disburse the compensation to the petitioners at the present market rate in respect of
their land taken away by the respondents forcibly for which a road has already been
constructed measuring 178 metres „PSC Motorable Bridge including approaches at
Ujhan (Rajouri)(cid:129), besides seeking a direction against the respondents to award
interest to the petitioners on the amount due to be paid to them on account of their
compensation from the date the amount of compensation fell due to be paid to the
petitioners up to the date of actual disbursement.
BRIEF FACTS:
02. Petition has been filed by the petitioners collectively, claiming to be owners and
in possession of the land in village Ujhan, Tehsil Darhal, District Rajouri. The specific
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 1
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
case of the petitioners is that for the construction of the road in Village Ujhan, Tehsil
Darhal, the lands of the petitioners were required to be acquired, the details of which
have been mentioned in the writ petition.
03. The further case of the petitioners is that the concerned Tehsildar has submitted
the file pertaining to the lands in question for acquisition for the construction of 178
meters PSC Motorable Bridge including approaches at Ujhan. It is further submitted
that thereafter the aforementioned road came to be constructed which remains in
existence as on today and the same is also under use by the villagers and others who
are required to move on the said road.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF PETITIONERS:
04. Mr C.M. Koul, learned Senior Counsel appearing along with Mr A.R. Bhat, has
submitted that the petitioners by no stretch of imagination could be deprived of their
land without following due process of law and the specific case which has been
projected by the learned counsel for the petitioners in the instant petition is that the
respondents without following the due process of law in reference to Land
Acquisition Act, have divested the petitioners of their land and the said road has been
constructed. He further submits that the same was apparently done to the
disadvantage and detriment of the petitioners as no compensation has been paid to
them.
The further case of the petitioners is that though the said land of the petitioners was utilised and the
road has already been constructed which continues to remain in existence as on today, besides the
same being under use of villagers and others without blacktopping.
05. The only grievance which has been projected by the petitioners is that the respondents have not
paid any compensation to the petitioners and the land of the petitioners were forcibly taken away by
the respondents without following due process of law. Learned counsel further submits that in
absence of any proceedings initiated for acquiring the land in question under the Land Acquisition
Act which was in vogue at that relevant point of time, the petitioners have been put to a
disadvantageous position as their land has been taken forcibly and even the compensation has not
been assessed and paid to the petitioners.
06. Learned counsel further submits that the petitioners cannot be deprived of their land in the
absence of conforming to the requirement of the procedure prescribed under the Land Acquisition
Act as admittedly, the respondents have not taken any steps contemplated under the
aforementioned Act. Learned counsel further submits that petitioners have been deprived of an
opportunity of being heard, therefore, according to the learned counsel, the right granted to the
petitioners in terms of Article 300 A of the Constitution of India has been glaringly transgressed by
the respondents.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF RESPONDENTS:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 2
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
07. The reply stands filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 2, 3 & 4 by Mrs. Monika Kohli, learned Sr.
AAG in which a specific stand has been taken in para B of the objections that as per spot position,
Road (178 Mtr. PSC Motorable Bridge including approaches) on spot stands constructed by PWD
(R&B) Department, Rajouri involving the land of the petitioners along with land owners. It is a
specific case of the respondents that they have not received any indent from the intending
department for the acquisition of the land in the instant case.
08. It is further projected by the learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents that
pursuant to the request of the land owners, revenue papers were prepared and sent to respondent
No. 3 vide communication dated 11.09.2018, and after verification and clarification of the same,
some observations including process of revenue papers without proper indent, the case file was
returned by respondent No. 3 with a direction to process the same after receiving the indent from
the competent authority. The respondent No. 4 has specifically projected in the aforesaid reply that
pursuant thereto, a request was made to the Executive Engineer, PWD for placement of indent
before the Collector so that the process of acquisition land in question is initiated.
09. Learned counsel further submits that as soon as the indent from the competent authority is
received in the instant case, the respondents will initiate the acquisition proceedings as per rules
and norms in vogue.
10. However, another set of objections have been filed on behalf of respondent Nos. 5 and 6 through
Mr. Ravinder Gupta, learned AAG, in which, the respondents have taken altogether a different
stand, wherein in para 6, it is averred that the petitioners are not entitled for any compensation in
the light of the fact that there is no provision of land compensation under NABARD as the scheme
stands approved by the NABARD.
11. According to Mr. Ravinder Gupta, learned AAG appearing on behalf of respondent Nos. 5 and 6,
there is no provision of land compensation under NABARD. The stand taken by the respondent Nos.
5 and 6 in para 6 of the reply runs contrary to the reply filed by respondent Nos. 2 & 3 and 4 in
which a specific stand has been taken that as soon as the indent from the competent authority is
received, the acquisition proceedings in the instant case will commence and the respondents have
not denied that the road has been constructed involving the lands of the petitioners along with other
land owners nor the respondents have denied the entitlement of the petitioners for receiving such
compensation.
LEGAL ANALYSIS
12. Heard learned counsel for the parties at length and perused the record.
13. With the consent of learned counsel for the parties, the instant petition is taken up for final
disposal at this stage.
14. The pleadings of the parties and the perusal of the record, clearly reveals that the lands of the
petitioners have been taken over by the respondents forcibly without the consent of the petitioners
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 3
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
and without taking recourse to any procedure prescribed under law. It is also an admitted fact that
the petitioners have not been paid any compensation with respect to the land in question. It is a
classic case where the respondents after taking the land of the petitioners without their consent,
have constructed the road involving the land of the petitioners without paying any compensation
and initiating any process of acquisition as envisaged under law.
15. For facility of reference, it would be apt to reproduce the relevant statutory provisions of the
State Land Acquisition Act, Svt. 1990
4. [Publication of preliminary notification and powers of officers thereupon.-- (1) Whenever land in
any locality is needed or is likely to be needed for any public purpose the Collector shall notify it--
(a) through a public notice to be affixed at convenient places in the said locality and
shall also cause it to be known by beat of drum and through the local Panchayats and
Patwaries ; [x x x] [x x x]
(b) in two daily newspapers having largest circulation in the said locality of which at
least one shall be in the regional language.] (2) [After the Collector has notified any
land in the manner prescribed in clause (a) of sub-section (1) as being needed or
likely to be needed for a public purpose] it shall be lawful for any officer, either
generally or specially authorised by the Government in this behalf, and for his
servants and workmen,--
to enter upon and survey and take levels of any land in such locality;
to dig or bore into the sub-soil; to do all other acts necessary to ascertain whether the land is
adopted for such purpose; to set out the boundaries of the land proposed to be taken and the
intended line of the work (if any) proposed to be made thereon ;
to make such levels, boundaries and line by placing marks and cutting trenches ; and where
otherwise the survey cannot be completed, and the levels taken and the boundaries and lines
marked, to cut down and clear away any part of any standing crop, fence or jungle :
Provided that, no person shall enter into any building or upon any enclosed court or
garden attached to a dwelling house (unless with the consent of the occupier thereof)
without previously giving such occupier at least 2[ten days] notice in writing of his
intention to do so.
6. Declaration that land is required for public purpose. --(1) When the Government is
satisfied after considering the report, if any, made under section 5-A, sub-section (2),
that any particular land is needed for public purpose, a declaration shall be made to
that effect under the signature of the Revenue Minister or of some officer duly
authorised in this behalf :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 4
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
[Provided that no such declaration shall be made unless the compensation to be
awarded for such property is to be paid wholly or partly out of the public revenues or
some fund controlled or managed by a local authority.] (2) The declaration shall be
published in official Gazette, and shall state the district or other territorial division in
which the land is situate, the purpose for which it is needed, its approximate areas
and where a plan shall have been made of the land, the place where such plan may be
inspected.
(3) The said declaration shall be conclusive evidence that land is needed for a public
purpose, and after making such declaration the Government may acquire the land in
manner hereinafter appearing.
9. Notice to persons interested. --(1) The Collector shall then cause public notice to be given at
convenient places on or near the land to be taken, stating that the Government intends to take
possession of the land, and that the claims to compensation for all interests in such land may be
made to him.
(2) Such notice shall state the particulars of the land so needed, and shall require all persons
interested in the land to appear personally or by agent, before the Collector at a time and place
therein mentioned (such time not being earlier than [fifteen days] after the date of publication of
notice), and to state the nature of their respective interests in the land and the amount and
particulars of their claims to compensation for such interests and their objections (if any) to the
measurements made under section 8. The Collector may in any case, require such statements to be
made in writing and signed by the party or his agent.
(3) The Collector shall also serve notice to the same effect on the occupier (if any) of such land and
on all such persons known or believed to be interested therein, or to be entitled to act for persons so
interested, as reside, or have agents authorised to receive service on their behalf, within the revenue
district in which the land is situate.
(4) In case any person so interested resides elsewhere, and has no such agent, the notice shall be
sent to him by post in a letter addressed to him at his last known residence, address or place of
business and registered in accordance with the Postal Rules in force for the time being in that
behalf.
[11-B. Period within which an award shall be made.-- The Collector shall make an award under
section 11 within a period of two years from the date of the publication of the declaration and if no
award is made within that period, the entire proceedings for the acquisition of land shall lapse :
Provided that in case where the said declaration has been published before the
commencement of the State Land Acquisition (Amendment) Act, 1997, the award
shall be made within a period of two years from such commencement.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 5
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
16. From a bare perusal of the aforesaid statutory provisions, it is emphatically clear
that whenever land in locality is needed or is likely to be needed for a public purpose,
the Collector is under an obligation to notify the same through the public notice to be
affixed at convenient place by publishing the same in two daily newspapers having
largest circulation.
Pursuant thereto, when the Government is satisfied that after considering the report, if any made
under Section 5-A Sub-Section (2) that any particular land is needed for the public purpose, a
declaration shall be made to the effect which has to be published in the official gazette and is a
conclusive evidence that the land is needed for public purpose after making such declaration.
Pursuant to the issuance of the notice, the Collector is also under an obligation to cast public notice
to be given at convenient place to the interested parties by showing the intention of the Government
to take possession of the land and claim to compensation for all interested in such land may be
made to them.
17. In the instant case, the land has been taken without complying the aforesaid statutory provisions
and even no compensation has been paid till date, which is substantiated from the stand taken by
the respondents in their reply.
18. From a bare perusal of Section 11-B of the aforesaid Act, it was incumbent on part of the
Collector to have passed the award under Section 11 within a period of two years from the date of
publication of the declaration and if no award is made within the period, the entire proceedings for
the acquisition of the land shall lapse.
19. What to talk of the passing of the award even the declaration/public notice till date has not been
issued and no acquisition proceedings have been initiated under the provisions of Land Acquisition
Act and having failed to do so, the respondents are under a legal obligation to pay the compensation
to the respondents under the Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition
Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 after following the due process of law as envisaged in the
aforesaid Act.
20. The action of the respondents to issue the indent after taking the land of the petitioners forcibly
and constructing the road is unheard of and is in flagrant violation to the procedure envisaged under
law. The respondents have admitted that they have acquired the land of the petitioners without
following any procedure and after spot verification, it is admitted that the road stands constructed
involving the lands of the petitioners and other land owners. The respondents are now initiating
acquisition proceedings i.e. after acquiring the land forcibly without issuing indent at the first
instance.
21. It was incumbent on part of the respondents to have issued the indent at the first instance
strictly in conformity with the procedure as envisaged under Land Acquisition Act by providing an
opportunity of being heard to the lawful owners and by settling the claim of the lawful owners with
respect to the compensation and then the road ought to have been constructed. However, in the
instant case, the respondents have initiated the process in a reverse manner which is in flagrant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 6
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
violation of the procedure envisaged in the Land Acquisition Act. It is not so, even the respondents
have taken a contradictory stand by filing two set of objections with a view to defeat the rights of the
petitioners to claim compensation.
22. From the record, it is apparently clear that the Tehsildar Darhal has submitted the file
pertaining to the land in question for acquisition of the aforementioned land required for the
construction of 178 meters PSC Motorable Bridge including approaches at Ujhan (Rajouri) vide
letter dated 11.09.2018 and, pursuant thereto, some clarification was sought by the Collector, Land
Acquisition, Rajouri vide letter dated 09.10.2019 from Tehsildar.
23. It is an admitted case of the respondents that the indent which was the basic requirement was
not placed by the intending department and this was precisely the reason that the acquisition
proceedings could not be initiated well in time. Admittedly, from the record, it has emerged that the
acquisition proceedings till date have not been initiated and after reorganization, a new Act i.e.
Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition Rehabilitation and Resettlement
Act, 2013 has come into force and the respondents as such, are under an obligation to pay
compensation to the petitioners in conformity with the provisions of the aforesaid Act after
following the procedure in the aforesaid Act.
24. It is well recognised that the right to property is a basic human right as guaranteed under Article
300A of the Constitution of India. It is empathetically clear that no one can be deprived of his/her
property other than by following procedure prescribed under law. The facts mentioned above clearly
reveals that the respondents have violated the basic rights of the petitioners and have deprived them
of their valuable constitutional right without following the procedure as envisaged under law. The
State and its agencies cannot dispossess a citizen of his property except in accordance with
procedure established by law. The obligation to pay the compensation though not expressly included
in Article 300A can be inferred from the said Article.
25. The State in exercise of its power of 'Eminent Domain' may interfere with the right of property of
a person by acquiring the same but the same must be for a public purpose and reasonable
compensation therefore must be paid. In a democratic polity governed by the rule of law, the State
could not have deprived the petitioners of their property without the sanction of law and it is
obligatory on part of the State to comply with the procedure for acquisition, requisition or any other
permissible statutory mode. The State being a welfare State governed by the rule of law cannot
arrogate itself to status beyond what is provided by the Constitution.
26. The right to property is now considered to be not only constitutional or statutory right but falls
within the realm of human rights. Human rights have been considered in the realm of individual
rights such as right to shelter, livelihood, health, employment etc and over the years, human rights
have gained a multifaceted dimension. In an identical case, the Hon(cid:129)ble Apex Court in case titled
"Vidya Devi versus State of Himachal Pradesh and others" reported as 2020 AIR (SC) 4709, has
been pleased to held as under: -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 7
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
―To forcibly dispossess a person of his private property, without following due
process of law, would be violative of a human right, as also the constitutional right
under Article 300 A of the Constitution.
Reliance is placed on the judgment in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. v.
Darius Shapur Chenai4, wherein it is held that: -
― 6. ... Having regard to the provisions contained in Article 300A of the Constitution,
the State in exercise of its power of "eminent domain" may interfere with the right of
property of a person by acquiring the same but the same must be for a public purpose
and reasonable compensation therefor must be paid.(cid:131) In N. Padmamma v. S.
Ramakrishna Reddy, (2008) 15 SCC 517, the Hon'ble Apex Court has held that: -
―21. If the right of property is a human right as also a constitutional right, the same
cannot be taken away except in accordance with law. Article 300A of the Constitution
protects such right. The provisions of the Act seeking to divest such right, keeping in
view of the provisions of Article 300A of the Constitution of India, must be strictly
construed.(cid:131) In Delhi Airtech Services Pvt. Ltd. &Ors. v. State of U.P.&Ors., (2011) 9
SCC 354, the Hon'ble Apex Court recognized the right to property as a basic human
right in the following words:
―30. It is accepted in every jurisprudence and by different political thinkers that
some amount of property right is an indispensable safeguard against tyranny and
economic oppression of the Government. Jefferson was of the view that liberty
cannot long subsist without the support of property.
"Property must be secured, else liberty cannot subsist" was the opinion of John
Adams. Indeed, the view that property itself is the seed bed which must be conserved
if other constitutional values are to flourish is the consensus among political thinkers
and jurists.(cid:131) In JilubhaiNanbhaiKhachar v. State of Gujarat, (1995) Supp. 1 SCC 596,
the Hon'ble Apex Court has held as under: -
―48. ...In other words, Article 300A only limits the powers of the State that no person
shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law. There has to be no
deprivation without any sanction of law.Deprivation by any other mode is not
acquisition or taking possession under Article 300A. In other words, if there is no
law, there is no deprivation.(cid:131) 10.5. In a democratic polity governed by the rule of law,
the State could not have deprived a citizen of their property without the sanction of
law. Reliance is placed on the judgment of this Court in Tukaram Kana Joshi &Ors. v.
M.I.D.C. & Ors.8 wherein it was held that the State must comply with the procedure
for acquisition, requisition, or any other permissible statutory mode. The State being
a welfare State governed by the rule of law cannot arrogate to itself a status beyond
what is provided by the Constitution.(cid:131)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 8
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
27. From the pleadings, it has emerged that the land of the petitioners has been utilised for
construction of 178 Mtr. PSC Motorable Bridge including approaches at Ujhan, but without there
being a formal acquisition inasmuch as till date, no declaration under Section 6 of the Land
Acquisition Act has been issued and published. The respondents have not denied the entitlement of
the petitioners to receive the compensation, rather a stand has been taken by the respondents that
the matter regarding completion of the acquisition proceedings stands submitted to the competent
authority and paying of the compensation would await once the proceedings are completed.
28. It goes without saying that the proceedings for acquisition of any land commences with the
issuance of notification under Section 4 of the Land Acquisition Act, proposing to acquire the land
for public purpose. Once the Government is satisfied on considering of report of the Collector that
the land is needed for public purpose, it directs for issuance of the declaration under Section 6 of the
Act and the said declaration by all means is the conclusive proof of the acquisition of land.
29. In the instant case, till date, no declaration under Section 6 of the aforesaid Act has been issued
and published, meaning, thereby, that the land has not been finally acquired by following due
procedure of law. The respondents could not have taken the possession of the land of the petitioners
and utilised it for the purposes of construction of the road. The action of the respondents in
constructing the road without acquiring the land in question after following due process of law is
nothing but an abuse of process of law depriving the petitioners from their valuable right to possess
the property.
30. In the above circumstances, I hold that the respondents are clearly guilty of violation of the
human rights of the petitioners as envisaged under Section 300A of the Constitution of India and,
accordingly, are liable to compensate the petitioners for such infringement.
31. I am fortified by the law laid down by the Division Bench of this Court in case titled "Krishan
Singh and Others Vs. State and Others; bearing WP(C) No. 2670/2019" decided on 30.12.2021,
wherein it has been held as under: -
―13. In the case at hand, till date no declaration under Section 6 of the Act has been
issued and published, meaning thereby that the land has not been finally acquired
and there is simply a proposal to acquire the said land. In such circumstances, when
the land has not been finally acquired, the respondents could not have taken
possession of the said land and utilized it for construction purposes. The action of the
respondents in constructing a community hall on the land in question without
waiting for the final acquisition of land and in the absence of the invocation of the
urgency clause, is nothing but an abuse of the process of law depriving the petitioners
from their valuable right to possess property.
14. In the above circumstances, the respondents are clearly guilty of violation of the
human rights of the petitioners and they are liable to compensate them for such
infringement. At the same time, since the community hall has already been
constructed and the land cannot be restored to the petitioners, it is desirable that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 9
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
respondents complete the acquisition proceedings at the earliest and make a final
award so that the petitioners may be compensated in a fair manner as per the
market-value.
15. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, we issue a writ in the nature of
mandamus commanding the respondents to forthwith distribute the estimated cost
of acquisition of the aforesaid land which has been worked out to be (cid:132)15,00,000/-
within a period of one month from today and to conclude the acquisition proceedings by issuing a
declaration under Section 6 of the Act and pronouncing the final award within a period of three
months from today and to pay the compensation as per the award to the petitioners forthwith
subject to any reference or appeal that may be preferred against the award.
16. A further writ in the nature of mandamus is issued to the respondents to pay a token
compensation of (cid:132)10,00,000/- to the petitioners for illegally depriving them of their land without
any authority of law and thus violating their human rights. This amount shall be paid to the
petitioners within a period of two weeks from the date a certificate copy of this order is placed before
the Secretary, Rural Development Department, Government of J&K.(cid:131)
32. Reliance is placed upon the judgment passed by the Hon(cid:129)ble Division Bench of this Court in
case titled "Shabir Ahmad Yatoo Vs. UT of J&K and others bearing WP(C) No. 174/2021", decided
on 30.06.2022, wherein it has been held as under:: -
―5.The aforesaid facts and circumstances clearly reveal that the private land of the
petitioner has been taken over by the respondents forcibly without the consent of the
petitioner and without taking recourse to any procedure prescribed in law. It is also
an admitted fact that the petitioner has not been paid any compensation in respect of
the said land though the determination/assessment of the compensation is under
way as per the stamp duty rate.
6. It is well recognized that Right to Property is a basic human right which is akin to a
fundamental right as guaranteed by Article 300 A of the Constitution of India and
that no one can be deprived of his property other than by following procedure
prescribe in law.
9. Accordingly, the respondents are directed to assess and determine the
compensation of the aforesaid land payable to the petitioner at the stamp duty rate as
prevalent today in the area within a period of 6 weeks and to make payment thereof
within a further period of 3 months. The respondents at the same time shall also pay
token rental compensation for the use and occupation of the aforesaid land from the
year 2017 till 2021 i.e., 05 years @ Rs. 1.00 lac per year within 3 months from today.
10. In addition to the above, on account of violation of the right to property of the
petitioner which is guaranteed by the Constitution, the respondents are directed to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 10
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
pay special penalty of Rs. 10.00 lacs to the petitioner within a period of three months.
11. In the event, the aforesaid amounts are not paid within the time stipulated, it will
be open for the petitioner to move an application and to bring it to the notice of the
Court whereupon the Court will swing into action and take appropriate coercive
measures against the respondents for the realization of the aforesaid amount may be
as arrears of land revenue.(cid:131) In the similar facts and circumstances of this case, the
Division Bench of this Court in case of Chuni Lal Bhagat Vs. State and ors. reported
as 2023 (3) JKJ[HC] has been pleased to held as under:-
―47. There is no law permitting the deprivation of the property of the citizens, the
respondents are either to restore the land to the land owners or pay them the
requisite compensation, as no one can be deprived of his Right to Property except in
accordance with law in force in hte State. The petitioners being small land owners are
deprived of their property without payment of any compensation till date. The
petitioners are, thus, entitled to payment of compensation as it has resulted in
infraction of basic rights of Right to Property as guaranteed under Article 300 A of
the Constitution of India and are also entitled to use and occupation charges for the
same.
48. In view of the aforesaid discussion, these petitions are also allowed. The
respondents are directed to initiate the steps for acquiring the land under the Right
to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act, 2013 within a period of eight weeks. The Deputy Commissioner
concerned shall pay rent for use and occupation of the land of the petitioners from
the date, the respondents have taken possession of the same.(cid:131) CONCLUSION
33. There is no law permitting the deprivation of the property of the citizens, as right to property is a
valuable constitutional right, as such, the respondents could not have taken the land of the
petitioners without acquiring the same. Thus, the respondents are under legal obligation either to
restore the land to the land owners or pay them the requisite compensation, as no one can be
deprived of his Right to Property except in accordance with law in force.
34. Since after the reorganization, Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land
Acquisition Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, 2013 has come into force and admittedly,
acquisition proceedings have not been initiated under the Land Acquisition Act and, thus, the
respondents are under legal obligation to initiate the steps for acquiring the land under the Right to
Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act,
2013.
35. In the light of the aforesaid discussion coupled with the legal proposition, the writ petition filed
by the petitioners is allowed and the respondents are directed to initiate the steps for acquiring the
land under Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition Rehabilitation and
Resettlement Act, 2013, which is in vogue within the period of six weeks from today. The Deputy
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 11
Mian Khan And Others vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
Commissioner concerned shall pay rental compensation for the use and occupation of the aforesaid
land of the petitioners from the date the respondents have taken the possession of the same till its
final realisation @ 1 lac per year within a period of three months from today.
36. In addition to above, on account of violation of right to property of the petitioners, which is
guaranteed by the Constitution, the respondents are also directed to pay penalty to the tune of Rs.
1,00,000/- (one lac) to the petitioners within a period of three months from today.
37. The writ petition, as such, is accordingly allowed in the manner indicated hereinabove.
38. Registry to handover the record to the learned counsel for the respondents against proper
receipt.
39. Disposed of, accordingly.
(WASIM SADIQ NARGAL) JUDGE Jammu:
23.08.2023 Tarun Whether the order is speaking? Yes.
Whether the order is reportable? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/41088033/ 12
