Miss Twinkle D/O Sh. Jameet Lal vs Kulbir Singh Manhas Alias Gulla on 4 October, 2023
Miss Twinkle D/O Sh. Jameet Lal vs Kulbir Singh Manhas Alias
Gulla on 4 October, 2023
Author: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
Bench: Wasim Sadiq Nargal
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH AT JAMMU
MA No. 275/2010
Reserved on: 08.08.2023
Announced on: 04.10.2023
Miss Twinkle D/o Sh. Jameet Lal
R/o Village Pandorian, PO Halqa, Tehsil
& District Jammu, through her mother
Smt. Raj Kumari W/o Sh. Jameet Lal
R/o Village Pandorian, PO Halqa, Tehsil
& District Jammu.
....Petitioner(s)/Appellant(s)
Through:- Mr. R.K.Bhatia. Advocate
V/s
1. Kulbir Singh Manhas alias Gulla
S/o Shri Kamal Singh
R/o Village Channi Tana Pargwal,
Tehsil Akhnoor, District Jammu.
2. Sh. Mohan Lal S/o Sh. Shankar Das
R/o Village Pandorian, PO Halqa, Tehsil
& District Jammu.
3. Oriental Insurance Company Limited.
DO I, Town Hall, Jammu.
....Respondent(s)
Through:- Mr. Amrit Sarin, Advocate.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE WASIM SADIQ NARGAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The instant appeal has been preferred by the appellant against award dated 29.01.2010 passed by
the Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Jammu (Court below, for short) in file No. 548/Claim titled
Twinkle v/s Kulbir Singh Manhas and others.
BRIEF FACTS.
2. The appellant met with an accident on 4 April 2004 due to rash and negligent driving of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118481139/ 1
Miss Twinkle D/O Sh. Jameet Lal vs Kulbir Singh Manhas Alias Gulla on 4 October, 2023
respondent 1 who was driving the vehicle (Tata Mobile) bearing No.JK02S-8863 and hit appellant
outside her house, situated at village Pandorian, Tehsil and District Jammu. Due to the accident, the
appellant suffered serious injury over left foot with exposure of underlying muscles, tendons and
bones, with crushing of lateral malleolus left. The external fixation with support of rods was given to
the appellant and an operation with bone grafting was done. The appellant has scarring of
dorsolateral aspect of left ankle with wasting of left foot with stiffness of left ankle, hence making
appellant unable to walk properly.
3. The appellant filed a claim petition bearing No. 548 on 27.10.2004 and claimed compensation to
the tune of Rs. 30 lacs, along with interest. The Motor Accident Claims Tribunal, Jammu after
consideration of the matter vide order dated 29.01.2010 passed an award of Rs.1,09,250.00 along
with 7.5% interest from the date of filing of the claim petition in favour of the petitioner (appellant
herein).
4. It is further submitted by the appellant that the amount awarded by the Tribunal is on the lower
side and hence prays for the enhancement of award amount on the following grounds:
a. That the appellant has become a crippled person and the future of appellant has
become dark due to injuries suffered by her in the accident and she has become
ineligible for getting employment while also making her marriage prospects totally
diminished. b. The appellant has also been hospitalized for a long time and has spent
huge amount of money on her treatment, travelling, medicines, special diet etc. c.
The appellant has not been granted any compensation for gracious service rendered
by her family members.
d. The appellant cannot run, squat or walk and has lost all amenities of life. She also
suffered lot of pain and suffering. e. The Tribunal awarded a meager amount of Rs
29,250/-on account of loss of future income, which is minimal and incorrect. The
amount awarded by the Tribunal is on the lower side. f. The interest on loss of future
is wrongly declined by the Tribunal.
Hence the appellant prays for the enhancement to the tune of Rs 30.00 lac along with
interest as stated in the claim petition.
QUESTION OF LAW
5. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for Appellant/claimant and having gone through the
material facts on record, the only question that falls for this court's consideration is whether the
appellant-claimant has made out any case for further enhancement of the amount of compensation.
LEGAL ANALYSIS Compensation To Be Just And Fair
6. While it is very difficult to make an accurate assessment of the compensation to be awarded to the
motor accident victim as the loss is not confined to the pecuniary value, however, the Motor Vehicles
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118481139/ 2
Miss Twinkle D/O Sh. Jameet Lal vs Kulbir Singh Manhas Alias Gulla on 4 October, 2023
Act, 1988 has provided a protection to the victim against an inadequate compensation. For
reference, the Section 168 of the Act is reproduced as under:
168. Award of the Claims Tribunal.--
"(1)On receipt of an application for compensation made under section 166, the
Claims Tribunal shall, after giving notice of the application to the insurer and after
giving the parties (including the insurer) an opportunity of being heard, hold an
inquiry into the claim or, as the case may be, each of the claims and, subject to the
provisions of section 162 may make an award determining the amount of
compensation which appears to it to be just and specifying the person or persons to
whom compensation shall be paid and in making the award the Claims Tribunal shall
specify the amount which shall be paid by the insurer or owner or driver of the
vehicle involved in the accident or by all or any of them, as the case may be: Provided
that where such application makes a claim for compensation under section 140 in
respect of the death or permanent disablement of any person, such claim and any
other claim (whether made in such application or otherwise) for compensation in
respect of such death or permanent disablement shall be disposed of in accordance
with the provisions of Chapter X........"
7. From perusal of aforesaid Section, it is evident that just compensation has to be determined based
on the foundations of fairness, reasonableness and equitability on acceptable legal standards. The
courts have time and again been emphatic about the endeavor to award just and fair compensation
in motor accident claims.
8. This Court is supported by the judgment of Apex Court in the case titled Sarla Verma & Ors vs
Delhi Transport Corp.& Anr (2009) 6 SCC 121, wherein it has been held: -
"Just compensation is adequate compensation which is fair and equitable, on the
facts and circumstances of the case, to make good the loss suffered as a result of the
wrong, as far as money can do so, by applying the well settled principles relating to
award of compensation. It is not intended to be a bonanza, largesse or source of
profit. Assessment of compensation though involving certain hypothetical
considerations should nevertheless be objective. Justice and justness emanate from
equality in treatment, consistency and thoroughness in adjudication, and fairness
and uniformity in the decision making process and the decisions. While it may not be
possible to have mathematical precision or identical awards, in assessing
compensation, same or similar facts should lead to awards in the same range. When
the factors/inputs are the same, and the formula/legal principles are the same,
consistency and uniformity, and not divergence and freakiness, should be the result
of adjudication to arrive at just compensation."
9. Furthermore, this court is also supported by the judgment of Apex Court in the case of SMT.
ANJALI & ORS. versus LOKENDRA RATHOD & ORS 2022 SCC Online SC1683., wherein, it was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118481139/ 3
Miss Twinkle D/O Sh. Jameet Lal vs Kulbir Singh Manhas Alias Gulla on 4 October, 2023
held as follows:-
"Motor Accident Compensation Claims - Income Tax Return is a statutory document
on which reliance be placed, where available, for computation of annual income of
deceased." (Para 9) "Motor Vehicles Act, 1988; Section 168 - Concept of "just
compensation" which ought to be determined on the foundation of fairness,
reasonableness and equitability - Although such determination can never be
arithmetically exact or perfect, an endeavor should be made by the Court to award
just and fair compensation irrespective of the amount claimed by the applicant/s."
(Para 10)
9. Recently, the Supreme Court in the case of Meena Devi Versus Nunu Chand Mahto @ Nemchand
Mahto & Ors. ...(2023)1 SCC 204 has held: -
"14. At this stage, it is necessary to clarify that as per the decision of a Three-Judge
Bench of this Court in Nagappa vs. Gurdayal Singh and others (2003) 2 SCC 274, it
was observed that under the MV Act, there is no restriction that the Tribunal/Court
cannot award compensation exceeding the amount so claimed. The Tribunal/Court
ought to award 'just' compensation which is reasonable in the facts relying upon the
evidence produced on record. Therefore, less valuation, if any, made in the Claim
Petition would not be impediment to award just compensation exceeding the claimed
amount."
10. The Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana vs. Jasbir Kaur (2003) 7 S.C.C. 484 has held
as under: - , "7. It has to be kept in view that the Tribunal constituted under the Act as provided in
Section 168 is required to make an award determining the amount of compensation which is to be in
the real sense "damages" which in turn appears to it to be "just and reasonable". It has to be borne in
mind that compensation for loss of limbs or life can hardly be weighed in golden scales. But at the
same time it has to be borne in mind that the compensation is not expected to be a windfall for the
victim. Statutory provisions clearly indicate that the compensation must be "just" and it cannot be a
bonanza; not a source of profit; but the same should not be a pittance. The courts and tribunals have
a duty to weigh the various factors and quantify the amount of compensation, which should be just.
What would be 'just" compensation is a vexed question. There can be no golden rule applicable to all
cases for measuring the value of human life or a limb. Measure of damages cannot be arrived at by
precise mathematical calculations. It would depend upon the particular facts and circumstances,
and attending peculiar or special features, if any. Every method or mode adopted for assessing
compensation has to be considered in the background of 'just" compensation which is the pivotal
consideration. Though by use of the expression "which appears to it to be just" a wide discretion is
vested in the Tribunal, the determination has to be rational, to be done by a judicious approach and
not the outcome of whims, wild guesses and arbitrariness. The expression 'just"
denotes equitability, fairness and reasonableness, and non- arbitrary, if it is not so it
cannot be just."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118481139/ 4
Miss Twinkle D/O Sh. Jameet Lal vs Kulbir Singh Manhas Alias Gulla on 4 October, 2023
11. It has been further held by Supreme Court in Yadava Kumar Vs. Divisional Manager National
Insurance Co. Ltd. (2010) 10 SCC 341. as under:
"14. While assessing compensation in accident cases, the High Court or the Tribunal
must take a reasonably compassionate view of things. It cannot be disputed that the
appellant being a painter has to earn his livelihood by virtue of physical work. The
nature of injuries which he admittedly suffered, and about which the evidence of
PW-2 is quite adequate, amply demonstrates that carrying those injuries he is bound
to suffer loss of earning capacity as a painter and a consequential loss of income is the
natural outcome.
15. It goes without saying that in matters of determination of compensation both the
Tribunal and the Court are statutorily charged with a responsibility of fixing a `just
compensation."
What Factors To Be Taken Into Consideration While Granting Compensation For An Accident Claim
12. Life and human faculties are beyond monetary valuation. It is impossible for anyone to assign a
financial worth to a limb or a human being. When an accident leaves a person in a vegetative state,
evaluating the loss of all faculties becomes a daunting task. Courts can only provide compensation
for pecuniary losses and related expenses, but quantifying the loss of life or limb is an
insurmountable challenge. In its very nature whenever a Tribunal or a Court is required to fix the
amount of compensation in cases of accident, it involves some guess work, some hypothetical
consideration, some amount of sympathy linked with the nature of the disability caused.
13. The provisions of Motor Vehicles Act 1988, makes it clear that the award must be just, which
means that the compensation should, to the extent possible, fully and adequately restore the
claimant to the position prior to the accident. The object of awarding the compensation is to make
good the loss suffered as a result of wrong done as far as money can do so, in a fair, reasonable and
equitable manner.
14. Court is of the view that a tribunal while awarding the compensation shall have to bear in mind
the future prospects of the victim affected by the accident as well in addition the other factors like
pain, agony caused due to accident, the medical expenses, the marriage prospects etc.
15. Factors to be taken into consideration while awarding compensation are explained by the
Hon'ble Apex Court in Jagdish vs Mohan and others reported in (2018) 4 SCC 571. Para 8 of the
judgment being relevant is taken note of:
"8. In assessing the compensation payable the settled principles need to be borne in
mind. A victim who suffers a permanent or temporary disability occasioned by an
accident is entitled to the award of compensation. The award of compensation must
cover among others, the following aspects:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118481139/ 5
Miss Twinkle D/O Sh. Jameet Lal vs Kulbir Singh Manhas Alias Gulla on 4 October, 2023
(i) Pain, suffering and trauma resulting from the accident;
(ii) Loss of income including future income;
(iii) The inability of the victim to lead a normal life together with its amenities;
(iv) Medical expenses including those that the victim may be required to undertake in
future; and
(v) Loss of expectation of life."
16. Reliance is also placed in case titled R.D. Hattangadi v. Pest Control (India) Pvt. Ltd. and Others,
reported in (1995) 1 SCC 551, "9. had categorically stated that in injury cases, compensation ought to
be assessed as Pecuniary Damages i.e. the costs incurred by the claimant for the injury and Special
Damages which includes damages for mental and physical shock, loss of amenities, loss of
expectation of life and inconvenience. It may be observed that cumulatively, only a meager sum of
Rs. 90,000/- has been awarded to the appellant for the same. It ought to be appreciated that the
appellant would not be able to marry as a consequence of the accident and is forced to live with the
pain and suffering throughout his life as he would require an attendant to care for him as well. It
may be observed that it has been specifically stated that the appellant is unable to squat or sit cross
legged and unable to stand and walk as well as per the disability certificate. Keeping in mind the
same, it would be reasonable to award compensation of Rs.50, 000/- each to the appellant-claimant
under the non- pecuniary heads of loss of amenities. It is submitted that with regards to litigation
expenses, the appellant has contested the matter right from the point of the Tribunal up to this
Court, in light of the same, it would be reasonable to award litigation expenses of Rs.50, 000/- to
the appellant."
17. Reliance is also placed in cases titled Govind Yadav v. New India Insurance Company Limited,
(2011) 10 SCC 683, Arvind Kumar Mishra v. New India Assurance Company Limited and Another,
(2010) 10 SCC 254, and Raj Kumar v. Ajay Kumar and Another, (2011) 1 SCC 343, wherein, the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has categorically held that adequate compensation ought to be awarded not
only for the physical injury and treatment, but also for the loss of earning and his inability to lead a
normal life and enjoy amenities, which he would have enjoyed but for the disability caused due to
the accident.
18. I am also fortified by the view of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in case titled K. Suresh v. New India
Assurance Co. Ltd. reported in (2012) 12 SCC 274, wherein it has been held as under:
"10. It is noteworthy to state that an adjudicating authority, while determining the
quantum of compensation, has to keep in view the sufferings of the injured person
which would include his inability to lead a full life, his incapacity to enjoy the normal
amenities which he would have enjoyed but for the injuries and his ability to earn as
much as he used to earn or could have earned. Hence, while computing
compensation the approach of the Tribunal or a court has to be broad-based.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118481139/ 6
Miss Twinkle D/O Sh. Jameet Lal vs Kulbir Singh Manhas Alias Gulla on 4 October, 2023
Needless to say, it would involve some guesswork as there cannot be any
mathematical exactitude or a precise formula to determine the quantum of
compensation. In determination of compensation the fundamental criterion of "just
compensation" should be inhered."
AWARD OF THE TRIBUNAL
19. The Tribunal has awarded the compensation in the present appeal to the tune of Rs 1, 09,250
under heads i. For loss of income = Rs 29,250/= ii. For pain and sufferings= Rs. 30,000/= iii. For
loss of amenities of life= Rs 30,000/= iv. For medical Expenses, special diet and conveyance= Rs
20,000/=
20. While awarding the compensation, the Tribunal has erred by not taking the marriage prospect of
the victim into consideration. The fact of the matter is that the victim being a girl child coupled with
disability caused due to the accident, the marriage prospects of the victim may have diminished.
Therefore, the compensation ought to have been awarded under this head also, as has been awarded
by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Sanjay Kumar v. Ashok Kumar and Another, reported as (2014) 5 SCC
330, wherein, the Apex Court has held as under:
"14.... On the point of loss of marriage prospectus, we feel that it is a major loss,
keeping in mind the young age of the Appellant and the High Court has gravely erred
in not awarding adequate compensation separately under this head and instead "loss
of future enjoyment of lie" and "pain and suffering". We thereby award Rs. 75,000/-
towards loss of marriage prospectus..."
21. Reliance is also placed on Master Ayush v. Branch Manager, Reliance General Insurance
Company Limited and Another, reported in (2022) 7 SCC 738, wherein the Apex Court has held as
under:
"14..."The appellant has not only lost his childhood but also adult life. Therefore, loss
of marriage prospects would also be required to be awarded..."
ERROR IN AWARD AS CONTENDED BY THE APPELLANT:
1) That the appellant has become a crippled person. The future of appellant has
become dark due to injuries suffered by her in the accident. She has become ineligible
for getting employment in any belt force. The Tribunal awarded a meager amount of
Rs 29,250/-
only on account of loss of future income. In the view of this Court, the method adopted by Tribunal
for determination of loss of future income is not correct. The amount awarded by the Tribunal, on
the face of it, is on very lower side.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118481139/ 7
Miss Twinkle D/O Sh. Jameet Lal vs Kulbir Singh Manhas Alias Gulla on 4 October, 2023
2) That marriage prospect of appellant is totally diminished. Because of injuries over left foot,
appellant is not in a position to walk properly as such appellant will not get a suitable match.
3) That appellant has not been granted any compensation for gratuitous service rendered by her
family members.
4) That appellant cannot run, squat or walk. She has lost all amenities of life. She also suffered lot of
pain and suffering. Compensation of Rs 30,000/- each for pain and suffering and loss of amenities
of life are on very lower side.
5) That appellant has remained hospitalized for pretty long time. A huge expenditure was incurred
on traveling, medicines, special diet etc. But compensation of Rs 20,000/- only under that head is
totally inadequate.
6) That interest on loss of future income is wrongly declined by the Tribunal.
22. While considering the above contentions, this Court is of the view that the tribunal has awarded
a lesser amount of compensation under the above- mentioned heads as compared to a fair
compensation which should have been awarded by it. The tribunal should have taken into
consideration the injuries sustained by the appellant and the disability caused as a consequence of
the same. Overall, the accident has diminished the chances of the appellant being employed
anywhere and therefore, reduced the chance of securing any future income.
23. Furthermore, this Court has already acknowledged the plea of the Appellant that the marriage
prospects of the appellant have been diminished as the consequence of disability from the aftermath
of the accident in question. Therefore, the Tribunal has erred in not awarding any compensation
under the head of marriage prospects.
CONCLUSION:
24. The main elements of damages in the case of child victims are the pain, shock, frustration,
deprivation of the ordinary pleasures and enjoyment associated with healthy and mobile limbs. The
compensation awarded should enable the child to acquire something or to develop a lifestyle which
will offset, to some extent, the inconvenience or discomfort arising out of the disability. Appropriate
compensation for disability should take care of all the non-pecuniary damages.
25. Placing reliance over the aforesaid judgments, this court is of the opinion that the Motor
Vehicles Accident Tribunal, Jammu has erred in calculating the compensation awarded to the
appellant and has made a major error by not computing the compensation to be payable to the
appellant for marriage prospects. Further, the tribunal has awarded somewhat a lower amount of
compensation than it was supposed to award.
26. Having regards to the aforesaid discussion, this court deems it proper to enhance the award
amount to the following extent:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118481139/ 8
Miss Twinkle D/O Sh. Jameet Lal vs Kulbir Singh Manhas Alias Gulla on 4 October, 2023
Sr. No Heads of Amount Amount after the
Compensation Awarded by enhancement
MACT
01. Disability/Loss of Rs. 29,250/= Rs. 3,00,000/=
income
02. Pain and sufferings Rs 30,000/= Rs.50,000/=
03. Loss of Amenities Rs 30,000/= Rs.50,000/=
of life
04. Medical Expenses, Rs 20,000/= Rs. 1,00,000/=
Special Diet and
Conveyance
05. Marriage Prospects Not awarded Rs. 1,00,000/=
Total Amount Rs. 1,09,250/= Rs 6,00,000/=
27. The appellant will be entitled to the said sum of Rs.4, 90,750/= in addition to what is already
awarded, with interest at the rate of 7.5% per annum from the date of appeal till the date of
realization.
28. The appeal is, accordingly, disposed of.
(Wasim Sadiq Nargal) Judge Jammu:
04/10/2023 "Hamid"
i. Whether the Judgment is reportable: Yes/No. ii. Whether the Judgment is
Speaking: Yes/No.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/118481139/ 9
