Mohammad Shamshad Ansari vs Directorate Of Enforcement Lko. Zonal ... on 28 February, 2025
Mohammad Shamshad Ansari vs Directorate Of Enforcement
Lko. Zonal ... on 28 February, 2025
Author: Rajesh Singh Chauhan
Bench: Rajesh Singh Chauhan
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:12048
Court No. - 11
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 1439 of 2025
Applicant :- Mohammad Shamshad Ansari
Opposite Party :- Directorate Of Enforcement Lko. Zonal Oficer Ashok Lko. U.P. Thru. Assistant Director
Counsel for Applicant :- Dharmendra Kumar Yadav
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Rohit Tripathi
Hon'ble Rajesh Singh Chauhan,J.
1. Heard Shri Mayank Sharma, Advocate holding brief of Shri Dharmendra Kumar Yadav, learned
counsel for the applicant and Shri Kuldeep Srivastava, learned counsel for the Directorate of
Enforcement.
2. By means of this application filed under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C./528 of B.N.S.S., the applicant
has prayed to modify the impugned order dated 30.11.2024 passed by the Special Judge,
Anti-Corruption, CBI (West)/E.D., Lucknow under Section 88 of Cr.P.C. (Now Section 91 of BNSS)
in Sessions Case No.1321 of 2024 & 2249 of 2024, ECIR No.- ECIR/LKZO/05/2021 (ED Vs
Mohammad Shamshad Ansari) to the extent, whereby it imposes the onerous condition that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115155580/ 1
Mohammad Shamshad Ansari vs Directorate Of Enforcement Lko. Zonal ... on 28 February, 2025
accused shall remain personally present before the court on each date fixed and shall not submit
application for exemption from personal appearance by setting aside the said condition.
3. The precise contention of learned counsel for the applicant is that while passing the impugned
order dated 30.11.2024, learned trial court has violated the specific condition being indicated by
Hon'ble Apex Court in re: Tarsem Lal vs. Directorate of Enforcement, Jalandhar Zonal Office;
(2024) 7 SCC 61. Learned counsel has stated that despite reproducing the operative direction of
Hon'ble Apex Court in re: Tarsem Lal (supra), such directions have been ignored vide condition no.5
of the impugned order dated 30.11.2024.
4. Learned counsel has stated that in the operative portion in re: Tarsem Lal (supra), the Hon'ble
Apex Court vide para 33.1 to 33.4 has held that once a complaint under Section 44 (1)(b) of the
PMLA is filed, it will be governed by Sections 200 to 205 of the Cr.P.C. as none of the said
provisions are inconsistent with any of the provisions of the PMLA.
5. Para 33.4 in re: Tarsem Lal (supra) further provides that in a case where the accused appears
pursuant to a summons before the Special Court, on a sufficient cause being shown, the Special
Court can grant exemption from personal appearance to the accused by exercising power under
Section 205 of the CrPC.
6. Notably the aforesaid sections of Cr.P.C. deal the complaint filed against opposite
parties/accused.
7. Para 33.1 to 33.4 read as under :
"33.1. Once a complaint under Section 44(1)(b) PMLA is filed, it will be governed by
Sections 200 to 205 CrPC as none of the said provisions are inconsistent with any of
the provisions of PMLA;
33.2. If the accused was not arrested by ED till filing of the complaint, while taking
cognizance on a complaint under Section 44(1)(b), as a normal rule, the court should
issue a summons to the accused and not a warrant. Even in a case where the accused
is on bail, a summons must be issued;
33.3. After a summons is issued under Section 204 CrPC on taking cognizance of the
offence punishable under Section 4 PMLA on a complaint, if the accused appears
before the Special Court pursuant to the summons, he shall not be treated as if he is
in custody. Therefore, it is not necessary for him to apply for bail. However, the
Special Court can direct the accused to furnish bond in terms of Section 88 CrPC;
33.4. In a case where the accused appears pursuant to a summons before the Special
Court, on a sufficient cause being shown, the Special Court can grant exemption from
personal appearance to the accused by exercising power under Section 205 CrPC;"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115155580/ 2
Mohammad Shamshad Ansari vs Directorate Of Enforcement Lko. Zonal ... on 28 February, 2025
8. In light of the aforesaid directions, learned counsel for the applicant has stated that if after
submitting bond under Section 88 of the Cr.P.C. by appearing in person before the court and after
executing and verifying such bonds, accused/applicant appears before the court through counsel,
there may not be any legal restriction on his such appearance. There might be couple of reasons not
to appear in person before the court concerned and if any specific application assigning the reason is
filed, the special court may grant exemption.
9. Learned counsel has stated that in the present case, the applicant has already appeared before the
special court at the time of submitting bonds and has given undertaking that in such case his
appearance would be proper, but that appearance does not mean his personal appearance inasmuch
as the representation of the applicant may be treated sufficient if his counsel appears on the date
fixed.
10. He has further stated that if on any date, the personal appearance of the applicant is required by
the special court and specific order to that effect is passed, the applicant shall appear in person
before the court on that date and if he is unable to appear on that date on any specific reason, he
would file an application for exemption of his personal appearance.
11. In the light of the aforesaid submissions, learned counsel for the applicant has drawn attention of
this Court towards condition no.5 of the impugned order dated 30.11.2024, whereby the special
court categorically directed the applicant that he shall remain present personally before the court on
each and every date and he shall not file any exemption application.
12. Learned counsel has reiterated that the aforesaid condition no.5 of the impugned order is
violative of the condition no. 33.4 in re: Tarsem Lal (supra), therefore, such condition may be
modified and the applicant undertakes that he shall appear before the special court strictly in
accordance with law and if on any date his personal appearance is required and such order is
passed, either he shall appear before the court concerned on that date or he may file appropriate
application apprising the reason as to why he is unable to appear personally and that application
may be dealt under condition no. 33.4 in re: Tarsem Lal (supra).
13. Per contra, Shri Kuldeep Srivastava, learned counsel for the Enforcement Directorate has drawn
attention of this Court towards paragraph nos.23 and 24 in re: Tarsem Lal (supra) by submitting
that in light of the aforesaid paragraphs, personal appearance of the applicant would be required
since he has filed his bond under Section 88 of the Cr.P.C. For convenience, paragraph nos.23 and
24 read herein-below:
"23. Therefore, if a warrant of arrest has been issued and proceedings under Section
82 and/or 83 CrPC have been issued against an accused, he cannot be let off by
taking a bond under Section 88. Section 88 is indeed discretionary. But this
proposition will not apply to a case where an accused in a case under PMLA is not
arrested by ED till the filing of the complaint. The reason is that, in such cases, as a
rule, a summons must be issued while taking cognizance of a complaint. In such a
case, the Special Court may direct the accused to furnish bonds in accordance with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115155580/ 3
Mohammad Shamshad Ansari vs Directorate Of Enforcement Lko. Zonal ... on 28 February, 2025
Section 88 CrPC.
24. Now, we come to the issue of whether an order of the court accepting bonds
under Section 88 amounts to grant of bail. If an accused appears pursuant to a
summons issued on the complaint, he is not in custody. Therefore, there is no
question of granting him bail. Moreover, even if the accused who appears before the
court does not offer to submit bonds under Section 88 CrPC, the court can always
direct him to do so. A bond furnished according to Section 88 is an undertaking to
appear before the court on the date fixed. The question of filing bail bonds arises only
when the court grants bail. When an accused furnishes a bond in accordance with
Section 88 CrPC for appearance before a criminal court, he agrees and undertakes to
appear before the criminal court regularly and punctually and on his default, he
agrees to pay the amount mentioned in the bond. Section 441 CrPC deals with a bond
to be furnished by an accused when released on bail. Therefore, in our considered
view, an order accepting bonds under Section 88 from the accused does not amount
to a grant of bail."
14. Shri Kuldeep Srivastava has stated that in para 24, Hon'ble Apex Court has observed that even if
the accused, who appears before the court, does not offer to submit bonds under Section 88 of
Cr.P.C., the court can always direct him to do so. The Hon'ble Apex Court further observed that the
question of filing bail bonds arisen only when the court grant bail. When an accused furnished bail
bonds in accordance with Section 88 of the Cr.P.C. for appearance before the criminal court, he
agrees and undertakes to appear before the criminal court regularly and punctually and on his
default to pay the amount mentioned in the bond.
15. Shri Kuldeep Srivastava has, therefore, stated that in light of the aforesaid direction, the
accused/applicant will have to appear regularly and punctually before the court concerned and such
appearance would be his personal appearance, therefore, the condition no.5 of the impugned order
is in conformity with the observations of Hon'ble Apex Court in para 24.
16. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having perused the material available on
record, I am of the considered opinion that unless and until the statute specifically provides for
personal appearance of accused/applicant after furnishing/submitting bail bonds either under
Section 88 of the Cr.P.C. or under Section 441 of Cr.P.C., he may not be compelled to appear on each
and every date fixed before learned trial court.
17. If for any particular reason, personal appearance of the accused/applicant is required, learned
trial court/special court may direct the accused/applicant to appear in person before learned trial
court and if for any reason or under any compelling circumstances, he is unable to appear before the
court concerned in person, he may file an exemption application seeking another date for his
personal appearance and such exemption application may be considered and disposed of in light of
the direction of Hon'ble Apex Court in para 33.4 in re: Tarsem Lal (supra).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115155580/ 4
Mohammad Shamshad Ansari vs Directorate Of Enforcement Lko. Zonal ... on 28 February, 2025
18. It is needless to say that at the time of furnishing/submitting bail bond and sureties, the
accused/applicant would appear in person and admittedly the accused/applicant appeared before
the special court/trial court in person.
19. The Hon'ble Apex Court in para 24 in re: Tarsem Lal (supra) has not specifically observed that
after furnishing bond under Section 88 of the Cr.P.C., the accused/applicant would appear
personally on each and every date, but it has been indicated that the appearance of the
accused/applicant would be required regularly and punctually and on his default, he would pay the
amount mentioned in the bond, meaning thereby if on the date fixed neither accused/applicant
appears before the court nor his counsel appears before the court and no reason for the aforesaid
non appearance is intimated to the court, the court may pass any coercive order strictly in
accordance with law.
20. Had the intention of Apex Court been such that on each and every subsequent dates, the
accused/applicant would appear in person, condition no. 33.4 in re: Tarsem Lal (supra), which has
been quoted in the impugned order, would have not been indicated, wherein the Apex Court has
categorically directed that the accused/applicant would appear before the special court on the date
fixed and on sufficient cause being shown, the special court can grant exemption from personal
appearance to the accused by exercising power under Section 205 of the Cr.P.C.
21. Therefore, the special court/trial court may not impose such condition snatching the right of the
accused/applicant to file exemption application, if he is having any cogent reason not to appear in
person before the court. If accused/applicant has engaged his Advocate, such Advocate shall attend
the court proceedings on behalf of the accused/applicant and that should be treated appearance of
the accused/applicant through counsel, however, if the personal appearance of the
accused/applicant is required for any special or particular reason, the accused/applicant would
appear before the special court/trial court pursuant to such order.
22. Therefore, in view of above, without interfering in the impugned order dated 30.11.2024 passed
by the Special Judge, Anti-Corruption, CBI (West)/E.D., Lucknow under Section 88 of Cr.P.C. (Now
Section 91 of BNSS) in Sessions Case No.1321 of 2024 & 2249 of 2024, ECIR No.-
ECIR/LKZO/05/2021 (ED Vs Mohammad Shamshad Ansari), I hereby modify the condition no.5 of
the impugned order, by invoking my power under Section 528 of B.N.S.S., to the effect that the
accused/applicant/his counsel shall remain present in the court on the date fixed and if on any date
the personal appearance of the accused/applicant is required and the specific order to that effect is
passed by the special court/trial court, either the accused/applicant shall appear in person or if he is
unable to appear in person on particular date pursuant to that order for any cogent reason, he may
file an application seeking exemption of his personal appearance. Such exemption for any particular
reason may be accepted, but consecutive applications to that effect avoiding personal appearance
before the court concerned despite specific order having been passed by the special court/trial court
indicating the reason would not be accepted.
23. In view of the aforesaid terms, this applicant is disposed of.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115155580/ 5
Mohammad Shamshad Ansari vs Directorate Of Enforcement Lko. Zonal ... on 28 February, 2025
.
[Rajesh Singh Chauhan, J.] Order Date :- 28.2.2025 Anupam S/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/115155580/ 6
