Mohammad Iqbal Gojar Tedwa vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 15 July, 2025
Mohammad Iqbal Gojar Tedwa vs Union Territory Of J&K
Through ... on 15 July, 2025
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
...
HCP No. 193/2024
Reserved on: 06.06.2025
Pronounced on: 15.07.2025
Mohammad Iqbal Gojar Tedwa, aged 34 years S/o Siraj U Din Tedwa R/o
Kulnar Bazipora, Tehsil Ajas, District Bandipora through his father
....... Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. M. I. Qadri, Sr, Advocate with Mr. Naveed Gul, Advocate
Versus
1. Union Territory of J&K through Principal Secretary, Home Department ,
J&K Govt. Civil Sectt. Srinagar
2. District Magistrate, Bandipora
3. Superintendent, Central Jail, Kotbhalwal, Jammu .
....Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Jahingeer A Dar, GA
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. Through the medium of this petition, Order no.07/DMB/PSA of 2024 dated 29.03.2024
(impugned detention order) passed by District Magistrate, Bandipora - respondent no. 2, (for short
'detailing authority') whereby detenu, namely, Mohammad Iqbal Gojar Tedwa, S/o Siraj U Din
Tedwa R/o Kulnar Bazipora, Tehsil Ajas, District Bandipora, has been placed under preventive
detention with a view to prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of Union
Territory of J&K, is sought to be quashed and detenu set at liberty on the grounds made mention of
therein.
2. The case set up by the petitioner in the petition is that the detenu came to be arrested on
05.02.2024 by Police Station Ajas, and kept him illegally under detention and thereafter was lodged
in Sub Jail, Bandipora, but was not enlarged on bail. While being in Sub Jail, Bandipora, the detenu
came to be detained under J&K Public Safety Act, although he has neither been found involved in
any subversive or militant activities nor any FIR stands registered against him relatable to the
militant or subversive activity in any Police Station. It is stated in the grounds of detention that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154454992/ 1
Mohammad Iqbal Gojar Tedwa vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 15 July, 2025
detenu has been involved in case FIR No.80/2018 under Section 379, 336, 353 RPC read with 06
Forest Act for which challan has been filed in the competent court of jurisdiction and is sub judice.
The said case does not relate to maintenance of law and order or security of the State nor has any
proximity with the detention of the detenu, and the allegation that the detenu got contacted with
PAK trained terrorists is vague, which does not disclose when and where the detenu got contacted
with such persons and at which place, is not mentioned in grounds of detention. Besides the
abbreviations shown in the grounds of detention, like OGW, PAK, VPNS and other such words,
which are incapable of giving exact meaning to the detenu , who is only 5 th class pass and does not
know the English language, even cannot effectively understand the Urdu language as well, therefore,
the grounds of detention are vague, meaningless, as such, the detention order is bad in law and
deserves to be quashed. It is being also stated that there are allegations in the grounds of detention
that the detenu was providing food, shelter, information to terrorists about movements of security
forces. Those allegations, according to petitioner, are vague, absurd and misconceived. It is also
averred that detaining authority has passed the impugned detention order mechanically without
application of mind. The detenu is neither associated with any organization nor involved in any
activity which is prejudicial to the security of Union Territory of J&K.
3. Respondents have filed reply/counter affidavit, insisting therein that the activities indulged in by
detenu are highly prejudicial to the security of the State and, therefore, his remaining at large is a
threat to the security of State. The activities narrated in the grounds of detention have been
reiterated in the reply affidavit filed by respondents. The factual averments that detenu was not
supplied with relevant material relied upon in the grounds of detention have been refuted. It is
insisted that all the relevant material, which has been relied upon by the detaining authority, was
provided to the detenu at the time of execution of warrant.
4. To rebut contentions of respondents, the petitioner has filed Rejoinder, wherein it is stated that in
the reply/counter, respondents have not mentioned as to in which language the grounds of
detention had been explained to detenu. It is being also stated that detenu had made a
representation to respondent no.1 but it is not coming to fore from reply/ counter as to whether the
said representation has been disposed of or not. According to petitioner, the contention of
respondent no.2 that representation was rejected and the same was conveyed to petitioner is false
and correct because there is no proof in this regard on record and produced by respondents.
5. I have heard learned counsel for parties and considered the matter. I have gone through the
detention record produced by the counsel appearing for respondents.
6. Learned senior counsel for petitioner states that the grounds of detention are vague, indefinite
and cryptic, inasmuch as grounds of detention does not disclose any activity on the basis whereof
detention can be ordered and that detaining authority has not attributed any specific allegation
against detenu.
7. On the contrary, counsel for respondents while opposing the submissions of Mr. M. I. Qadri, Sr.
counsel, would vehemently contend that the order under challenge has been passed by the detaining
authority validly and legally owing to the activities the detenu being prejudicial to the Security of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154454992/ 2
Mohammad Iqbal Gojar Tedwa vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 15 July, 2025
State.
8. It may be appropriate to mention that perusal of impugned detention order reveals that detenu
has been detained so as to prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to "security of Union
Territory of J&K" whereas in Reply Affidavit, respondent no.2 has stated that "detaining authority
found it necessary and imperative to invoke the relevant provisions of Act of 1978 and subsequently
detain the detenue in order to preclude the detenue from indulging in activities which would be
prejudicial to Maintenance of Public Order". It is pertinent to mention here that the Government
may, if satisfied with respect to any person that with a view to prevent him from acting in any
manner prejudicial to the maintenance of the public order or the security of the State, make an
order directing that the person be detained. When the law providing for preventive detention
permits detention of a person whose activities are prejudicial to defence, security of India or security
of the State, it will be lawful to detain such person if any of his activities is considered by detaining
authority affecting security of the State. Reliance is made to A. K. Roy v. Union of India, AIR 1982
SC 710. The security of the State can be put to danger by crimes of violence intended to overthrow
the government. The expression "Security of the State" includes economic security also. Those who
commit economic offences do harm to the national interest and economy of the State and can be
detained under preventive detention. Counterfeiting of currency and putting the same in circulation
destabilize the economy of the State ad it affects the security of the State. Reference is made to
Santokh Singh v. Delhi Administration, 1973 SC 1091; A.G. v. Amritlal(1994) 5 SCC 54; Safiya v.
Government of Kerala, AIR 2003 SC 3562; Bashir Ahmad v. State 2004 (ii) SLJ 550. The question to
ask is: "Does it lead to disturbance of the current life of the community so as to amount to a
disturbance of the public order or does it affect merely an individual leaving the tranquillity of the
society undisturbed"? This question has to be faced in every case on its facts. The "public order",
"law and order", and "security of the State", draw three concentric circles, the largest representing
law and order, the next representing public order and the smallest representing security of the State.
Every infraction of law must necessarily affect order, but an affecting law and order may not
necessarily also affect the public order. Likewise, an act may affect public order, but not necessarily
the security of the State. The true test is not the kind, but the potentiality of the act in question. One
act may affect only individuals while the other, though of a similar kind, may have such an impact
that it would disturb the even tempo of the life of the community. This does not mean that there can
be no overlapping in the same that an act cannot fall under two concepts at the same time. An act,
for instance, affecting public order may have an impact that it would affect both public order and
security of the State.
9. Perusal of relevant case law, thus, would show that "public order"
specifies something more than "law and order". The breach of public order involves a
degree of disturbance and it affects upon the life of the community in a locality, which
determines whether the disturbance amounts only to breach of law and order and not
a public order. The difference between two concepts is in only one degree. An act
affecting law and order may not necessarily also affect the public order and an act
which might be prejudicial to public order may not affect the security of the State.
Public order is synonymous with public safety and tranquillity and it is the absence of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154454992/ 3
Mohammad Iqbal Gojar Tedwa vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 15 July, 2025
any disorder involving breaches of local significance in contradiction to national
upheavals, such as revolution, civil strife, war, affecting the security of the State.
10. In Dr Ram Manohar Lohia v. State of Bihar and others, 1966 AIR SC 740, it has been held by the
Supreme Court that any contravention of law always affects order but before it can be said to affect
public order, it must affect the community or the public at large. It was observed that offences
against "law and order", "public order" and "security of the State" are demarcated on the basis of the
gravity. It is the degree of disturbance and its affect upon the life of the community in a locality
which determines whether the disturbance amounts only to breach of law and order though in the
grounds of detention, the detaining authority had stated that by committing this offence in public,
the detenu created a sense of alarm, scare and a feeling of insecurity in the minds of the public of the
area and thereby acted in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order which affected
the even tempo of life of the community. It was held that mere citation of these words in the order of
detention was more in the nature of a ritual rather than with any significance to the content of the
matter.
11. The determining test in all such cases is "the act leads to disturbance of the current life of the
community so as to amount to a disturbance of the public order or does it affect merely an
individual leaving the tranquillity of society undisturbed". The expression "law and order", "public
order" and "security of the State" are distinct concepts though always not separate. Every public
order if disturbed, must lead to public disorder but every breach of the peace does not lead to public
disorder. For example, when two drunkards quarrel and fight there is disorder but not public
disorder. They can be dealt with under the powers to maintain law and order but cannot be detained
on the ground that they were disturbing public order. Disorder is no doubt prevented by the
maintenance of law and order also but disorder is a broad spectrum which includes at one end small
disturbances and at the other the most serious and cataclysmic happenings.
12. As has been held by the Supreme Court in G.M. Shah v. State of J&K, 1980 (AIR) SC 494, the
expressions "law and order", "public order" and "security of the State" are distinct concepts, though
not always separate. While every breach of peace may amount to disturbance of law and order, every
such breach does not amount to disturbance of public order and every public disorder may not
prejudicially affect the "security of the State".
13. The distinction between "Law and order" and "Public order" has been pointed out in Arun Ghosh
v. State of West Bengal, AIR 1970 SC 1228. According to that decision, the true distinction between
the areas of "law and order" and "public order" is "one of degree and extent of the reach of the act in
question upon society". The Supreme Court pointed out that "the act by itself is not determinant of
its own gravity. It its quality it may not differ but in its potentiality it may be very different".
14. In the present case, detaining authority has made use of both expressions "prejudicial to
maintenance of public order" as well as "prejudicial to security of the State". Impugned detention
order made on the basis of grounds of detention using the expression by the detaining authority to
place detenu under preventive detention to prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to
security of the State whereas defending the same detention order in the Reply Affidavit, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154454992/ 4
Mohammad Iqbal Gojar Tedwa vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 15 July, 2025
detaining authority states that it was necessary to prevent detenu from acting in any manner
prejudicial to maintenance of public order, reflects and suggests non-application of mind on the part
of detaining authority and, therefore, vitiates impugned detention order.
15. The question whether the prejudicial activities of a person requiring to pass a detention order is
proximate to time when the order is made or the live- link between the prejudicial activities and the
purpose of detention is snapped, depends on the facts and circumstances of each case. Nonetheless,
when there is an undue and long delay between the prejudicial activities and the passing of the
detention order, the court has to scrutinise whether the detaining authority has satisfactorily
examined such a delay and afforded a tenable and reasonable explanation as to why such a delay has
occasioned, when called upon to answer and further the court has to investigate whether the casual
connection has been broken in the circumstances of each case. Certainly, in the present case, there is
no cogent explanation coming to fore from perusal of the grounds of detention with reference to the
live-link between the prejudicial activities and the purpose of the detention and resultantly the
impugned detention order is liable to be quashed. In this regard reference is made to the law laid
down in T. A. Abdul Rahman v. State of Kerala (1989) 4 SCC 741 and Rajinder Arora v. Union of
India and others (2006) 4 SCC 796].
16. Preventive detention must be supported by existence of a 'live and proximate link' between past
conduct and present imperative need to detain a person. It has been very often held that order of
preventive detention must be passed by due application of mind and taking note of relevant factors.
If order of detention is passed on the basis of incidents which are stale, it is often stated that
incident not being of relevance to establish imperativeness in passing an order of detention and such
order passed must be treated as being based on extraneous factors. The observations made by the
Supreme Court in Sama Aruna v. State of Telangana and another, (2018) 12 SCC 150, is relevant to
be reproduced herein "22. We are of the view, that the detention order in this case is vitiated by
taking into account incidents so far back in the past as would have no bearing on the immediate
need to detain him without a trial. The satisfaction of the authority is not in respect of the thing in
regard to which it is required to be satisfied. Incidents which are stale, cease to have relevance to the
subject-matter of the enquiry and must be treated as extraneous to the scope and purpose of the
statute."
17. In such cases, the question would also arise regarding validity of an order of detention where
after the last of such incidents there is a lull and after a substantial time lag, an order of detention is
sought to be passed. The detaining authority must establish habituality of commission of offences
which could be directly linked to a pattern of behaviour. In order to establish such pattern of
behaviour that would reasonably indicate continuing commission of offences, the detaining
authority must establish intermittent commission of offences which would indicate a regular
pattern.
18. In plethora of judgments, the Supreme Court has held that the order of detention must not be
based upon stale events and the relevant observations made by the Supreme Court in Ameena
Begum v. State of Telangana and others, (2023) 9 SCC 587, are as under:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154454992/ 5
Mohammad Iqbal Gojar Tedwa vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 15 July, 2025
"17. In a different context, we may take note of the decision in Sama Aruna vs. State
of Telangana11, where, S.A. Bobde, J. (as the Chief Justice then was) while construing
the provisions of the Act, held:
"16. There is little doubt that the conduct or activities of the detenu in the past must
be taken into account for coming to the conclusion that he is going to engage in or
make preparations for engaging in such activities, for many such persons follow a
pattern of criminal activities. But the question is how far back? There is no doubt that
only activities so far back can be considered as furnish a cause for preventive
detention in the present. That is, only those activities so far back in the past which
lead to the conclusion that he is likely to engage in or prepare to engage in such
activities in the immediate future can be taken into account." In holding that the
order of detention therein was grounded on stale grounds, the Court held that: "The
detention order must be based on a reasonable prognosis of the future behaviour of a
person based on his past conduct in light of the surrounding circumstances. The live
and proximate link that must exist between the past conduct of a person and the
imperative need to detain him must be taken to have been snapped in this case. A
detention order which is founded on stale incidents, must be regarded as an order of
punishment for a crime, passed without a trial, though purporting to be an order of
preventive detention. The essential concept of preventive detention is that the
detention of a person is not to punish him for something he has done but to prevent
him from doing it."
19. This was further affirmed by the Supreme Court in Khaja Bilal Ahmed v. State of Telangana,
(2020) 13 SCC 632, in which order of detention was issued on 2nd November 2018 and detaining
authority had delved into the history of cases involving the appellant-detenu therein from the years
2007-2016, despite the subjective satisfaction of the Officer not being based on such cases. In
quashing such an order, it was observed:
"23..... If the pending cases were not considered for passing the order of detention, it
defies logic as to why they were referred to in the first place in the order of detention.
The purpose of the Telangana Offenders Act 1986 is to prevent any person from
acting in a manner prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. For this purpose,
Section 3 prescribes that the detaining authority must be satisfied that the person to
be detained is likely to indulge in illegal activities in the future and act in a manner
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order. The satisfaction to be arrived at by the
detaining authority must not be based on irrelevant or invalid grounds. It must be
arrived at on the basis of relevant material; material which is not stale and has a live
link with the satisfaction of the detaining authority. The order of detention may refer
to the previous criminal antecedents only if they have a direct nexus or link with the
immediate need to detain an individual. If the previous criminal activities of the
Appellant could indicate his tendency or inclination to act in a manner prejudicial to
the maintenance of public order, then it may have a bearing on the subjective
satisfaction of the detaining authority. However, in the absence of a clear indication
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154454992/ 6
Mohammad Iqbal Gojar Tedwa vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 15 July, 2025
of a causal connection, a mere reference to the pending criminal cases cannot account
for the requirements of Section 3. It is not open to the detaining authority to simply
refer to stale incidents and hold them as the basis of an order of detention. Such stale
material will have no bearing on the probability of the detenu engaging in prejudicial
activities in the future."
20. I may also refer to the decision of a Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in Sunil Fulchand
Shah v. Union of India, (2000) 3 SCC 409, wherein the need to strictly adhere to the timelines,
provided as procedural safeguards, was stressed upon. It was held thus:
"11.....The safeguards available to a person against whom an order of detention has
been passed are limited and, therefore, the courts have always held that all the
procedural safeguards provided by the law should be strictly complied with. Any
default in maintaining the time-limit has been regarded as having the effect of
rendering the detention order or the continued detention, as the case may be, illegal.
The justification for preventive detention being necessity a person can be detained
only so long as it is found necessary to detain him. If his detention is found
unnecessary, even during the maximum period permissible under the law then he has
to be released from detention forthwith. It is really in this context that Section 10 and
particularly the words 'may be detained' shall have to be interpreted."
21. In the case in hand lack of demonstration of a live and proximate link between the year 2024 and
2018, has resulted in the order of detention being based on stale incidents. The assertion of habitual
offender or absence of respect towards law of the land and other assertions as made in the ground of
detention are not sufficient to maintain the thread of connection between the last incident and the
order of detention in the absence of any material to substantiate propensity to commit crime
realistically. Thus, the order stands vitiated.
22. The requirement of 'proximity/live link' is required to demonstrate imperativeness in invoking
power of preventive detention more so where criminal prosecution is pending which proceedings
may culminate in imposition of a punitive sentence. It is a settled position of law that the power of
passing an order of preventive detention cannot be a punitive measure on the apprehension
however reasonable it maybe that detenu is going to go scot free in pending trials due to lack of
support to prosecution by crucial witnesses or otherwise.
23. The power of preventive detention as the very word indicates has to be used bona fidely for the
purpose of prevention of possible criminal offences by detenu based on past behaviour with a
pattern of repeated offences. The observations of the Supreme Court in Khudiram Das v. State of
West Bengal, AIR 1975 SC 550, would throw light on the above, the relevant observations are as
follows:-
"8.... The power of detention is clearly a preventive measure. It does not partake in
any manner of the nature of punishment. It is taken by way of precaution to prevent
mischief to the community. Since every preventive measure is based on the principle
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154454992/ 7
Mohammad Iqbal Gojar Tedwa vs Union Territory Of J&K Through ... on 15 July, 2025
that a person should be prevented from doing something which, if left free and
unfettered, it is reasonably probable he would do, it must necessarily proceed in all
cases, to some extent, on suspicion or anticipation as distinct from proof....."
24. When the incidents, constituting the last incident, stops about six years back and as discussed
above the thread of connectivity between the last incident and the order of preventive detention, is
lost. The order of detention can be stated to be based on stale events in the absence of live link.
Intertwined with the issue of proximity and live link are other factors that have vitiated the order of
detention in the present case.
25. For the reasons discussed above, the detention Order no.07/DMB/ PSA of 2024 dated
29.03.2024, passed by District Magistrate, Bandipora, is quashed. Respondents, including
Superintendent Jail concerned, are directed to release the detenu forthwith, provided he is not
required in any other case.
26. Disposed of.
27. Registry to return detention record to learned counsel for respondents.
(Vinod Chatterji Koul) Judge Srinagar 15.07.2025 (Qazi Amjad, Secy) 18.07.2025 16:52 HCP
no.193/2024
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/154454992/ 8
