Mohan vs State Rep. By on 25 November, 2021
Mohan vs State Rep. By on 25 November, 2021
Author: R.N.Manjula
Bench: R.N.Manjula
Crl.A.No.638 of 2018
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 25.11.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE Ms.JUSTICE R.N.MANJULA
Criminal Appeal No.638 of 2018
and
Crl.MP.No.14013 of 2018
Mohan
... Appellant
-Vs-
State rep. by
Inspector of Police,
All Women Police Station,
Gudiyatham, Vellore District.
(Crime No.15 of 2013)
... Respondent
Criminal Appeal filed under Section 374(2) of the Code of Criminal
Procedure against the Judgment passed in S.C.No.114 of 2016 on the file of
the Fast Track Mahila Court (Sessions Court), Vellore, Vellore District dated
03.10.2018.
For Appellant : Mr.S.Doraisamy
For Respondent : Mr.A.Gopinath
Government Advocate (Crl.Side)
*****
1/14
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) Crl.A.No.638 of 2018
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34670330/ 1
Mohan vs State Rep. By on 25 November, 2021
JUDGMENT
This appeal has been preferred challenging the judgment of the learned Fast Track Mahila Court
(Sessions Judge), Vellore dated 03.10.2018 passed in SC.No.114 of 2016.
2. The victim is mentally retarded at a moderate level. The case of the prosecution is that
approximately six months prior to 28.08.2013 one day at about 6.00.p.m when the victim girl was
walking through the jungle of her village, the accused forcibly took her to a nearby bush and raped
her. Thereafter, he repeatedly raped her by giving false assurance to her that he would marry her. In
view of that, the victim girl got conceived. The accused threatened the victim that if she dared to tell
his acts to anyone, he would kill her. However, on 28.08.2013 the victim girl (PW1) gave a complaint
(Ex.P1). On the basis of her complaint, PW8 registered a case in Crime No.195 of 2013 of
Bharatharami Police Station under Sections 376 and 506(i) IPC and the FIR was prepared by the
Inspector of Police (PW8).
3. The case was taken up for investigation by PW9-Shri.V.Rani, Inspector of Police, All Women
Police Station, Polur by assigning a new Crime https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis No.15 of 2013. She
visited the place of occurrence, prepared the Observation Mahazar (Ex.P4) along with the Rough
Sketch (Ex.P16) and enquired the witnesses. At about 5.00.p.m on 29.08.2013, she arrested the
accused near Gudiyatham new bus stand and recorded his confession statement and then sent him
to judicial custody. She also subjected the victim and the accused for medical examination. The
statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C of the victim girl (Ex.P2) was also recorded by the learned
Magistrate. After getting necessary medical documents from the Doctor, she examined the accused
and the victim. Subsequently she got transferred and the Inspector K.Shanthi (PW10) succeeded her
and continued the investigation. PW 10 completed the investigation by examining the rest of the
witnesses and filed the charge sheet against the accused for the offences under Sections 376(2)(k),
376(2)(m), 417 and 506(ii) IPC.
4. After taking the case on filed and after observing the legal mandates and on being satisfied with
the materials placed on record, the learned trial judge framed charges against the accused under
Sections 376(2)(k), 376(2)(m), 417 and 506(ii) IPC. The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis to be tried. During the course of trial, on the side of the
prosecution, 10 witnesses were examined as PW1 to PW10 and Exs.P1 to P16 were marked. On the
side of the defence, no witness was examined and no document was marked.
5. The complainant was examined as PW1 and she had stated in her evidence about the occurrence.
PW2/Brother of PW1 has stated that he came to know from the doctor that PW1 was pregnant. After
enquiring the victim, he came to know that the accused is the reason for the pregnancy. PW3 is the
witness for Observation Mahazar (Ex.P4). PW4/K.Dhanasekaran is the Village Assistant, in whose
presence the confession statement of the accused was recorded. PW5 is the Doctor, who examined
the accused with regard to his potency and he gave his opinion that there is nothing to suspect that
the accused is impotent. When the victim was produced before PW6/Doctor, she recommended the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34670330/ 2
Mohan vs State Rep. By on 25 November, 2021
victim to be examined by a psychologist, Gynaecologist, Radiologist and Dentist.
6. According to the Dental examination, the age of the victim is found to be above 14. Since the
victim was pregnant, Radiological examination could https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis not be done.
PW7/Doctor, who examined the victim girl had observed that the victim girl is mentally retarded
and she recommended for psychiatric examination. Her psychiatric examination revealed that her
mental age was 7 years.
7. After concluding the Trial and on considering the materials on record, the learned Trial Judge
found the accused guilty and convicted and sentenced him as under:
Rank of the Charge Punishment
Accused/Appellant
Sole Accused 376(2) (f) & 10 years Rigorous Imprisonment
376(2)(n) IPC and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/- in
default to undergo three months
Rigorous Imprisonment
417 IPC One year Rigorous Imprisonment
506(ii) IPC One year Rigorous Imprisonment
8. Aggrieved over the same, the appellant/ accused has preferred this appeal.
9. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Government Advocate (Crl. Side)
appearing for the respondent and perused the entire materials on record.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
10. The learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the Doctor, who conducted the medical
examination on the victim and gave opinion that the victim was pregnant was not examined; and the
woman by name Valliammal, who accompanied the victim when the victim was examined by the
Doctor was also not examined; there are contradictions in the evidence of the victim and it requires
corroboration; the complaint was given after six months and the delay in registering the FIR creates
doubt in the case of the prosecution. PW1 has stated in her evidence that she used to go with the
accused to several places and that would show that she is a consenting party and the accused cannot
be convicted for the offence of rape; the Doctor, who had attended the delivery of the victim has not
been examined to show that she had given birth to a still born child; mere assurance to marry will
not attract the provisions of Section 417 IPC and hence, it is wrong to convict the accused for the
offence under Sections 376 and 417 IPC; mere reference of words will not constitute an offence
under Section 506(ii) and hence, the judgment of the Sessions Court should be set aside and the
accused should be acquitted. He relied the following judgments in support of his contentions:-
(i) Raju and others Vs. State of Madhya Pradesh reported in (2008) 15 SCC 133;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34670330/ 3
Mohan vs State Rep. By on 25 November, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(ii) Rai Sandeep Alias Deepu Vs. State (NCT OF DELHI) reported in (2012) 8 SCC 21;
11. So the accused is not entitled to any benefit of doubt on the ground that the identity of the
accused itself is not proper.
12. The learned Government Advocate (Crl. Side), appearing for the State submitted that in the
offences of this nature, the evidence of the victim plays a prominent role and it does not require any
corroboration; the evidence of the victim would show that she was put under compulsion and force
by the accused and he raped her on compulsion; though the victim was mentally retarded at
moderate level, she deposed evidence clearly and hence her evidence cannot be rejected; the learned
Trial Judge has appreciated the evidence in a correct perspective and hence the judgement of the
lower court does not require any interference.
13. Point for consideration:
Whether the conviction and sentence of the accused for the offence under Sections
376(2) (f) & 376(2)(n), 417 and 506(ii) IPC by the learned Sessions Judge based on
the materials available on record is fair and proper?
14. According to the evidence of the Doctor, who conducted dental https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
examination, the age of the victim was found to be above 14 years. In fact, the age of the victim was
claimed to be 19 years at the time of the occurrence. Since she was mentally retarded at moderate
level, her psychological (mental) age is found to be just 7 years. That means, the victim girl had the
maturity of 7 years old though her actual age is above 18. The defence did not dispute the fact that
the victim girl was mentally retarded at moderate level. The only contention of the appellant is that
since PW 1 is mentally retarded, no credence can be given to her evidence.
15. Before recording the evidence of PW1, the learned Trial Judge had assessed her fitness to depose
evidence by putting some preliminary questions and satisfied about the understanding ability of the
victim. Since the victim was found fit enough to depose evidence she was examined further. PW1 has
stated in her evidence that, one day when she was walking on the dry lands of her village, the
accused lifted her, held her tight and then forcibly raped her. Subsequent to that occurrence also,
the accused repeated the same acts on many occasions within a period of five months. In view of
that, the victim became five months pregnant. Only after that the matter was made known to her
family members. PW2, who is the brother of PW1came to know about
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis this. He has stated in his evidence that the victim girl used to
accompany a nearby pregnant woman by name Valliammal to hospital for medical check up. On one
such occasion on the way to hospital the victim got fainted. So she was examined by the doctor and
later found to be pregnant. On enquiry PW2 came to know that the accused is the reason for her
pregnancy.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34670330/ 4
Mohan vs State Rep. By on 25 November, 2021
16. When PW2 came to know about the occurrence, he went to the house of the accused and
demanded him to marry the victim and for which the accused refused. Thereafter, the complaint
was given. His evidence would also reveal that the victim delivered a pre-matured still born male
baby. The Death Certificate of the baby of the victim has been marked as Ex.P13 and that would
show that the victim had delivered a male baby and it was still born. Ex.P7 is the medical certificate
issued by PW6 doctor, who examined the victim. In the said certificate dated 03.09.2013, the
pregnancy of the victim is recorded. PW6/Doctor Malathi has stated about the same in her evidence
as well. Hence, the opinion of the doctor would confirm that the victim was pregnant.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
17. The evidence of the victim about the occurrence as it appears from her evidence is cogent and
consistent. And the medical evidence also corroborates the same. In the offences of this nature, the
evidence of the victim assumes more significance. Even in the judgments cited by the learned
counsel for the defence, it is held that the evidence of the victim girl should be treated like that of an
injured witness. Neither the victim nor her family members had any motive against the accused in
order to implicate him falsely in the case. Since the accused had committed repeated rapes on the
victim, on the assurance of marriage, the victim could easily identify him and hence there is no need
to conduct an identification parade.
18. The accused took advantage of the moderate mental retardation of the victim and raped her
repeatedly and made her pregnant. As per sec. 114-A of the Evidence Act, in sexual offences it has to
be presumed that there was no consent. Section 114-A of the Evidence Act reads as below:
“114-A. In a prosecution for rape under clause (a), clause(b), clause(c), clause(c),
clause (d), clause (e), clause (f), clause(g), clause(h), clause(i), clause (j), clause (k),
clause(l), clause(m) or clause(n) of Sub-section (2) of section 376 of the Indian Penal
Code (45 of 1860), where sexual intercourse by the accused is proved and the
question is whether it was without the consent of the woman
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis alleged to have been raped and such woman states
in her evidence before the court that she did not consent, the court shall presume that
she did not consent.”
19. The victim girl has given clear account of how she was abused by the accused. Though the victim
might be immature and could not understand the motive of the accused, the accused knew very well
what he was doing. He knew very well that he did not have the intention of marrying the victim girl,
who is mentally retarded. Had he ever intended to marry her he would not have raped her. So it is
not wrong on the part of the Sessions Court to come to the conclusion that the accused had cheated
her on the assurance of marriage and raped her repeatedly. Section 415 IPC defines ‘cheating’ as
under:-
“415.Cheating. - Whoever, by deceiving any person, fraudulently or dishonestly
induces the person so deceived to deliver any property to any person, or to consent
that any person shall retain any property, or intentionally induces the person so
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34670330/ 5
Mohan vs State Rep. By on 25 November, 2021
deceived to do or omit to do anything which he would not do or omit if he were not so
deceived, and which act or omission causes or is likely to cause damage or ham to
that person in body, mind, reputation or property, is said to 'cheat'.”
20. In this case, the victim was made to believe that the accused would
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis marry her and by believing his false words, she gave her person to
him and delivered a child. The damage that had caused on the mental and physical integrity of the
victim is evident from the evidence of the prosecution. Since I find no reason to reject the evidence
of the victim and it is cogent, consistent and clear with regard to the occurrence, it does not require
any corroboration. Due to the above reasons, the judgments cited by the learned counsel for the
petitioner in support of his contention is not applicable to the facts and circumstances of this case.
The learned judge has rightly found the accused guilty. Hence I do not find any illegality or infirmity
on the judgment of the trial Court and finding that the accused is guilty for the offence under
Sections 376(2) (f) & (n) and 417 IPC.
21. However, with regard to the offence under Section 506(ii) IPC, there is nothing much available
on record. The mere words of the accused that he would kill the victim would not attract the
conviction of the accused under Section 506(ii) IPC. Hence the findings of the trial court that the
accused is guilty under Section 506(ii) IPC alone is liable to be set aside.
22. In the result, this Criminal Appeal is partly allowed and the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
judgment of the learned Sessions Judge, Magalir Neethimandram (Fast Track Mahila Court),
Vellore, passed in S.C.No.114 of 2016 is modified to the extent that the accused is found guilty for
the offences under Sections 376(2)(f) & (n) and 417 IPC. Rest of the conditions and punishment
imposed on the accused shall remain unaltered and will run concurrently. Consequently, connected
Miscellaneous Petition is also closed.
25.11.2021 Index: Yes / No Speaking / Non-Speaking order kmi To
1.The Sessions Judge, Magalir Neethimandram, Fast Track Mahila Court, Vellore.
2.The Inspector of Police, All Women Police Station, Gudiyatham, Vellore District.
3.The Public Prosecutor, High Court, Madras -104.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis R.N.MANJULA, J kmi Criminal Appeal No.638 of 2018
25.11.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/34670330/ 6
