Mohammad Ismail Koka vs Ut Of J&K Through Commissioner on 18 March, 2025
Mohammad Ismail Koka vs Ut Of J&K Through Commissioner
on 18 March, 2025
S. No.1
Regular List
HIGH C0URT 0F JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
CRM(M) No. 125/2020
Mohammad Ismail Koka ...Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Shahbaz Sikander, Advocate.
Vs.
UT of J&K through Commissioner ...Respondent(s)
Secretary to Govt, Home Department.
Through: Mr. Mubashir Majid Malik, Dy. AG for R-1 and R-2.
None for respondent No. 3
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE MOHD YOUSUF WANI, JUDGE
ORDER
18.03.2025
1. Through the medium of the instant petition filed under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1973 (now repealed and replaced by Bhartiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita, 2023 but
applicable in the case and hereinafter referred to as the "Code" for short), the petitioner has sought
the quashment of the FIR bearing No. 100 of 2020, dated 29.07.2020 registered with the Police
Station, Zaipora Shopian under Sections 452 and 376B on the grounds, inter alia, that he has been
falsely and frivolously implicated in the impugned case FIR when he is innocent and has not
committed the alleged crime; that lodgement of the impugned FIR is just an afterthought and the
case is purely concocted, fabricated, baseless and manufactured aimed at to settle personal scores
with him; that actually he entered into a marriage agreement with the complainant/respondent No.
3 on 10-12-2017, which was followed by the performance of Nikah Ceremony on 29th October, 2018;
that subsequently on 06.12.2018, he along with the respondent No. 3 approached this Court Page 1 o
f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020 through a petition bearing OWP No. 2296/2018 seeking protection
which was granted; that subsequently the respondent No. 3/complainant went to her parental home
and her parents counselled and pressurised her to abstain from his matrimonial company so much
so that a Khula Nama was drafted on which he was forced to sign on 10.07.2020; that subsequently
on 29th July, 2020, the respondent No. 3 was made to lodge a complaint against him in the Police
Station Zainpora Shopian leading to the registration of impugned case FIR No. 100 of 2020 under
Sections 452 and 376B IPC against him which is outcome of the abuse of the powers of the police
concerned, thus deserving to be quashed in the ends of justice.
2. I have heard the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned Deputy Advocate General for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63068744/ 1
Mohammad Ismail Koka vs Ut Of J&K Through Commissioner on 18 March, 2025
respondents 1 and 2.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that during the pendency of the instant petition,
the petitioner/accused and the respondent No.3/complainant (victim) have entered into a mutual
settlement and have also executed a formal compromise deed dated 13.09.2022 which has been
placed on record of the petition after permission of the Court. He submitted that as per the terms of
the compromise, the parties have agreed that their marriage stands dissolved through mutual
settlement otherwise called Khula; that their statements also stand recorded by the Registrar
Judicial of this Court pursuant to the Court order dated 27.09.2022; that in their statements
recorded before the Registry, they have admitted the contents of the compromise deed.
4. The learned counsel further contended that this Court has got extraordinary powers in terms of
the provisions of Section 482 of theCode to quash the impugned FIR as the same has become
desirable rather Page 2 o f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020 justified in the facts and circumstances of the
case. The learned counsel submitted that the power of this Court under Section 482 of the Code is
not subject to the provisions of Section 320 of the Code providing for compounding of some
offences. He submitted that the Hon'ble Apex Court has allowed the quashment of the FIR and
consequent criminal proceedings by invoking the inherent jurisdiction vested in the High Courts, in
justified circumstances, where matrimonial disputes are amicably settled between the
complainant/victim and the accused, so as to meet the ends of justice.
5. The learned counsel in support of his arguments placed reliance on the authoritative judgments of
the Hon'ble Apex Court cited as "Parbatbhai Aahir Alias Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur and Ors
vs State of Gujarat and Anr. (2017) 9 SCC 641" and "Kapil Gupta Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) and Anr
2022 15 SCC 44".
6. The learned State Counsel, Mr. Mubashir Majid Malik, Dy. AG, however, submitted that since the
impugned FIR has been registered under Sections 452 and 367B of the Indian Penal Code which
offences are non- compoundable, as such, the petition does not deserve to be allowed. He submitted
that allowing the quashment of the criminal proceedings on the mere pretext of an amicable
settlement between the accused and the complainant is likely to cause miscarriage of justice.
7. In the backdrop of the mutual settlement of the dispute between the petitioner/accused and the
respondent No.3/complainant, this Court is of the opinion that it may meet the ends of justice in
case the FIR in question bearing No. 100 of 2020 registered with Police Station, Zainpora Shopian
Page 3 o f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020 is quashed as the same shall facilitate the peaceful and cordial
relation between the two parties and their respective families in future.
8. Although this Court is of the opinion that an FIR cannot be generally and in routine manner
allowed to be quashed in exercise of the powers under Section 528 of BNSS corresponding to
Section 482 of the Code on the main ground that the parties have settled their controversy that had
become the cause of occurrence, yet exceptional ground appears to be made out in the opinion of the
Court, in the facts and the circumstances of the case, for invoking its extraordinary powers under
Section 528 of BNSS to quash the FIR in question.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63068744/ 2
Mohammad Ismail Koka vs Ut Of J&K Through Commissioner on 18 March, 2025
9. The provisions of Section 359 of the BNSS corresponding toSection 320 of the Code do not
restrict but limit and circumvent the powers of this Court under Section 528 of the
BNSScorresponding toSection 482 of the Code regarding quashment of FIR's and criminal
proceedings for the sake of the society at large which is real beneficiary of the criminal justice
delivery system.
10. This Court in its opinion feels fortified with an authoritative judgment of the Hon'ble Apex Court
cited as "Gopal Kumar B. Nar Vs. CBI (2014) 5 SCC 800"in which it has been held that "though
quashment of non-compoundable offence under Section 482 CrPC, following a settlement between
the parties would not amount to circumvention of Section 320, but such power has to be exercised
with care and caution and would depend on facts of each case."
11. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in "Parbatbhai Aahir Alias Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur and
Ors vs State of Gujarat and Anr. (2017) 9 SCC 641" relied upon by the learned counsel for the
petitioner, has Page 4 o f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020 considered the aspect of the invocation of the
inherent powers by the High Courts under Section 528 of the BNSS corresponding to Section 482 of
the Codeand was pleased to lay down some broad governing principles for invocation of such power
of the High Courts. The relevant portions of the judgment are reproduced as under for the sake of
convenience:
"Section 482 is prefaced with an overriding provision. The statute saves the inherent
power of the High Court, as a superior court, to make such orders as are necessary (i)
to prevent an abuse of the process of any court; or (ii) otherwise to secure the ends of
justice. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on the subject, may
be summarised in the following propositions:
(i) Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the High Court to prevent an abuse
of the process of any court or to secure the ends of justice. The provision does not
confer new powers. It only recognises and preserves powers which inhere in the High
Court;
(ii) The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to quash a First Information
Report or a criminal proceeding on the ground that a settlement has been arrived at
between the offender and the victim is not the same as the invocation of jurisdiction
for the purpose of compounding an offence. While compounding an offence, the
power of the court is governed by the provisions of Section 320 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973.
The power to quash under Section 482 is attracted even if the offence is non-compoundable.
(iii) In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or complaint should be quashed in
exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482, the High Court must evaluate whether the ends of
justice would justify the exercise of the inherent power;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63068744/ 3
Mohammad Ismail Koka vs Ut Of J&K Through Commissioner on 18 March, 2025
(iv) While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide ambit and plenitude it has to be
exercised; (i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent an abuse of the process of any court;
Page 5 o f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020
(v) The decision as to whether a complaint or First
Information Report should be quashed on the ground that the offender and victim have settled the
dispute, revolves ultimately on the facts and circumstances of each case and no exhaustive
elaboration of principles can be formulated;
(vi) In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and while dealing with a plea that the dispute has
been settled, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and gravity of the offence. Heinous
and serious offences involving mental depravity or offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot
appropriately be quashed though the victim or the family of the victim have settled the dispute. Such
offences are, truly speaking, not private in nature but have a serious impact upon society. The
decision to continue with the trial in such cases is founded on the overriding element of public
interest in punishing persons for serious offences;
(vii) As distinguished from serious offences, there may be criminal cases which have an
overwhelming or predominant element of a civil dispute. They stand on a distinct footing in so far as
the exercise of the inherent power to quash is concerned;
(viii) Criminal cases involving offences which arise from commercial, financial, mercantile,
partnership or similar transactions with an essentially civil flavour may in appropriate situations fall
for quashing where parties have settled the dispute;
(ix) In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal proceeding if in view of the compromise
between the disputants, the possibility of a conviction is remote and the continuation of a criminal
proceeding would cause oppression and prejudice; and
(x) There is yet an exception to the principle set out in propositions (viii) and (ix) above. Economic
offences involving the financial and economic well-being of the state have implications which lie
beyond the domain of a mere dispute between private disputants. The High Court Page 6 o f 1 3
CRM (M) No. 125/2020 would be justified in declining to quash where the offender is involved in an
activity akin to a financial or economic fraud or misdemeanour. The consequences of the act
complained of upon the financial or economic system will weigh in the balance.
12. It is also needful to reproduce the relevant portion of the law laid down by Hon'ble Supreme
Court in "Kapil Gupta Vs. State (NCT of Delhi) and Anr 2022 15 SCC 44" also referred to by the
learned counsel for the petitioner, on an appeal, impugning the judgment and order dated
28.09.2021 passed by the learned Single Judge of the High Court of Delhi thereby dismissing the
criminal petition, which was filed for quashing the criminal proceedings, as under:
(i) In present case, consent given by respondent No. 2 for putting an end to
proceeding was voluntary and without any coercion and duress. Respondent No. 2, in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63068744/ 4
Mohammad Ismail Koka vs Ut Of J&K Through Commissioner on 18 March, 2025
order to live in peace, wants to bring an end to criminal proceedings.
(ii) Though court should be slow in quashing proceedings wherein heinous and
serious offences are involved. High Court is not foreclosed from examining as to
whether there exists material for incorporation of such offences or as to whether
there is sufficient evidence which if proved would lead to proving for offence charged
with.
(iii) Court has also to take into consideration as to whether settlement between the
parties is going to result in harmony between them which may improve their mutual
relationship.
(iv) It is also relevant to consider as to what is the stage of proceedings. If application
(for quashing proceedings) is made at belated stage wherein evidence has been led
and matter is at stage of arguments or judgment, Court should be slow to exercise
power to quash proceedings.
However, if such application is made at initial stage before commencement of trial, said factor will
weight with Court in exercising its power.
Page 7 o f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020
(v) In present case, facts and circumstances are peculiar.
Respondent 2 is young lady of 23 years. She feels that going through trial in one case, where she is
complainant, and in other case, wherein she is accused, would rob prime of her youth. She feels that
if she is made to face trial rather than getting any relief, she would be faced with agony of
undergoing trial.
(vi) In both aforesaid cases, though charge-sheets have been filed, charges are yet to be framed and
as such, trial has not yet commenced. It is further to be noted that since Respondent 2 herself is not
supporting prosecution case, even if criminal trial is permitted to go ahead, it will end in nothing
else than acquittal. If request of parties is denied, it will be amounting to only adding one more
criminal case already overburdened criminal courts.
(vii) In that view of the matter, though in heinous or serious crime like rape, Court should not
normally exercise powers of quashing proceedings, in peculiar facts and circumstances of present
case and in order to give succour to respondent 2 so that she is saved from further agony of facing
two criminal trials, one as victim and one as accused, present is a fit case wherein extraordinary
powers of Supreme Court be exercised to quash criminal proceedings.
(viii) In that view of the matter, proceedings in criminal cases arising out of both aforesaid FIR's are
quashed and set aside.
13. This Court in its opinion also feels fortified with the authoritative judgments of the Hon'ble Apex
Court cited as "Gyan Singh Vs. State of Punjab (2012) 10 SCC 303 and "Narender Singh Vs. State of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63068744/ 5
Mohammad Ismail Koka vs Ut Of J&K Through Commissioner on 18 March, 2025
Punjab (2014) 6 SCC 466", the relevant paras of which are reproduced as hereunder for the sake of
convenience:
"Gian Singh Vs. State of Punjab (2012) 10 SCC 303"
61. "In other words, the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or contrary to the
interest of Page 8 o f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020 justice to continue with the criminal proceeding or
continuation of the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of law despite
settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to secure the ends of
justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end and if the answer to the above question(s)
is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal
proceedings."
"Narender Singh Vs. State of Punjab (2014) 6 SCC 466"
29. "In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay down the following principles by which
the High Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to the settlement between the parties
and exercising its power under Section 482 of the Code while accepting the settlement and quashing
the proceedings or refusing to accept the settlement with direction to continue with the criminal
proceedings: 29.1 Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be distinguished from the
power which lies in the Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the Code. No doubt,
under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has inherent power to quash the criminal
proceedings even in those cases which are not compoundable, where the parties have settled the
matter between themselves. However, this power is to be exercised sparingly and with caution; 29.2
When the parties have reached the settlement and on that basis petition for quashing the criminal
proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases would be to secure :(i) ends of justice, or(ii) to
prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
While exercising the power the High Court is to form an opinion on either of the aforesaid two
objectives. 29.3 Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions which involve heinous and
serious offences Page 9 o f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020 of mental depravity or offences like murder,
rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not private in nature and have a serious impact on society.
Similarly, for offences alleged to have been committed under special statute like the Prevention of
Corruption Act or the offences committed by Public Servants while working in that capacity are not
to be quashed merely on the basis of compromise between the victim and the offender."
14. Having regard to the amicable settlement of the dispute between the petitioner/accused and the
complainant/respondent No. 3, the continuance of the criminal proceedings sought to be quashed
appears to be a futile exercise,for just completing the procedure for recording an order of acquittal.
In its opinion, this Court is fortified with the law laid down by Hon'ble Supreme Court in, (i) Satesh
Nehra V/S Delhi Administration 1996 (III) Crimes 85 SC; (ii) Madan Mohan Abott Vs. State of
Punjab AIR 2008 SC 1969' and (iii) JugdishChananan and ors Vs. State of Haryana and anr. AIR
2008 SC 1968.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63068744/ 6
Mohammad Ismail Koka vs Ut Of J&K Through Commissioner on 18 March, 2025
Relevant Paras of the referred judgments deserve a needful mention as under:
"Satesh Nehra V/S Delhi Adminstration 1996 (III) Crimes 85 SC."
"But when the judge is fairly certain that there is no prospect of the case, ending in
conviction, the valuable time of the court should not be wasted for holding a trial only
for purpose of formally completing the procedure to pronounce the conclusion at a
future date. Most of the Sessions Courts in India are under heavy pressure of work
load. If the Sessions Judge is almost certain, that the trial would be only an exercise
in futility or sheer wastage of time, it is advisable to truncate or swap the
proceedings."
Page 10 o f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020
"(ii) Madan Mohan Abott Vs. State of Punjab,
AIR 2008 SC 1969"
"In disputes where the question involved is of a purely personal nature the court
should ordinarily accept the terms of compromise even in criminal proceedings
keeping the matter alive with no possibility of a result in favour of the prosecution in
a luxury, which the courts, grossly overburdened as they cannot afford and that the
time so save can be utilized in deciding more effective and meaningful litigation."
"(iii) JugdishChananan and ors Vs. State of Haryana and anr AIR 2008 SC 1968"
"In the light of the compromise it is unlikely that the prosecution will succeed in the
matter. We also see that the dispute is a purely personal one and no public policy is
involved in the transaction that had been entered into between the parties. To
continue with the proceedings, therefore, would be a futile exercise we accordingly
allow the appeal and quash FIR 83/12.3.2001 P/S City Sonapat and on subsequent
proceedings."
15. The Hon'ble Apex Court has permitted the compounding of the offences even at the appellate
stage having regard to the mutual settlement between the contesting parties and the nature of the
offences involved in the proceedings being personal in nature "[Mulukri Sira Prassad Vs. State of
Andra Pradesh 2001 (4) SC 254, Khursheed and Anr. Vs. State of UP and anr. 2007 and Ab. Sattar
Vs. State of M.P AIR 1981 SC 1775]."
16. Allowing the complainant/victim and the accused in a criminal proceeding at any stage of
investigation, trial or appeal to seek quashment of the proceedings or the compounding of the
offences even in cases where commission of non-compoundable offences of personal nature not
Page 11 o f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020 involving public/social aspect is alleged, on the basis of
amicable settlement, is not likely to prove detrimental to the scope and object of the provisions of
Section 359 of the BNSS corresponding to Section 320 of the Code. Such an approach is likely to put
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63068744/ 7
Mohammad Ismail Koka vs Ut Of J&K Through Commissioner on 18 March, 2025
an end to some further apprehended litigation of both civil and criminal nature and to allow the
parties to have a peaceful and cordial relation, besides saving the precious time of the Criminal
Courts being already grossly over-burdened as the continuance of such criminal proceedings is likely
to prove a futile exercise only for the purpose of completing the procedure for recording an order of
acquittal at the end. Provisions of Section 320 of the Code corresponding to Section 359 of the BNSS
do not restrict but only limit the powers of this Court under Section 482 of the Code corresponding
to Section 528 of BNSS so that the extraordinary powers are used only in exceptional circumstances
to meet the ends of justice. Provisions of Section 482 of the Code (528 of BNSS) have an overriding
affect and are not to be read as subject to the provisions of Section 320 of the Code (359 of BNSS).
The criminal proceedings, involving heinous offences of anti- social nature or offences under special
penal statutes do not qualify for being quashed/compounded in exercise of the powers under
Section 482 of the Code (528 BNSS).
17. Criminal litigation between near relatives or co-sharers more often originates from the
civil/matrimonial disputes and as such directing the quashment of proceedings by invoking the
inherent powers under the Code/BNSS, in such matters of personal nature not involving the
commission of any heinous offence is likely to meet the ends of justice.
Page 12 o f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020
18. It is needful to mention that the investigation process in the impugned case FIR remained stayed
under the interim court orders passed w.e.f., 18.08.2020.
19. For the foregoing discussion, the instant writ petition is allowed and the FIR bearing No. 100 of
2020 dated 29.07.2020, registered with Police Station, Zainpora Shopian, under Sections 452 and
376B of IPC, along with any subsequent criminal proceedings is quashed.
20. Disposed of.
(MOHD YOUSUF WANI) JUDGE SRINAGAR 18.03.2025 ''Shahid-SS'' Whether the order is
speaking? Yes.
Whether the order is reportable in law journal? Yes.
Page 13 o f 1 3 CRM (M) No. 125/2020
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/63068744/ 8
