Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April,
2024
Author: B.P. Routray
Bench: B.P. Routray
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRLA No.880 OF 2022
From the judgment and order dated 29.9.2022 passed by learned Special
Judge, Vigilance, Bhubaneswar in T.R.Case No.1 of 2009.
Mohammed Moquim ...... Appellant
Versus
State of Odisha (Vigilance) ....... Respondent
Advocate(s) appeared in this case:-
For Appellant : Mr.Pitambar Acharya, Sr. Advocate
For Respondent : Mr.S.Das, Sr. Standing Counsel (Vigilance)
Mr.S.K.Das, Standing Counsel (Vigilance)
CORAM : JUSTICE B.P. ROUTRAY
JUDGMENT
10th April, 2024 B.P. Routray,J.
1. The Appellant has been convicted for commission of offences under Sections 468, 471, 420 and
Section 120-B of the Indian Penal Code and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three
years Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication for each such offence along
with payment of fine of Rs.50,000/-. Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024
15:02:15
2. Appellant is the Managing Director of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. There were five accused
persons and the present Appellant was Accused No.4. Accused No.1 (Vinod Kumar) was the
Managing Director of Orissa Rural Housing Development Corporation (ORHDC) and Accused No.2
(Swosti Ranjan Mohapatra) was its Company Secretary. Accused No.3 was M/s. Metro Builders Pvt.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 1
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
Ltd. and Accused No.5 was the Director of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd.
3. Prosecution case in brief is that ORHDC, incorporated on 19th August 1994 before the Registrar
of Companies, is a Government owned Corporation and its objective was to act as the principal
institution for financing, promoting and developing the rural housing and related activities. Accused
No.1 & 2, who are the Managing Director and Company Secretary of ORHDC, while discharging
their public duties as such, have illegally sanctioned and disbursed the loan amount of Rs.1.5 Crore
to M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. by abusing their position and without such financial power on their
part and without keeping adequate security for the loan amount, and thereby caused wrongful
financial loss to ORHDC. It is alleged that M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. was a known defaulter to
ORHDC as they had not Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication repaid the
previous loan amount of Rs.1 Crore taken for their project Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack
Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 Metro City I. Present Appellant being its Managing Director managed
to get further loan amount of Rs.1.5 Crore along with other co-accused (Piyushdhari Mohanty) in the
guise of its new project Metro City II in conspiracy with Accused No.1 and 2, who are the officials of
ORHDC. Out of said loan amount of Rs.1.5 Crore, Rs.50 lakhs was adjusted towards repayment of
the previous loan of Rs.1 Crore. Further, the loan was disbursed in favour of the Appellant and his
company without execution of any registered mortgage deed or tripartite agreement. It is alleged
that though the loan of Rs.1.5 Crore was availed for the purpose of construction of apartment, the
tripartite agreement between ORHDC, loanee builder and the flat owners was required to be
executed. Further, the entire loan amount was disbursed on 28th August 2000 without the authority
of the Board of Directors of ORHDC and without having requisite financial power by the Managing
Director, ORHDC. The Managing Director, ORHDC did not have any financial power to sanction
any loan amount, but only for the first time the Board of Directors authorized the Managing
Director in its meeting dated 31st August 2000, i.e. three days after the sanction of alleged loan
amount, to sanction the loan up to Rs.5,00,000/- only. So the Managing Director of Digitally Signed
ORHDC was not authorized to sanction any loan amount prior to 31st Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN
BISWAL Reason: Authentication Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15
August 2000 that too to the extent of Rs.1.5 Crore. It is also alleged that the loan amount was
sanctioned in favour of the Appellant and M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. in conspiracy between all
the accused persons and for that purpose many documents were forged by the Appellant and the
rules have been violated. The Appellant managed to get further loan of Rs.1.5 Crore in the guise of
the project Metro City II without paying the previous loan amount taken from ORHDC and by
forging the documents like fire certificate and other documents. Such forged documents have been
used by the Appellant and other accused persons as genuine documents with knowledge and reason
to believe the same as forged documents.
4. The Appellant denied the charge and pleaded innocence with false implication.
5. Learned trial court formulated five points for determination and in the context of present
Appellant, it is important to determine that, whether he committed forgery? Secondly, whether the
Appellant fraudulently and dishonestly used the document as genuine knowingly or having reason
to believe the same to be forged documents, while Digitally Signed getting sanction and disbursal of
the loan amount from ORHDC ? Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 2
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
Thirdly, Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Whether forgery is committed with intention that the
Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 documents so forged would be used for cheating to ORHDC ? Fourthly,
whether to get sanction and disbursal of such loan amount from ORHDC, the Appellant had
conspired with other accused persons?, Fifthly, whether the Appellant along with other co-accused
persons has cheated and dishonestly induced the ORHDC to disburse such loan amount by
acceptance of forged documents as genuine?
6. Prosecution in order to prove their case have examined seventeen witnesses and marked thirty
seven documents as exhibits. On the other hand, the defence did not examine any witness and only
marked the documents under Ext.A to S in support of its case.
7. The status of the Appellant as the Managing Director of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. is admitted.
Similarly, the status of other accused persons as the M.D. and Company Secretary of ORHDC and
Director of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. are also admitted. M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. applied
for the loan on 24th June 2000 and the amount was disbursed on 28th August 2000. The loan
amount was to the tune of rupees one crore fifty lakhs. Prior to that, M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd.
had also availed previous loans from ORHDC and it had not repaid the Digitally Signed same
entirely. There was outstanding amount of rupees fifty lakhs Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL
Reason: Authentication against Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd.
and while sanctioning and Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 disbursing present loan amount of Rs.1.5
crores, Rupees fifty lakhs was adjusted towards the outstanding of previous loan amount.
Prosecution alleges that all the accused persons were in criminal conspiracy for grant of loan of such
amount to the tune of Rs.1.5 crore in favour of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. and in execution of the
agreement between them, such huge amount of loan was sanctioned and disbursed illegally by
forging the documents and without keeping proper security and without verification of documents.
In the process, the financial advisor, i.e. Executive Director (Finance) of ORHDC was kept out of the
fray and the empanelled legal advisor of ORHDC was not consulted. M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd.
being a loan defaulter to ORHDC is not eligible to get further loan and the loan was disbursed by
submission of forged documents. Further, the loan was sanctioned and disbursed by accused no.1
without having any financial power on his part. For the purpose of loan, the Appellant submitted
and used forged estimate, forged permission and plan of BDA, forged fire prevention document and
opinion of unauthorized Advocate (who is not an empanelled Lawyer of ORHDC).
8. The charges against the Appellant in substance is that, the Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL
Reason: Authentication Appellant being the M.D. of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. in criminal
Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 conspiracy with other accused
persons has deceived and induced ORHDC to disburse loan amount of Rs.1.5 crores by cheating and
using forged documents as genuine.
9. It is the allegation that during July and August, 2000, accused number 1 & 2 while discharging
their public duties as the Managing Director and Company Secretary of ORHDC respectively,
abused their official position and by making criminal conspiracy with present Appellant and other
co-accused persons have illegally sanctioned and disbursed loan to the tune of Rs.1.5 crores to M/s.
Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. without any financial power on the part of accused no.1 and without
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 3
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
keeping adequate security for the loan amount and thereby cheated ORHDC causing wrongful loss.
The Appellant being the M.D. of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. deceived and cheated ORHDC in
conspiracy with other accused persons to receive aforesaid loan amount of Rs.1.5 crores by using
forged documents. No registered mortgage deed was executed nor any tripartite agreement was
furnished to receive the loan amount and original documents were not submitted. The loan amount
was also not repaid and on the date of registration of F.I.R. the outstanding amount was to the tune
of Rs.168.47 lakhs which was Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication
enhanced to Rs.622.25 lakhs as on 30th October, 2007. Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date:
10-Apr-2024 15:02:15
10. Mr. Acharya, learned senior counsel submits on behalf of the Appellant that mere inability to
repay the loan amount cannot be treated as cheating and the same cannot give rise for criminal
prosecution against the defaulter. It is further submitted that the allegations about forged estimate
and plan has been disproved by the officials of BDA (Bhubaneswar Development Authority) and the
allegations about submission of forged fire prevention certificate has not been substantiated through
adequate evidence. He further submits that the Managing Director of a company cannot be held
liable for the actions of the company unless sufficient evidences of his active role are there coupled
with criminal intent.
11. Mr. Das, learned senior standing counsel submits on the other hand that, entire series of actions
starting from application for loan coupled with the circumstances that the applicant was a loan
defaulter and the sanctioning authority did not have any financial power to sanction such huge
amount of loan, that too violating the procedures without keeping equitable mortgage against the
loan amount and without keeping the original documents of property, do justify the criminal
conspiracy by agreement between all the accused persons Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL
Reason: Authentication including the Appellant with intention to cheat the Corporation Location:
Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 (ORHDC). The Appellant also used forged
documents as genuine knowingly for getting the loan from ORHDC.
12. In the case at hand, as stated above, the status of the Appellant as the Managing Director of M/s.
Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd., in whose favour the loan amount was disbursed, remains admitted. The
Appellant in his statement under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. has admitted the same. Further, from
the trend of cross-examination of prosecution witnesses it is seen that such position of the Appellant
as M.D. of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. is never disputed.
13. So far as sanction and disbursal of loan amount in question in favour of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt.
Ltd. is concerned, the same also remains admitted in the statement of the Appellant and other
co-accused persons under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C. This aspect of disbursal of loan amount is never
questioned by any of the accused persons. M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. had applied for loan with
the signature of the Appellant as its Managing Director and the loan file was processed in ORHDC.
According to the evidence of P.W.9, the Financial Advisor- cum-Chief Accounts Officer, the Project
Finance File (Ext.13) in respect Digitally Signed of Metro City II of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd.
was initiated for Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication sanction Location:
Orissa High Court, Cuttack of loan amount of Rs.1.5 Crores. The file was processed by Date:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 4
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 Accused No.2 and put up before the M.D. of ORHDC (Accused No.1), who
sanctioned the loan vide order dated 5th July 2000. The loan amount was disbursed through
different cheques enchased in favour of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. on different dates. The last
phase of the loan was released on 28th August 2000. It is further stated by P.W.9 that though he did
not have detail knowledge about outstanding amount of previous loan on M/s. Metro Builders Pvt.
Ltd., but a sum of Rs.50 lakhs from the present loan amount was adjusted towards the outstanding
of earlier loan. In his cross-examination, the Appellant did not dispute sanction and disbursal of
aforesaid loan amount in favour of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. On the other hand, the Appellant
had cross-examined this P.W.9 regarding the jurisdiction and competency of Accused No.1 to
sanction the loan and his financial power to do so. The other accused persons including Accused
No.1, who sanctioned the loan, also did not question anything to P.W.9 disputing disbursal of loan
amount up-to the tune of Rs.1.5 Crores in favour of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd.
14. In this case, the I.O. namely K.S.Balabantaray, who did major part of investigation, died during
pendency of the trial. So he could not be examined as a witness in the trial. The subsequent I.O.,
who Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication submitted the charge-sheet, has
been examined as P.W.15. He has stated Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024
15:02:15 about the seizure of the file regarding processing of loan amount and other documents
justifying the disbursal of such loan in favour of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. The note sheets of
account statements for Metro City II project of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. has been marked
under Ext.36. As per Ext.36, the outstanding as on 22nd December 2002 was Rs.1,29,68,909/-.
Ext.37 is the accounts statement of loan, which shows outstanding of Rs.6,22,25,214/- as on 6th
November 2007. Therefore, from analysis of the evidence of P.W.9, 15 and other witnesses as well as
the statement of the Appellant and other accused persons recorded under Section 313 of the Cr.P.C.,
and from the trend of cross-examination of the witnesses, it is established that loan amount of Rs.1.5
Crores was sanctioned and disbursed in favour of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. being applied by it
with signature of the Appellant, and the same remained unpaid as on 6th November 2007 with
outstanding amount of Rs.6,22,25,214/-.
15. Defence has not brought any evidence or material regarding repayment of loan amount after 6th
November 2007. Prosecution also remained silent about the status of unpaid loan as on the date of
completion of trial or thereafter. In the appeal before this court, neither Signed by: CHITTA
RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024
15:02:15 party raise any submission regarding repayment of the loan amount subsequently or its
status thereafter.
16. It is next to be seen if such loan amount was received by the Appellant as Managing Director of
M/s.Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. in fraudulent and dishonest manner by using forged documents to
cheat ORHDC. It is borne from prosecution evidence that on the date of application for loan, M/s.
Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. was a known defaulter having heavy outstanding against him. Ext.32 is the
certified note sheets relating to sanction and disbursal of previous project loan in respect of Metro
City - I and as per the same, the outstanding dues as on 5th July 2000 over M/s. Metro Builders Pvt.
Ltd. was Rs.1,34,44,390/-. It is the consistent evidence of P.W.9, the Financial Advisor of ORHDC
that on the date of application, such huge amount of outstanding was there against M/s. Metro
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 5
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
Builders Pvt. Ltd.
17. P.W.14 is the Secretary to Government in Housing and Urban Development Department and
Chairman of ORHDC. He has stated in his evidence that, the MD of ORHDC had no financial power
to sanction the loan prior to 31.08.2000. For the first time, power to Digitally Signed sanction
individual housing loan up-to rupees five lakhs was granted in Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN
BISWAL Reason: Authentication st favour Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttackof the MD of
ORHDC (Accused No.1) in the 21 Board Meeting Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 of ORHDC held on
31.08.2000. He has further stated that, there was no post facto approval of the loan sanctioned by
the MD of ORHDC and there was absolutely no authorization given by the Board to the MD of
ORHDC for sanctioning housing loan prior to 31.08.2000. The powers of the MD has been
specifically mentioned in Article 131 (2) of the Articles of Association (Ext.B), which does not
authorize the MD to sanction and disburse any loan. It is further stated by P.W.14 that, fiscal
prudence requires specific power of an authority to grant, sanction and disburse loan. But here the
MD of ORHDC (Accused No.1) did not have any such power to sanction and disburse loans prior to
31.08.2000. This evidence of P.W.14 could not be assailed in his cross-examination.
P.W.9 is the Financial Advisor-cum-Chief Accounts Officer of ORHDC. He has also stated in his
evidence that, present loan was sanctioned by the MD beyond his authority and jurisdiction and the
file was not processed through him (P.W.9). The loan sanction file (Ext.13) was directly processed by
the Company Secretary (Accused No.2) and approved by Accused No.1 to sanction and disburse the
loan amount. In the process, the financial advisor of the institution has been ignored and by-passed.
So from analysis of the evidences of P.W.14, P.W.9 and Digitally Signed Ext.B, it is clearly
established that, the loan to the tune of Rs.1.5 crores Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason:
Authentication Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 was illegally
sanctioned and disbursed in favour of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. violating procedural rules.
18. Prosecution alleges that, to get sanctioned and disbursal of such loan amount, present Appellant
being the MD of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. had submitted certain forged documents such as,
BDA Plan Approval Letter, Estimate and No Objection Certificate of the Fire Prevention Officer. The
Appellant also used the legal opinion of an unauthorized Advocate in his support.
19. Coming to see the Plan Approval Letter of Bhubaneswar Development Authority (BDA), the
relevant witnesses are P.W.1, 3, 7 & 8, who are the officials of BDA. P.W.1 is the Junior Assistant,
who spoke about seizure of two files, P.W.3 is the Enforcement Officer, P.W.7 is the Assistant Town
Planner and P.W.8 is the Planning Assistant of BDA.
P.W.3 has said that upon direction of higher authority he had made a confidential enquiry on the
allegations against the then Assistant Town Planner namely, Sudhir Ranjan Mohanty in connection
with the Building Plan Approval of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd., and during Digitally Signed
enquiry it is found that, the then Town Planning Staff had fraudulently Signed by: CHITTA
RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication approved Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack the 2nd
phase construction plan (Metro City-II) in connivance Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 with Metro
Builders. P.W.7, who was the Assistant Town Planner, has said in his evidence that, the Appellant as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 6
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
the MD of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. submitted the application for approval of construction of
residential apartment up-to sixth floor on 28.08.1998 along with necessary documents. The
documents include Ext.C - the No Objection Certificate of Fire Prevention Officer and Ext.E - the
Structural Safety Certificate. The plan was approved on 26th September, 1998 and the approval
letter is marked under Ext.3/17.
20. According to the evidence of P.W.3, lot of irregularities were committed by the then Assistant
Town Planner of BDA and Junior Town Planner in connivance with the applicant to get the Plan
Approval Letter. It is true that the plan was approved by the Chairman of BDA, who is the
competent authority and based on his approval order, the letter under Ext.3/17 was issued. The said
plan approval letter was never recalled or cancelled by the BDA. At this stage, it is now important to
look into the prosecution allegations about the No Objection Certificate (Ext.C). Prosecution alleges
that, the No Objection Certificate (Fire Safety Certificate) with regard to prevention of fire as
submitted by the Appellant to get the plan approved in favour of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Signed
by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication Ltd. is a forged document. In this regard the
evidence of P.W. 17 is Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 pressed
into. Said P.W.17 is the State Fire Prevention Officer and he has stated that no such "No Objection
Certificate" was ever issued to the Advisor-cum-Planning Member of BDA relating to multi-storey
building complex of Metro City. He has further stated that the 'No Objection Certificate' marked
under Ext.C is a forged and fabricated document.
It needs to be mentioned here that Ext.C marked by the Appellant during cross-examination of
P.W.7 is the purported letter of the Fire Prevention Officer, Odisha in letter no.216/FPW dated 23rd
July 1998, addressed to the Advisor-cum-Planning Member of BDA relating to issue of NOC on fire
safety point of the proposed building complex- Metro City. P.W.17 was working as the Fire
Prevention Officer, Odisha on 23rd July 1998 and he produced the copy of the dispatch register of
his office from 21st to 30th July 1998 to justify that no such letter as per Ext.C was ever issued by
their office. Rather letter no.216 was issued on 27th July 1998 and addressed to the Station Officer
of Nilagiri Fire Station. Said P.W.17 has also clarified this in his letter No.6/FPW dated 5th August
2005 marked under Ext.30.
There has been an attempt made through cross-examination of Digitally Signed said P.W.17 to say
that Ext.C was issued by his predecessor namely, Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason:
Authentication Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 Biranchi Narayan
Mohapatra. But this statement of P.W.17 made in his cross-examination is found unbelievable and
appears to be a development. It is for the reason that, P.W.17 has not stated anything about issuance
of Ext.C by his predecessor in his letter under Ext.30 nor had he stated anything about Biranchi
Narayan Mohapatra in his statement made before the I.O. under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. Further,
it is mentioned by P.W.17 in his examination in chief that, there is one post of Fire Prevention
Officer for the State of Odisha, who is only competent to issue 'No Objection Certificate' regarding
fire safety, and he has said in his cross-examination that Biranchi Narayan Mohapatra was working
as Fire Station Officer (not same as Fire Prevention Officer). Therefore, the evidence of P.W.17 as
stated in his examination in chief remains firm and could not be demolished by the defence in the
cross-examination. It is further noticed that, P.W.17 was examined in chief on 1st February 2019,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 7
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
when the Appellant did not cross-examine him and this witness was cross-examined by the
Appellant and Accused No.5 on 9th July 2019. Thus, on analysis of the evidence of P.W.17 and the
I.O. (P.W.15) as well as from the contents of the Ext.30 and Ext.C, it is established that Ext.C, which
was submitted by the Appellant to BDA Digitally Signed for approval of the plan, is a forged
document. Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication Location: Orissa High
Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 Undoubtedly, 'No Objection Certificate' regarding fire
safety is one of the essential documents required to be submitted for getting approval of the plan in
respect of a multi-storey building complex. When the 'No Objection Certificate' under Ext.C is
proved to be a forged document and utilized by the Appellant to get the plan approved by BDA, the
consequent approval of the plan in plan approval letter under Ext.3/17 is proved to be the forged
one also.
21. Regarding submission of the estimate, it is seen that P.W.16 is the Proprietor of 'Development
Engineers', who has stated in his evidence that, the estimate submitted by M/s. Metro Builders Pvt.
Ltd. and available in the project finance file under Ext.13 has not been issued by him. The signature
appearing therein is not of him, and the seal and signature appearing in the so called certificate of
'Development Engineers' is forged. He has further stated that, the certificate under Ext.13/11 and the
estimate under Ext.13/12 are forged documents. The defence has been failed to bring anything in his
cross-examination to demolish his evidence except the statement that Ext.13/11 and Ext.13/12 could
have been issued by any other official. A thorough analysis of the evidence of P.W.16 justifies the
prosecution case that the certificate and Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason:
Authentication estimate under Ext.13/11 and Ext.13/12 submitted by M/s. Metro Location: Orissa
High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 Builders Pvt. Ltd. for sanction of loan, are forged
documents. It is to be mentioned here that, the defence does not dispute the authority of P.W.16 as
the source and author of the documents under Ext.13/11 and Ext.13/12. When the authority of
P.W.16 as the Proprietor of 'Development Engineers' is not disputed and P.W.16 denies his signature
and seal on the document, no reason is left to deny the documents as forged.
22. The legal opinion used in the process of sanction of loan was given by an Advocate namely,
Purna Chandra Rath (P.W.13). He is not the empanelled lawyer of ORHDC. One Shri Pratap Kumar
Das was the sole legal retainer of ORHDC during the period 2000-01. It is not that the opinion of a
legal expert not authorized by ORHDC was used for processing the file for sanction of the loan, but it
is interesting to see the note sheet under Ext.13 where it is mentioned that "the legal opinion
obtained from our legal retainer opined that the land offered, is free from any litigation and is
suitable to be taken as a mortgage as a security against the loan." Therefore, the use of legal opinion
of P.W.13 stating that the same is the opinion of the legal retainer of ORHDC is itself illegal and
cannot be treated as a safe and reliable Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason:
Authentication Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 document for the
purpose of granting loan. Accordingly prosecution is found to have satisfied it's case here also.
23. Apart from above, several other irregularities have been brought on record through prosecution
evidence. First of all, no equitable mortgage in respect of the property has been created for the loan
amount keeping the original title deeds. Secondly, against the valuation of the property at Rs.25
lakhs, loan of Rs.1.5 Crores was disbursed. Thirdly, not a single original document was kept in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 8
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
file (Ext.13) before disbursal of the loan amount. P.W.9, who is the financial head of the Institution
(ORHDC), has not been consulted nor the file was routed through him.
24. In order to satisfy the ingredients to constitute the offence of cheating, there should be
fraudulent or dishonest inducement of the person deceived by the accused who intentionally
induced him to deliver the property. It is needless to say that a person who dishonestly induced any
person to deliver any property is liable for the offence of cheating. Having analyzed the evidences
and the circumstances brought on record through evidence, it is seen that all the accused persons
have acted in Digitally Signed tandem with agreement between them to disburse the loan amount of
Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication Rs.1.5 Location: Orissa High Court,
CuttackCrores in favour of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. The offence of Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15
criminal conspiracy can be satisfied through circumstantial evidence with necessary implications. In
Baldev Singh vs. State of Punjab, (2009) 6 SCC 564, the Hon'ble Supreme Court have held as
follows:-
"17. Conspiracy is defined in Section 120-A IPC to mean:
"120-A. Definition of criminal conspiracy.--When two or more persons agree to do, or
cause to be done,--
(1) an illegal act, or (2) an act which is not illegal by illegal means, such an agreement
is designated a criminal conspiracy:
Provided that no agreement except an agreement to commit an offence shall amount
to a criminal conspiracy unless some act besides the agreement is done by one or
more parties to such agreement in pursuance thereof.
Explanation.--It is immaterial whether the illegal act is the ultimate object of such
agreement, or is merely incidental to that object."
An offence of conspiracy which is a separate and distinct offence, thus, would require
the involvement of more than one person. Criminal conspiracy is an independent
offence. It is punishable separately, its ingredients being:
(i) an agreement between two or more persons;
(ii) the agreement must relate to doing or causing to be done either
(a) an illegal act;
(b) an act which is not illegal in itself but is done by illegal means.
It is now, however, well settled that a conspiracy ordinarily is hatched in secrecy. The court for the
purpose of arriving at a finding as to whether the said offence has been committed or not may take
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 9
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
into consideration the circumstantial evidence. While however doing so, it must be borne in mind
that meeting of the mind is essential; mere knowledge or discussion would not be sufficient.
18. Adverting to the said question once again, we may, however, notice that recently in Yogesh v.
State of Maharashtra [(2008) 10 SCC 394 : (2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 51 : (2008) 6 Scale 469] a Division
Bench of this Court held: (SCC p. 402, para 25) "25. Thus, it is manifest that the meeting of minds of
two or more persons for doing an illegal act or an act by illegal means is sine qua non of the Digitally
Signed between them by direct proof. Nevertheless, existence of the conspiracy Signed by: CHITTA
RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication and its objective can be inferred from the surrounding
circumstances and Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttackthe conduct of the accused. But the
incriminating circumstances must form Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 a chain of events from which a
conclusion about the guilt of the accused could be drawn. It is well settled that an offence of
conspiracy is a substantive offence and renders the mere agreement to commit an offence
punishable, even if an offence does not take place pursuant to the illegal agreement."
19 . Yet again in Nirmal Singh Kahlon v. State of Punjab [(2009) 1 SCC 441 : (2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 523 :
(2008) 14 Scale 639] this Court following Ram Lal Narang v. State (Delhi Admn.) [(1979) 2 SCC 322
: 1979 SCC (Cri) 479] held that a conspiracy may be a general one and a separate one meaning
thereby a larger conspiracy and a smaller conspiracy which may develop in successive stages. For
the aforementioned purpose, the conduct of the parties also assumes some relevance.
20. In K.R. Purushothaman v. State of Kerala [(2005) 12 SCC 631 :
(2006) 1 SCC (Cri) 686] this Court held: (SCC pp. 636-38, paras 11 & 13) "11. Section
120-A IPC defines 'criminal conspiracy'. According to this section when two or more
persons agree to do, or cause to be done (i) an illegal act, or (ii) an act which is not
illegal by illegal means, such an agreement is designated a criminal conspiracy. In
Major E.G. Barsay v. State of Bombay [AIR 1961 SC 1762 : (1962) 2 SCR 195] Subba
Rao, J., speaking for the Court has said: (AIR p. 1778, para 31) '31. ... The gist of the
offence is an agreement to break the law. The parties to such an agreement will be
guilty of criminal conspiracy, though the illegal act agreed to be done has not been
done. So too, it is not an ingredient of the offence that all the parties should agree to
do a single illegal act. It may comprise the commission of a number of acts.' ***
13. To constitute a conspiracy, meeting of minds of two or more persons for doing an
illegal act or an act by illegal means is the first and primary condition and it is not
necessary that all the conspirators must know each and every detail of the conspiracy.
Neither is it necessary that every one of the conspirators takes active part in the
commission of each and every conspiratorial acts. The agreement amongst the
conspirators can be inferred by necessary implication. In most of the cases, the
conspiracies are proved by the circumstantial evidence, as the conspiracy is seldom
an open affair. The existence of conspiracy and its objects are usually deduced from
the circumstances of the case and the conduct of the accused involved in the
conspiracy. While appreciating the evidence of the conspiracy, it is incumbent on the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 10
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
court to keep in mind the well-known rule governing circumstantial evidence viz.
each and every incriminating circumstance must be clearly established by reliable
evidence and the circumstances proved must form a chain of events from which the
only and no other hypothesis against the guilt is possible. Criminal conspiracy is an
independent offence in the Penal Code. The unlawful agreement is Signed by:
CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication sine qua non for constituting
offence under the Penal Code and not an Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date:
10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 accomplishment. Conspiracy consists of the scheme or
adjustment between two or more persons which may be express or implied or partly
express and partly implied. Mere knowledge, even discussion, of the plan would not
per se constitute conspiracy. The offence of conspiracy shall continue till the
termination of agreement."
25. Further, the Supreme Court has explained in Ram Narayan Poply Vs- CBI, AIR 2003 SC 2748,
that, "Privacy and secrecy are more characteristics of conspiracy, than of a loud discussion in an
elevated place open to public view. Direct evidence in proof of a conspiracy is seldom available.
Offence of conspiracy can be proved by either direct or circumstantial evidence. It is not always
possible to give affirmative evidence about the date of the formation of the criminal conspiracy,
about the persons who took part in the formation of the conspiracy, about the object, which the
objectors set before themselves as the object of conspiracy, and about the matter in which the object
of conspiracy is to be carried out, all this is necessarily a matter of inference."
26. In State of Maharashtra vrs. Som Nath Thapa, (1996) 4 SCC 659, it is observed that, to establish
a charge of conspiracy 'knowledge' about indulgence in either an illegal act or a legal act by illegal
means is necessary. In some cases, intent of unlawful use being made of the goods or services in
question may be inferred from the knowledge itself. Digitally Signed This apart, the prosecution has
not to establish that a particular unlawful Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason:
Authentication Location: Orissa High Court, useCuttack was intended, so long as the goods or
service in question could not Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 be put to any lawful use. Finally, when the
ultimate offence consists of a chain of actions, it would not be necessary for the prosecution to
establish, to bring home the charge of conspiracy, that each of the conspirators had the knowledge of
what the collaborator would do, so long as it is known that the collaborator would put the goods or
service to an unlawful use.
27. As discussed earlier, the documents under Ext.C, Ext.3/17, Ext.12/11 and Ext.13/12 are proved as
forged documents. Section 464 of the IPC defines making a false document and Section 468
provides that whoever commits forgery intending that the documents shall be used for the purpose
of cheating, shall be punished with imprisonment of such description. Section 471 provides that
whoever fraudulently and dishonestly uses as genuine knowingly or having reason to believe to be a
forged document, shall be punished for such description. An analysis of Section 464, 468, 470 and
471 of the IPC makes it understand of making a false document by forgery. As per Section 463,
whoever makes any false document intending to cause damage or injury to the public or to any
person, or to cause any person to part with property, or with intent to committee fraud or that fraud
may be committed, is said to Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication have
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 11
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
committed forgery. Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 The
documents narrated above, have been used by the Appellant as the M.D. of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt.
Ltd. to get the loan disbursed in favour of his company. Use of such forged documents coupled with
the circumstances discussed earlier that how the loan was processed for disbursal are enough to
attract the offences under Sections 468/471 along with the offence of cheating under Section 420 of
the IPC. To constitute an offence of cheating under Section 415 of the IPC, it is required to be
established that a person has been induced, either fraudulently or dishonestly, to deliver any
property to any person. In Mohd. Ibrahim vrs. State of Bhihar, (2009) 8 SCC 751, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court has observed that, for the offence of cheating, there should not only be the cheating,
but as a consequence of such cheating, the accused should also have dishonestly adduced the person
deceived to delivery any property. In the present case, when the documents under Ext.C, 3/17, 13/11,
13/12 and other documents, are established as forged and have been used to process the loan in
favour of the accused company, the dishonest and fraudulent intention of the Appellant as the M.D.
of the company is clearly satisfied. Use of these forged documents have resulted disbursal of the loan
of Rs.1.5 Crores in favour Digitally Signed of the company.
Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication Location: Orissa High Court,
Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15
28. In the case at hand, it is the Appellant, who applied with his signature in the capacity of M.D. of
M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. for grant of loan. He is the applicant also before the BDA in the same
capacity to get the plan approval letter. The law has been well settled in plethora of decisions
regarding liability of the Directors of a company in commission of offence by the company. In Sunil
Bharati Mittal vs. C.B.I. (2015) 4 SCC 609, the Supreme Court while considering the circumstances,
when Director/Person in-Charge of the affairs of the company can also be prosecuted, have held that
a corporate entity is an artificial person which acts through its Officers, Directors, Managing
Directors, Chairman etc. and if such of a company commits an offence involving mens rea, it would
normally be the intent and action of that individual who would act on behalf of the company. The
relevant observations are as follows:
"39. In Iridium India [Iridium India Telecom Ltd. v. Motorola Inc., (2011) 1 SCC 74 :
(2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1201] , the aforesaid question fell directly for consideration,
namely, whether a company could be prosecuted for an offence which requires mens
rea and discussed this aspect at length, taking note of the law that prevails in America
and England on this issue. For our benefit, we will reproduce paras 59-64 herein:
(SCC pp. 98-100) "59. The courts in England have emphatically rejected the Digitally
Signed which was an outcome of an act of will needing a particular state Signed by:
CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication of mind. The aforesaid notion
has been rejected by adopting the Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack doctrine of
attribution and imputation. In other words, the criminal Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15
intent of the 'alter ego' of the company/body corporate i.e. the person or group of
persons that guide the business of the company, would be imputed to the
corporation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 12
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
60. It may be appropriate at this stage to notice the observations made by
MacNaghten, J. in Director of Public Prosecutions v. Kent and Sussex Contractors
Ltd. [1944 KB 146 :
(1944) 1 All ER 119 (DC)] : (KB p. 156) A body corporate is a "person" to whom,
amongst the various attributes it may have, there should be imputed the attribute of a
mind capable of knowing and forming an intention--indeed it is much too late in the
day to suggest the contrary. It can only know or form an intention through its human
agents, but circumstances may be such that the knowledge of the agent must be
imputed to the body corporate. Counsel for the respondents says that, although a
body corporate may be capable of having an intention, it is not capable of having a
criminal intention. In this particular case the intention was the intention to deceive.
If, as in this case, the responsible agent of a body corporate puts forward a document knowing it to
be false and intending that it should deceive, I apprehend, according to the authorities that Viscount
Caldecote, L.C.J., has cited, his knowledge and intention must be imputed to the body corporate.
61. The principle has been reiterated by Lord Denning in Bolton (H.L.)(Engg.) Co. Ltd. v. T.J.
Graham & Sons Ltd. [(1957) 1 QB 159 : (1956) 3 WLR 804 : (1956) 3 All ER 624 (CA)] in the
following words: (QB p. 172) A company may in many ways be likened to a human body. They have a
brain and a nerve centre which controls what they do. They also have hands which hold the tools
and act in accordance with directions from the centre. Some of the people in the company are mere
servants and agents who are nothing more than hands to do the work and cannot be said to
represent the mind or will. Others are Directors and managers who represent the directing mind
and will of the company, and control what they do. The state of mind of these managers is the state
of mind of the company and is treated by the law as such. So you will find that in cases where the
law requires personal fault as a condition of liability in tort, the fault of the manager will be the
personal fault of the company. That is Carrying Co. Ltd. v. Asiatic Petroleum Co. Ltd. [1915 AC
Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL 705 : (1914-15) All ER Rep 280 (HL)] (AC at pp. 713 &
Reason: Authentication 714). So also in the criminal law, in cases where the law Location: Orissa
High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 requires a guilty mind as a condition of a criminal
offence, the guilty mind of the Directors or the managers will render the company themselves guilty.
62. The aforesaid principle has been firmly established in England since the decision of the House of
Lords in Tesco Supermarkets Ltd. v. Nattrass [1972 AC 153 : (1971) 2 WLR 1166 : (1971) 2 All ER 127
(HL)] . In stating the principle of corporate liability for criminal offences, Lord Reid made the
following statement of law: (AC p. 170 E-G) 'I must start by considering the nature of the personality
which by a fiction the law attributes to a corporation. A living person has a mind which can have
knowledge or intention or be negligent and he has hands to carry out his intentions. A corporation
has none of these: it must act through living persons, though not always one or the same person.
Then the person who acts is not speaking or acting for the company. He is acting as the company
and his mind which directs his acts is the mind of the company. There is no question of the company
being vicariously liable. He is not acting as a servant, representative, agent or delegate. He is an
embodiment of the company or, one could say, he hears and speaks through the persona of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 13
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
company, within his appropriate sphere, and his mind is the mind of the company. If it is a guilty
mind then that guilt is the guilt of the company. It must be a question of law whether, once the facts
have been ascertained, a person in doing particular things is to be regarded as the company or
merely as the company's servant or agent. In that case any liability of the company can only be a
statutory or vicarious liability.'
63. From the above it becomes evident that a corporation is virtually in the same position as any
individual and may be convicted of common law as well as statutory offences including those
requiring mens rea. The criminal liability of a corporation would arise when an offence is committed
in relation to the business of the corporation by a person or body of persons in control of its affairs.
In such circumstances, it would be necessary to ascertain that the degree and control of the person
or body of persons is so intense that a corporation may be said to think and act through the person
or the body of persons. The position of law on this issue in Canada is almost the same. Mens rea is
attributed to corporations on the principle of 'alter ego' of the company.
64. So far as India is concerned, the legal position has been in Standard Chartered Bank v.
Directorate of Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Enforcement [(2005) 4 SCC 530 : 2005 SCC
(Cri) 961] . On a Reason: Authentication detailed consideration of the entire body of case laws in
this Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 country as well as other
jurisdictions, it has been observed as follows: (SCC p. 541, para 6) '6. There is no dispute that a
company is liable to be prosecuted and punished for criminal offences. Although there are earlier
authorities to the effect that corporations cannot commit a crime, the generally accepted modern
rule is that except for such crimes as a corporation is held incapable of committing by reason of the
fact that they involve personal malicious intent, a corporation may be subject to indictment or other
criminal process, although the criminal act is committed through its agents.'"
40. It is abundantly clear from the above that the principle which is laid down is to
the effect that the criminal intent of the "alter ego" of the company, that is the
personal group of persons that guide the business of the company, would be imputed
to the company/corporation. The legal proposition that is laid down in the aforesaid
judgment in Iridium India case [Iridium India Telecom Ltd. v. Motorola Inc., (2011) 1
SCC 74 :
(2010) 3 SCC (Cri) 1201] is that if the person or group of persons who control the
affairs of the company commit an offence with a criminal intent, their criminality can
be imputed to the company as well as they are "alter ego" of the company.
41. In the present case, however, this principle is applied in an exactly reverse scenario. Here,
company is the accused person and the learned Special Magistrate has observed in the impugned
order that since the appellants represent the directing mind and will of each company, their state of
mind is the state of mind of the company and, therefore, on this premise, acts of the company are
attributed and imputed to the appellants. It is difficult to accept it as the correct principle of law. As
demonstrated hereinafter, this proposition would run contrary to the principle of vicarious liability
detailing the circumstances under which a Director of a company can be held liable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 14
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
42. No doubt, a corporate entity is an artificial person which acts through its officers, Directors,
Managing Director, Chairman, etc. If such a company commits an offence involving mens rea, it
would normally be the intent and action of that individual who would act on behalf of the company.
It would be more so, when the criminal act is that of conspiracy. However, at the same time, it is the
cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence that there is no vicarious liability unless the statute
specifically provides so.
43. Thus, an individual who has perpetrated the commission of an offence on behalf of a company
can be made an accused, along with the Digitally Signed criminal intent. Second situation in which
he can be implicated is in those Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL cases where the statutory
regime itself attracts the doctrine of vicarious Reason: Authentication Location: Orissa High Court,
Cuttackliability, by specifically incorporating such a provision. Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15
44. When the company is the offender, vicarious liability of the Directors cannot be imputed
automatically, in the absence of any statutory provision to this effect. One such example is Section
141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881. In Aneeta Hada [Aneeta Hada v. Godfather Travels &
Tours (P) Ltd., (2012) 5 SCC 661 : (2012) 3 SCC (Civ) 350 : (2012) 3 SCC (Cri) 241] , the Court noted
that if a group of persons that guide the business of the company have the criminal intent, that
would be imputed to the body corporate and it is in this backdrop, Section 141 of the Negotiable
Instruments Act has to be understood. Such a position is, therefore, because of statutory intendment
making it a deeming fiction. Here also, the principle of "alter ego", was applied only in one direction,
namely, where a group of persons that guide the business had criminal intent, that is to be imputed
to the body corporate and not the vice versa. Otherwise, there has to be a specific act attributed to
the Director or any other person allegedly in control and management of the company, to the effect
that such a person was responsible for the acts committed by or on behalf of the company."
29. Similarly, in Shiv Kumar Jatia vrs. State (NCT) of Delhi), (2019) 17 SCC 193, it is held that, "21.
By applying the ratio laid down by this Court in Sunil Bharti Mittal [Sunil Bharti Mittal v. CBI,
(2015) 4 SCC 609 : (2015) 2 SCC (Cri) 687] it is clear that an individual either as a Director or a
Managing Director or Chairman of the company can be made an accused, along with the company,
only if there is sufficient material to prove his active role coupled with the criminal intent. Further
the criminal intent alleged must have direct nexus with the accused. Further in Maksud Saiyed v.
State of Gujarat [Maksud Saiyed v. State of Gujarat, (2008) 5 SCC 668 : (2008) 2 SCC (Cri) 692] this
Court has examined the vicarious liability of Directors for the charges levelled against the Company.
In the aforesaid judgment this Court has held that, the Penal Code does not contain any provision
for attaching vicarious liability on the part of the Managing Director or the Directors of the
Company, when the accused is a company. It is held that vicarious liability of the Managing Director
and Director would arise provided any provision exists in that behalf in the statute. It is further held
that statutes indisputably must provide fixing such vicarious liability. It is also held that, even for
the said purpose, it is obligatory on the part of the complainant to make requisite allegations which
would attract the provisions constituting vicarious liability."
30. When the Appellant is the undisputed Managing Director of M/s. Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN
BISWAL Reason: Authentication Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. and he has played his active role for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 15
Mohammed Moquim vs State Of Odisha (Vigilance) on 10 April, 2024
getting the Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 building plan
approved and the loan amount was sanctioned in favour of the company on his application, the
same coupled with the irregularities committed while sanctioning the loan, the criminal intent of the
appellant is established having direct nexus with the offences committed. There are sufficient
evidences available on record against the Appellant for his active role played in getting the loan
sanctioned in favour of the company. In addition to this, it is seen from the loan file under Ext.13
that, the loan was sanctioned on the security of the personal of guarantee, indemnity and assurance
of the present Appellant as the M.D. of M/s. Metro Builders Pvt. Ltd. It is further indicated from the
evidences that the Appellant along with other co-accused persons have intentionally and knowingly
used series of forged documents, as discussed above, to get the loan sanctioned in favour of accused
company without any justification. It is true that mere inability to repay the loan amount would not
give rise to criminal prosecution. But here in the present case, fraudulent and dishonest intention of
the Appellant as the M.D. of the accused company has been established through prosecution
evidence to show his intention to get the loan sanctioned and such conduct of the Appellant from the
very date of application for Digitally Signed loan is clear on record to satisfy the existence of mens
rea on his part. Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL Reason: Authentication Location: Orissa
High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15 Considering all such materials and the evidences,
coupled with the circumstances narrated above, it is held that the prosecution has successfully
proved the charges against the Appellant. The findings of the learned trial court and the conviction
are thus confirmed.
31. Keeping in view the extent of sentence and the nature of offences as well as the role played by the
Appellant in committing the offences, no reason is found to interfere with the sentencing.
32. In the result, the appeal is dismissed. The bail bonds are cancelled. The LCR may be returned.
(B.P. Routray) Judge C.R.Biswal, A.R.-cum-Sr.Secretary Signed by: CHITTA RANJAN BISWAL
Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date: 10-Apr-2024 15:02:15
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/157459822/ 16
