Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 3 March, 2025
Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko.
... on 3 March, 2025
Author: Saurabh Lavania
Bench: Saurabh Lavania
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:12862
Court No. - 12
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 1522 of 2025
Applicant :- Mohammad Haroon
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. And Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Ashutosh Pandey,Premkant,Sanjay Kumar Upadhayay,Vimal Kishor Singh,Wazhul Qamar
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Saurabh Lavania,J.
1. Heard learned counsel appearing for the applicant and learned Additional Government Advocate
on behalf of State-respondents.
2. Present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed for the following main relief:
"Wherefore, it is most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may very graciously
be pleased to quash the impugned charge sheet No. 01/26.06.2019, under Section of
447 of I.P.C. and 2/3 of the Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act 1984,
arising out of Case Crime No.0249/2017, under Section 447 of I.P.C. and 2/3 The
Representation of People Act 1950, 1951 and 1989 as well as impugned Summoning
Order dated 12.04.2022 passed by the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow in
Criminal Case No. 27257/2022, in the interest of justice.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106976570/ 1
Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 3 March, 2025
It is further prayed that this Hon'ble Court may very graciously be pleased to stay the
operation and implementation of the aforesaid impugned order of cognizance and
summoning dated 12.04.2022 passed by the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate,
Lucknow in Criminal Case No. 27257/22 (State Versus Lekhraj and along with the
entire proceeding of Criminal Misc. Case No. 27257/2022, pending before the Court
of the Learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow, during pendency of this
Application."
3. Submission of learned counsel for the applicant for the purposes of causing interference in the
pending proceedings is to the effect that as per the case set up in the FIR registered as Case Crime
No.0249 of 2017, on 26.04.2017 the case of the prosecution is to the effect that 16 individuals
including the applicant namely Mohammad Haroon, S/o Mohammad Farooqh, encroached part of
Gata No.169Min./0.863 Hectare, which is recorded as 'Usar' i.e. Gaon Sabha/Government
land/public utility land.
4. The F.I.R. was lodged against the applicant under Section 447 of I.P.C. and Section 2/3 of the
Representation of People Act, 1950, 1951, 1989, wrongly mentioned, it ought to be Section 2/3 of
Prevention of Damage to Public Property Act, 1984 (in short "Act of 1984"). It is also stated that the
Investigating Officer thereafter conducted investigation and upon completion of the investigation
filed the charge sheet indicating therein that the offence against the applicant is made out under
Section 447 I.P.C. and Section 2/3 of the Lok Sampati Niwaran Adhiniyam.
5. It is also submitted that thereafter the Chief Judicial Magistrate, Lucknow, without application of
mind vide order dated 12.04.2022 summoned the applicant and other accused for facing the trial for
the offence indicated in the charge sheet.
6. He further submitted that in the above factual background of the case the present application
seeking main relief, quoted above, has been filed particularly on the ground(s) that (i) Offense under
Section 447 I.P.C. and Section 2/3 of Act, 1984 is not made out against the applicant; (ii) the
Magistrate has passed the cognizance order on an printed proforma as such the Magistrate has not
applied his judicial mind; (iii) U.P. Revenue Code, 2006 (in short "Code, 2006"), is self-contained
code and encroacher can be dealt with in the manner prescribed therein particularly Section 67 read
with relevant rules. Under Section 67 of Code, 2006, after following the due process of law, the
encroacher can be evicted and the penalty can also be imposed on the encroacher by the Revenue
Authority namely Tehsildar and order of the Tehsildar passed in exercise of power under Section 67
of Code, 2006, is appealable.
7. He further submitted that tenure holder can file declaratory suit under Section 144 of Code, 2006
and the Gram Panchayat can file a suit for declaration under Section 145 of Code, 2006.
8. He further submitted that in view of scheme of Code, 2006, the FIR lodged by the lekhpal is
nothing but an abuse of process of law as such, the indulgence of this Court is required in the
matter.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106976570/ 2
Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 3 March, 2025
9. He further submitted that this Court in the judgment passed in the case of Prabhakant And
Another Vs. State of U.P. and others reported in 2023 SCC OnLine All 397, after considering the
provisions of the Act, 1984 and the Code, 2006, interfered in the proceedings under Sections 2/3 of
Act, 1984.
10. He further submitted that a perusal of Paras 14 to 22 of the judgment of this Court in the case of
Prabhakant (supra) would show that the present application is squarely covered by the judgement
passed in the case of Prabhakant (supra). Relevant paras, referred, on reproduction, are as follows:
"(14). Now coming to yet another aspect of the issue, learned counsel for the
applicants in order to buttress their contention have drawn attention of the Court to
the provisions of Section 67 of the U.P. Revenue Code which speaks about the power
to prevent damages, misappropriation and wrongful occupation of Gram Panchayat
property:-
(i) Where any property entrusted or deemed to be entrusted under the provisions of
this Code to a Gram Panchayat or other local authority is damaged or
misappropriated, or where any Gram Panchayat or other authority is entitled to take
possession of any land under the provisions of this Code and such land is occupied
otherwise than in accordance with the said provisions, the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti
or other authority or the Lekhpal concerned, as the case may be, shall inform the
Assistant Collector concerned in the manner prescribed.
(ii) Where from the information received under sub-section (i) or otherwise, the
Assistant Collector is satisfied that any property referred to in sub-section (i) has
been damaged or misappropriated, or any person is in occupation of any land
referred to in that sub-section in contravention of the provisions of this Code, he shall
issue notice to the person concerned to show cause why compensation for damage,
misappropriation or wrongful occupation not exceeding the amount specified in the
notice be not recovered from him and why he should not be evicted from such land.
(iii) If the person to whom a notice has been issued under sub-section (ii) fails to
show cause within the time specified in the notice or within such extended time as
the Assistant Collector may allow in this behalf, or if the cause shown is found to be
insufficient, the Assistant Collector may direct that such person shall be evicted from
the land, and may, for that purpose, use or cause to be used such force as may be
necessary, and may direct that the amount of compensation for damage or
misappropriation of the property or for wrongful occupation as the case may be, be
recovered from such person as arrears of land revenue.
(iv) If the Assistant Collector is of opinion that the person showing cause is not guilty
of causing the damage or misappropriation or wrongful occupation referred to in the
notice under sub-section (ii), he shall discharge the notice.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106976570/ 3
Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 3 March, 2025
(v) Any person aggrieved by an order of the Assistant Collector under Sub-section
(iii) or Sub-Section (iv), may within thirty days from the date of such order, prefer an
appeal to the Collector.
(vi) Notwithstanding anything contained in any other provisions of this Code, and
subject to the provisions of this section every order of the Sub-Divisional Officer
under this section shall, subject to the provisions of sub-section (5) be final.
(vii) The procedure to be followed in any action taken under this section shall be such
as may be prescribed.
Explanation.- For the purposes of this section, the word "land" shall include the trees and building
standing thereon."
(15). Further, under Rule 67(1) of U.P. Revenue Code, 2016, it is incumbent upon the Assistant
Collector to make an inquiry as he deems proper and obtain further information regarding the
following issues :
"(a) full description of damage or misappropriation caused or the wrongful
occupation made with details of village, plot number, area, boundary, property
damaged or misappropriated and market value thereof;
(b) full address along with parentage of the person responsible for such damage,
misappropriation or wrongful occupation;
(c) period of wrongful occupation, damage or misappropriation and class of soil of
the plots involved;
(d) value of the property damaged or misappropriated calculated at the circle rate
fixed by the Collector and the amount sought to be recovered as damages."
(16). Thus, from the above it is clear that as per the U.P. Revenue Code, it is the Assistant Collector
of the area who is the authority concerned to act a pivotal role in demarcation and holding and
declaring the land in dispute is encroached by the applicants. The Investigating Officer of criminal
cases is not even remotedly connected to conduct this exercise. The entire procedure has been laid
down in Section 67(2) that only after getting a reply from the alleged encroacher, the Assistant
Commissioner/Sub Divisional Officer has to pass an order giving reasons for not exceeding the
explanation, if so offered by the person concerned. The eviction from the land in dispute can only be
recorded after disposal of the explanation offered by the person concerned keeping in line with the
cardinal principle of natural justice by passing a well reasoned and speaking order while disposing
of the said explanation. The Act is itself contained the amount of compensation of damage or
misappropriation of the property or for wrongful occupation, as the case may be, may be recovered
from such person as arrears of land revenue. Section 210 of the Revenue Code, 2006 confers
supervisory power on the Board or the Commissioner to call for the record of any proceeding
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106976570/ 4
Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 3 March, 2025
decided by the subordinate revenue court in which no appeal lies for the purpose of satisfying itself
or himself as to the legality or propriety of any order passed in such suit or proceeding.
(17). A careful reading of the provisions of the Revenue Code, 2006, thus, makes it clear that the
proceeding for causing damage to the public property can be undertaken against any person who is
in wrongful occupation of the same or causes damage or misappropriations to the said property. The
nature of eviction proceeding under Section 67 of the Revenue Code, 2006, is, however, summary in
nature. The rights of the parties claimed, if gives rise to a dispute requiring adjudication on the
questions of fact, a suit for declaration has to be instituted against such person. The Gram Sabha
may institute a suit under Section 145 of the U.P. Revenue Code, 2006 for declaration of its right or
to seek any further relief. In case of institution of such a suit, a temporary injunction may be granted
by the Court concerned to prevent wastage, damage or alienation of the suit property. The Revenue
Code, 2006 is a Special enactment providing for the law relating to the 'land' defined under Section
4(14) of the Code.
(18). As far as criminal proceeding for illegal encroachment, damage or trespass over the land
belonging to Gram Sabha is concerned, the same can be undertaken but it would be subject to the
adjudication of rights of the parties over the land in dispute as the said determination can be done
only by the revenue Court.
LEGALITY OF CRYPTIC/SUMMONING ORDER ON A PRINTED PROFORMA :
(19). In addition to above, learned counsel for the applicants have drawn attention of
the Court to the impugned summoning order whereby the concerned Magistrate,
despite of the repeated directions of the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as of this Court,
have adhered to the old fashion by taking the cognizance of offences on a printed
proforma. Needless to mention here that on the previous occasion at least a dozen of
the cases of different Benches of this Court in different proceedings have condemned
and deprecated this practice of taking cognizance on a printed proforma, but it seems
that the concerned Magistrates repeatedly in utter defiance of the directions of this
Court are still taking cognizance on a printed praforma without applying their
judicial mind. This is wholly unacceptable and condemned in strong term. The
Session Judges of respective sessions divisions are required to look into the matter
and issue an specific order that the cognizance order must be speaking and showing
application of judicial mind.
(20). It was noted by Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Abdul Rashid vs. State of
U.P., 2010 SCC online Alld 2819, wherein it has been held that the judicial order
cannot be allowed to be passed in a mechanical fashion either by filling in the blanks
in a printed proforma or by affixing a readymade seal etc. of the order on a plain
paper. Such tendency must be deprecated and cannot be allowed to perpetuate. This
reflects not only lack of judicial mind to the facts of the case but is also against the
settled judicial norms.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106976570/ 5
Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 3 March, 2025
(21). Similarly in the case of Bhushan Kumar vs. State (NCT of Delhi), 2012 5 SCC
424, wherein the Hon'ble Apex Court has observed that Section 204 of the Code does
not mandate the Magistrate to explicitly state the reasons for issuance of summons. It
clearly states that if in the opinion of a Magistrate taking cognizance of an offence,
there is sufficient ground for proceeding, then the summons may be issued. While
explaining the true import of expression "sufficient ground for proceeding" the
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Sunil Bharti Mittal vs. Central Bureau of
Investigation, AIR 2015 sc 923 has held as under :
"47. However, the words "sufficient grounds for proceeding" appearing in the Section
are of immense importance. It is these words which amply suggest that an opinion is
to be formed only after due application of mind that there is sufficient basis for
proceeding against the said accused and formation of such an opinion is to be
swtated in the order itself?."
(22). As mentioned above, taking into account the gravity of offence and its nature in which there is
no criminality as such and the apt remedy would be to proceed against the erring so called
encroacher u/s 67 of the U.P. Revenue Code and get the land in dispute demarcated. It is the case
exclusively falls within the domain of concerned revenue authority to impose the fine, if any, after
taking the whole exercise as per the provisions of law contained u/s 67 of the U.P. Revenue Code. "
11. Learned counsel for the applicant also referred para 5 to 18 of the judgment dated 06.08.2020
passed in the case of Application U/S 482 No.9964 of 2020, (Munshi Lal And Another vs. State of
U.P. and Another), which are extracted hereinunder:-
"5. In any case, the question as to whether the land in dispute belongs to the
applicants or they had illegally encroached upon the land vested in Gram Sabha,
allegedly recorded as Banjar, can only be adjudicated by the revenue Court. The
proper proceeding for eviction of the unauthorized occupant can be undertaken
under Section 67 of the Revenue Code, 2006. The short cut procedure adopted by the
Lekhpal of the village concerned is nothing but with a view to harass the applicants.
6. Having heard the learned counsel for the applicants and perused the record. At the
out set, we may note that complete mechanism has been provided under Section 67
of the Revenue Code, 2006 empowering the Gram Sabha or any other authority to
take possession of any land under the provisions of the Revenue Code, where such
property is entrusted or deemed to be entrusted to a Gram Sabha or other local
authority and is damaged or misappropriated by anyone. The Sub-Divisional Officer
of the concerned Sub-Division is empowered to take action on the information
received from the Bhumi Prabandhak Samiti or other authority or the Lekhpal
concerned about such illegal occupation or damage or misappropriation of the Gram
Sabha Land. In case, any person is found in occupation of any such land in
contravention of the provisions of the Revenue Code, the Sub-Divisional Officer has
to issue notice to the person concerned to show cause as to :- (i) why compensation
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106976570/ 6
Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 3 March, 2025
for damage, misappropriation or wrongful occupation specified in the notice be not
recovered from him? (ii) why he should not be evicted from such land?
7. The person to whom such a notice is issued under sub-section (2) of Section 67 of
the Code, can submit his reply disclosing his right or title or the nature of occupation
over the land in question. In that case, the Sub- Divisional Officer has to pass an
order giving reasons for not accepting the explanation, if so, offered by the person
concerned. The eviction from the land can only be ordered after disposal of the
explanation offered by the person concerned keeping in line with the principles of
natural justice by passing a reasoned and speaking order which shall disclose the
application of mind by the Officer. The amount of compensation for damage or
misappropriation of the property or for wrongful occupation, as the case may be, may
be recovered from such person as arrears of land revenue. Under sub-section (4) of
Section 67, the Officer is empowered to discharge the notice if he forms an opinion
that the person showing cause is not guilty of causing the damage or
misappropriation or wrongful occupation of the property in question. Any person
aggrieved by the order of the Sub-Divisional Officer under sub-section (3) or
sub-section (4) of Section 67 may prefer an appeal to the Collector within thirty days
from the date of such order. The procedure for undertaking the proceedings under
Section 67 of the Revenue Code, thus, is complete in itself and does not leave any
scope for any further computation of damage for wrongful occupation, damage
caused or misappropriation of Gram Sabha land.
8. Section 210 of the Revenue Code, 2006 confers supervisory power on the Board or
the Commissioner to call for the record of any proceeding decided by the subordinate
revenue court in which no appeal lies for the purpose of satisfying itself or himself as
to the legality or propriety of any order passed in such suit or proceeding.
Chapter XV of the Revenue Code, 2006 talks of penalties for encroachment and
provides that any person who encroaches upon or causes any obstruction to the use
of any public land (including chak road). path or common land of the village, shall be
liable to a fine minimum Rs. 500/- and not exceeding Rs. 2,000/- and in case of his
repetitive act, the Sub-Divisional Officer or the Tehsildar may require him to execute
a personal bond for a sum not exceeding of Rs. 5,000/-.
9. A careful reading of the provisions of the Revenue Code, 2006, thus, makes it clear
that the proceeding for causing damage to the public property can be undertaken
against any person who is in wrongful occupation of the same or causes damage or
misappropriation to the said property. The nature of eviction proceeding under
Section 67 of the Revenue Code, 2006 is, however, summary in nature. The rights of
the parties claimed, if gives rise to a dispute requiring adjudication on the questions
of fact, a suit for declaration has to be instituted against such person. The Gram
Sabha may institute a suit under Section 145 of the U.P. Revenue Code, 2006 for
declaration of its right or to seek any further relief. In case of institution of such a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106976570/ 7
Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 3 March, 2025
suit, a temporary injunction may be granted by the Court concerned to prevent
wastage, damage or alienation of the suit property. The Revenue Code, 2006 is a
Special enactment providing for the law relating to the 'land' defined under Section
4(14) of the Code.
10. As far as criminal proceeding for illegal encroachment, damage or trespass over
the land belonging to Gram Sabha is concerned, the same can be undertaken but it
would be subject to the adjudication of rights of the parties over the land in dispute as
the said determination can be done only by the revenue Court.
11. As far as the P.D.P.P. Act, 1984 is concerned, the same has been enacted with the
specific purpose. The statement of objects and reasons of the said Act shows that it
was enacted with a view to curb acts of vandalism and damage to public property
including destruction and damage caused during riots and public commotion. A need
was felt to strengthen the law to enable the authorities to deal with cases of damage
to public property. The "public property" as defined under Section 2(b) of the P.D.PP.
Act, 1984 means any property, whether immovable or movable (including any
machinery) which is owned by or in possession of or under the control of the Central
or State Government or any local authority or any Corporation or any institution
established by the Central, Provincial or State Act or its undertaking. Section 3 of the
P.D.P.P. Act, 1984 provides that anyone who commits mischief by doing any act in
respect of any public property' including the nature referred in sub-section (2) in the
said section shall be punished with imprisonment and a fine depending upon the
nature of the property as per sub-section (1) and sub-section (2) of Section 3 of the
P.D.P.P. Act, 1984. Section 4 provides punishment for an act of 'Mischief' causing
damage to pubic property by fire or explosive substance. The P.D.P.P. Act, 1984 is,
thus, a Special Act enacted to punish for the offence committed under Sections 3 and
4 of the said Act by doing any act of vandalism including the destruction or damage
during any riots or public demonstration in the name of agitations, bandhs, hartals
and the like. The "Mischief" has been defined under Section 2(a) of the P.D.P.P. Act,
1984 having the same meaning as in Section 425 of the Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860). Section 6 is the saving clause which says that the Act' 1984 covers the offence
committed under it and the provisions of it are in addition to any other law which
provides for any proceeding (whether by way of investigation or otherwise) which
may be instituted or taken against the offender, apart from this Act. Special
provisions with regard to disposal of a prayer for bail made by a person accused of
commission of offence under the Act' 1984 has been provided under Section 5 of the
P.D.P.P. Act, 1984.
The provisions oblige a person found guilty of commission of offence to pay the
damage or loss caused to the public property. This Act, thus, covers the specific area
of damage or loss or destruction of public property and recovery of such damages
from the person(s) who is/are found guilty of such damage during the course of any
public demonstration in the name of agitations, bandhs, hartals and the like.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106976570/ 8
Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 3 March, 2025
12. In Re. Destruction of Public and Private Properties, In Re vs. State of Andhra
Pradesh and others'. Taking a serious note of various instances where there was a
large scale destruction of public and private properties in the name of agitations,
bandhs, hartals and the like, suo motu proceedings had been initiated by the Apex
Court and two committees were appointed to give suggestions on strengthening of
the legal provisions of P.D.PP. Act to effectively deal with such instances. The
recommendations of two committees were considered and it was observed that the
suggestions were extremely important and they constitute sufficient guidelines which
need to be adopted. It was left open to the appropriate authorities to take effective
steps for their implementation.
In a recent decision in Kodungallur Film Society and another vs. Union of India and
others, relief was sought to issue a mandamus to the appropriate authorities to
strictly follow and implement the guidelines formulated by the Apex Court
"Destruction of Public & Private Properties In re:", with regard to measures to be
taken to prevent destruction of public and private properties in mass protests and
demonstrations and also regarding the modalities of fixing liability and recovering
compensation for damages caused to public and private properties during such
demonstration and protests.
It was acknowledged in Kodungallur Film Society that the recommendations of the
Committee noted in the said judgment travesed the length and breadth of the issue at
hand and, if implemented in their entirety, would go a long way in removing the bane
of violence caused against persons and property.
As far as implementation of the said recommendations, the Union had advised the
States to follow the same in its letter and spirit. Issuing directions to implement
recommendations made by the Apex Court in both the above decisions. Direction was
issued in Kodungallur Film Society to both the Central and the State Government to
do the same at the earliest.
13. In compliance thereof, the State of U.P. notified the "Uttar Pradesh Recovery of
Damages to Public and Private Property Rules, 2020", framed with a view to provide
for recovery of damages to public and private property during hartal, bundh, riots,
public commotion, protests etc. in respect of the property and imposition of fine. The
said 'Rules' provide for constitution of the claims tribunal to investigate the damages
caused and to award compensation related thereto.
The area which is covered by the P.D.P.P. Act, 1984 is, thus, confined to the
destruction or damage to the 'public property' within the meaning of Section 2(b) of
the Act during the course of riots or public demonstrations (commotion). The said
provisions, in the considered opinion of the Court, cannot be invoked for lodging the
criminal complaint or the first information report on the allegations of damage or
loss caused to the Gram Sabha land by illegal encroachment against a person
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106976570/ 9
Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 3 March, 2025
permanently residing in the village or a tenure holder of any land in the village in
question.
14. The first information report dated 19.8.2017 reporting an offence committed
under Section 2/3 of the P.D.P.P. Act, 1984 is nothing but an abuse of the process of
law. The concerned Magistrate has committed a patent error of law in taking
cognizance of the alleged offence by passing a cryptic order without application of his
independent mind. The charge sheet and the cognizance order summoning the
applicants herein for alleged commission of offence under Section 2/3 of the P.D.P.P.
Act, 1984 are, thus, liable to be quashed.
15. As far as the allegation of criminal offence under Section 447 IPC to constitute
criminal trespass, the prosecution has to prove and the Court has to return a finding
on the the evidence cutie the trespass was committed with one of the intents
enumerated in Section 441 of the Indian Penal Code. The prosecution has, thus, not
only to allege but also to prove that the entry or unlawful occupation must be with an
intent; (i) to commit an offence; or (ii) to intimidate, insult or annoy any person in
possession of the property". Every 'trespass' by itself is not criminal. In absence of
any such finding, the conviction under Section 447 IPC cannot be sustained. The
offence under Section 447 I.P.C. though is cognizable but is also a compoundable
offence triable by any Magistrate, trial of which has to be conducted summarily. A
charge under this section should specifically state intent which is alleged. The
accused may lay a bonafide claim and right in the land in question. Although he may
have no right to the land but he cannot be convicted of criminal trespass unless it is
proved by the prosecution that he did so with an intention to intimidate, insult or
annoy the person in possession or to commit an offence. The complainant need not
be necessarily a person in actual physical possession of the land in question on the
date of entry of the trespasser, i.e, the accused person. He may be a person to whom
the land in question belonged or deemed to have been vested. The person who
actually owns the land or property is the competent person to lodge the complaint.
16. In the instant case, the allegations in the F.I.R. are general and vague against
many persons with respect to different nature of lands. So far as the applicants herein
both sons of Ganga Ram are concerned, it is averred in the FIR that they had
encroached and damaged the public property belonging to Gram Sabha. The charge
sheet does not disclose appreciation of any particular material on record against the
applicants. The order of taking cognizance passed by the Magistrate is a non-
speaking order. In this case, the criminal action proposed against the applicants,
thus, is a result of non-application of judicial mind.
17. Noteworthy is that the allegations against the applicants herein are of
encroachment on "Banjar land and not on a public utility land, which can be
regularized if a proceeding for eviction is instituted against the applicants under the
Revenue Code, 2006 as they may take a defince of being landless labourers of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106976570/ 10
Mohammad Haroon vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Home Lko. ... on 3 March, 2025
village concerned, Le of being eligible persons for allotment of land of reqularization
of their occupation/possession.
18. In any case, determination on the disputed questions of facts, in an appropriate
proceeding before the Revenue Court is necessary. Neither the damage can be
imposed for alleged 'Mischief by taking criminal action under Section 2/3 of the
PD.PP. Act, 1984 nor any offence of criminal trespass under Section 447 of the Indian
Penal Code can be said to have been prima facie made out against the applicants
herein. The criminal proceedings initiated against the applicants pursuant to the
F.I.R. namely Case Crime No. 0850 of 2017. Police Station Banda, District
Shahjahanpur cannot but be said to be an abuse of the process of law or the Court.
The cognizance order dated 14.10.2019 in Criminal Case No. 2418 of 2019 (State vs.
Kastoori Singh and others) has been passed in complete ignorance of law. The
continuation of criminal proceedings, in the considered opinion of the Court, being
an abuse of process of the Court, ends of the justice requires that the said proceedings
be quashed. 19. Invoking inherent powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. of the High
Court, the entire criminal proceedings of Case Crime No. 850 of 2017, Police Station
Banda, District Shahjahanpur is hereby quashed.
The application stands allowed."
12. Prayer is to allow the present application.
13. Learned AGA for the State opposed the present application but he could not dispute observations
made by this Court in the judgment passed in the case of Prabhakant (supra) and Munshi Lal
(supra).
14. Upon due consideration of the facts of the present case, indicated above, and the observation in
the judgment, referred above, this Court is of the view that the present case is squarely covered by
the judgement of this Court passed in the case of Prabhakant (supra) and Munshi Lal (supra).
15. Having considered the aforesaid, the present application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is allowed.
The entire criminal proceedings of Criminal Case No.27257/2022, under Section 447 of I.P.C. and
Section 2/3 of the Prevention of Damages to Public Property Act, 1984 (wrongly mentioned as
Section 2/3 of the Lok Sampati Niwaran Adhiniyam), arising out of Case Crime No. 0249/2017, are
hereby quashed qua the applicant.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 ML/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/106976570/ 11
