Mohammad Dar vs Chairman J&K Special Tribunal on 9 May, 2025
Mohammad Dar vs Chairman J&K Special Tribunal on 9 May,
2025
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND
LADAKH AT SRINAGAR
Reserved on: 24.04.2025
Pronounced on: 09.05.2025
LPA No.236/2023
MOHAMMAD DAR ...APPELLANT(S)
Through: - Mr. Saqib Amin Parray, Advocate.
Vs.
CHAIRMAN J&K SPECIAL TRIBUNAL
AND OTHERS ...RESPONDENT(S)
Through:- Mr. G. A. Lone, Advocate.
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHD. YOUSUF WANI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Per Sanjeev Kumar 'J'
1) The bone of contention between the appellant and respondent No.2 is land measuring 3 kanals
and 5 marlas ["subject land"] comprised in Khasra No.112 of Estate Balsoo Kulgam. This land was
earlier owned by the appellant. In the entry of Kharif, 1971, the appellant is recorded as owner in
self-cultivation of the subject land. The subject land came to be mutated in favour of respondent
No.2 under Section 8 of the J&K Agrarian Reforms Act, 1976 ["the Act of 1976"]. The land
measuring 2 kanals was mutated in favour of respondent No.2 under MIR ARIF MANZOOR Section
8 of the Act of 1976 vide order dated 16th March, 1988 passed on mutation No.250. Similarly, land
measuring 1 kanal and 5 marlas out of the subject land was mutated in favour of respondent No.2
under Section 8 of the Act of 1976 vide mutation No.246 dated 13 th February, 1988.
2) On 13th April, 2006, the appellant challenged four mutations, i.e. mutation No.247 dated 7th
March, 1988 (under Section 4), mutation No.250 dated 16th March, 1988 (under Section 8),
mutation No.244 dated 01.01.1988 (under Section 4) and mutation No.246 dated 13th February,
1988 (under Section 8), by filing four separate appeals before the Additional Deputy Commissioner,
Anantnag, having powers of Commissioner, Agrarian Reforms. The appeals were highly belated and,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123910203/ 1
Mohammad Dar vs Chairman J&K Special Tribunal on 9 May, 2025
therefore, were accompanied by applications for condonation of delay. The Appellate Authority i.e.
Additional Deputy Commissioner, Anantnag, vide order dated 11th July, 2006, rejected all the
appeals being grossly barred by limitation. Aggrieved, the appellant filed a revision petition before
the J&K Special Tribunal ["the Tribunal"] challenging the order dated 11th July, 2006, passed by the
ADC, Anantnag. Vide order and judgment dated 6th October, 2006, the Tribunal allowed the
revision petition and set aside all the four mutations above referred. The Tribunal directed
restoration of position qua the subject land as it existed before the attestation of impugned
mutations. The Tribunal also left it open to the parties to agitate the matter before the civil court for
enforcement of agreement of sale, if any, executed between the parties.
3) The order of the Tribunal dated 6th October, 2006, was assailed by the respondent No.2 before
the learned Single Judge of this Court ["the Writ Court"] in OWP No.744/2006. The Writ Court,
having noticed that there were many factual issues which had not been addressed by the Tribunal,
remanded the matter back to the Tribunal for re-consideration. This is how the Writ Court vide its
judgment dated 24th August, 2023, quashed the impugned order of the Tribunal with a view to
facilitating the latter to re-consider the matter. It is this judgment of the Writ Court dated 24th
August, 2023, passed in OWP No.744/2006, which is impugned before us in this appeal.
4) The judgment impugned has been assailed by the appellant on the following grounds:
(I) That the Writ Court has not appreciated the fact that with a view to attract the
provisions of the Act of 1976, the person claiming to be entitled to be conferred the
ownership rights under Section 8 of the Act of 1976 must establish tenant and
landlord relationship between the parties in existence during Kharif 1971.
(II) That the Writ Court has, without indicating as to which legal or factual aspects
have not been considered by the Tribunal, remanded the matter to the Tribunal for
reconsideration.
(III) That the appellant was and continues to be the owner in self-cultivation of the
subject land and the Khasra Girdawari of Kharif, 1971, bears the testimony of the
aforesaid fact. The Tribunal, having regard to all aspects of the matter and the
manner in which the mutations stood attested by the revenue officer at the behest of
respondent No.2, rightly concluded that there was no evidence to establish that
respondent No.2 was a tiller qua the subject land in Kharif, 1971. The Writ Court,
without appreciating the clear findings of fact recorded by the Tribunal on the basis
of the revenue record, has hasten to hold that there were many other aspects in the
matter required to be considered by the Tribunal.
(IV) That the Writ Court also did not appreciate the fact that in a suit for permanent
prohibitory injunction filed by respondent No.2, there is a categoric admission by the
said respondent that he had purchased the subject land from the appellant which
clearly belies the assertion of the respondent No.2 that he was a tiller cultivating the
subject land in Kharif, 1971 and thereafter.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123910203/ 2
Mohammad Dar vs Chairman J&K Special Tribunal on 9 May, 2025
(V) The Revisional Court i.e. the Tribunal, had clearly seen through the
manipulations made by respondent No.2 in connivance with the revenue officer and
rightly concluded that the mutations were sham and required to be set aside.
5) Mr. Saqib Amin Parray, learned counsel appearing for the appellant, has laid stress
on the aforesaid grounds of challenge and submits that the judgment passed by the
Writ Court is erroneous both on facts and law and, therefore, cannot sustain.
6) Per contra, Mr. G. A. Lone, learned counsel appearing for respondent No.2, would
submit that the appeal filed by the appellant under Clause 12 of the Letters Patent is
not maintainable against an order of remand passed by the Writ Court. He would
argue that the Writ Court has not determined finally any rights between the parties
and, therefore, the impugned judgment of the Writ Court cannot be termed as a
judgment within the meaning of the expression used in Clause 12 of the Letters
Patent of this Court. That apart, Mr. Lone would submit that the Tribunal, exercising
its revisional jurisdiction, could not have condoned the delay of more than 18 years,
more particularly when the appellant was all along aware that the subject land was
under occupation of respondent No.2 who had raised his residential house on the
subject land.
Another argument was raised by Mr. Lone that the settlement operations in Village Balsoo Kulgam
were completed in the year 1996-97 and all mutations under the Act of 1976 including those
challenged by the appellant came to be accepted and incorporated in the record of rights those were
prepared pursuant to the settlement operations. The appellant, who was none other than the
Lumberdar of the Village, never objected to the entries those were made in the revised record of
rights prepared after settlement operations and, therefore, cannot be permitted to assail the entries
in the revenue records other than by filing a civil suit before the civil court of competent jurisdiction.
7) Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, we are of the
considered opinion that the impugned judgment passed by the Writ Court is liable to be set aside on
the solitary ground that the Writ Court has nowhere indicated in the impugned judgment as to how
the matter has not received an appropriate consideration of the Tribunal. There is reference in
paragraph (9) of the impugned judgment that during adjudication of the appeals (should have been
revision), the Tribunal has not manifestly considered the factual matter appropriately, be it
regarding attestation of mutation Nos.247 and 250 as also in respect of mutation Nos.244 and 246.
We have minutely gone into the impugned judgment in its entirety but could not find anything,
which, in the view of the Writ Court, was not considered by the Tribunal. The order of the Tribunal
is elaborate and has taken note of all aspects of the dispute elaborately.
8) While holding so, we could have straightway accepted the appeal and set aside the order of the
Writ Court. However, having regard to the fact that the parties are litigating since the year 2006,
remanding the matter to Writ Court for re-consideration would un-necessarily prolong the wait of
the parties to the conclusion of their litigation and resolution of their dispute. We have, thus,
ventured to consider the matter on merits to put a quietus on the dispute between the parties.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123910203/ 3
Mohammad Dar vs Chairman J&K Special Tribunal on 9 May, 2025
9) Admittedly, the subject land belongs to the appellant. It is the appellant who is recorded as owner
in self- cultivation in Kharif, 1971, which is a crucial date for determining the rights of the parties
under the Act of 1976. True it is that there is one mutation i.e. mutation No.197 dated 18th June,
1983. This is in reference to land of the appellant measuring 01 kanal and 05 marlas. A perusal of
mutation No.197 appended with writ petition as Annexure-G would indicate that by virtue of this
mutation, Khasra Girdawari entry of 1971, which showed the appellant in self-cultivation, was
corrected to indicate respondent No.2 as tiller. The appellant is not amongst the persons who were
present at the time of attestation of this mutation nor his name appears in the list of signatories.
Obviously mutation No.197 dated 18.06.1983 has been attested by Tehsildar, Kulgam, at the back of
the appellant. This mutation was neither relied upon nor produced by respondent No.2 before the
Tribunal. This mutation was, for the first time, introduced in the amended writ petition filed before
the Writ Court.
10) Be that as it may, it is not understandable as to why the follow up action in terms of attestation
of mutation under Section 4 of the Act of 1976 in favour of respondent No.2 was not immediately
taken. As a matter of fact, mutation under Section 4 of the Act of 1976 in respect of land measuring
01 kanal and 05 marlas falling under Survey No.112 was never attested. We are in agreement with
Mr. Lone that mutation No.244, purportedly attested under Section 4 of the Act of 1976, attested
under Section 4 of the Act of 1976, does not pertain to any land under Survey No.112. It is, thus,
evident that Tehsildar, Kulgam, without attesting any mutation under Section 4, straightway
attested mutation No.246 dated 13th February, 1988, under Section 8 of the Act of 1976 conferring
ownership rights in respect of land measuring 01 kanal 05 marlas upon respondent No.2. This
obviously is a serious lapse on the part of the revenue officer and speaks volumes about the manner
in which the mutations were attested.
11) Regarding mutation No.247 dated 7th March, 1988, attested under Section 4 of the Act of 1976
with respect to land measuring 02 kanals falling under Survey No.112, suffice it to say that the said
mutation has been attested without having resort to correction of Khasra Girdawari entry of 1971 in
terms of Rule 4 of the J&K Agrarian Reforms Rules, 1977 ["the Rules of 1977"]. From perusal of
mutation No.247, it clearly transpires that the appellant has been shown in self-cultivation as per
Khasra Girdawari entry of 1971. It is, however, not forthcoming as to how the entry of
self-cultivation has been changed to reflect the name of respondent No.2 as tiller without there
being any mutation of 'Sehti Indraj'. We are saying so because mutation No.247 does not refer to
any earlier mutation of 'Sehti Indraj' attested by competent revenue officer after following the
provisions of Rule 4 of the Rules of 1977. Undoubtedly, mutation No.250 dated 16th March, 1988,
under Section 8 of the Act of 1976 is attested on the basis of mutation No.247.
12) We are in complete agreement with the Tribunal that the mutating officer has thrown the
provisions of the Act of 1976 and the Rules framed thereunder to wind and attested the mutations
which are, on the face of it, contrary to the provisions of the Act of 1976 and the Rules framed
thereunder. It is true and we agree with Mr. Lone that mutation No.244 dated 01.01.1988 does not
pertain to the piece of land measuring 01 kanal and 05 marlas under Survey No.112. We are even
ready to accept the contention of learned counsel for respondent No.2 that correction of Khasra
Girdawari entry of Kharif 1971 in respect of land measuring 01 kanal 05 marlas stood made vide
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123910203/ 4
Mohammad Dar vs Chairman J&K Special Tribunal on 9 May, 2025
mutation No.197 dated 18.06.1983, yet we are at loss to understand as to how the mutating officer
could straightway attest mutation under Section 8 of the Act of 1976, which ought to have,
necessarily, followed a mutation attested under Section 4 of the Act of 1976. As has been held above
that there was no mutation under Section 4 of the Act of 1976 attested in respect of land measuring
01 kanal and 05 marlas. This is beside the point that mutation No.197 was attested in violation of
the principles of natural justice and without following the procedure laid down under Rule 4 of the
Rules of 1977. We are aware that mutation No.197 has not been challenged by the appellant before
any forum. As a matter of fact, mutation No.197 came to light for the first time when amended writ
petition was filed by respondent No.2 before the Writ Court. We, therefore, conclude that the
manner in which the mutations have been attested by the revenue officer qua the subject land, is
contrary to the provisions of the Act of 1976 and the Rules framed thereunder. All the mutations
were attested at the back of the landlord (the appellant) and, therefore, are nullity in the eye of law.
13) Regarding delay, we would like to point out that since the mutations challenged by the appellant
before the Appellate Forum under the Act of 1976 were all exparte and attested at the back of the
appellant, as such, the appellant had no occasion to have the knowledge of such mutation. It is true
that on a portion of subject land the respondent No.2 has made certain constructions including the
construction of his residential house and that was enough to impute knowledge to the appellant. The
appellant has, however, explained that the construction was raised by respondent No.2 on the land
measuring 05 marlas which had been sold by him to the said respondent. At this juncture we would
like to refer to the provisions of Rule 52 of the Rules of 1977, which reads thus:
"52. Case where appeal fails on ground of limitation.-- Where the appeal is dismissed
on the ground of limitation, the appellate authority shall, if he be of the opinion that
the order appealed from is one which should be revised, submit the case through
proper channel to the revisional authority with a report why the order appealed from
needs being revised and what the revised order should be. On receipt of this report,
the revisional authority shall act as if an application for revision under the Act had
been made to him.
14) From a reading of Rule 52, it clearly transpires that even if the appeal under the
Act of 1976 is dismissed on the ground of limitation and the appellate authority is of
the opinion that that the order appealed from is one which should be revised, it shall
submit the case through proper channel to the revisional authority with a report as to
why the order appealed from is required to be revised. It is true that in the instant
case the appellate authority has not held such opinion. However, from reading of
Rule 52, it can be safely inferred that the revisional authority hearing a revision
petition against the order of dismissal of appeal on the ground of limitation passed by
the appellate authority has wider jurisdiction and may ignore the delay if it is of the
opinion that the order appealed from before the appellate authority is required to be
revised. In short, the discretion of the revisional authority to ignore the delay MIR
ARIF MANZOOR would depend upon the merits of the appeal dismissed by the
appellate authority on the ground of limitation. The Tribunal has, thus, rightly
exercised its revisional power and has accepted the explanation tendered by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123910203/ 5
Mohammad Dar vs Chairman J&K Special Tribunal on 9 May, 2025
appellant for filing of belated appeals before the appellate authority. The Writ Court
has also not found fault with exercise of such power by the Tribunal but has
remanded the case to the Tribunal for re-consideration on the ground that some
aspects have remained unconsidered by the Tribunal.
15) For all these reasons, we do not find any fault with the order of the Tribunal
which has been set aside by the Writ Court. In the given facts and circumstances and
also the reasons given hereinabove, there was hardly any need to remand the matter
for re-consideration to the Tribunal.
The Tribunal has correctly appreciated the controversy and set aside the mutations, which on the
face of it, were contrary to the provisions of the Act of 1976 and the Rules framed thereunder.
However, before we conclude, we deem it appropriate to deal with a specious argument raised by
Mr. Lone that after the preparation of revised Record of Rights pursuant to the settlement
operations started vide SRO 297 dated 9th October, 1991, and completed in respect of Village Balsoo
in the year 1996-97, all mutations including the impugned mutations under the Act of 1976 came to
be recorded in the revised Record of Rights and, therefore, such entries made in the Record of
Rights on the basis of impugned mutations cannot be changed or altered except under due process
of law prescribed by Section 32 of the Land Revenue Act i.e. by way of a suit for declaration filed by
the party aggrieved before the civil court. Mr. Lone also places reliance on Section 121 of the Land
Revenue Act to contend that impugned mutations which led to the making of entries in the Record
of Rights could have been objected to by the appellant during the course of preparation of Record of
Rights or revision of Record of Rights and the Collector could have disposed of such dispute
summarily subject to such orders that may be passed in appeal by the Divisional Commissioner.
16) We have given thoughtful consideration to the argument vehemently raised by Mr. Lone and we
find no substance therein. With a view to better appreciate the issue raised by Mr. Lone, we need to
understand the nature of 'Record of Rights' (Jamabandi). Section 21 of the Land Revenue Act deals
with Record of Rights and documents included therein. For ready reference, Section 21 of the Land
Revenue Act is set out below:
"21. Record of rights and documents Included therein. - (1) Save as otherwise
provided by this Chapter, there shall he a record-of-rights for each estate.
(2) The record-of-rights for an estate shall include the following documents, namely:
--
(a) statements showing, so far as may be
practicable--
(i) the persons who are land-holders,
tenants or assignees of land revenue in the estate, or who are entitled to receive any
of the rents, profits or produce of the estate or to occupy land therein;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123910203/ 6
Mohammad Dar vs Chairman J&K Special Tribunal on 9 May, 2025
(ii) the nature and extent of the interests of those persons; and the conditions and
liabilities attaching thereto; and
(iii) the rent, land revenue, rates, cesses or other payments due from and to each of
those persons and to the State;
(b) a statement of customs respecting rights and liabilities in the estate;
(c) a map of the estate;
(d) such other documents as the Financial Commissioner with the previous sanction
of the Government may prescribe.
EXPLANATION.-Record-of-rights mentioned above includes record-of-rights and the map prepared
and transferred under the provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Consolidation of Holdings Act,
1962.
17) From plain reading of Section 21 (supra), it is evident that the Record of Rights for an estate
shall include the statements showing the persons who are land holders, tenants or assignees of land
revenue in the estate; or who are entitled to receive any of the rents, profits or produce of the estate
or to occupy land therein; the nature and extent of interest of those persons; and the conditions and
liabilities attaching thereto; and the rent, land revenue, rates cesses and other payments due from
and to each of those persons and to the State. It also includes statement of customs respecting rights
and liabilities in the estate; a map of the estate and such other documents as the Financial
Commissioner with the previous sanction of the Government may prescribe.
18) Making of special revision of record of rights is referable to Section 22, which confers upon the
Government power to direct by way of a notification that record of rights be made or the record of
rights be revised, as the case may be. In short, a record of rights prepared at a settlement or its
revision, of an estate which gives line of dissent of land-holders, a village map and defines right,
interest and liabilities of landholders, tenants and assignees of land revenue, is called record of
rights. It, of course, comprises of the documents mentioned in Section 21(2) of the Land Revenue
Act. The requisite documents/papers, from which the record of rights are prepared/revised, consist
of:
(I) the last Jamabandi;
(II) mutations attested since last Jamabandi was
framed; and
(III) the Khasra Girdawari;
19) The changes of rights and cultivation concerning
landholders, tenants, mortgagees and lease-holders and change of assignees of the land revenue are
given effect to in the record of rights strictly in accordance with the orders passed on Mutation
Register. This is so clearly provided in Rule 5 of the Standing Order 23-B issued by the Revenue
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123910203/ 7
Mohammad Dar vs Chairman J&K Special Tribunal on 9 May, 2025
Minister in the exercise of powers vested in him under the J&K Land Revenue Act.
20) It is true that under Section 32 of the Land Revenue Act, a person aggrieved by an entry in the
record of rights is entitled to institute a suit before the Collector (Deputy Commissioner) for
correction of record and for possession of the right claimed, if he is not in possession thereof etc.
However, in the instant case, the entry made in the record of rights is strictly as per the mutations
attested by competent mutating officer under the J&K Agrarian Reforms Act and, therefore, the
entry in the revised record of rights prepared pursuant to the settlement operations initiated vide
SRO 297 dated 9th October, 1991, cannot be said to be an incorrect entry made in the record of
rights which is required to be corrected by way of filing a suit for declaratory decree by the aggrieved
person before the Collector (Deputy Commissioner). The basis of the entry in the record of rights are
the mutations attested by the competent revenue officer and, therefore, it cannot be said that the
entries qua the subject land made in the revised record of rights prepared pursuant to the settlement
operations aforesaid are incorrect entries. However, it cannot be said that once an entry in the
record of rights on the basis of a mutation is made, the mutation becomes immune to challenge and
the aggrieved party has no remedy except to file a suit for declaration under Section 32 of the Land
Revenue Act. The mutations attested under Section 4 and 8 of the Act of 1976 are appealable under
Section 21(1) of the Act of 1976 and the person aggrieved by a final order of Collector or a revenue
officer of a class lower than that of a Collector is entitled to prefer an appeal to the Commissioner
Agrarian Reforms having jurisdiction in the area to which the appeal relates. The entry made in the
revised record of rights pursuant to the settlement operations conducted under the orders of the
Government cannot take away this statutory remedy of appeal conferred upon the aggrieved person.
21) Needless to say that if the mutations with respect to which the entries already stand made in the
record of rights are set aside by the appellate or the revisional forum under the Agrarian Reforms
Act or under the Land Revenue Act, as the case may be, a necessary consequence thereof would be
updation of the record of rights and the orders of the appellate authority/revisional authority, as the
case may be, shall be reflected by revising the record of rights on the commencement of next
settlement operation. Neither Section 32 nor Section 121 of the Land Revenue Act can come in the
way of the person aggrieved of a mutation to avail of the remedies provided under the statute. We,
therefore, hold that the appeals before the appellate authority and the revision before the Tribunal
by the appellant were maintainable, notwithstanding the fact that on the basis of the impugned
mutations, the requisite entries stood made in the revised record of rights.
22) Regarding the objection taken by Mr. Lone with regard to maintainability of the appeal under
Clause 12 of the Letters Patent, suffice it to say that the impugned judgment passed by the Writ
Court is not an order of remand simplicitor for re-consideration by the Tribunal but it also sets aside
the judgment of the Tribunal whereby the Tribunal has accepted the revision petition of the
appellant and set aside the mutations attested by Tehsildar, Kulgam, against the appellant.
Otherwise, also in the given facts and circumstances, the remand of the case was not called for, more
particularly when the Writ Court had not spelled out the factual aspects which had escaped the
attention of the Tribunal and deserved reconsideration.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123910203/ 8
Mohammad Dar vs Chairman J&K Special Tribunal on 9 May, 2025
23) During the course of hearing the matter and while going through the entire record, we find that
there are two vital admissions made by the parties. The appellant has categorically stated before the
appellate authority as well as before us that he had sold only 05 marlas of land to respondent No.2.
There is also an admission made by respondent No.2 that the land under his occupation since 1971
is actually purchased by him from the appellant.
24) In view of the aforesaid two admissions, one thing is clearly established that there was never
ever a relationship of landlord and tenant between the parties attracting the provisions of Section 4
and 8 of the Act of 1976. Probably with a view to giving legal colour to the illegal transaction
between the parties, the manipulations, in connivance with revenue officers, were made. In the
absence of any agreement to sell or sale deed on record, it is difficult for us to say as to how much
land was actually transferred by the appellant to respondent No.2. It is, however, trite law that after
the commencement of the Act of 1976, nobody was entitled to hold the agricultural land for a
purpose other than personal cultivation nor was he entitled to transfer the same to some other
person for consideration or otherwise. Obviously, if there has been transfer of land from appellant to
respondent No.2 or that the appellant has ceased to be in cultivating possession of the subject land
owned by him, there is, prima facie, violation of the provisions of the Act of 1976 and the Rules
framed thereunder. This is one issue which needs to be gone into by the revenue authorities.
25) For the foregoing reasons, we find merit in this appeal and the same is, accordingly, allowed.
The impugned order and judgment passed by the Writ Court is set aside and the order of the
Tribunal is upheld. The Tehsildar, Kulgam, is directed to conduct an enquiry to find out as to how
the subject land or a portion thereof has come to be transferred in favour of respondent No.2. He
shall also hold a detailed enquiry to find out as to whether there has been violation of the provisions
of the Agrarian Reforms Act and the Rules framed thereunder entailing an action for escheatment of
the land to the State. The action to be initiated under the provisions of the Agrarian Reforms Act
would depend upon the result of such enquiry.
(MOHD. YOUSUF WANI) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
Srinagar,
09.05.2025
"Bhat Altaf-Secy"
Whether the JUDGMENT is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/123910203/ 9
