Mohabat Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 3 March, 2023
Mohabat Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 3 March, 2023
Author: Puneet Gupta
Bench: Puneet Gupta
Sr. No. 64
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Pronounced on : 03.03.2023
Crl R No. 43/2021
CrlM No. 134/2022
CrlM No. 2439/2021
CrlM No. 2440/2021 in
Bail App No. 133/2022
CRM (M) No. 876/2022
CrlM No. 1808/2022
Mohabat Khan .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Rohit Gupta & Mr. Vikram Pangotra,
Advocates vice Mr. R.P.Sharma, Advocate
(in Crl R No. 43/2021).
Mr. P.N.Raina, Sr. Advocate with
Ms. Diksha Handoo & Mr. J.A.Hamal,
Advocates (in BA No. 133/2022 &
CRM (M) No. 876/2022).
Vs
UT of J&K and others ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Adarsh Bhagat, GA.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The trial court framed charges against the respondents-accused under Sections 304/147 IPC
though the charge sheet was filed against the accused persons on completion of investigations in
FIR No. 133/2020 registered with Police Station, Poonch for offences under Sections 302/147 IPC.
2. The petitioner-complainant has grievance against the order dated 07.12.2021 passed by the trial
court.
a/w connected matters
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27478093/ 1
Mohabat Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 3 March, 2023
3. The private respondents are represented through counsel. The respondent no.1 has also pleaded
the cause of the petitioner in the present petition while arguing the matter.
4. Mr. R.P.Sharma, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has argued that the trial court has
erred in framing the charge against the accused under Section 304 IPC though prima facie case is
made out under Section 302 IPC. The material on record satisfies the parameters for framing the
charge under Section 302 IPC. The statements on record and the medical evidence when read
together leave no room for the trial court not to frame the charge under Section 302 IPC in which
the challan was presented. The participation of the accused persons with an intention to eliminate
the victim-Mohd. Younis Khan during the course of occurrence is made out and the reliance of the
trial court merely on the medical evidence is not justified.
5. Mr. P.N. Raina, learned senior counsel appearing for the accused has vehemently argued that the
accused should not have been charged for any offence and in any case charge framed by the trial
court under Section 304 IPC against the accused requires no alteration as pleaded by the petitioner
herein. The counsel has laid much emphasis on the post mortem report in order to argue that the
accused cannot be charged for offence under Section 302 IPC as argued by the petitioner.
6. The occurrence of 06.09.2020 led to the registration of FIR against the accused persons on the
complaint filed by Mohabat Khan, petitioner in the present petition. It was alleged that on
05.09.2020 there was some dispute on a water channel between the complainant and his father and
a/w connected matters the accused Annayat Khan and Azam Khan. The occurrence in question took
place on 06.09.2020 at 9.30 AM when the complainant and his father were coming out of their
house and the accused persons who had hidden themselves near the house of the complainant and
the accused Annayat Khan, they with common intention came on spot and started beating the father
of the complainant. The brother, the mother and cousin brother Zaheed Khan of the complainant
also came on spot. The accused persons with intention to kill the father encircled him and started
giving fist and stick blows on the head as a result the father fell on the ground. The complainant and
his family members tried to rescue the victim but failed. The accused fled from the spot after the
occurrence. The complainant visited the Police Station and lodged a report. On the completion of
the investigation, the challan was filed against respondents.
7. The occurrence has taken place in the manner in which it has been projected by the prosecution in
the challan cannot be debated upon in the present petition. The argument of the petitioner is that
the trial court while framing the charge against the accused persons has in a way commented upon
the evidence which is otherwise yet to be produced by the prosecution and has sifted the evidence in
the manner it was not required.
8. It may be mentioned herein that the respondents-accused have tried to convince the court that
the FIR in question is itself doubtful and so is the challan as the story built up by the prosecution is
unconvincing and unreliable because it is not possible that though the complainant and a/w
connected matters his family members were present on the spot during the course of occurrence
they did not even try to rescue the alleged victim. Similarly, the counsel for the respondents has also
taken the court through the site plan of the alleged occurrence in order to impress upon the court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27478093/ 2
Mohabat Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 3 March, 2023
that the story projected by the prosecution gets belied by the site plan itself. Again the court is not to
thrash out the possibilities of happening of the occurrence in terms of the argument raised by the
respondents as the same will be tested on the touchstone of the evidence that may come on record
during trial.
9. The focal point of framing of charge by the trial court is the post-mortem report of the victim. Of
course, there is other evidence including statements of the witnesses recorded during the course of
investigation. It is profitable to note the post-mortem report at this stage and which reads as under :
"The deceased person has died with cardio respiratory arrest with myocardial
infarction due to emotional stress."
As per the post-mortem report, the only injury noticed on the person of the victim was minor
scratch on nose.
10. The charge is required to be framed against the accused persons keeping in view the totality of
the circumstances that emanate from the challan. The absence of injury on the person of the victim
in the post-mortem report is the reason for the respondents to support the impugned order. The
assault caused by the accused persons resulted into such medical condition that led to the death of
victim or the victim has died not as a consequence of attack allegedly engineered but a/w connected
matters independently of the medical condition of the victim requires determination during trial.
This court cannot in anticipation hold that the medical report reveals that action of the accused
during the course of occurrence did not result into the death of the victim and, therefore, attains
finality. The charge sheet as produced in the court of law cannot be simply brushed aside as the
same is filed after the detailed investigations. At the same time, it is also true that the trial court
while framing the charge is not to act as mere post office for the prosecution and has to see in the
light of the circumstances that appear in the challan as to what charge can be framed against the
accused persons for which they have to face the trial.
11. The post-mortem report with the finding "The deceased person has died with cardio respiratory
arrest with myocardial infarction due to emotional stress" will not absolve the accused of the charge
of 302 RPC as maintained in the charge sheet. The medical condition as reflected in the post
mortem report will not by itself mean that no role can be attributed to the accused in the death of
victim. The post- mortem report cannot be read in isolation and has to be viewed in the light of
other circumstances that appear during investigation. It may be noticed herein that the trial court
has also thrashed the statements of the witnesses and indicated the contradictions vis-à-vis one
another which should not have been done by the trial court. The court has recorded that belated
recording of statements of PWs-Zaheed Khan and Salima Bi speaks volume of the case of the
prosecution and also stated that their statements are tutored. To say the least, the trial court has
given a/w connected matters its finding on the credibility of the statements of these witnesses which
infact should have been left by the trial court to be determined at the completion of the trial. The
court has held conclusively that the medical report could be sufficient proof to suggest that the
deceased who was in the advance years of his age of above 55 years might have died in the said
melee of the sudden and spontaneous occurrence which took place on 05.09.2020 (infact
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27478093/ 3
Mohabat Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 3 March, 2023
06.09.2020) and the court has erred in observing so. The trial court has again speculated the factor
leading to the death of victim vis-à-vis his age.
12. The complete answer to the arguments raised by the learned counsel for the respondents herein
and particularly with regard to the post-mortem report can be found in the judgment reported in
2022 Law Suit (SC) 866 titled „Ghulam Hassan Beigh v. Mohammad Maqbool Magrey and others(cid:130)
wherein the Hon(cid:130)ble Apex Court in para 29 of the judgment held that the trial court as well as High
Court got persuaded by the fact that the cause of death of the deceased as assigned in the
post-mortem report being the "cardio respiratory failure", the same cannot be said to be having any
nexus with the alleged assault that was laid on the deceased. Such approach of the trial court is not
correct and cannot be countenanced in law. The post mortem report, by itself, does not constitute
substantive evidence. Whether the "cardio respiratory failure" had any nexus with the incident in
question would have to be determined on the basis of the oral evidence of the eye witnesses as well
as the medical officer concerned i.e. the expert witness who may be examined by the prosecution as
one of its witnesses. To put it in a/w connected matters other words, whether the cause of death has
any nexus with the alleged assault on the deceased by the deceased persons could have been
determined only after the recoding of oral evidence of the eye witnesses and expert witness along
with other substantive evidence on record.
13. The Apex Court in paras 32 & 33 of the judgment (supra) has also mentioned the reason for
framing of a charge under Section 302 IPC than the lesser charge under 304 IPC as in case lesser
charge is framed against the accused the prosecution will be compelled to proceed to establish the
case of culpable homicide and not murder. The court also noted that it is prudent to permit the
prosecution to lead appropriate evidence wherever it is worth in accordance with its original case as
put up in the charge sheet. The aforesaid judgment comes to the aid of the petitioner herein.
14. The respondents-accused have cited (2010) 11 Supreme Court Cases 774 titled "Mayandi v. State
represented by Inspector of Police"
wherein the Apex Court altered the conviction of the accused from Section 302 IPC to
Section 326 IPC also keeping in view the medical condition of the victim who had
died due to myocardial infarction. It may be noted that this judgment does not help
the respondents at this stage as the judgment came to be passed after the accused
faced trial in the case. The other judgments cited by the respondents-accused are not
applicable to the issue which has been raised in the present petition.
15. The statements of the prosecution witnesses who are alleged to be witness to the
occurrence do prima facie make out that the accused a/w connected matters persons
did attack the victim collectively whereupon the victim died immediately of the
attack. As mentioned above, the death of the victim has occurred directly as the result
of the assault by the accused persons or the death cannot be related to the assault
allegedly committed by the accused persons cannot be finally determined by the
court at this stage without having the full-fledged trial. The court is of the view that
the order directing framing of charge against the accused under Section 304 IPC
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27478093/ 4
Mohabat Khan vs Ut Of J&K And Others on 3 March, 2023
instead of one laid against the accused under Section 302 IPC does not sustain. The
petition is allowed. The order passed by the trial court is set aside and the trial court
shall proceed against the accused after framing the charge under Section 302 RPC
along with other offences as mentioned in the order impugned herein. The trial court
is directed to pass fresh order framing the charge in accordance with law.
16. The petition bearing Crl R No. 43/2021, accordingly, stands disposed of.
17. List Bail Application No. 133/2022 along with CRM (M) No. 876/2022 for
consideration on 13.03.2023 as per roster.
( Puneet Gupta ) Judge Jammu :
03.03.2023 Pawan Chopra Whether the order is speaking : Yes/No Whether the
order is reportable : Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/27478093/ 5
