Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5
May, 2025
Author: Rahul Bharti
Bench: Rahul Bharti
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU& KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
HCP No.282/2024
Reserved On:11thof April, 2025.
Pronounced On: 5thof May, 2025.
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat
... Petitioner(s)
Through: -
Mr R. A. Jan, Senior Advocate with
Mr Adil Mushtaq, Advocate;
Mr Z. A. Qurashi, Senior Advocate with
Ms RehanaFayaz, Advocate; and
Mr Mohammad Younis, Advocate.
V/s
Union Territory of J&K and Ors.
... Respondent(s)
Through: -
Mr Jehangir Ahmad Dar, Government Advocate.
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr Justice Rahul Bharti, Judge.
(JUDGMENT)
01. Heard learned counsel for the parties.
02. Perused the pleadings of the writ petition and the record therewith. Also perused
the record relating to the preventive detention of the petitioner as produced by the
respondents.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 1
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
03. "The history of liberty has largely been the history of the observance of
procedural safegurads" is a famous quote of Justice Felix Frankfurter, Judge
Supreme Court of United States with a perpetual meaning and pregnant with a
message that personal liberty of a citizen/subject is a 'Handle with Care and Caution'
tag in case it is intended to be curtailed on preventive side intent and end of law.
04. The petitioner, who is a practicising advocate aged 71 years, has come to suffer
preventive detention custody in terms of an order No. DMS/PSA/18/2024 dated 16th
of July, 2024 passed by the respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar acting in
exercise of power under section 8 of the Jammu & Kashmir Public Safety Act, 1978 by
reckoning the petitioner's personal liberty and his alleged reported activities to be
prejudicial to the maintenance of security of the State. In terms of said order, the
respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar directed the petitioner's detention and
consequent detainment in the District Jail, Kathua.
05. The petitioner was taken into preventive custody when the detention warrant
came to be executed on 17th of July, 2024 by PSI-Mubarak Ahmad Shah,
Sub-Inspector Police Station, Sadar, Srinagar.
06. The institution of the present writ petition, seeking setting aside of his preventive
detention custody by quashing of preventive detention order, came to take place on
12th of August, 2024 by the petitioner acting through his wife-Mst. Asmat Hagroo.
07. A case for seeking preventive detention of the petitioner under the Jammu &
Kashmir Public Safety Act, 1978 came to be initiated by the Senior Superintendent of
Police (SSP), Srinagar who, vide his letter No. LGL/Det-PSA/2024/14353-55 dated
15th of July, 2024, submitted a dossier to the respondent No.2-District Magistrate,
Srinagar thereby reporting the alleged activities of the petitioner, being in state of
freedom of movement and personal liberty, to be prejudicial to the maintenance of
the security of the State.
08. Text and context of said dossier needs to be reproduced as it is, on the basis of
which the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Srinagar solicited slapping of
preventive detention upon the petitioner. The dossier reads as under:
"Name: Mohammad Ashraf Bhat.
Parentage: Late Ghulam Hassan Bhat.
Residence: Mughal Mohalla Chattabal A/P Rawalpora near Boys Higher Secondary
Mohalla Rawalpora.
Category: General Secretary of Kashmir High Court Bar Association.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 2
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
Age: 70 years.
The subject was born at Mughal Mohalla Chattabal Srinagar in the year 1953 and is presently
putting up atRawalpora Srinagar. The subject graduated in law. Soon after the completion of Law
degree, subsequently subject started practicing as lawyer as a regular member of High Court Bar
Association Kashmir. The subject came to be nominated as General Secretary of high Court Kashmir
Bar Association, Srinagar, having affiliated with APHC-G. The subject is known for his secessionist
ideology and its anti-national propagation among like-minded lawyers and general masses.
The subject in the capacity of General Secretary of High Court Bar Association (HCBA) and has been
instrumental in reviving of HCBA and to provide a platform to secessionist and terrorists. It was
provided in adopted constitution of Kashmir High Court Bar Association to provide support to the
terrorist movement till objective of secessionist of UT of J&K from Union of India is achieved. The
subject is still continuing his activities for propagating the erstwhile adopted constitution of
JKHCBA to support the terrorist movement to achieve unlawful desired object of secessionism
under the influence of Advocate Abdul Qayoom, a staunch supporter of terrorist and secessionism.
The subject due to his hardcore secessionist ideology was very close to secessionist organizations
and aided secessionist elements including Late Syed Ali Shah Geelani to formulate protest calendars
during unrest of 2008, 2010 and 2016. The subject has also remained associated with the Peoples
League and was arrested in the year 1989. He was tasked by APHC (G) to defend the cases of
secessionist and terrorists sub-judice before different Courts which made him earn a prominent
position within the secessionist rank. Subject is responsible for organizing anti-national seminars,
rallies formulating secessionists programs aimed with to create anti- national atmosphere in the
valley.
The subject post-abrogation of Article 370 in consultation with the mentors across the border was
advocating to led many agitations and was hell bent upon to create a situation which could
jeopardize public order of UT of J&K was detained under PSA in year 2019. However, after his
release from the detention he did not mend his ways and continued propagating secessionism and
terrorist.
In 2002, subject had gone to Pakistan with 03 other Kashmir Advocates namely Ghulam Nabi
Shaheen, G. N. Hagroo and Mohd. Amin Bhat to attend a seminar on "Peace through Law"
organized by Pakistan Bar Association at Islamabad. Reportedly, during their meeting with General
Parvaiz Musharaff, they were warned to work strictly as per ISI directions and not to utter a word
about peace in Kashmir. Since them, the subject has loyally toed the Pakistan line in Kashmir. He
has remained staunch support separatism in Kashmir. The brother of the subject namely Advocate
Mohamad Younis S/o Ghulam Hassan Bhat R/o Mughal MohallaChattabal is a released locally
trained terrorist of the proscribed outfit Hizbul Mujahideen who was arrested by Security Forces in
1991 and released after two years of detention.
The subject remained active in mobilizing anti-national protests against the execution of death
penalty inflicted by Hon'ble Court of Law against the hanging of Afzal Guru and delivered sermons
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 3
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
that he was hanged without affording him the chance of a fair trial exposed Indian Judicial System
as well as Kashmir's Pro-Indian Camp.
There are credible and technical reports received with respect to the subject from various agencies
which are suggestive of the fact that the subject has been facilitating terrorists/OGWs by way of legal
recourse to get out of the ambit of law and subject has visited number of jails all over India and had
assured terrorists/secessionist lodged there that he will facilitate the release of such terrorists, this
was done only to rise the circle of terrorists/secessionists groups. The subject being an Advocate
practicing in High Court and District Court Srinagar is providing his services as Advocate to
Terrorists, OWGs (accused persons) involved in UAPA cases.
The subject has always trying to find ways and means to devise programs/seminars/calendars which
have been and are direct threat to the security of State in the past, as well because the subject is
holding discreet meet with his likeminded lawyers and masses to review the secessionism in the
valley District Srinagar particularly. The subject as per the credible/confidential sources and
technical inputs is direct threat to security of state at present and assessing his past activities. The
subject, being a staunch antinational element cannot see peace returning in UT of J&K and as such
always in search of opportunity to mobilize the ways and means having bearing on security of State
and as such has been found to have secretly devised programs for creating large scale violence which
in all possibilities will have bearing on the security of State.
The subject whose audacity can be gauged from the activities he has carried out in past and is trying
to revive is a potential threat to the security of State, if the subject is allowed to remain at large,
there are more than compelling reasons that once the subject, is allowed to remain at large at this
point of time, he is going to indulge in activities which are prejudicial to security of State.
Therefore, taking a wholesome view of the likely impact of the activities of the subject upon the
overall scenario, if the subject gets liberty to move freely at this point of time, there is very chance
that the subject will devise a plan with his likeminded advocates and masses which in all
possibilities will be a threat to the security of State. In order to safety of security of State and keeping
the compelling circumstances mentioned above, the detention of subject under provisions of PSA
1978, for maximum period at this stage has become imperative.
It is as such requested, that a warrant of detention under provisions of J&K Public Safety Act 1978 to
prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to Security of State may kindly be issued against
subject and sent to this office for early execution."
09. Acting upon the said dossier, the respondent No.2- District Magistrate, Srinagar formulated the
grounds of detention on the purported basis whereof the respondent No.2-District Magistrate
Srinagar came to hold that the petitioner's personal liberty warranted to be curtailed in order to
prevent him from acting in a manner prejudicial to the security of the State.
10. The respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar, vide communication No.
DMS/PSA/JUD/1003-1006/2024 dated 16th of July, 2024, addressed to the petitioner meant to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 4
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
notify him about the passing of detention order against him and his impending detention to be
carried out pursuant thereto and further registering a reminder to the petitioner about his option to
exercise his right to make a representation against the order of detention be it to the respondent
No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar and/ or to the Government as may be desired by the petitioner.
11. Simultaneously, the respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar also notified the Principal
Secretary to Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir vide letter No.
DMS/PSA/JUD/1007-1008/2024 dated 16th of July, 2024 about passing of detention order against
the petitioner by the respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar.
12. The actual detention of the petitioner taking place on 17th of July, 2024 was accompanied with
handing over of eight (08) leaves compilation to the petitioner by the Superintendent of Police,
District Jail, Kathua attended with the grounds of detention being read over and explained to the
petitioner.
13. Upon lodgment of the petitioner in the District Jail, Kathua, the Superintendent, District Jail,
Kathua, vide his communication No. DJK/DS/4333-38 dated 18th of July, 2024, apprised the
Financial Commissioner (Additional Chief Secretary), Government of Union Territory of J&K,
Home Department about the detention of the petitioner having been carried out and his detainment
in the District Jail, Kathua having taken place.
14. Upon execution of detention warrant resulting in taking into custody the person of the
petitioner, the Station House Officer (SHO), Police Station Sadar, vide his letter No.
SDR/PSA/24/04 dated 19th of July, 2024, apprised the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP),
Srinagar about the fact of the petitioner being taken into preventive detention custody.
15. Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Srinagar at his end, vide his letter No.
LGL/PSA-3717/24/14828-31 dated 20th of July, 2024, apprised the Principal Secretary to
Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir about the execution of the
detention warrant upon the petitioner.
16. The preventive detention order No. DMS/PSA/80/2024 dated 16th of July, 2024 came to be
approved by the Home Department, Government of Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir vide
Government Order No. Home/PB-V/1503 of 2024 dated 22nd of July, 2024 in terms whereof the
determination of period of detention of the petitioner under the preventive detention custody was
made subject to the receipt of opinion of the Advisory Board.
17. The petitioner, acting through his wife, submitted a written representation dated 24th of July,
2024 addressed to the Chairman, Advisory Board thereby detailing the facts and circumstances on
the basis of which the revocation of the detention order was solicited.
18. In addition, the petitioner, through his wife, also submitted written representation dated 24th of
July, 2024 to the respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar duly received in the office of District
Magistrate, Srinagar in terms whereof a plea was made for revocation of the preventive detention
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 5
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
against the petitioner.
19. The preventive detention file of the petitioner is said to have been sent and submitted for its
opinion to the Advisory Board under the Jammu & Kashmir Public Safety Act, 1978 on 24th of July,
2024.
20. The Deputy Secretary to Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu &
Kashmir, vide his letter No. Home/PB-V/417-2024(7527085) dated 26th of July, 2024, addressed to
the Chairman, Advisory Board also forwarded the written representation of the petitioner for
consideration.
21. In order to avail his right of representation against his preventive detention in an effective
manner, the petitioner, vide a handwritten application dated 1st of August, 2024 addressed to
Principal Secretary to Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir,
asked for personal hearing before the Advisory Board.
22. The petitioner being in state of custody handed over his handwritten application dated 1st of
August, 2024 to the Superintendent, District Jail, Kathua obviously for the purpose of its placement
before the Principal Secretary to Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu &
Kashmir.
23. Superintendent, District Jail, Kathua, acting at his end vide letter No. DJK/MH/4720 dated 2nd
of August, 2024 addressed to the Director General Prisons, Jammu & Kashmir, Srinagar, forwarded
said handwritten application of the petitioner seeking right of personal hearing before the Advisory
Board.
24. Meanwhile, the Advisory Board under the Jammu & Kashmir Public Safety Act, 1978 came to
submit its opinion report on file No. Home/PB-V/417/2014 dated 5th of August, 2024 in terms
whereof the preventive detention of the petitioner was held to be based upon sufficient grounds.
25. The Advisory Board in its opinion report came to refer about the fact of the written
representation of the petitioner being considered but found to be without any substance. The
Advisory Board in express terms came to observe that the petitioner had not registered any request
for personal hearing.
26. Staff Officer to the Director General Prisons, Jammu & Kashmir, Srinagar, vide a letter No.
DS/PSA correspondence SJ Reasi/2024 (7423072) 3764 dated 6th of August, 2024 addressed to the
Principal Secretary to Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir
forwarded the letter No. DJK/MH/4270 dated 2nd of August, 2024 of the Superintendent, District
Jail, Kathua along with handwritten application dated 1st of August, 2024 of the petitioner seeking
personal hearing before the Advisory Board.
27. Thereafter, the Deputy Secretary to Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu
& Kashmir, vide letter No. Home/PB-V/417/2024/7527085 dated 8th of August, 2024 addressed to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 6
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
the respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar, conveyed the fact of rejection of petitioner's
representation. Copy of this communication was also meant to be forwarded to the Superintendent,
District Jail, Kathua for the sake of conveying to the petitioner about the rejection of his
representation against his preventive detention.
28. On the other hand, following the Advisory Board's opinion confirming the petitioner's
preventive detention, confirmation of the petitioner's detention came to be ordered vide
Government Order No. Home/PB-V/1638 of 2024 dated 8th of August, 2024 and thereby settling
the period of the petitioner's detention custody at the first instance for six months to be kept
detained in District Jail, Kathua.
29. The Deputy Secretary to Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu &
Kashmir, vide his letter No. Home/PB-V/417/2024(7527085) dated 20th of August, 2024 addressed
to the Additional Director General of Police, CID, J&K, forwarded communication No. DS/PSA
correspondence SJ Reasi/2024(7423072) 3764 dated 6th of August, 2024 of the Staff Officer to
Director General, Prisons, Jammu &Kashmir.
30. The respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar vide his letter No.
DMS/JUD/Misc/2024/1785 dated 11th of October, 2024 addressed to the Principal Secretary to
Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir, forwarded the written
representation of the petitioner seeking revocation of his detention which was submitted by the
respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar.
31. The Deputy Secretary to Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir,
vide his letter No. Home/PB-V/417-2024-7527085 dated 16th of October, 2024 addressed to the
respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar, apprised him about the fact that the petitioner's
written representation against his preventive detention stood already rejected as conveyed vide
letter No. Home/PB-
V/417/2024/7527085 dated 8th of August, 2024.
32. From the office of Additional Director General of Police, CID, J&K, Senior Superintendent of
Police (A), vide letter No. CID/SSP(A)/BR/M-03/2019/SGR/14278 dated 29th of October, 2024
addressed to Principal Secretary to Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu &
Kashmir, recommended the rejection of the petitioner's representation, whereafter the Deputy
Secretary to Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu &Kashmir, vide his letter
No. Home/PB-V/417/2024/7527085 dated 28th of October, 2024 addressed to respondent
No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar, conveyed the fact of rejection of the petitioner's representation.
33. The Additional District Magistrate, Srinagar vide his letter No.
DMS/JUD/Misc/2024/2203-2204 dated 26th of November, 2024 apprised the Senior
Superintendent of Police (SSP), Srinagar about the disposal of the petitioner's representation.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 7
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
34. Vide Government Order No. Home/PB-V/99 of 2025 dated 14th of January, 2025, the
petitioner's period of detention came to be extended by period of another six months w.e.f. 17 th of
January, 2025 to 16th of July, 2025 which period is still in currency and in the course of which the
adjudication of this writ petition has come up.
35. The petitioner in his writ petition has assailed his preventive detention custody on the grounds
as set out in para 8 (A) to (J).
36. The petitioner challenges his preventive detention being procured by suppression of facts at the
end of the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Srinagar who is said to have withheld true and full
disclosure of facts of the petitioner's previous preventive detention ordered in year 2019 under the
Jammu & Kashmir Public Safety Act, 1978 resulting in its setting aside and quashment by a
judgment dated 16th of March, 2020 in WP (Crl) No. 573/2019.
37. The petitioner has annexed copy of judgment dated 16 th of March, 2020 along with his writ
petition as Annexure-V page Nos. 26 to 30. In the said writ petition, the Superintendent of Police,
Srinagar figured as respondent No.5 and was, thus, meant to be fully cognizant of previous
preventive detention of the petitioner having taken place earlier in 2019 but consequently getting
quashed.
38. It is pleaded in the grounds of challenge that the second time detention of the petitioner, now
being under challenge, is premised on the same basis as was the preventive detention effected in the
year 2019 vide Order No. DMS/PSA/129/2019 dated 26th of September, 2019.
39. It is pleaded in the grounds of challenge to his preventive detention custody that from 2019
onwards, there is no activity whatsoever reflected and reported in the dossier by the Senior
Superintendent of Police (SSP), Srinagar on the basis of which the present preventive detention
custody of the petitioner could come to take place and, therefore, second time preventive detention
of the petitioner is resting upon the same grounds without being first disclosed and briefed to the
respondent No.2- District Magistrate, Srinagar about first detention order.
40. It is further pleaded that once the preventive detention of the petitioner effected in the year 2019
came to be quashed by judgment dated 16th of March, 2020 passed by this Court which remained
unchallenged, all the preceding references which led upto passing of preventive detention order No.
DMS/PSA/129/2019 dated 26th of September, 2019 against the petitioner were to be of no worth
even for reference sake much less for reliance sake but still in the dossier submitted by the Senior
Superintendent of Police (SSP), Srinagar against the petitioner to the respondent No.2-District
Magistrate, Srinagar, who thereupon formulated grounds of detention, all the self-same references
were borrowed and imported in the grounds of detention on the basis of which the impugned second
time detention order came to be passed subjecting the petitioner to suffer loss of personal liberty by
the preventive detention mode.
41. The petitioner has also assailed his preventive detention custody on the ground that his
representation made through his wife has remained unconsidered and un-responded.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 8
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
42. In addition, though not pleaded in the writ petition but came to be argued by the learned counsel
for the petitioner that petitioner's request for personal hearing duly submitted by him in terms of his
handwritten application dated 1st of August, 2024 was made to go waste by the Jail Authorities and
also by the Home Department, Government of Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir which resulted
in denying him personal hearing before the Advisory Board in connection with consideration of his
written representation submitted to the Advisory Board seeking revocation of his preventive
detention.
43. The petitioner has relied upon the following judgments to supplement his submissions in
seeking quashment of his preventive detention custody:
i. 1975 (II) SCC 4;
ii. 1979 (V) SCC 559;
iii. 1980 (IV) SCC 544;
iv. 1987 (VII) SCC 22;
v. 1989 (IV) SCC 741;
vi. 2006 (IV) SCC 796;
vii. 2023 AIR SC 4273;
viii. 2023 JKJ (II) 394; and
ix. 2023 JKJ (VI) 77.
44. The petitioner has also agitated, as a ground of challenge, the fact that the dossier
submitted by the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Srinagar to the respondent
No. 2-
District Magistrate, Srinagar was not provided to him and, as such, the material on the basis of
which the dossier was framed was also not provided to him.
45. In the counter affidavit to the writ petition, the respondents in general and respondent
No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar in particular has come forward with preliminary objections as
well as parawise reply on the basis of which the dismissal of the writ petition filed by the petitioner
is being sought.
46. In the preliminary objections, it is being stated that no legal, fundamental or statutory right of
the petitioner has been violated and, therefore, the writ petition merits outright rejection. It is
further objected by the answering respondents, with respect to the maintainability of the writ
petition, that the petitioner has not approached the Court with clean hands and the contentions
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 9
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
made in the writ petition are baseless.
47. Continuing with their preliminary objections, the respondents come forward with recitals as to
the jurisdictional basis of preventive detention jurisdiction and in that regard draw reference from
the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the cases of 'Haradhan Saha v. State of West Bengal,
1975 (III) SCC 198'; 'The Secretary to Government, Public (Law and Order-F) &Anr. v. Nabila
&Anr.', '2015 (XII) SCC 127; Debu Mahato v. State, 1974 AIR (SC) 816'; and 'Ashok Jumar v. Delhi
Administration and Ors., 1982 AIR (SC) 1143.'
48. In order to provide insulation to the preventive detention of the petitioner as ordered by
respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar, the respondents in their reply have come forward
claiming that all the statutory requirements and constitutional guarantees were fulfilled and
complied with in ordering and effecting the preventive detention of the petitioner keeping in mind
the very object of law of preventive detention.
49. It is further asserted that the detention order and the grounds in support thereof were not only
made available to the petitioner but also read over and explained to the petitioner besides apprising
him about his right of making a representation against his preventive detention. Further, in order to
salvage the basis of preventive detention imposed upon the petitioner, the respondents in their
counter affidavit have come forward stating that even if on one of the grounds of detention the
preventive detention of the petitioner is rendered questionable, the other grounds can suffice and
serve the purpose to lend validity to the preventive detention of the petitioner.
50. On parawise reply side, the respondents have come up with a novelty of the factual background
narrative without bothering to deal with the parawise reply of the assertions and averments made in
the writ petition filed by the petitioner.
51. This Court is at loss to discern the reluctance on the part of the respondent No.2-District
Magistrate, Srinagar in coming forward with parawise reply in the counter affidavit to the averments
and assertions made in the writ petition by the petitioner.
52. In the factual background as set out in the counter affidavit, there is a very muted reference of
one liner about the earlier preventive detention case of the petitioner dating back to 2019 and its
outcome, and also as to how the petitioner came to be apprised about the outcome of consideration
of his written representation made for seeking revocation of his preventive detention.
53. There is nothing said or suggested in the counter affidavit by the respondent No.2-District
Magistrate, Srinagar as to why the petitioner's plea for seeking personal hearing before the Advisory
Board was made to suffer waste in the process of official correspondence and, in the meanwhile, the
Advisory Board was let to opine on the preventive detention of the petitioner without personal
hearing accorded to the petitioner.
54. Upon consideration of all facts and circumstances with respect to the case in hand drawn from
the writ petition, the documents therewith, the counter affidavit without any documents therewith
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 10
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
and the detention record produced, the preventive detention of the petitioner is found to be
seriously faulty and flawed.
55. The first and foremost flaw is the stone like silence on the part of the Senior Superintendent of
Police (SSP), Srinagar and also of the respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar in putting out
in full with respect to the petitioner's preventive detention effected in the year 2019. The petitioner
had earned quashment of his first preventive detention custody through the medium of a writ
petition WP (Crl) No. 573/2019 in which the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Srinagar and
the District Magistrate, Srinagar figured as respondents No. 4 and 5. The adjudication of said 2019
writ petition had taken place not in an ex-parte manner for affording said two officers an excuse to
plead ignorance. First preventive detention of the petitioner was quashed on merits. This Court is
clueless to decipher as to why in his dossier, the Senior Superintendent of Police (SSP), Srinagar
missed out in documenting in his dossier the details and dossier of the petitioner's preventive
detention effected in the year 2019 and its consequent quashment.
56. Likewise, the respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar, if had acted with due diligence at
his end, would have come across with a fact from the records of his office that the petitioner was
subjected to preventive detention in the year 2019 which came to be set aside by the intervention of
the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh. This omission is too serious to be taken casually
much less by this Court as being the guardian of the fundamental rights of a citizen of India which
the petitioner undoubtedly is.
57. The preventive detention of the petitioner is further flawed because of the petitioner being kept
uninformed about the fate of his written representation which was made not only to the Advisory
Board but also to the respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar and to the Principal Secretary to
Government, Home Department, Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir. There is found no
communication on the detention record file of the petitioner, as produced from the respondents'
end, to confirm that the petitioner was duly notified with respect to the rejection of his written
representation against his preventive detention.
58. In the present writ petition, the respondent No.3 is Superintendent of Police, District Jail,
Kathua. There is no counter affidavit from his end nor is there any averment in the counter affidavit
filed by the respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar by reference to the respondent
No.3-Superintendent of Police, District Jail, Kathua that the petitioner was duly notified about the
rejection of his written representation which was otherwise conveyed to the respondent No.3.
59. These two grounds are self-sufficient by themselves to render the preventive detention of the
petitioner bad in the eyes of law.
60. The exercise of preventive detention jurisdiction is a double-edged sword which is unsparing
both for the hand which wields it and the hand which bears its blow. If mishandled by the wielder of
said sword, then the effect stays on the side of the wielder whereas the relief passes on to the side of
the person aimed to suffer its blow, and which precisely is the situation in hand before this Court in
the context of the present case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 11
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
61. In the case of "Ayya @ Ayub Vs State of UP and another," (1989)1 SCC 374, the Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India has delved into the essence of preventive detention jurisdiction and its sensitivities.
Paras 11,12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 & 20 are worth reference herein which are reproduced as under:-
"11. Personal liberty protected under Article 21 of the Constitution is held so
sacrosanct and so high in the scale of constitutional values that this Court has shown
great anxiety for its protection and wherever a petition for writ of habeas-corpus is
brought-up, it has been held that the obligation of the detaining-authority is not
confined just to meet the specific-grounds of challenge but is one of showing that the
impugned detention meticulously accords with the procedure established by law.
Indeed the English Courts a century ago echoed the stringency and concern of this
judicial vigilance in matters of personal liberty in the following words:
Then comes the question upon the habeas corpus. It is a general rule, which has
always been acted upon by the Courts of England, that if any person procures the
imprisonment of another he must take care to do by steps, all of which are entirely
regular, and that if he fails to follow every step in the process with extreme regularity
the Court will not allow the imprisonment to continue."
12. It has been said that the history of liberty has largely been the history of observance of
procedural safeguards. The procedural sinews strengthening the substance of the right to move the
court against executive invasion of personal liberty and the due dispatch of judicial- business
touching violations of this great is stressed in the words of Lord Dinning:
Whenever one of the King's Judges takes his seat, there is one application which by
long tradition has priority over all others. Counsel has but to say 'My Lord, l have an
application which concerns the liberty of the subject' and forth-with the Judge will
put all other matters aside and hear it. It may be an application for a writ of habeas
corpus, or an application for bail, but, whatever form it takes, it is heard first.
13. Personal liberty, is by every reckoning, the greatest of human freedoms and the laws of
preventive- detention are strictly construed and a meticulous compliance with the procedural
safeguards, however technical, is strictly insisted upon by the courts. The law on the matter did not
start on a clean state. The power of courts against the harsh incongruities and unpredictabilities of
preventive detention is not a merely 'a page of history but a whole volume. The compulsions of the
primordial need to maintain order in society. without which the enjoyment of all rights, including
the right to personal liberty, would lose all their meaning are the true justifications for the laws of
preventive detention. The pressures of the day in regard to the imperatives of the security of the
State and of public- order might. it is true, require the sacrifice of the personal-liberty of individuals.
Laws that provide for preventive detention posit that an individual's conduct prejudicial to the
maintenance of public-order or to the security of State provides grounds for a satisfaction for a
reasonable prognostication of a possible future manifestations of similar propensities on the part of
the offender. This jurisdiction has been called a jurisdiction of suspicion; but the compulsions of the
very preservation of the values of freedom, of democratic society and of social order might compel a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 12
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
curtailment of individual liberty. "To lose our country by a scrupulous adherence to the written law"
said Thomas Jeferrson "would be to lose the law itself, with life, liberty and all those who are
enjoying with us; thus absurdly sacrificing the end to the needs." This is, no doubt, the theoretical
justification for the law enabling preventive detention.
14. But the actual manner of administration of the law of preventive detention is of utmost
importance. The law has to be justified by the genius of its administration so as to strike the right
balance between individual-liberty on the one hand and the needs of an orderly society on the other.
But the realities of executive excesses in the actual enforcement of the law have put the courts on the
alert, ever-ready to intervene and confine the power within strict limits of the law both substantive
and procedural. The paradigms and value judgments of the maintenance of a right balance are not
static but vary according as the "pressures of the day" and according as the intensity of the
imperatives that justify both the need for and the extent of the curtailment to be individual liberty.
Adjustments and readjustments are constantly to be made and reviewed. No law is an end in itself.
The "inn that shelters for the night is not journey's end and the law, like the traveller, must be ready
for the morrow."
15. As to the approach to such laws which deprive personal liberty without trial, the libertarian
judicial faith has made its choice between the pragmatic view and the idealistic or doctrinaire view.
The approach to the curtailment of personal liberty which is an axiom of democratic faith and of all
civilized like is an idealistic one for, loss or personal liberty deprives a man of all that is worth living
for and builds up deep resentments. Liberty belongs what correspond to man's inmost self. Of this
idealistic view in the judicial traditions of the free- world, Justice Dougla said:
"Faith in America is faith in her free institutions or it is nothing. The Constitution we
adopted launched a daring and bold experiment. Under that compact we agreed to
tolerate even ideas we despise. We also agreed never to prosecute people merely for
their ideas or beliefs ......."
16. Judge Stanley H. Fuld of the New York Court of Appeals said:
"It is a delusion to think that the nation's security is advanced by the sacrifice of the
individual's basic- liberty. The fears and doubts of the moment may loom large, but
we lose more than we gain if we counter with a resort to alian procedures or with a
denial of essential constitutional guarantees."
It was a part of the American judicial faith that the Constitution and Nation are one and that it was
not possible to believe that national security did require what the Constitution appeared to
condemn.
17. Under our Constitution also the mandate is clear and the envoy is left under no dilemma. The
constitutional philosophy of personal liberty is an idealistic view, the curtailment of liberty for
reasons of State's security, public-order, disruption of national economic discipline etc. being
envisaged as a necessary evil to be administered under strict Constitutional restrictions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 13
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
18. In Ichudevi v. Union of lndia AIR 1980 SC 1983, Bhagwati J. spoke of this Judicial commitment:
"The Court has always regarded personal liberty as the most precious possession of
mankind and refused to tolerate illegal detention, regardless of the social cost
involved in the release of a possible renegade.
This is an area where the court has been most strict and scrupulous in ensuring
observance with the requirements of the law, and even where a requirement of the
law is breached in the slightest measure, the court has not hesitated to strike down
the order of detention ...." (emphasis supplied)
19. In Vijay Narain Singh v. State of Bihar, AIR 1984 SC 1334 Justice Chinnappa Reddy J. in his
concurring majority view said:
"....I do not agree with the view that those who are responsible for the national
security or for the maintenance of public order must be the sole judges of what the
national security or public order requires. It is too perilous a pro- position. Our
Constitution does not give a carte blanche to any organ of the State to be the sole
arbiter in such matters .... There are two sentinels, one at either end. The legislature
is required to make the law circumscribing the limits within which persons may be
preventively detained and providing for the safeguards prescribed by the
Constitution and the courts are required to examine, when demanded, whether there
has been any excessive detention, that is, whether the limits set by the Constitution
and the legislature have been transgressed . . ."
20. In Hem Lall Bhandari v. Sikkim, AIR 1987 SC 762 at 766, it "It is not permissible in matters
relating to the personal liberty and freedom of a citizen to take either a liberal or a generous view of
the lapses on the part of the officers ........"
62. The preventive detention custody of the petitioner being based upon procedural pitfalls is, thus,
held to be illegal and liable to be quashed.
63. Accordingly, preventive detention order No. DMS/PSA/18/2024 dated 16th of July, 2024 passed
by the respondent No.2-District Magistrate, Srinagar read with confirmation/ approval/ extension
orders with respect to the preventive detention of the petitioner are hereby quashed.
64. The petitioner is directed to be restored, without loss of any time, to his personal liberty by his
immediate release from the concerned Jail and to that effect the Superintendent of the concerned
Jail detaining the petitioner to act in compliance of the directions hereby being issued with respect
to the release of the petitioner from preventive detention custody.
65. Disposed of.
66. Record be returned.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 14
Mohammad Ashraf Bhat vs Union Territory Of J&K And Ors on 5 May, 2025
(Rahul Bharti) Judge SRINAGAR May 5th, 2025 "TAHIR"
i. Whether the Judgment is approved for reporting? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/76236456/ 15
