Mohammad Abass Lone vs Union Of India And Ors on 10 February, 2025
Mohammad Abass Lone vs Union Of India And Ors on 10
February, 2025
Author: Javed Iqbal Wani
Bench: Javed Iqbal Wani
S. No. 11
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
WP(C) 1836/2024 CM(4964/2024)
MOHAMMAD ABASS LONE ...Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Taha Khalil, Advocate.
Vs.
UNION OF INDIA AND ORS ...Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Faizan Ahmad Ganie CGSC vice
Mr. T. M. Shamsi, DSGI.
Ms. Nadia Abdullah, AC vice
Mr. Mohsin Qadri, Sr. AAG.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE JAVED IQBAL WANI, JUDGE
ORDER
10.02.2025 (ORAL)
1. In the instant petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution, the petitioner herein has prayed
for the following reliefs; -
A. Writ in the nature of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ declaring the impugned action of
the Respondents 2 and 3 in withholding the clearance report (verification) qua the petitioner as not
clear only because of pendency of case FIR No. 02/2020 lodged by Respondent No. 5, as well as
action of the Respondent No. 4 in withholding the Reissuance of Passport/Travel Document applied
for by the petitioner online in the prescribed Format vide keeping the application of the petitioner at
the "Review" stage, void ab-initio and non-est in law being violative of Articles 14 and 21 of
Constitution of India read with The Passport Act, 1967 and the Rules framed thereunder and the
Law declared on the subject by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and this Hon'ble Court in case titled
Rajesh Gupta vs Union India and another (WP(C) No. 1534/2022) decided on 23.11.2022,
respectively, be issued in favour of the petitioner and against respondents B. Writ in the nature of
Certiorari or any other appropriate writ quashing the impugned action of the Respondents 2 and 3
in withholding the clearance report (verification) qua the petitioner as not clear only because of
pendency of case FIR No. 02/2020 lodged by Respondent No. 5, as well as action of the Respondent
No. 4 in withholding the Reissuance of Passport/Travel Document applied for by the petitioner
online in the prescribed Format vide keeping the application of the petitioner at the "Review" stage,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68779268/ 1
Mohammad Abass Lone vs Union Of India And Ors on 10 February, 2025
void ab-initio and non-est in law being violative of Articles 14 and 21 of Constitution of India read
with The Passport Act, 1967 and the Rules framed thereunder and the Law declared on the subject
by Hon'ble Supreme Court of India and this Hon'ble Court in case titled Rajesh Gupta vs Union of
India and another (WP(C) No. 1534/2022) decided on 23.11.2022, respectively, be issued in favour
of the petitioner and against Respondents;
C.Writ in the nature Mandamus or any other appropriate Writ, directing Respondent No. 04 to
grant passport facility to the petitioner in the Re- Issue category in accordance with The Passport
Act, 1967 and the Rules framed thereunder and the Law declared on the subject by Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India and this Hon'ble Court in case titled Rajesh Gupta vs Union of India and another
(WP(C) No. 1534/2022) decided on 23.11.2022, respectively, be issued in favour of the petitioner
and against Respondent No. 04;
2. The facts under the shade and cover of which the aforesaid reliefs have been prayed and as are
stated in the petition are that petitioner herein has retired on superannuation from a gazetted
engineering post in Jammu Kashmir Projects Construction Corporation, a Public Sector
Undertaking and that on 4th February 2020, while the petitioner was in service and working as Dy.
General Manager of Unit 10 of Kupwara FIR was registered by respondent 5 against the officials of
the said Unit 10 under Sections 468, 471, 120-B, IPC, read with Section 5(2) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act and despite undertaking investigation in the said FIR, no charge sheet was laid down
before any competent Court of law and that in connection with the investigation of the said FIR, the
bank account of the petitioner came to be freezed by the investigating agency, which bank account,
however, subsequently came to be defreezed by the competent Court, upon an application filed by
the petitioner.
3. It is further stated that the petitioner was holding a passport/travel document issued in his favour
bearing number M4633407 and had applied for its renewal before its date of expiry on 26th of
December, 2024, before Respondent 4 through online mode in the prescribed format on 28th of
May, 2024, however, subsequently discovered online on the official website of the respondent 1 that
the case of the petitioner for reissuance of passport/travel document has been halted on account of
the registration of FIR No.02/2020, as security clearance/verification has not been accorded for
reissuance of the passport in favour of the petitioner by respondent 5, and that the application of the
petitioner for reissuance of the passport has been kept pending at "review stage" by respondent 4.
4. The petitioner herein has maintained the instant petition while seeking aforesaid reliefs, on the
premise that the action of the respondents 2 to 4 in halting the reissuance of passport/travel
document in favour of the petitioner on account of pendency of FIR No. 02/2020, supra, is illegal
and unconstitutional, violative of Article 14 of the Constitution.
5. Reply to the petition of the respondents though not filed is taken on record at the request of the
counsel for the respondents wherein the petition is being opposed on the premise that the
passport/travel document in favour of the petitioner could not be issued on account of the
verification report received from the Director General of Police, (CID), owing to the involvement of
the petitioner in FIR No. 41/2020 and 02/2020 both registered with Police Station Crime Branch,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68779268/ 2
Mohammad Abass Lone vs Union Of India And Ors on 10 February, 2025
which FIRs are under investigation and the petitioner accordingly came to be intimated about the
reason for non-issuance of passport/travel documents vide letter dated 8th of August, 2024, and
that the passport/ travel document is issued in favor of a person on the basis of a clear verification
report.
6. On joint request of counsel for the parties, the matter is taken up for final consideration and
disposal at this stage.
Heard counsel for the parties and perused the record.
7. Counsel for the petitioner while making his submission in line and tune with the case setup in the
petition, invited the attention of this court to the judgment passed by the co-ordinate Bench of this
Court in WP(C) No. 1534/2022 titled as "Rajesh Gupta v. Union of India and Anr"
dated 23rd of November, 2022, and would submit that the instant case is covered by
the said judgment, wherein it has been held that mere registration of FIR or
pendency of investigation by the investigating agency is no ground to refuse the
renewal of a passport.
8. The appearing counsel for the respondents do not dispute the passing of the aforesaid judgment
by a co-ordinate Bench and law lay down therein.
9. Before proceeding further in the matter, it would be appropriate and advantageous to refer to
para 8 to 13 of the judgment supra hereunder: -
8. Indisputably, the right to travel abroad is a facet of personal liberty guaranteed to
the citizens of this Country under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. This is so
authoritatively held in Satwant Singh Sawhney v. D.Ramarathnam, AIR 1967 SC 1836
and Menaka Gandhi v. Union of India and another AIR 1978 SC 597 and, therefore,
this right can only be curtailed by imposing restrictions as are authorized by law. The
Passport Act is an Act of Parliament that deals with the issue of passports and travel
documents to regulate the departure from India of citizens of India and other persons
and for the matters incidental or ancillary thereto. Section 5 of the Passport Act deals
with applications, to be submitted for obtaining passports, travel documents and
other orders thereon.
The refusal of the passport or travel documents is dealt with by Section 6 of the Passport Act, which
for facility of reference is reproduced hereunder:-
"6. Refusal of passports, travel documents. etc. (1) Subject to the other provisions of
this Act, the passport authority shall refuse to make an endorsement for visiting any
foreign country under clause (b) or clause (c) of sub-section (2) of section 5 on any
one or more of the following grounds, and no other ground, namely: -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68779268/ 3
Mohammad Abass Lone vs Union Of India And Ors on 10 February, 2025
(a) that the applicant may, or is likely to, engage in such country in activities
prejudicial to the sovereignty and integrity of India:
(b) that the presence of the applicant in such country may, or is likely to, be
detrimental to the security of India;
(c) that the presence of the applicant in such country may, or is likely to, prejudice
the friendly relations of India with that or any other country,
(d) that in the opinion of the Central Government the presence of the applicant in
such country is not in the public interest.
(2) Subject to the other provisions of this Act, the passport authority shall refuse to
issue a passport or travel document for visiting any foreign country under clause (c)
of sub-section (2) of section 5 on any one or more of the following grounds, and on no
other ground, namely: -
(a) that the applicant is not a citizen of India.,
(b) that the applicant may, or is likely to, engage outside India in activities prejudicial
to the sovereignty and integrity of India.,
(c) that the departure of the applicant from India may, or is likely to, be detrimental
to the security of India;
(d) that the presence of the applicant outside India may, or is likely to, prejudice the
friendly relations of India with any foreign country;
(e) that the applicant has, at any time during the period of five years immediately
preceding the date of his application, been convicted by a court in India for any
offence involving moral turpitude and sentenced in respect thereof to imprisonment
for not less than two years;
(f) that proceedings in respect of an offence alleged to have been committed by the
applicant are pending before a criminal court in India;
(g) that a warrant or summons for the appearance, or a warrant for the arrest, of the
applicant has been issued by a court under any law for the time being in force or that
an order prohibiting the departure from India of the applicant has been made by any
such court;
(h) that the applicant has been repatriated and has not reimbursed the expenditure
incurred in connection with such repatriation;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68779268/ 4
Mohammad Abass Lone vs Union Of India And Ors on 10 February, 2025
(i) that in the opinion of the Central Government the issue of a passport or travel
document to the applicant will not be in the public interest."
9. Sub Section (1) of Section 6 of the Passport Act clearly provides that application for grant or
renewal of passport shall be refused only on the grounds mentioned in the Section and on no other
ground. Apart from other grounds, Clause (f) of Sub Section (2) of Section 6 provides that request
for grant or renewal of passport or travel documents can be refused, if proceedings in respect of an
offence alleged to have been committed by the applicant are pending before a criminal Court in
India.
10. Mere registration of an FIR or pendency of investigation by the Investigating Agency is no
ground to refuse issue or renewal of passport requested by the applicant. At this stage, when FIR
alone is registered and investigation is undertaken by the Investigating Agency, there are no
proceedings before a criminal Court. The criminal proceedings commence before the competent
Court of criminal jurisdiction only when a final report is laid by the investigating agency before the
Court or in case of a private complaint, when the criminal Court of competent jurisdiction takes
cognizance and proceeds in the manner provided under the Code of Criminal Procedure. Till such
eventuality happens, we cannot say that there are criminal proceedings pending in the Court. If that
be the clear and unequivocal position emerging from the scheme of Code of Criminal Procedure,
there is not even an iota of doubt that registration of FIR and the investigation taken thereupon by
the investigating agency cannot be said to be the proceedings pending before a criminal Court in
India to attract disqualification laid down in Clause (f) of Sub Section (2) of Section 6 of the Passport
Act.
11. To the similar effect are the provisions of Section 10 of the Passport Act, which deal with
variation, impounding and revocation of passports and travel documents. Under Section 10 of the
Passport Act, the passport authority may impound or cause to be impounded or revoke a passport or
travel document, if apart from others, it is brought to its notice that the proceedings in respect of an
offence alleged to have been committed by the holder of the passport or travel documents are
pending before a criminal Court in India. This is so provided in Clause (e) of Sub Section of Section
10. Clause (h) of Sub Section (3) of Section 10 further provides that the passport already issued can
be impounded or revoked by the passport authority, if it is brought to its notice that a warrant or
summons for the appearance, or a warrant for the arrest of the holder of the passport or travel
document has been issued by a Court under any law for the time being in force or if an order
prohibiting the departure from India of the holder of the passport or other travel document has been
made by any such Court.
12. The issue as to when can the proceedings be said to be pending before the Criminal Court was
considered by the Madras High Court in Venkatesh Kandasamy v. Government of India, Ministry of
External Affairs, AIR 2015 Mad 3 and it was held that no proceedings can be said to have been
initiated under Clause (a) of Section 190 of the Criminal Procedure Code unless cognizance is taken
by the Court for proceeding further in the matter.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68779268/ 5
Mohammad Abass Lone vs Union Of India And Ors on 10 February, 2025
13. In the aforesaid case, Madras High Court found that all criminal complaints as against the
applicant were only at the stage of investigation and, therefore, it was not a case of the passport
authorities that final reports have been filed in the criminal Court in any of the criminal complaint
so as to make the case come within the four corners of Section 6(2)(f) of the Passport Act. Similar
order passed by the passport authorities was set aside by the Madras High Court.
10. Having regard to the aforesaid judgment as also the fact of the case, wherein it came to be passed
by the Co-ordinate Bench, inasmuch as the facts and issues involved in the instant petition, it is not
in dispute that in the case supra, petitioner herein had been declined the issuance of passport on
account of his alleged involvement in a criminal case being FIR No.03/2019 wherein no chargesheet
had been filed. It is not in dispute that in the instant case as well, the petitioner is alleged to have
been involved in the FIRs 41/2020 and 02/2020, and in both the FIRs the investigation is stated to
have not been concluded and no charge sheet laid before the competent court of law.
11. In view of the aforesaid position obtaining in the matter, this court has no reason to take a view
different than what has been taken by the Co- ordinate Bench in Rajesh Gupta's case, supra, as the
instant case is squarely covered by the law laid down by the co-ordinate Bench in the said case.
12. Accordingly, for the aforesaid reasons, the instant petition deserves to be allowed and same
accordingly is allowed with a direction to the respondents 1 and 4 to accord consideration to the case
of the petitioner for grant of passport/travel document, notwithstanding the alleged involvement of
the petitioner in FIR Nos. 41/2020 and 02/2020 and the no clearness granted by respondents 2, 3
and 5 in this regard. However, before according such consideration respondent 4 shall re-verify as to
whether a final report/charge sheet has been laid in the FIRs' in question in which the petitioner is
alleged to be involved before any competent court of law. Let needful be done within a period of four
weeks from the date a copy of this order is produced by the petitioner before respondent 4.
13. Disposed of.
(JAVED IQBAL WANI) JUDGE SRINAGAR 10.02.2025 Ishaq Whether the order is speaking? Yes
Whether approved for reporting ? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68779268/ 6
