Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki vs Union Territory Of Jammu &
Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
Sr.No.01
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP(Crl) No. 25/2021
Reserved on:07.11.2022
Pronounced on:30.01.2023
Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki, age 60 years S/O Mohd ....Petitioner(s)
Sharief, R/o Hamirpur Dahargloon, Tehsil Mendhar
District Poonch, through his daughter Tasleem
Akhter.
Through :- Sh. I. H. Bhat, Advocate
V/s
1. Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir through ....Respondent(s)
Commissioner/Secretary (Home), Civil
Secretariat, Jammu/ Srinagar;
2. District Magistrate Poonch;
3. The Senior Superintendent of Police Poonch;
4. The Superintendent District Jail Rajouri.
Through :- Sh. Adarsh Bhagat, GA
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE
O R D E R
30 -- 01 -- 2023
1. By this petition under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, petitioner Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki
age 60 years S/o Mohd. Sharief R/o Hamirpur Dahargloon Tehsil Mendhar District Poonch, seeks
issuance of a writ of Habeas Corpus challenging the validity of the order of detention dated 13-
03-2021 passed by respondent No.2 (District Magistrate Poonch) u/s 8 of Jammu & Kashmir Public
Safety Act 1978 (for short „the Act(cid:129)) vide his detention order No. 1/PSA of 2021 dated 13.03.2021 on
being satisfied that his detention was necessary with a view to preventing him from "acting in any
manner prejudicial to the security of state". Aggrieved of and dissatisfied with the passing of
impugned detention order, petitioner has questioned its legality, propriety & correctness and has
sought its quashment/setting aside on the following grounds:
(i) that the respondent No.2 has not applied his mind properly while passing the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75397761/ 1
Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
order of detention because as per the order of detention, the dossier has been
submitted to respondent No.2 on 13.03.2021 by respondent No.3, on the same day
opportunity has been given to the petitioner to make the representation before the
advisory board and on the same day respondent No.2 has passed the order of
detention which clearly shown that everything has been done on the same day in a
rush and casual manner in order to falsely implicate the petitioner in a false case of
Public Safety Act, respondent No.2 had not applied his mind properly while passing
the impugned order because the petitioner has been booked in FIR No. 217/2020
registered in Police Station Mendhar and he was admitted to default bail by the Court
of learned 3rd Additional Sessions Judge Jammu on 10.03.2021 on the ground that
the police agency have failed to file the charge sheet within the stipulated period of
180 days and afterwards the petitioner has never furnished the bail bond and as such,
on this ground alone, the impugned order is liable to be quashed.
(ii) that the respondents have not communicated all the relevant record to the
petitioner so that he can make a representation before the detaining authority,
respondents are under the legal obligation to mention this fact to the petitioner so
that he can make an representation to the detaining authority and by not giving such
opportunity would constitute an infraction of the valuable constitutional right
guaranteed under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India and Section 13 of J&K
Public Safety Act 1987;
(iii) that respondent Nos. 2, 3 and 4 are under the legal obligation to communicate
the detention order to the petitioner in the language, which the petitioner
understood, the photocopy of the detention order which was supplied to the
petitioner is in English language which is not understandable to the petitioner
because petitioner is an illiterate man and he only understand Gojri language, non-
communication and non-serving the copy of the detention order to the petitioner in a language
which the petitioner can understand would constitute a violation of the valuable constitutional right
under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India vitiating the detention order;
(iv) that the grounds of detention mentioned in the order are replica/verbatim copy of the dossier
with interplay of some words here and there, which exhibits that the respondent No.2 have not
applied his mind properly at the time of passing of the order and as such on this count also the order
impugned is bad and the same deserves to be set aside.
2. Counter has been filed by respondent No.2 (District Magistrate Poonch) specifically making
averments, that the detenue was informed about his right to make representation against his
detention; the detaining authority indisputably keeping in mind the very object of law of preventive
detention being not punitive but only preventive has passed the impugned detention order after
carefully perusing the dossier provided and relevant record and after being satisfied and convinced
that the detention of petitioner is in the interest of society and state. It is contended, that the
petitioner was detained under the provisions of the Public Safety Act validly and legally by virtue of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75397761/ 2
Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
detention order No. 01/PSA of 2021 dated 13.03.2021 issued by R-2 (District Magistrate Poonch),
all statutory requirements and constitutional guarantees have been fulfilled and complied with by
the detaining authority, petitioner namely Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki S/o Mohd Sharief R/o
Hamirpur Dhargloon was at judicial remand in District Jail Rajouri in case FIR No. 217/2020 u/ss
15/18/23 ULA, 121-A/122 IPC and 26/27 Arms Act and was released from the jail on default bail
manner by the 3rd Additional Sessions Judge (Special Judge u/s 22 NIA Act, Jammu) on
10.03.2021, the detaining authority has passed order of detention after subjective satisfaction in the
matter, the grounds of detention, order of detention, as well as entire material relied upon by the
detaining authority came to be furnished to the detenue well within statutory period provided under
Section 13 of the Act, warrant was accordingly executed by Executing Officer namely SI Abdul
Majeed of Police Station Mendhar and detenue was handed over to SP, Central Jail, Rajouri for
lodgment on 13.03.2021. It is moreso contended, that the activities of the detenue were highly
prejudicial to security of state, therefore, to prevent him from acting in such activities, he has been
detained strictly following the prescribed procedure of J&K Public Safety Act before and after
passing the detention order and even while executing the order of detention against the petitioner,
the impugned order of detention is well founded on facts and law, prayer has been made for
dismissal of the petition.
3. Sh. I. H. Bhat, learned counsel for petitioner while reiterating the grounds averred in the memo of
petition, has sought the quashment of the impugned detention order and release of petitioner by
canvassing arguments, that respondent No.2 has not applied his mind properly while passing the
order of detention, because as per the order of detention, the dossier has been submitted to
respondent No.2 on 13.03.2021 by respondent No.3, on the same day opportunity has been given to
the petitioner to make the representation before the advisory board and on the same day respondent
No.2 has passed the order of detention which clearly shown that everything has been done on the
same day in a rush and casual manner in order to falsely implicate the petitioner in a false case of
Public Safety Act. It is argued, that the respondents have not communicated/supplied all the
relevant record to the petitioner viz; copy of detention order, copy of FIR, copies of statements of
prosecution witnesses etc. so that he can make a representation before the detaining authority,
non-supply of the essential documents would amount to infraction of the valuable constitutional
right guaranteed under Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India r/w Section 13 of J&K Public Safety
Act 1987 vitiating the detention order. It is moreso argued, that the respondents were under the
legal obligation to communicate the detention order alongwith all the essential material in the
language which the petitioner understood, the photocopy of the detention order which was supplied
to the petitioner is in English language which is not understandable to the petitioner because he is
an illiterate man and he only understand Gojri language, non-communication and non-serving the
copy of the detention order to the petitioner in a language which the petitioner can understand
would constitute a violation of the valuable constitutional right under Article 22(5) of the
Constitution of India vitiating the detention order. It is argued, that the grounds of detention
mentioned in the order are replica/verbatim copy of the dossier with interplay of some words here
and there, which exhibits that the respondent No.2 have not applied his mind properly at the time of
passing of the order and as such on this count also the order impugned is bad and the same deserves
to be set aside. To support his arguments, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied upon the
judgments reported in (i) 2022 Legal Eagle (J&K) 118 [Abdul Karim Khuroo versus Union Territory
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75397761/ 3
Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
of J&K &Ors.] & (ii) 2022 Legal Eagle (J&K) 155 [Farooq Ahmad Beigh versus UT of Jammu and
Kashmir and others].
4. Sh. Adarsh Bhagat, learned GA per-contra, has defended the passing of impugned detention order
and has sought the outright rejection and dismissal of the writ petition by vehemently articulating
arguments, that all the documents/materials basing the passing of detention order have been
supplied to petitioner/detenue, there has been subjective satisfaction of the detaining authority
while passing the order of detention, even in the case of a person in custody a detention order can be
validly passed if the authority passing the order is aware of the fact that he is actually in custody. It
is argued, that the preventive detention is devised to afford protection to the society, the object is
not to punish a man for having done something but to intercept before he does it and to prevent him
from doing in future, any preventive measure even if it involves some restraint or hardship upon the
individuals do not partake in any way of the nature of punishment but are taken by way of
precaution to prevent mischief to the state, the particular acts reflected in the grounds of detention
in the case in hand clearly show that activities of petitioner/detenue cover a wide field and fall
within the contours of security of state, the order of detention therefore is not rendered invalid
merely because the grounds of detention were furnished on the same day in rush and casual
manner. It is moreso argued, that the detention order can be passed in a solitary case, it is the
detaining authority to take decision in accordance with law in holding that the subjective
satisfaction has been arrived and there is real and imminent possibility of the detenue to indulge in
such activities which are prejudicial to the security of the state, all the documents/essential material
basing the issuance of detention order have been supplied to the petitioner and made him to
understand in the language the petitioner understands and moreso the grounds of detention are not
verbatim copy of the dossier. It is argued, that the High Court in its writ jurisdiction under Article
226 of the Constitution of India is to see whether order of detention has been passed on any material
before it, it can examine the material on record only for the purpose of seeing whether order of
detention has been based on no material, the satisfaction maintained in Section 3 of the Act is
satisfaction of the detaining authority and not of the court, the court can only examine whether
grounds disclosed in the detention order are relevant to the object of preventive detention Act. To
support his arguments, learned GA has relied upon the judgments reported in (i) 1982 Legal Eagle
(SC) 108 [Ashok Kumar versus Delhi Administration and others] & (ii) 2014 Legal Eagle SC 4801
[Secretary to Government Public (Law and Order-F) & Anr. Versus Nabila & Anr.]
5. I have heard and considered the rival arguments advanced by learned counsel for the parties,
gone through the grounds of detention, counter filed by the respondents and the detention record
made available by learned GA. I have also bestowed my thoughtful consideration to the material
aspects involved in the case and have meticulously scanned the ratios of the judgments relied upon
by learned counsel for the parties.
6. The 1st argument portrayed by learned counsel for petitioner is, that the dossier and other
connected documents/essential material basing the passing of detention order which has swayed the
mind of detaining authority (R-2 District Magistrate Poonch) to pass order of detention have not
been supplied to petitioner/detenue which has prevented him to make effective representation to
the Govt., non-supply of the material thereof vitiates the detention order.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75397761/ 4
Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
Per-contra, Ld. GA has vehemently argued, that there is no vagueness in the grounds of detention,
the procedural safeguards prescribed under the provisions of Public Safety Act and the rights
guaranteed to the detenue under the Constitution have strictly been followed in the instant case, the
detenue has been furnished all the material as was required, and was also made aware of his right to
make representation to the detaining authority against his detention. It is pertinent to mention here,
that detention record viz; the dossier depicts that petitioner has been indicted in case FIR No.
217/2020 u/ss 15/18/20/23 ULA r/w 121-A/122 IPC r/w 26/27 Arms Act. The grounds of detention
bearing No. DMP/J/2740-49 dated 13-03-2021 have been formulated by respondent No.2 (District
Magistrate Poonch) and on the same date of 13-03-2021 vide order No. 01/PSA of 2021
petitioner/detenue has been detained for a period of 3 months for his activities from acting in any
manner prejudicial to the security of state for his involvement in the above named FIR. The
detention record further depicts, that Abdul Majid SI No. EXJ-835814 of P/S Mendhar has executed
the detention warrant upon petitioner on the same day on 13-03-2021 lodged in District Jail Rajouri
under PSA and the execution of PSA warrant further demonstrates that the contents of detention
warrant have been read over and explained to the petitioner/ detenue in Urdu/Pahari Language
which he has understood and in token whereof the petitioner has appended his thumb impression
on the execution warrant. The receipt of detention warrant (page 21 of the record) demonstrates that
all the material documents including grounds of detention (04 leaves) have been supplied to the
petitioner/detenue and read over to him in English Urdu or Pahari Language which he has
understood. It is pertinent to reiterate here, that respondent No.3 SSP Poonch vide his endorsement
No. CS/PSA/2021/1406-07 dated 13-03-2021 has supplied material/record such as copies of FIRs,
dossier and other connected documents in respect of the petitioner to respondent No.2 and on the
same date of 13-03-2021 the detention order has been passed against the petitioner without any
delay. The arguments of Ld. Counsel for petitioner that the relevant material/essential documents
forming the basis of issuance of detention order have not been supplied to the petitioner and made
him understand in the language he understood, there is non-application of mind on the part of
detaining authority (R-2), in the facts and circumstances of the case in hand, are legally
unsustainable, repelled, discarded and rejected.
7. The next argument canvassed by Ld. Counsel for petitioner are, that the grounds of detention
mentioned in the detention order are replica/verbatim copy of the dossier with interplay of some
words here and there, which exhibits that the respondent No.2 have not applied his mind properly
at the time of passing of the order and as such on this count also the order impugned is bad and the
same deserves to be set aside.
In 2022 Legal Eagle (J&K) 118 [Abdul Karim Khuroo versus Union Territory of J&K & Ors] & 2022
Legal Eagle (J&K) 155 [Farooq Ahmad Beigh versus UT of Jammu and Kashmir and others] relied
by learned counsel for petitioner, Coordinate Benches of this Court quashed the detention orders for
the reasons that the grounds of detention were nothing but verbatim reproduction of dossiers
forwarded by the police to the detaining authority which in fact showed non-application of mind by
the detaining authority making the detention orders illegal. I have meticulously scanned the
detention recorded produced by the respondents. The dossier submitted by respondent No.3 deals
with the criminal activities of the petitioner and it contains as many as 3 pages. The grounds of
detention which lay its foundation from the dossier also consist of 3 pages delineating the entire
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75397761/ 5
Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
criminal activities of the petitioner. But to say that grounds of detention are ditto copy/verbatim of
the dossier is untrue and far from reality. In the grounds of detention the criminal activities of the
petitioner have been highlighted which reveal that petitioner/detenue has been indicted in case FIR
No. 217/2020 u/ss 15/18/20/23 ULA r/w Sections 121-A/122 IPC r/w 26/25 Arms Act of P/S
Mendhar for the allegations that "on 11.09.2020 on a tip off information a joint cordon and search
operations was launched in the area of Balakote besides established nakas at different places, on the
same day at about 1930 hours the petitioner alongwith a girl found coming towards uphill from the
thorny bushes in a suspicious manner carrying bales in his hand, the police party challenged and
asked both of them for halt but both of them fled from the spot, accordingly both were chased in a
very tactful manner and apprehended by the joint party and during their search two packets were
recovered which contained upon arms and ammunition i.e. (1) Pistol=03 Nos+06 magazines, (2)
Posters Tehreek-ul-Mujahideen= 02 Nos (3), Grenade=11 Nos, (4) ammunition pistol=70 Nos, (5)
wireless set ICOM along with antenna=01 No.(6) IED=1 01 No.(7) Fuse=04 Nos.(8) Batteries
IED=02Nos.(9) Detonator= 01 Nos.(10) Mobile phone with charger=01No. (11) Pen drive=01 No. to
whom petitioner/detenue were illegally transported the material from the area on the allurement of
either PAK ISI or ANEs which is suggestive of the fact that petitioner/detenue is providing logistic
support to the aforesaid terrorist organization in a clandestine manner, the activities of
petitioner/detenue are highly prejudicial to the security and sovereignty of the country. Arguments
of Ld. Counsel for the petitioner that the grounds of detention are ditto copy/verbatim of the dossier
are legally misplaced, discarded and rejected.
8. Even otherwise it is settled law that this Court in the proceedings under Article 226 of the
Constitution has limited scope to scrutinizing whether detention order has been passed on the
material placed before it, it cannot go further and examine sufficiency of material. In the above
background, Constitutional Bench of Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in The State of Bombay v. Atma Ram
Shridhar Vaidya (AIR 1951 SC 157) in para 5 of the judgment observed as under:-
5. It has to be borne in mind that the legislation in question is not an emergency
legislation. The powers of preventive detention under this Act of 1950 are in addition
to those contained in the Criminal Procedure Code, where preventive detention is
followed by an inquiry or trial. By its very nature, preventive detention is aimed at
preventing the commission of an offence or preventing the detained person from
achieving a certain end. The authority making the order therefore cannot always be in
possession of full detailed information when it passes the order and the information
in its possession may fall far short of legal proof of any specific offence, although it
may be indicative of a strong probability of the impending commission of a
prejudicial act. Section a of the Preventive Detention Act therefore requires that the
Central Government or the State Government must be satisfied with respect to any
person that with a view to preventing him from acting in any manner prejudicial to
(1) the defence of India, the relations of India with foreign powers, or the security of
India, or (2) the security of the State or the maintenance of public order, or (8) the
maintenance of supplies and services essential to the community ......... it is necessary
So to do, make an order directing that such person be detained. According to the
wording of section 3, therefore, before the Government can pass an order of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75397761/ 6
Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
preventive detention it must be satisfied with respect to the individual person that his
activities are directed against one or other of the three objects mentioned in the
section, and that the detaining authority was satisfied that it was necessary to prevent
him from acting in such a manner. The wording of the section thus clearly shows that
it is the satisfaction of the Central Government or the State Government on the point
which alone is necessary to be established. It is significant that while the objects
intended to be defeated are mentioned, the different methods, acts or omissions by
which that can be done are not mentioned, as it is not humanly possible to give such
an exhaustive list. The satisfaction of the Government however must be based on
some grounds.
9. In the light of aforesaid position of law settled by the Six-Judge Constitution Bench of the
Supreme Court, way back in the year 1951, the scope of looking into the manner in which subjective
satisfaction is arrived at by detaining authority, is limited. This Court, while examining the material,
which is made basis of subjective satisfaction of detaining authority, would not act as a „court of
appeal' and find fault with the satisfaction on the ground that on the basis of material before
detaining authority, another view was possible. Even in Abdul Latief Abdul Wahab Sheikh V. B.K.
Jha, 1987 (2) SCC 22 Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court has categorically held that it is only procedural
requirements, which are the only safeguards available to detenue, that is to be followed and
complied with as the Court is not expected to go behind the subjective satisfaction of detaining
authority. In the case in hand, as discussed above, the procedural requirements have been followed
and complied with by respondents in letter and spirit. Liberty of an individual has to be
subordinated, within reasonable bounds, to the good of the people. The framers of the Constitution
were conscious of the practical need of preventive detention with a view to striking a just and
delicate balance between need and necessity to preserve individual liberty and personal freedom on
the one hand, and security and safety of the country and interest of the society on the other hand.
Security of State, maintenance of public order and services essential to the community, prevention
of smuggling and black- marketing activities, etc. etc. demand effective safeguards in the larger
interests of sustenance of a peaceful democratic way of life. In 1982 Legal Eagle SC 108 [Ashok
Kumar Versus Delhi Administration and others] relied by Ld. Counsel for respondent Hon(cid:129)ble
Supreme Court held, that it is the potentiality of the act to disturb the tempo of the life of
community which makes it prejudicial to the security of state and even the supply of grounds of
detention late by two days do not by itself render the detention invalid. Ratio of the judgment
applies to the facts of the case in hand, as in the case in hand, the criminal activities of
petitioner/detenue are highly prejudicial to the security of the state and there is no delay in
supplying the grounds of detention to the petitioner/detenue as on 13-03-2021 respondent No.3 SSP
Poonch has supplied material viz; copy of FIR & dossier alongwith connecting document to
respondent No.2 (District Magistrate Poonch) who on the same date has issued the detention order
and on the same date Abdul Majid SI No. EXJ-835814 of P/S Mendhar has executed the detention
warrant upon the petitioner. In 2014 Legal Eagle SC 4801 [Secretary to Government Public (Law
and Order-F) & Anr. Versus Nabila & Anr.] also relied by Ld. Counsel for respondents, Hon(cid:129)ble
Supreme Court held, that even the detention order can be passed in a „solitary case(cid:129) and where
individual liberty comes into conflict with interest of security of the state, then the liberty of the
individual must give way to the larger interest of nation. Ratio of the judgment (Supra) squarely
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75397761/ 7
Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
applies to the facts of the case in hand. Even in the case in hand, petitioner/detenue has been
involved in solitary FIR No. 217/2020 u/ss 15/18/20/23 ULA r/w Sections 121-A/122 IPC r/w 26/25
Arms Act of P/S Mendhar, but his criminal activities have been found highly prejudicial to the
security of the state, hence rightly detained under PSA.
10.Observing that the object of preventive detention is not to punish a man for having done
something but to intercept and to prevent him from doing so, the Supreme Court in the case of
Naresh Kumra Goyal v. Union of India and others, (2005) 8 SCC 276 and ingeminated by the
Supreme Court in Union of India and another v. Dimple Happy Dhakad, AIR 2019 SC 3428, has
held, that an order of detention is not a curative or reformative or punitive action, but a preventive
action, avowed object of which being to prevent antisocial and subversive elements from imperiling
welfare of the country or security of the nation or from disturbing public tranquility or from
indulging in smuggling activities or from engaging in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances, etc. Preventive detention is devised to afford protection to society. The authorities on
the subject have consistently taken the view that preventive detention is devised to afford protection
to society. The object is not to punish a man for having done something but to intercept before he
does it, and to prevent him from doing so. To sum up, a law of preventive detention is not invalid
because it prescribes no objective standard for ordering preventive detention, and leaves the matter
to subjective satisfaction of the Executive. The reason for this view is that preventive detention is not
punitive but preventive and is resorted to with a view to prevent a person from committing activities
regarded as prejudicial to certain objects that the law of preventive detention seeks to prescribe.
Preventive detention is, thus, based on suspicion or anticipation and not on proof. The
responsibility for security of State, or maintenance of public order, or essential services and
supplies, rests on the Executive and it must, therefore, have necessary powers to order preventive
detention. Having said that, subjective satisfaction of a detaining authority to detain a person or not,
is not open to objective assessment by a Court. A Court is not a proper forum to scrutinize the merits
of administrative decision to detain a person. The Court cannot substitute its own satisfaction for
that of the authority concerned and decide whether its satisfaction was reasonable or proper, or
whether in the circumstances of the matter, the person concerned should have been detained or not.
It is often said and held that the Courts do not even go into the question whether the facts
mentioned in grounds of detention are correct or false. The reason for the rule is that to decide this,
evidence may have to be taken by the courts and that is not the policy of law of preventive detention.
This matter lies within the competence of Advisory Board. While saying so, this Court does not sit in
appeal over decision of detaining authority and cannot substitute its own opinion over that of
detaining authority when grounds of detention are precise, pertinent, proximate and relevant.
11. It is apposite to mention that our Constitution undoubtedly guarantees various freedoms and
personal liberty to all persons in our Republic. However, it should be kept in mind by one and all
that the constitutional guarantee of such freedoms and liberty is not meant to be abused and
misused so as to endanger and threaten the very foundation of the pattern of our free society in
which the guaranteed democratic freedom and personal liberty is designed to grow and flourish. The
larger interests of our multi-religious nation as a whole and the cause of preserving and securing to
every person the guaranteed freedom peremptorily demand reasonable restrictions on the
prejudicial activities of individuals which undoubtedly jeopardize the rightful freedoms of the rest of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75397761/ 8
Mohd Mushtaq @ Shakki vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 30 January, 2023
the society. Main object of Preventive Detention is the security of a State, maintenance of public
order and of supplies and services essential to the community demand, effective safeguards in the
larger interest of sustenance of peaceful democratic way of life. In the case in hand, as per the
grounds of detention, petitioner/detenue and his sons were earlier working for banned
organizations of militant outfit especially Tehreek-ul-Mujahideen and J&K Gaznvi force which
remained proactive whereby petitioner/detenue and his sons got involved for transporting illegal
arms/ammunition from the area to provide the illegal assistance/logistic support to militants for
executing subversive activities to disturb the peace and order in the District. The activities of the
petitioner/detenue are not only threat to peace and tranquility of the area/UT of J&K but also
dangerous to security, sovereignty and integrity of the nation. Petitioner(cid:129)s son namely Sher Ali has
been recently arrested from Airport Jammu on 17-02-2021 involved in case FIR No. 292/ 2020 u/s
16/18/20 ULA r/w 121-A/122/295-A IPC r/w 8/21/22 NDPS Act of P/S Mendhar. Petitioner
remained in judicial custody in FIR No. 217/2020 and was released by 3rd Addl. Sessions Judge
(Spl. Judge u/s 22 NIA Act) Jammu on 10-03-2021 and there is every apprehension by the detaining
authority that petitioner will again indulge and revive militancy in the area, and in order to prevent
the petitioner from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of state, he has been rightly
detained under Public Safety Act.
12. For the foregoing discussion, the petition sans any merit and is, accordingly, dismissed and
disposed of.
13. Detention record be returned to the learned GA for the respondents.
(Mohan Lal) Judge Jammu:
30.01.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No Whether the order is
reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75397761/ 9
