Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K
Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
1
S No. 1
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP (Crl) No. 17/2022
Reserved on : 22.12.2022
Pronounced on : 17.02.2023
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar age 23 years (Through his ....Petitioner(s)
brother Abdullah Gujjar, age 26 years) S/O Noor
Gujjar R/O Village Krawha, Tehsil Banihal District
Ramban.
Through :- Mr. Bari Abdullah, Advocate
V/s
1. Union Territory of J&K through its Financial ....Respondent(s)
Commissioner (Home) Civil Secretariat
Srinagar;
2. District Magistrate Ramban;
3. Superintendent Central Jail Kot Bhalwal Jammu.
Through :- Ms. Monika Kohli, Sr. AAG
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. Petitioner by invoking the jurisdiction of this Court in terms of Article-226 of the Constitution of
India, has sought the indulgence of this court for issuance of writ of Habeas Corpus with the prayer
for quashment of the impugned detention order No. DMR/45-50 dated 27.04.2022 issued by the
respondent No. 2 (District Magistrate Ramban) for detaining the petitioner u/s 8 of the J&K Public
Safety Act 1978 and further commanding the respondent No. 3 to release the petitioner from Central
Jail Kot Bhalwal Jammu on the following grounds:-
(i) that the petitioner is aggrieved of the impugned detention order No. DMR/45-50
dated 27.04.2022 passed by respondent No.2 whereby the petitioner has been
detained under Section 8 of the J&K Public Safety Act 1978 on the grounds that the
detention of the petitioner is illegal, it is no longer res integra that while passing an
order for the preventive detention of a person the detaining authority is required to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143554610/ 1
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
spell out the reasons that he is likely to indulge in activities prejudicial to the security
of the State, neither was the respondent no. 2 aware about petitioner's being a laborer
at the time of the issuance of detention order nor has he spelt out any such reasons
which are necessary for putting a person who is already in detention in preventive
detention; the manner in which the respondent no. 2 has passed the detention order
which clearly demonstrates his non-application of mind in exercising jurisdiction
under Section 8 of the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act, 1978;
respondent No. 2 has used section 8 of the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act arbitrarily to
detain the petitioner when his action violates Article 14 of the Constitution of India, therefore, the
detention of the petitioner under the provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Public Safety Act is
illegal and in view of this the detention order No. DMR/45-50 dated 27.04.2022 is required to be set
aside and directions are required to be issued to the respondents to release the petitioner from
illegal custody forthwith;
(ii) that the covering letter dated 27.04.2022 and grounds of detention attached thereto are in
English language which were not at all understandable to the petitioner and thus the petitioner was
prevented from making an effective and meaningful representation, therefore, the detention of the
petitioner is illegal in the eyes of law and in view of this the detention order No. DMR/45-50 dated
27.04.2022 require to be set aside and directions are required to be issued to the respondents to
release the petitioner from illegal custody forthwith;
(iii) that the petitioner was neither supplied with the copies of FIR, recovery memos, statements if
any, recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. and other incriminating material collected by the police
during investigation based on which the detention order has been passed nor its translated script in
the language (Gojri) which is understandable by the petitioner, the same is mandatorily required
under article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India for making a representation to the competent
authority against the order of detention, thus the order of detention renders invalid on this ground
also and in view of this the detention order No. DMR/45-50 dated 27.04.2022 is required to be set
aside and directions are required to be issued to the respondents to release the petitioner from
illegal custody forthwith;
2. Respondent No. 02 has filed a counter affidavit, wherein, it has specifically contended, that
keeping in view the prejudicial activities of the detenue, his preventive detention has been ordered
so as to deter him from acting/indulging in prejudicial activities, the impugned order of detention
does not suffer from any malice or legal infirmity, as such, challenge thrown to it is totally
misdirected and misconceived; petitioner has concealed material facts, as right to liberty is not an
absolute right and it is subjected to reasonable restrictions as envisaged under Article-22(2) of the
Constitution of India, thereby, petition is not maintainable and deserves to be dismissed. It is
contended, that Superintendent of Police Ramban vide communication No.CB/DOSSER/21/5005
dated 20.04.2022 submitted a dossier of activities recommending a case for detention of Mohd
lbrahim S/O Noora Gujjer R/O Krawah Tehsil Banihal District Ramban under the provisions of J&K
Public Safety Act 1978, the dossier has been examined in light of legal provisions and circumstances
related to the case the details of which have been furnished by the District Police, the subject is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143554610/ 2
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
reportedly involved in anti- national/anti-social activities creating law and order problems in
Banihal, the subject made an attempt to promote enmity between two different religious groups
which in turn could spiral wave of violence and hatred between different social/religious groups; the
subject is reported as notorious criminal and is one of the sympathizers and well-wishers of the
outlawed of Jammu and Kashmir Hurriyat Group which aims to liberate the UT of J&K from Union
of India by means of anti-national/anti-social/criminal activities, the subject is involved in
anti-national activities within the jurisdiction of Police Station Banihal and its surrounding areas;
the subject is involved in organizing Hartals/Bandhs in Banihal area on the instance and call given
by the Hurriyat leaders from Kashmir Valley. It is contended that the subject is instigating the
people of the Banihal area especially the youth against the democratically established Government
of J&K and Union of India, the subject forces and instigates youth of the area to raise anti-national
slogans against the Government of J&K as well as Union of India and in favour of the alien country
i.e. Pakistan thereby creating hostile atmosphere in the Banihal area and its surroundings; due to
his active instigation, abetment and provocation the strikes are being organized with the association
of other likeminded persons of the area; there is every apprehension of law & order problem as well
as anti-national rallies in Banihal area which will vitiate peaceful atmosphere having both
communities i.e. Muslims and Hindus; the subject is a history sheeter and involved in number of
cases at Police Station Banihal; the subject in connivance with likeminded people of the area has
been conducting meetings at unknown places with the intention to instigate the youth against the
Nation and to direct them to the obsession of so-called freedom and if he remains free in society, he
would definitely indulge in criminal activities and would be danger to public peace and tranquility,
the presence of subject in society is certainly prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, peace,
tranquility and safety of citizens of the area.
3. Mr. Bari Abdullah, learned counsel for the petitioner has sought the setting aside/quashment of
the impugned detention order by vehemently canvassing arguments, that petitioner/detenue has
not been supplied the copy of FIR, recovery memos, statements if any recorded under Section 161
Cr.P.C. and other incriminating material collected by the police during investigation based on which
the detention order has been passed nor its translated script in the language (Gojri) which is
understandable by the petitioner which is mandatorily required under article 22 (5) of the
Constitution of India for making a representation to the competent authority against the order of
detention, thus the order of detention is rendered invalid on this ground. It is vehemently argued,
that the manner in which the respondent no. 2 has passed the detention order clearly demonstrates
he has used this section arbitrarily to detain the petitioner which is illegal, the impugned detention
order and the list of cases attached with it are in the English language, whereas, the
petitioner/detenue only understands Gojri language, the detention order was not read over and
explained to the petitioner in Gojri language which is a pre-requisite for maintainability of the
detention order, the non-supply of detention order and all other documents in Gojri language
violates the provisions of law as such the detention order deserves its quashment.
4. Ms. Monika Kohli, learned Sr. AAG, has recapitulated the grounds urged in the grounds of
detention/detention order and has streneously argued, that the detenue/petitioner is a habitual
criminal who has created fear amongst the general public and since he was likely to commit similar
offences in future, therefore, it was important to prevently detain him, as the ordinary law had no
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143554610/ 3
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
deterrent effect on him. It is argued, that the petitioner has no respect for law and has indulged in
case FIR No. 155/2017 under Sections 302, 307, 120B, 121A, 382 RPC r/w 7/27 IA Act of police
station Banihal, petitioner is one of the sympathizer and well wishers of the outlawed Jammu and
Kashmir Hurriyat Group which aims to liberate the UT of J&K from Union of India by means of
anti-national/anti-social criminal activities within the jurisdiction of Police Station Banihal and its
surrounding areas, petitioner is instigating the people of Banihal area especially the youth to
destabilize the Government of J&K and Union of India, there is every apprehension that it will
create law and order problem and anti national rallies in Banihal areas vitiating the peaceful
atmosphere among the both communities of Muslims and Hindus, therefore, the criminal activities
of the petitioner required to be kept under preventive measures, the detention order passed by
respondent No.2 therefore, does not suffer from any illegality and the same requires o be
confirmed/upheld.
5. I have heard learned counsel for the parties, perused the averments of the petition, counter
affidavit filed by the respondent No. 2, record made available by the respondents and the relevant
law on the subject matter coupled with the judgments relied upon by learned counsel for the parties.
6. The 1st argument urged by learned counsel for petitioner is, that the detention order does not
spell out the reasons for detaining the petitioner, the detaining authority has not applied its mind in
exercising jurisdiction under Section 8 of J&K PSA 1978 which vitiates the detention order. It is
pertinent to reiterate here, that the perusal of grounds of detention delineated by respondent No.2
clearly spell out that petitioner/detenu has been indicted in case FIR No. 155/2017 for commission
of offences under Sections 302/307/120B/121A/382 RPC r/w 7/27 Indians Arms Act of Police
Station Banihal, wherein, the criminal activities of the petitioner have been clearly specified, as the
petitioner has actively engaged himself in the activities which are highly prejudicial for the peace,
prosperity, tranquility and integrity of the country. The arguments of learned counsel for petitioner
that the detention order/ grounds of detention are without application of mind, are legally
untenable, repelled, discarded and rejected.
7. The 2nd argument propounded by learned counsel for the petitioner is, that the covering letter
dated 27.04.2022 and grounds of detention attached thereto are in English language which were not
at all understandable to the petitioner, who only understands Urdu or Gojri language, thus the
petitioner was prevented from making an effective and meaningful representation to the
Government or the detaining authority, therefore, the detention of the petitioner is illegal in the eyes
of law, the detention order No. DMR/45-50 dated 27.04.2022 therefore, require to be set aside. It is
unambiguously reiterated here, that the detention order bearing No. DMR/45-50 dated 27.04.2022
passed by respondent No.2 District Magisrate Ramban has been executed by Inspector
Neam-ul-Haq No. EXJ-055518 of Police Station Banihal upon petitioner on 04.05.2022 without
delay, notice of detention has been given to petitioner/detenue and contents of detention warrant
and grounds of detention had been read over to the petitioner in English and explained to him in
Urdu/Kashmiri language which the petitioner has fully understood and in lieu thereof, petitioner
has appended his signature on the execution report in English, which clearly establishes that the
petitioner in addition to Urdu or Kashmiri language also understands English, moreso,
petitioner/detenu has been informed that he can make representation to the Government as well as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143554610/ 4
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
to the detaining authority against his detention. The arguments of learned counsel for petitioner,
therefore, are legally untenable, repelled, discarded and rejected.
8. The 3rd argument canvassed by learned counsel for the petitioner is, that the petitioner has not
been supplied with essential material of detention record which has debarred him from making
effective representation to the Government or to the detaining authority which is serious infraction
of Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India r/w Section 13 of J&K Public Safety Act 1978 and the
same vitiates the detention order. It is apt to reiterate here, that bare perusal of the detention record
demonstrates that the impugned detention order No. DMR/45-50 has been passed by respondent
No.2-District Magistrate Ramban on 27.04.2022 on the strength of material like dossier submitted
by respondent No.3-SSP Ramban vide his endorsement No. CB/Dossier/21/2005 dated
20.04.2022. The grounds of detention have been clearly delineated by respondent No. 2 which read
as under:-
"You Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar S/O Noor Gujjar R/O Village Krawha, Tehsil Banihal
District Ramban, as per dossier prepared by Senior Superintendent of Police,
Ramban do hereby informed that you are reportedly involved in anti-
national/anti-social activities, creating law and order problems in Banihal, that you
made an attempt to promote enmity between two different religious groups which in
turn could spiral wave of violence and hatred between different social/religious
groups, that you are reportedly as notorious criminal and is one of the sympathizers
and well-wishers of the outlawed of Jammu and Kashmir Hurriyat Group, which
aims to liberate the UT of J&K, from Union of India by means of
Anti-National/Anti-social/criminal activities. The subject is involved in anti- national
activities within the jurisdiction of Police Station Banihal and its surrounding areas.
The subject is involved in organizing Hartals/Bandhs in Banihal area on the instance
and call given by the Hurriyat leaders from Kashmir Valley. The subject is instigating
the people of the Banihal area especially the youth against the democratically
established government of J&K, and Union of India. The subject forces and instigates
youth of the area to raise anti-national slogans against the Government of J&K as
well as Union of India and in favour of the alien country i.e. Pakistan, thereby
creating hostile atmosphere in the Banihal area and its surroundings. Due to his
active instigation, abetment and provocation, the strikes are being organized with the
association of other likeminded persons of the area. There is every apprehension of
law & order problem as well as anti- national rallies in Banihal area, which will vitiate
peaceful atmosphere having both communities i.e. Muslims and Hindus. The subject
is a history sheeter and involved in number of cases at Police Station Banihal. The
subject in connivance with likeminded people of the area has been conducting
meetings at unknown places with the intention to instigate the youth against the
Nation and to direct them to the obsession of so-called freedom. Some of the highly
objectionable activities of the subject are briefly enumerated as under:-
1. "FIR No. 155/2017 u/s 302/307/120-B/121-A/382/RPC, 7/27 I.A.Act of P/S
Banihal:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143554610/ 5
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
That on 20-09-2017 at 1915 hours a reliable information was received at police
station Banihal to the effect that nafri of 14th BN. SSB (F) deployed for Tunnel
protection duty with NAVYUGA company at Tethar when returning from duty
towards their Camp, reached near Masque Gund about 1900 hours, were fired upon
by some unknown militants, who were equipped with weapon as a result of which one
Head Constable Ram Parvesh got martyred on the spot while ASI Sham Singh got
critically injured. The unknown militants took away (1) one Rifle AR-41 Butt No.74,
Reg.No.MBD51-5257, with 03 no of Magazines and 90 cartridges of 7.62 MM (2) one
Insas Rifle Butt no.421, Reg. No.16955025 with one magazine and 20 cartridges of
5.56 MM and fled away from the spot. On this information the above said FIR was
registered in Police Station Banihal. During the course of investigation, it has came to
light that militants namely 01- Gazanfar lqbal Khan S/O Mohd Yaqoob Khan R/O
Kaskoot 02- Mohd Arif Wani S/O Ghulam Hassan Wani R/O Asher 03-Aqib Waheed
Najar R/O Kaskoot hatched criminal conspiracy with common criminal intention to
kill the security officials and snatched weapon of SSB personnel's. These militants
attacked the SSB party at Gund Thethar and started indiscriminate firing resulting
into the death of Head Constable Ram Parvesh and injuries to ASI Sham Singh, they
also snatched (1) one Rifle AR-41 Butt No.74, Reg.No.MBD51-5257, with 3 no of
Magazines and 90 cartridges of 7.62 MM (2) one lnsas Rifle Butt no.421, Reg.
No.16955025 with one magazine and 20 cartridges of 5.56 and fled away. All the
three militants were arrested from Kaskoot and Nawgam area of Banihal and
snatched arms/ammunition alongwith weapon of offence were recovered from their
possession.
During sustained interrogation at JIC Jammu, the above said militants confessed
regarding possession of one live grenade which was also recovered from Asher forest
area and two more accused namely Nazir Ahmed S/O Abdul Ahad R/O Verinag and
Mohd Ibrahim S/O Noor Mohd Gujjar R/O Krawah, Tehsil Banihal, District Ramban
were also arrested. During investigation, role of both the persons surfaced who
assisted all the above three militants in carrying the attack on security forces. After
completing all legal formalities the challen was produced against the accused person
namely Mohd Ibrahim, S/O Noora Gujjar, R/O Krawah, Tehsil Banihal, District
Ramban before the Hon'ble Sessions Court, Ramban. The subject is under trial.
01. The activities of the subject are very harmful and highly prejudicial for the peace,
prosperity, tranquility, integrity and security of the UT particularly in Banihal area.
02. The subject remains instigating and provoking the general masses particularly
youths of Banihal area and adjoining area against the Government and
creating/disturbing Banihal area and adjoining area against the Government and
creating/disturbing peaceful atmosphere in Banihal area. He also tries to create
communal tension and usually remain busy in recruiting/indulging youth in
militancy related activities.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143554610/ 6
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
The subject is on the footprints of the Hurriyat leaders of Srinagar who are instigating the youth for
stone pelting thereby disturbing the peaceful atmosphere in Banihal and its surrounding areas,
resulting into the obstruction of disturbing the free flow of traffic, free and peaceful running of
business establishments and private establishments. These anti-social and anti-national activities of
the subject like strikes are hindrance in the free and peaceful studies of young school going children.
That the subject is still at large and his remaining at large is a great security risk and thus there is a
urgent need to detain him under the provisions of the J&K Public Safety Act.
From the above mentioned facts, it is evident that criminal activities committed by the subject are
serious in nature which involves spreading enmity between the people of different religion/regions
which could be detrimental to the regional harmony as well as security of the UT.
Whereas it is brought out through the dossier that the subject is creating hostile environment in
Banihal area by arranging hartals, bandh calls and strikes thereby disturbing a free and peaceful
atmosphere Whereas, the contents of the dossier have been perused with thorough care and having
regard to the law governing the situation in the instant case and the strong inputs received from
time to time by various agencies indicate that the subject is arranging and conducting secret
meetings of anti-national elements at various places till date. This clearly shows the oblique motives
of the subject to keep the pot of insurgency boiling. Hence the activities of the subject are highly
objectionable, anti-national and prejudicial to the maintenance of the peace in the area as well as UT
of J&K. Therefore, a clear case has been made out that the subject has entered into a criminal
conspiracy as a part of large game plan to disrupt the peaceful environment and incite regional
tension which could take more serious turn by creating wedge between different social groups apart
from being a serious impediment to the flow of traffic on National Highway which in turn could
hinder the trade and commerce activities between the two regions of the state as well as with rest of
the Country. Banihal is the strategic gateway on the National Highway towards the Kashmir Valley.
Therefore, the activities of the subject have a potential of igniting a cycle of violence in the UT of
J&K. Given the historical background of the law and order situation in the sensitive UT the criminal
conspiracy of the subject is clearly made out to be a rare incident of its kind which is aimed at
disturbing public order and peace in the area. Whereas, Section 8(3) (b) of the J&K Public Safety Act
spell out the meaning of "acting in any manner prejudicial to maintenance of public order which is
as follows;-
1). Promoting propagation or attempting to create feeling of enmity or hatred or disharmony on
ground of religion, race, cast, community or region.
2). Making preparations for using or attempting to use or using or Instigating, inciting, provoking or
otherwise abetting the use of force where such preparation, using attempting, instigating, inciting,
provoking or abetting, disturbs or likely to disturb public order.
3). Attempting to commit, or committing or instigating, inciting, provoking or otherwise abetting
the commission or, mischief within the meaning of Section 425 of IPG where commission of such
mischief disturbs or likely to disturb public order.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143554610/ 7
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
4). Attempting to commit, or committing or instigating, inciting, provoking or otherwise abetting
the commission of an offence punishable with death of imprisonment for life or imprisonment of a
term extending to seven years or more, where the commission of such offence disturbs the , or likely
to disturb public order.
The activities of the subject which are anti-national and anti-social and prejudicial to the security
and peaceful atmosphere of the Banihal area as such fit into the legal meaning of being prejudicial to
the maintenance of public order. Therefore, there is dire need to prevent the subject from such
activities. Whereas, perusal of the dossier submitted by Superintendent of Police, Ramban read with
the provisions of the J&K Public Safety Act makes it evident that the subject is involved in acts
detrimental to public order.
Detention record further demonstrates that the order of detention dated 27.04.2022 has been
served upon the petitioner/detenue on 04.05.2022 without any delay, whereby, copies of detention
order (01 leaf), Notice of detention (01 leaf), grounds of detention (04 leaves), copies of FIRs,
statements of witnesses and other related relevant documents total 06 leaves have been handed
over/furnished to the petitioner/detenue through Executing officer, Inspector Neam-Ul-Haq No.
EXJ.055518 of Police Station Banihal and receipt thereof has been given by the petitioner/detenue
by writing his name in English which clearly establishes that the petitioner understands English
language also. Moreso, the execution report depicts, that the contents of detention warrant and
grounds of detention have been read over to the petitioner/detenue in English and also explained to
him in Urdu/Kashmiri language which he fully understands and in lieu thereof, petitioner has
appended his signature on the execution report. In view of the detailed record submitted by the
respondents, it is discernable, that the petitioner/detenue has been supplied whole of the detention
record/essential material so as to enable him to make a effective representation against the said
detention order before the Government or Detaining Authority and therefore, no right much less
any right of the petitioner guaranteed to him under Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India r/w
Section 13 of Public Safety Act has been violated. Arguments of learned counsel for the petitioner
that non-supply of record/documents/ essential material to the petitioner in regard to his detention
has violated/infringed his fundamental right and debarred him from making an effective
representation, are far from reality, legally unsustainable, repelled, discarded and rejected.
9. Although right of personal liberty is most precious right, guaranteed under the Constitution,
which has been held to be transcendental, inalienable and available to a person independent of the
Constitution, yet the personal liberty may be curtailed, where a person faces a criminal charge or is
convicted of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment. A person is not to be deprived of his
personal liberty except in accordance with procedure established under law and the procedure as
laid down in Maneka Gandhi vs. Union of India, (1978 AIR SC 597), is to be just and fair. Where a
person is facing trial on a criminal charge and is temporarily deprived of his personal liberty owing
to criminal charge framed against him, he has an opportunity to defend himself and to be acquitted
of the charge in case prosecution fails to bring home his guilt. Where such person is convicted of
offence, he still has satisfaction of having been given adequate opportunity to contest the charge and
also adduce evidence in his defence. However, the framers of the Constitution have, by
incorporating Article 22(5) in the Constitution, left room for detention of a person without a formal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143554610/ 8
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
charge and trial and without such person held guilty of an offence and sentenced to imprisonment
by a competent court. Its aim and object is to save the society from activities that are likely to
deprive a large number of people of their right to life and personal liberty. In such a case it would be
dangerous for the people at large to wait and watch as by the time ordinary law is set into motion,
the person having dangerous designs, would execute his plans, exposing general public to risk and
causing colossal damage to life and property. It is for that reason, necessary to take preventive
measures and prevent the person bent upon to perpetrate mischief from translating his ideas into
action. Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India, therefore, leaves scope for enactment of preventive
detention law.
10.The essential concept of preventive detention is that the detention of a person is not to punish
him for something he has done, but to prevent him from doing it. The basis of detention is the
satisfaction of the executive of a reasonable probability of likelihood of detenue acting in a manner
similar to his past acts and preventing him by detention from doing the same. The Supreme Court in
Haradhan Saha vs. State of W.B. (1975) 3 SCC 198, points out that a criminal conviction, on the
other hand, is for an act already done, which can only be possible by a trial and legal evidence. There
is no parallel between prosecution in a Court of law and a detention order under the Act. One is a
punitive action and the other is a preventive act. In one case, a person is punished to prove his guilt
and the standard is proof, beyond reasonable doubt, whereas, in preventive detention a man is
prevented from doing something, which is necessary for reasons mentioned in the Act, to prevent.
11.Article 22 (5) of the Constitution of India and Section 13 of the J&K Public Safety Act 1978,
guarantee safeguard to detenue to be informed, as soon as may be, of grounds on which order of
detention is made, which led to the subjective satisfaction of detaining authority and also to be
afforded earliest opportunity of making representation against order of detention. Detenue is to be
furnished with sufficient particulars to enable him to make a representation, which on being
considered, may obtain relief to him. Detention record, made available by learned counsel for
respondents, reveals that detention order was made on proper application of mind to the facts of the
case and detenue was detained at the time of execution of detention order, the material and grounds
of detention and also informed that he had a right to represent against his preventive detention.
Perusal of detention order depicts its execution. It further reveals that the copy of detention
warrant, grounds of detention, notice of detention, copy of dossier etc. were received by the
petitioner-detenue which were read over and explained to detenue in Urdu/Kashmiri languages,
which detenue understood fully in token of which the signatures of detenue had been obtained. It
also divulges that detenue was informed that he can make representation to the government and
detaining authority. The grounds of detention are definite, proximate and free from any ambiguity.
The detenue has been informed with sufficient clarity what actually weighed with Detaining
Authority while passing detention order. Detaining Authority has narrated facts and figures that
made the authority to exercise its powers under Section 8 J&K Public Safety Act 1978 and record
subjective satisfaction that detenue was required to be placed under preventive detention in order to
prevent him from acting in any manner prejudicial to the security of the State.
12.Further, by in depth perusal of the grounds of detention, one cannot lose sight of the fact that
petitioner/detenue actively and covertly takes part in anti-national/anti social activities and has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143554610/ 9
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
tried to spoil the peaceful atmosphere of Banihal area, as he has already remained involved in case
FIR No. 155/2017 u/s 302/307/120-B/121-A/382 RPC and 7/27 Arms Act which made basis to book
him under the Public Safety Act so as to prevent him from acting in a manner similar to his past acts
or engaging in activities prejudicial to security of the State or maintenance of public order. Further,
the sponsoring authority has not only supplied the material, viz; dossier, containing gist of the
activities of the detenue, but has also supplied the grounds of detention. All this material was before
the detaining authority when it arrived at subjective satisfaction that activities of the detenue were
prejudicial to maintenance of public order and requires preventive detention of detenue. Moreso, if
in any given case a single act is found to be not sufficient to sustain the order of detention that may
well be quashed, but it cannot be stated as a principle that one single act cannot constitute the basis
for detention. On the contrary, it does. In other words, it is not necessary that there should be
multiplicity of grounds for making or sustaining an order of detention. The same views and
principles were reiterated by the Apex Court in Goutam Jain vs. Union of India, AIR 2017 SC 230. In
the present case, the petitioner-detenue seems to be a hard core criminal having links with militants
and has become a terror figure among the people of the area as against him one FIR came to be
registered in police station Banihal under various sections of the IPC and Arms Act and since 2017
the petitioner/detenue exists in the list of Over Ground Worker (OGW). Since the actions taken
against the petitioner-detenue under the ordinary law from time to time have not been proved to be
deterrent, as such, the respondents had no other option but to keep him in preventive detention.
13.Personal liberty is one of the most cherished freedoms, perhaps more important than the other
freedoms guaranteed under the Constitution. It was for this reason that the Founding Fathers
enacted the safeguards in Article 22 in the Constitution so as to limit the power of the State to detain
a person without trial, which may otherwise pass the test of Article 21, by humanizing the harsh
authority over individual liberty. In a democracy governed by the rule of law, the drastic power to
detain a person without trial for security of the State or maintenance of public order must be strictly
construed. However, where individual liberty comes into conflict with an interest of the security of
the State or public order, then the liberty of the individual must give way to the larger interest of the
nation. These observations have been made by the Supreme Court in The Secretary to Government,
Public (Law and Order-F) and another vs. Nabila and another (2015) 12 SCC 127.
14.In the present case, the petitioner has been involved in FIR No. 155/2017 u/s
302/307/120-B/121-A/382/RPC, 7/27 I.A. Act registered at Police Station Banihal. The petitioner
actively and covertly takes part in anti national/anti social activities and tried to spoil the peaceful
atmosphere of Banihal area. Petitioner/detenue exists in the list of Over Ground Worker (OGW) and
if he remains free in the society, he would definitely indulge in criminal activities and would be
danger to the public peace and tranquility, therefore, the presence of subject in society is certainly
prejudicial to the maintenance of public order, peace and tranquility and safety of citizens of the
area. From the bare perusal of the FIR and the allegations therein against the petitioner, it is
discernable, that the petitioner is a hardcore criminal, has become a terror figure among the people
of the area, the actions taken against him under ordinary law from time to time have not been
proved to be deterrent. It seems that petitioner/detenue instead of mending his ways has
continuously been indulging in criminal activities and has not shown any respect for the law of the
land, as such, the petitioner/detenue has created a sense of alarm, scare and a feeling of insecurity
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143554610/ 10
Mohd Ibrahim Gujjar Age 23 Years ... vs Union Territory Of J&K Through Its ... on 17 February, 2023
in the minds of the public of the area, has become a chronic fear amongst the people of the area.
Thus, the activities of the petitioner are of hardcore criminal and habitual nature of indulging in acts
of murder, Arms Act and other criminal nature, hence, petitioner has been rightly detained by
Respondent No. 2, therefore, the detention order issued vide order No. DMR/45-50 dated
27.04.2022, does not suffer from any illegality, propriety and perversity, the same is
affirmed/upheld.
15. For the foregoing discussion, the petition sans any merit, is accordingly, dismissed along with
connected application(s), if any.
16.Registry to return the detention record against proper receipt.
(MOHAN LAL) JUDGE Jammu 17.02.2023 Vijay Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No Whether
the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/143554610/ 11
