Mohd. Sadiq vs The Jammu Municipal Corporation on 17 August, 2023
Mohd. Sadiq vs The Jammu Municipal Corporation on 17
August, 2023
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU AND KASHMIR & LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRR No. 95/2006
IA No. 78/2006
Reserved on: 6" June 2023
Pronounced on: 17" August 2023
Mohd. Sadiq. ...Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. Amrish Kapoor, Advocate.
v/S
The Jammu Municipal Corporation, = = ----_..... Respondent (s)
Through :- Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy. AG.
CORAM: HON'BLE.:MR CE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE.
1. Impugned in this p udgment dated 19.12.2006, passed by learned 2" Addi Appellate Court), vide
which judgment _ 7 2p sed by learned Special Municipal Magistrate, Jammu, (the Trial Court),
against the petitioner under sections 7/16 of the Prevention of Food Adulteration Act, 1954 (the Act,
for short), has been upheld.
2. Before the grounds of challenge urged in the petition are adverted to, it shall be apt to have an
overview of the background facts.
3. The petitioner is a milk vendor. On 22.11.2002, the respondent, Food Inspector, along with his
colleagues inspected his shop at Talab Khatikan Jammu, and collected the sample of 1500 gms of
mixed milk, against a payment of Rs. 15 as price of the sample. The sample was divided into three
equal parts. After the requisite legal formalities, one of the samples in Form No. 7 was handed over
in a sealed cover to the Public Analyst, Jammu, which after analysis, was found to be adulterated.
The remaining two parts of samples with Form No. 7 were handed over to the Local (Health)
Authority. Consequently, a complaint under Section 7 read with Section 16 of the Act, came to be
lodged against the petitioner and it appears that after filing of the complaint, intimation letter
envisaged under section 13(2) of the Act, was given to the petitioner, whereby he was notified about
the report of the Public Analyst as also the sanction accorded for prosecution, through registered
post on 22.12.2003. The respondent/ complainant in order to prove the accusations, besides
himself, examined Inspector Rehmat Ali. The peti offences under sectio petitioner/accused in his
stat Section 342 CrPC (corresponding to Section 313 of Central C nied the inculpatory circumstances
arrogated to him' bs 'stating ilk vetidor, he is not involved in selling adulterated milk, was lodged
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170660358/ 1
Mohd. Sadiq vs The Jammu Municipal Corporation on 17 August, 2023
against him and witnesses have made false statements against him. He did not produce any defense
evidence. On conclusion of the trial, the petitioner was found guilty and was sentenced to undergo
simple imprisonment for three months and pay fine of Rs. 500/- and in default to pay fine, further
ordered to undergo imprisonment of fifteen days.
4. Having heard the rival contentions, I have given my thoughtful consideration to the facts and
circumstances attending the case as also the law, which governs the field.
5. Although petitioner has questioned the impugned judgment on multiple grounds, yet Mr. Amrish
Kapoor, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has confined his arguments primarily on the
following three grounds:
(i) that after the Amendment of the Act, in 1976, the Local (Health) Authority is
obliged to forward a copy of the report of the result of the analysis, to the accused,
thereby informing him that, if he so desires, he may make an application to the Court
to get the sample of article of food, analyzed by the Central Food Laboratory, within a
period of ten days from the date 'report, which prosecution has 'rendering the entire
o buttress, he has relied upon Deboo reported as 1988 SCC
(ii) that there is no evidence on the record to establish that copy of Public Analyst
report, purported to have been served by registered post, was received by the
petitioner, as mere dispatch of document without proof of service was not sufficient.
He has relied upon Food Inspector, Guntur vs Bavirisetty Hanumanth Rao reported
as 1993 SCC Online (AP) 252; and
(iii) that since report of the Public Analyst was not put to the petitioner/accused
during his examination under section 342 CrPC, therefore, it cannot be formed basis
for conviction. He has relied upon State (Delhi Administration) vs Dharampaul
reported as AIR 2001 SC 2924; and Basavaraj R. Patil & Ors vs State of Karnataka &
Ors reported as AIR 2000 (SC) 3214.
6. Sections 8 to 13 of the Act deal with ANALYSIS OF FOOD. Section 11 of the Act lays down the
procedure to be followed by the Food Inspector. The Food Inspector, except in special cases
provided by rules under the Act, is bound to divide the sample so taken by him into three parts
under Section 11 (1) (b) and in terms of clause (c) (i) of sub section 1, he is obliged to send one of the:
aid:sample to Public Analyst under Authority of the result of the analysis of any article of food
submitted to him.
7. Now, the entire controversy hovers around Section 13 (2) of the Act, which reads thus:
"13 (2). On receipt of the report of the result of the analysis under sub-section (1) to
the effect that the article of food is adulterated, the Local (Health) Authority shall,
after the institution of prosecution against the persons from whom the sample of the
article of food was taken and the person, if any, whose name, address and other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170660358/ 2
Mohd. Sadiq vs The Jammu Municipal Corporation on 17 August, 2023
particulars have been disclosed under section 14A, forward, in such manner as may
be prescribed, a copy of the report of the result of the analysis to such person or
persons, as the case may be, informing such person or persons that if it is so desired,
either or both of them may make an application to the court within a period of ten
days from the date of receipt of the copy of the report to get the sample of the article
of food kept by the Local (Health) Authority analysed by the Central Food
Laboratory."
8. If we take a stock of Section 13(2) of the Act, it is manifest that Local (Health) Authority, after the
institution of prosecution against the persons, from whom sample of the article of food was taken
and the person, if any, whose name, address and other particulars have been disclosed under
Section 14, is obliged to forward, a copy of the report of the Public Analyst received by him under
sub:se¢ etion 13 of the Act, to such person s:may be prescribed. In addition to forwarding a copy
port, the Local. (Health) Authority shall also inform, such perso ons of his/their right to make an the
Court within a period of ten days from the date "of: of the said report to get the sample of article of
food, kept by the Local (Health) Authority, analyzed by the Central Food Laboratory. Be it noted
that Section 13(2) of the Act contemplates not only forwarding of copy of report of the Public
Analyst to the accused but also an intimation in writing that he may make an application before the
Court for second analysis by the Central Food Laboratory. It confers a valuable right upon the
accused for adopting recourse to appropriate defense. It is pertinent to underline that a certificate
issued by the Director Food, of the Central Food Laboratory under sub section 3 of Section 13,
supersedes the report given by the Public Analyst under sub section 1. In other words, in case of
conflict between the reports of the Public Analyst and Central Food Laboratory, it is the later which
gets better off. A careful reading of Section 13 (2) of the Act would indicate that it intends to provide
certain safeguards and rights to the accused. Therefore, Section 13(2) of the Act, commanding the
Prosecuting Authority to forward a copy of the report of the Public Analyst to the accused, as also
informing him to make an application to the Court within the stipulated period for getting the said
sample kept by Local (Health) Authority analyzed by the Central Food Laboratory, after institution
of the prosecution, is mandatory and non-observance thereof shall vitiate the trial. The following
observation of Hon'ble Supreme in Municipal Corporation Delhi vs Ghisa Ram reported as AIR 1967
SCC 970, would clinch the issue:
"Tt appears to us that when a valuable right i is confined by Section 13 (2) of the Act
on the vendor to have the sample given to him analysed by the Director of the Central
Food Laboratory, it is to. be 'expected that the prosecution will proceed i in | Such a
'manner that Fight will not be denied to the Director supersedes the report of the
Public Analyst and is treated as conclusive evidence of its contents. Obviously, the
right has been given to the vendor in order that, for his, satisfaction and proper
defence, he should be able to have the sample kept in his charge analysed by a greater
expert whose certificate is to be accepted by Court as conclusive evidence. In a case
where there is denial of this right on account of the deliberate conduct of the
prosecution, we think that the vendor, in his trial, is so seriously prejudiced that it
would not be proper to uphold his conviction on the basis of the report of the Public
Analyst, even though that report continues to be evidence in the case of the facts
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170660358/ 3
Mohd. Sadiq vs The Jammu Municipal Corporation on 17 August, 2023
contained therein."
9. A similar view has been taken in State of Punjab vs Deboo (supra), relevant excerpt whereof reads
as below:
"Thus, in our considered view. both the requirements of section 13(2) of the Act i.e.
the sending of the report of the Public Analyst and drawal of specific attention of the
accused to his right, are mandatory and non-compliance of both or compliance of one
and not the other, would in both events be fatal to the prosecution. So, this part of
section 13(2) of the Act, we hold as mandatory non- compliance of which and in any
event uptill the commencement of effective Court proceedings would _ vitiate the
proceedings.......
10. In view of the aforesaid position of law, the question which arises for consideration, is, whether
Local (Health) Authority in the present forwarding report 'of the informing him of his right to Local
(Health) Autho Cental Food Laboratory. It is contention of the petitioner that there is no evidence
on the record to establish that copy of Public Analyst report purported to have been forwarded to
him by registered post, was actually received by him. According to learned counsel for the petitioner,
the conclusion drawn by learned Appellate Court that receipt placed on record by the prosecution
showing dispatch of letter to the petitioner by registered post, was sufficient compliance of Section
13 (2) of the Act and the presumption that document in question had been received by the
petitioner, is erroneous.
11. A perusal of the file reveals that a copy of the report of the Public Analyst has been placed on
record and a receipt indicating dispatch of the said report to the petitioner, is also part of the record
to show that petitioner was informed of his right to make an application to the Court within the
stipulated period, for getting the sample analyzed by the Central Food Laboratory. The question
which begs consideration is whether mere dispatch of letter per se raises the presumption of service
of said letter upon the petitioner.
12. The language employed under section 13(2) of the Act is that report of Public Analyst shall be
forwarded by the Local (Health) Authority to the accused, in such manner as may be prescribed.
Therefore, mere proof of dispatch of the report::o malyst, is not sufficient proof of bd service of
notice upon the a icularly when. service of said notice is in question. The responden mess, should
have taken immediate steps to examine. the postal to prove the: actual delivery of the registered
cover on't the acknowledgment card has not been produced an exhrbited:and no attempt has been
made by the prosecution to explain as to why same was not tendered in evidence. The prosecution,
is obliged to satisfy Section 13(2) of the Act by actually serving a copy of the report of the Public
Analyst on the accused. The prosecution could do so by examining the postal authority who
delivered the registered letter to the petitioner by exhibiting the signature of the petitioner on the
postal acknowledgment card, which as already stated, has not been placed on record. Therefore,
learned Appellate Court was not correct in holding that there was presumption of receipt of copy of
Public Analyst's Report by the petitioner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170660358/ 4
Mohd. Sadiq vs The Jammu Municipal Corporation on 17 August, 2023
13. I am supported in my view by Food Inspector, Guntur (supra)
14. The argument of learned counsel for the respondent that service of notice envisaged under
Section 13(2) of the Act shall be deemed to be affected, by properly addressing and posting by
registered post under Section 27 of the General Clauses Act, is also misconceived. Section 27 of the
General Clauses Act provides that when a document is served by post, whether the expression
"serve" or either of the expressions "give" or "send" or any other expression is used, then, unless a
different intention appears, the service shall be deemed to be effected, by properly addressing,
pre-paying and posting by registered post, a letter containing the document, and unless the contrary
is proved, to have been effected at the time at which the letter would be delivered, in the ordinary
course of post. It is evident on careful perusal of this.S x properly addressed, the post business of the
post offi proved by the concerned Postal Authority issuing the receipt of registered post. Back to the
present case, neither prosecution has examined the Postal Authority to prove the postal receipt
placed on record nor the acknowledgment has been placed on record to prove that notice was
actually acknowledged by the petitioner, nor the postman has been examined to prove that it was
actually delivered upon the petitioner.
15. Be that as it may, there can be no presumption of service of notice in a criminal prosecution in
which accused is liable to be convicted and sentenced to jail. General Clauses Act cannot be attracted
in a criminal prosecution, which entails conviction, imprisonment and fine. The prosecution,
therefore, is bound to satisfy the requirement of Section 13(2) of the Act by actually serving a copy of
report of Public Analysts on the accused. Since, prosecution, in the instant case, has failed to
establish that notice envisaged under Section 13(2) of the Act was actually served upon the
petitioner and acknowledged by him, therefore, prosecution has failed to comply with the
requirements of Section 13(2) of the Act and it vitiates the trial.
16. Further observation of learned Appellate Court that since neither accused pleaded before learned
Trial Court, nor did he do so in his statement under section 342 CrPC, that his right under Section
13(2) of the Act has he been violated, therefore owed to raise the said plea at the is so because
Section 13 (2) of the Act is held to be mandatory ; and, therefore, it is a question of prejudice and
plea of prejudic aised at any stage of the prosecution even at a later stage, b fore th al or Appellate
Forum.
17. The petitioner has also assailed the impugned judgment on the ground that since report of Public
Analyst was not put to him during his examination under Section 342 of CrPC, therefore, he was
deprived of his right to explain the incriminating evidence which was likely to be used against him.
18. It is by far a crystalized position of law that attention of the accused should be drawn to every
inculpatory circumstance appearing in the prosecution evidence, so as to enable him to explain it.
This principle is founded on the doctrine of Justice and Fair play. It is also trite that if incriminating
or inculpatory evidence is not put to the accused during his examination under Section 342 CrPC,
the Court must eschew such evidence from consideration. The record of the present case bears
testimony to the fact that petitioner was not put to explain the Public Analyst report while he was
examined under Section 342 CrPC. Section 342 CrPC is not an empty formality. The accused must
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170660358/ 5
Mohd. Sadiq vs The Jammu Municipal Corporation on 17 August, 2023
be questioned separately about each incriminating circumstance appearing in the prosecution
evidence, intended to be used against him. The object behind Section 342 CrPC is to provide fair and
proper opportunity to the accused of explaining circumstances which appear against him. This
opportunity must be real and adequate. Omission on the part of the prosecution to put inculpatory
material to the accused, on specific and material points vitiates the trial. Hon'ble Supreme Court in
S. Harna: A dmn.) reported as AIR 1976 SC 2140, while under mport of Section 342 of CrPC and
obligation of the Trial Court in th ect, has ruled as below:
"Section 342 of the Code « C1 iminal Procedure, 1898, casts a duty on the Court at
any enquiry or trial, questions to the accused for the purpose of enabling him to
explain any circumstances appearing in the evidence against him. It follows as a
necessary corollary therefrom that each material circumstance appearing in evidence
against the accused is required to be put to him specifically, distinctly and separately.
Failure to do so amounts to a serious irregularity vitiating the trial if it is shown to
have prejudiced the accused. If the irregularity does not, in fact, occasion a failure of
justice, it is curable under Section 537 of the Code."
19. An identical view has been expressed in Basavaraj R. Patil (supra).
20. It is manifest from the aforequoted observation of Hon'ble Supreme Court that if incriminatory
circumstance is not separately and distinctly put to the accused during his examination under
Section 342 CrPC, it being a serious irregularity, vitiates the trial, if it is shown to have prejudiced
the accused. In the instant case, since prosecution not only failed to prove service of the notice under
section 13 (2) of the Act on the petitioner, but also its due acknowledgment by him, therefore, use of
report of Public Analyst against the him without same being put to him during his examination,
under Section 342 CrPC, and affording him a fair opportunity to explain such inculpatory material,
certainly occasioned a prejudice to the petitioner, which resulted in miscarriage of justice.
Therefore, conviction cannot be sustained on this co
21. 2en observed.and discussed above, what comes to the fore is that, on 13(2) of the Act, Local
(Health) Authority is not nly obliged e report of the Public Analyst to the acc sec 'to make an
application to the Court within the stipulatedperiod:for getting the same analyzed by the Central
Food Laboratory, after institution of the prosecution and non- observance thereof, shall vitiate the
trial. Mere dispatch of the report of Public Analyst, is not sufficient proof of service of notice upon
the accused, particularly when service of said notice is in question. It is also held that General
Clauses Act cannot be attracted in a criminal prosecution, which entails conviction and
imprisonment and fine. The accused must be questioned separately about each inculpatory
circumstance appearing in the prosecution evidence, which is intended to be used against him and
omission on the part of the prosecution to do so on specific and material points, shall vitiate the
trial.
22. Having regard to the aforesaid, learned Appellate Court has fallen in grave error of law to uphold
the conviction and sentence recorded by learned Trial Court. Hence, the present revision petition is
allowed and the impugned judgment being illegal and perverse, is _ set-aside.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170660358/ 6
Mohd. Sadiq vs The Jammu Municipal Corporation on 17 August, 2023
Consequently, petitioner is acquitted and is relived of his bail bonds.
23. Record of the Trial Court be returned with convenient dispatch.
24. Disposed of on the above terms.
(RAJESH SEKHRI) JUDGE Jammu:
17.08.2023 "Hamid"
igment is Speaking? Yes igment is Report ble? Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170660358/ 7
