Mohd. Shakoor Age 24 Years S/O Mohd. ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 27 March, 2023
Mohd. Shakoor Age 24 Years S/O Mohd. ... vs Union Territory Of
Jammu & Kashmir ... on 27 March, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
Sr. No. 104
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Bail App No. 435/2022
a/w connected CrlMs in
CRM (M) No. 956/2022
Reserved on : 17.03.2023
Pronounced on: 27.03.2023
C qp
Mohd. Shakoor age 24 years S/o Mohd. Bashir R/o ....Petitioner(s)
Mora Tehsil Koteranka District Rajouri.
Through :- Mr.. Ch. Mohd. Shabir, Advocate
V/s
1. Union Territory of Jammu & Kashmir through ....Respondent(s)
SHO Police Station Kandi Rajouri;
2. Rubia Kousar w/o Zafer Hussain R/O Mora
Tehsil Koteranka District Rajouri (impleaded as
respondent No.2 in terms of order of this court
dated 11.01.2023).
Through :- Mr. Bhanu Jasrotia, GA.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE
O R D E R
27.03.2023
1. Petitioner has preferred instant bail application under Section 438 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure (hereinafter referred to as the "Code") for grant of bail in his favour in anticipation of his
arrest in case FIR No. 118/2022 dated 05.11.2022 registered with Police Station Kandi Rajouri for
commission of offences under Sections 376, 506 and 458 IPC on the grounds, that the petitioner is a
young respectable person of 24 years of age, law abiding citizen of India and permanent resident of
UT of J&K and presently serving in Indian Army and has been falsely implicated in the aforesaid
FIR by respondent No.2 who has filed a false and frivolous complaint in the Police Station Kandi
Rajouri; that the registration of FIR is a sheer abuse of process of law, as the parties have dispute of
land since long for the last ten years; that respondent No. 2 has filed the complaint to pressurize the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186751755/ 1
Mohd. Shakoor Age 24 Years S/O Mohd. ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 27 March, 2023
petitioner for getting Rs. 10 lacs, as she retracted from her baseless complaint in Panchayat Biradari
held on 30.09.2022 wherein in the said Panchayat she has admitted that the dispute between the
parties stood resolved, but still she is exploiting the petitioner, whereby, the impugned FIR has been
lodged by her after a lapse of 52 days of occurrence just for ruining the service carrier of the
petitioner. It is averred, that respondent No. 1 is calling the petitioner in police station for the last
few days and is hell bent to arrest him, but the fact remains that the petitioner is not involved in
commission of any offence, petitioner has strong apprehension of his arrest by the police and in case
he is arrested, he shall suffer irreparable loss to his reputation, he seeks indulgence of this Court to
grant anticipatory bail to him on any terms and conditions, as there is no question of his jumping
over the bail, as he also undertakes that he will co- operate with the investigation and will not
temper the evidence.
2. Respondent No. 1 has also not filed the response/objections to the bail application, therefore,
learned counsel for the respondent No. 1 has adduced arguments in opposing the grant of
anticipatory bail to the petitioner. Respondent No. 2 has been impleaded as a necessary party in the
petition in terms of the order of this Court dated 11.01.2023. Registered notice was served upon the
respondent No. 2, but despite the service of notice as is evident from the postal receipt dated
17.01.2023 appended with the file, respondent No. 2 has chosen not to contest the petition,
therefore, by the order of this Court dated 17.03.2023, respondent No.2 has been proceeded
ex-parte.
3. Learned counsel for petitioner while seeking anticipatory bail in favour of the petitioner has
vehemently canvassed arguments, that as per the complaint lodged by the complainant/respondent
No.2 before the police station, the date of occurrence has been mentioned as 26.09.2022 whereas
the FIR has been lodged on 05.11.2022 after an inordinate delay 52 days. It is argued, that the
allegations leveled against the petitioner stem not from motives of furthering the ends of justice, but
from some ulterior motives activated by mala-fides, as there is unexplained delay which is fatal for
prosecution, delay of 52 days in lodging FIR has seriously dented the veracity, creditworthiness and
reliability of the prosecution case, as no explanation has come forth from the prosecutrix as why she
kept silent/mum for 52 days or what prevented her to lodge the FIR. It is vehemently argued, that
FIR should be lodged with promptitude so that there could be no chance for concoction or colored
version, moreso, the petitioner is serving in Indian Army and cannot be expected to abscond and
flee from justice and influence the prosecutrix, petitioner has no criminal history and taking into
consideration the accusations and there being no possibility of his freeing from justice and 52 days
delay in lodging FIR, petitioner is entitled to grant of anticipatory bail. To support his arguments,
learned counsel has relied upon (i) Bhadresh Bipinbhai Sheth versus State of Gujarat and Anr. [2015
Legal Eagal (SC) 1183], (ii) Partap Versus State of UP and others, [Criminal Misc.
Anticipatory Bail Application No. 4583 of 2020], (iii) Sumedh Singh Saini Versus State of Punjab
and Anr. [Criminal Appeal No. 827 of 2020 arising from SLP (Criminal) No. 4336/2020] & (iv)
Krishan Vs. State [Bail Application No. 3316/2021 decided by High Court of Delhi on 15.11.2021].
4. Ld. GA Per contra, has opposed the grant of anticipatory bail by strenuously arguing, that the
accusations against the petitioner are grave and serious as he has committed offence of rape upon
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186751755/ 2
Mohd. Shakoor Age 24 Years S/O Mohd. ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 27 March, 2023
the prosecutrix, the offence of rape is punishable upto maximum imprisonment for life, the
investigation is at infancy and the custodial interrogation of the accused is required. It is argued,
that the offence of rape is against the society at large, therefore, the individual interest of the
petitioner/accused should not outweigh the larger interest of the society, instant case is of huge
public importance, therefore, the bail application deserves to be dismissed.
5. I have heard Ld. Counsel for petitioner/accused and Ld. GA for respondents. I have also gone
through the relevant law on the subject matter meticulously. Before I proceed further, I would like
to discuss the law relating to the grant of anticipatory bail as has been developed through judicial
interpretative process. A judgment which needs to be pointed out is a Constitution Bench judgment
of Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court in the case of Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia and others v. State of Punjab,
[(1980) 2 SCC 565], which emphasized that the provision of anticipatory bail enshrined in Section
438 of the Code is conceptualized under Article 21 of the Constitution which relates to personal
liberty. Therefore, such a provision calls for liberal interpretation of Section 438 of the Code in light
of Article 21 of the Constitution. The Code explains that an anticipatory bail is a pre-arrest legal
process which directs that if the person in whose favour it is issued is thereafter arrested on the
accusation in respect of which the direction is issued, he shall be released on bail. A direction under
Section 438 is therefore, intended to confer conditional immunity from the „touch(cid:128) or confinement
contemplated by Section 46 of the Code. In a Division Bench judgment of Siddharam Satlingappa
Mhetre v. State of Maharashtra and ors. [(2011) 1 SCC 694], Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court has laid down
an exhaustive commentary of Section 438 of the Code covering, in an erudite fashion, almost all the
aspects which in the process relies upon the aforesaid Constitution Bench judgment in Gurbaksh
Singh(cid:128)s case, highlighting the conflicting interests which are to be balanced while taking a decision
as to whether bail is to be granted or not. It is trite law, that the plentitude of Section 438 of the
Code must be given its full play. There is no requirement that the accused must make out a „special
case(cid:128) for exercise of power to grant anticipatory bail. This virtually reduces the salutary power
conferred by Section 438 of the Code to a dead letter. A person seeking anticipatory bail is still a free
man, entitled to the presumption of innocence.
In "Data Ram Singh vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and ors., [2018 (3) SCC 22], the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme
Court has encapsulated the concept of bail as under:-
1. A fundamental postulate of criminal jurisprudence is the presumption of
innocence, meaning thereby that a person is believed to be innocent until found
guilty. However, there are instances in our criminal law where a reverse onus has
been placed on an accused with regard to some specific offences but that is another
matter and does not detract from the fundamental postulate in respect of other
offences. Yet another important facet of our criminal jurisprudence is that the grant
of 23:32:05 IST Reason:
bail is the general rule and putting a person in jail or in a prison or in a correction
home (whichever expression one may wish to use) is an exception. Unfortunately,
some of these basic principles appear to have been lost sight of with the result that
more and more persons are being incarcerated and for longer periods. This does not
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186751755/ 3
Mohd. Shakoor Age 24 Years S/O Mohd. ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 27 March, 2023
do any good to our criminal jurisprudence or to our society.
2. There is no doubt that the grant or denial of bail is entirely the discretion of the
judge considering a case but even so, the exercise of judicial discretion has been
circumscribed by a large number of decisions rendered by this Court and by every
High Court in the country. Yet, occasionally there is a necessity to introspect whether
denying bail to an accused person is the right thing to do on the facts and in the
circumstances of a case.
3. To put it shortly, a humane attitude is required to be adopted by a judge, while
dealing with an application for remanding a suspect or an accused person to police
custody or judicial custody. There are several reasons for this including maintaining
the dignity of an accused person, howsoever poor that person might be, the
requirements of Article 21 of the Constitution and the fact that there is enormous
overcrowding in prisons, leading to social and other problems as noticed by this
Court in In Re-Inhuman Conditions in 1382 Prisons.
4. The historical background of the provision for bail has been elaborately and lucidly
explained in a recent decision delivered in Nikesh Tarachand Shah v.
Union of India 2 going back to the days of the Magna Carta. In that decision, reference was made to
Gurbaksh Singh Sibbia v. State of Punjab in which it is observed that it was held way back in
Nagendra Nath Chakravarti, is that bail is not to be withheld as a punishment. Reference was also
made to Emperor v. Hutchinson wherein it was observed that grant of bail is the rule and refusal is
the exception. The provision for bail is therefore age-old and the liberal interpretation to the
provision for bail is almost a century old, going back to colonial days.
In P. Chidambaram vs. Directorate of Enforcement [Criminal Appeal No. 1831/2019 (arising out of
SLP (Criminal) No. 10496/2019] Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court has further encapsulated the basic
jurisprudence relating to the concept of bail as under:-
21. Thus from cumulative perusal of the judgments cited on either side including the
one rendered by the Constitution Bench of this Court, it could be deduced that the
basic jurisprudence relating to bail remains the same inasmuch as the grant of bail is
the rule and refusal is the exception so as to ensure that the accused has the
opportunity of securing fair trial. However, while considering the same the gravity of
the offence is an aspect which is required to be kept in view by the Court. The gravity
for the said purpose will have to be gathered from the facts and circumstances arising
in each case. Keeping in view the consequences that would befall on the society in
cases of financial irregularities, it has been held that even economic offences would
fall under the category of "grave offence" and in such circumstance while considering
the application for bail in such matters, the Court will have to deal with the same,
being sensitive to the nature of allegation made against the accused. One of the
circumstances to consider the gravity of the offence is also the term of sentence that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186751755/ 4
Mohd. Shakoor Age 24 Years S/O Mohd. ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 27 March, 2023
is prescribed for the offence the accused is alleged to have committed.
Such consideration with regard to the gravity of offence is a factor which is in addition to the triple
test or the tripod test that would be normally applied. In that regard what is also to be kept in
perspective is that even if the allegation is one of grave economic offence, it is not a rule that bail
should be denied in every case since there is no such bar created in the relevant enactment passed
by the legislature nor does the bail jurisprudence provides so. Therefore, the underlining conclusion
is that irrespective of the nature and gravity of charge, the precedent of another case alone will not
be the basis for either grant or refusal of bail though it may have a bearing on principle. But
ultimately the consideration will have to be on case to case basis on the facts involved therein and
securing the presence of the accused to stand trial.
6. Ratios of the judgments (Supra) of "Data Ram Singh" & "P. Chidambaram"
cases lay down an invariable principle of law that the basic jurisprudence relating to
bail remains the same, inasmuch as, the "grant of bail is the rule" and "refusal is an
exception". In the case in hand, on perusal of scanned copy of FIR (Annexure-I) it is
depicted, that the occurrence of rape with respondent No.2 (prosecutrix) has taken
place on 26.09.2022 whereas the FIR has been registered with Police Station Kandi
Rajouri by the respondent No. 2 on 05.11.2022 after a delay of about 39 days (1
month and 09 days).
In Bhadresh Bipinbhai Sheth versus State of Gujarat and Anr. [2015 Legal Eagal (SC)
1183] relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner, Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court granted
anticipatory bail to the petitioner/accused for the reasons that there was delay of 17
years in reporting offence of rape. In Partap Versus State of UP and others, [Criminal
Misc. Anticipatory Bail Application No. 4583 of 2020] relied by the petitioner,
Allahabad High Court on 18.08.2020 granted anticipatory bail to the
petitioner/accused for the reasons that the FIR for commission of offences under
Sections 328, 342, 323, 504, 506, 376-D and 120- B IPC was lodged after
unexplained delay of 5 months. In Sumedh Singh Saini Versus State of Punjab and
Anr. [Criminal Appeal No. 827 of 2020 arising from SLP (Criminal) No. 4336/2020]
further relied by Ld. Counsel for the petitioner, Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court granted
anticipatory bail to the accused indicted for commission of culpable homicide
amounting to murder under Section 302 IPC for the reason that there was
unexplained delay of 29 years in lodging the FIR for the said offence. In Krishan Vs.
State [Bail Application No. 3316/2021 decided by High Court of Delhi on 15.11.2021]
also relied by Ld. Counsel for petitioner, anticipatory bail was granted to the
petitioner/accused in case indicted for commission of offences under Section 376 IPC
for the reasons that there was a unexplained delay 21 days in registration of the FIR.
7. Taking into account the ratio decidendi of the case laws (Supra) relied by Ld. Counsel for
petitioner, law is well settled, that when the victim is major/mature, the unexplained delay in
lodging the FIR is seriously fatal to the prosecution which entitles the accused the grant of even
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186751755/ 5
Mohd. Shakoor Age 24 Years S/O Mohd. ... vs Union Territory Of Jammu & Kashmir ... on 27 March, 2023
anticipatory bail. Taking into consideration the facts and the allegations against the
petitioner/accused, it can(cid:128)t be understood as to what stopped the victim/respondent No. 2 from
lodging the complaint of rape against the petitioner on the next day of occurrence or immediately
thereafter without any delay or why respondent No.2 remained silent for about 39 days in lodging
the report of rape against her.
8. Having regard to the facts of the case in hand, I feel that no purpose would be served in
compelling the petitioner/accused to go behind the bars as under-trial by refusing the anticipatory
bail in respect of the alleged incident of rape against him, which occurrence was reported by the
victim/prosecutrix to the police after an unexplained delay of 39 days. The investigation is in
progress, statement of the prosecution/victim stands recorded, and there is no substantial allegation
supported with proof that petitioner may abscond and flee from the course of justice and try to
influence the prosecution witnesses. In the aforesaid circumstances, even when there is a serious
charge leveled against the petitioner, that by itself should not be a reason to deny the anticipatory
bail when the matter is examined keeping in view the other factors stated above. Looking into the
fact that the FIR is delayed by 39 days without any justifiable reason, taking into consideration the
gravity of accusations and there being no possibility of the petitioner fleeing from justice, without
expressing any opinion upon the merits of the case, the petitioner is entitled to be released on
anticipatory bail at this stage. It is, therefore, ordered that in the event of arrest of the petitioner in
the case in hand, he shall be released on anticipatory bail on his furnishing personal bond in the
sum of Rs. 50,000/- with two sureties of the like amounts before the I/O with the following
conditions:-
(i) that the petitioner/accused shall make himself available for the purpose of
investigation as and when required by the Investigating Officer;
(ii) that the petitioner/accused shall not directly or indirectly make an inducement,
threat or promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade
him/her/them from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer.
9. The bail application is, accordingly, disposed of alongwith connected applications.
10.List the main petition on 08.05.2023.
Jammu: (Mohan Lal)
27.03.2023 Judge
Ram Krishan
Whether the order is speaking? Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186751755/ 6
