Mohinder Singh Age 24 Years vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir ... on 9 May, 2023
Mohinder Singh Age 24 Years vs Union Territory Of Jammu And
Kashmir ... on 9 May, 2023
Author: Mohan Lal
Bench: Mohan Lal
S. No. 5
Supp Cause List
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Bail App No. 83/2023
Reserved on: 26.04.2023
Pronounced on:09.05.2023
1. Mohinder Singh age 24 years, ...Petitioner(s)
S/o Sh.Yog Raj,
R/o Village Jakhed Tehsil Latti,
District Udhampur (J&K).
2. Mohd. Rafee age 23 years,
S/o Sher Mohd,
R/o Village Dudu Tehsil Latti,
District Udhampur (J&K).
Through: Mr. Neeraj Gupta, Advocate.
Vs.
Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir through Police ...Respondent(s)
Station Basantgarh.
Through: Mr. Sumeet Bhatia, GA.
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE MOHAN LAL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. Applicants presently lodged in District Jail Udhampur for the last almost two (2) years in case FIR
No. 19/2021 registered with Police Station Basantgarh (Udhampur) for commission of offences
punishable under Sections 376-D/342/34 IPC have claimed bail on the grounds, that after
conclusion of the investigation a formal chargesheet has been filed against them which is pending
trial in the Court of Principal Sessions Judge Udhampur wherein formal charges have been framed
against the applicants/accused, and out of 17 witnesses listed in the challan almost four (4)
witnesses including the prosecutrix have been examined. It is averred, that PW-1 (prosecutrix) on
12.04.2022 has been examined by the trial court and she in her evidence has never supported the
prosecution story and has not tendered any incriminating evidence against the applicants/accused,
and even has not identified them in the Court. It is moreso averred, that applicants/accused are
innocent, peace loving citizens of the Country and have committed no offence, otherwise also the
offences charged against the applicants/accused are not punishable with life imprisonment or death
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175133831/ 1
Mohinder Singh Age 24 Years vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir ... on 9 May, 2023
penalty, presumption of innocence always lies in favour of the applicants/accused as it is the
cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence that an accused is presumed to be innocent till guilty is
proved against him, the applicants/accused are ready to abide by all the terms and conditions
imposed by this Court.
2. Respondent has opposed the bail on the grounds, that the offences alleged against the
applicants/accused are against the interests of the society, there is every likelihood that if the
applicants/accused are enlarged on bail they would temper with the prosecution evidence. It is
contended, that allegations against the applicants/accused are serious in nature, the punishment for
the said offences is severe in nature, hence applicants/accused do not qualify for concession of bail.
3. Learned counsel for the applicants has sought their release on bail by vehemently canvassing
arguments, that applicants are peace loving citizens of the Country, have been falsely implicated in
the case as the evidence lead by PW-1 (prosecutrix of the case before the trial Court) has totally
exonerated the applicants/accused from the crime alleged, as she in her deposition has clearly
categorically stated that applicants/accused have not committed any rape upon her and even she has
not identified them in the Court. It is argued, that for the last two (2) years applicants are
languishing in District Jail Udhampur for no fault, in view of the fact that the statement of
prosecutrix has been recorded, there cannot be any apprehension on the part of the respondent that
if released on bail applicants would temper the prosecution evidence or influence the victim and
dissuade her from deposing before the court of law.
4. Learned Government Advocate for respondent has strenuously opposed the grant of bail by
articulating arguments, that applicants/accused are involved in serious crime of gang rape which is
against the society at large, the nature and character of evidence adduced by the prosecution
witnesses before the trial Court cannot be appreciated in bail application, there is reasonable
apprehension that if enlarged on bail the applicants would give slip to law and flee from the course
of justice. Prayer has been made for rejection of bail.
5. I have heard Ld. Counsel for parties, gone through the contents of bail application and objections
filed thereto by the respondents and have also gone through the relevant law on the subject matter.
The principles which generally govern the grant of bail are relatable to, (i) Seriousness of allegations,
severity of punishment, the character of evidence on which the charges is supposed to be sustained,
tempering and intimidating of witnesses and chances of running away from the trial, (ii) False
implication of the accused, allegations leveled not believable and the wrecking vengeance for
political or business reasons. It is also to be noted that at the stage of granting bail, the court can
only go into question as to whether a prima-facie case is established against the accused and cannot
go into the evidentiary value, creditability and reliability of the witnesses. In light of the principles
laid down above, the plea projected by ld. Counsel for the petitioner in the bail application requires
to be examined generally. Applicants are indicted for commission of offences u/s 376-D/342/34
IPC, for gang rape of prosectrix (PW-1). The prosecution so far has examined four (4) witnesses
included prosecutrix (PW-1) who in her deposition before the trial court has exenorated the
applicants for the commission of crime attributed to them. In a case law reported in 2010 (3) JKJ
129 (HC) (Jagdish Kumar & Ors Versus State & Ors) this Court while granting the bail to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175133831/ 2
Mohinder Singh Age 24 Years vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir ... on 9 May, 2023
accused charged for commission of offences u/ss 306/498-A RPC, and while discussing the
principles of "prima- facie case", "question of influencing the prosecution witnesses" & "approach of
the court in granting bail in non-bailable offences", in paras 17, 18 & 19 of the judgment held as
under:-
"17.While applying the aforementioned principles, it is necessary for the court to
examine the nature and gravity of the circumstances under which the offence is
committed. Existence of a prima-facie case is essential. If there is no prima-facie case,
there is no question of considering other circumstances. Even where a prima-facie
case is established, the approach of the court in the matter of bail, is not that the
accused should be detained by way of punishment but whether the presence of the
accused would be readily available for trial or that he is likely to abuse the discretion
granted in his favour by tempering with the evidence.
18. The circumstances which have been brought into focus by the respondents as also
by the learned sessions Judge, Samba are that the accused persons tried to influence
the investigation at the initial stage. The post mortem was got conducted by the
Board only through the intervention of the Dy. Commissioner. Nothing has been
revealed nor any material has been shown by the prosecution or by the learned
Principal Sessions Jude to substantiate this plea. It is mere bald assertion, which
cannot beaccepted unless there is some material to that extent.
19. Regarding the question of influencing the witnesses, it be seen that material
witnesses are parents and brothers of the deceased, which cannot be influenced.
Mere allegation that accused persons are influential is not sufficient unless there is
some material to that extent.
Ratio of the judgment (Supra) makes the legal proposition manifestly clear, that even
if prima-facie case is established, the approach of the court in granting bail should be
that the accused should not be detained by way of punishment and regarding
influencing of witnesses, the material witnesses viz; prosecutrix and her parents
cannot be expected to be win over by the accused.
In another case law reported in 2016(2)J.K.J 702, [Arjun Katal and Ors. versus State
of J&K & Ors.] t h i s Court while granting bail to accused for offences u/ss 498A,
304B & 306 RPC & while observing that refusal of bail would amount to punishing
the petitioner without trial, in Head Note "B" & paras 17, 25 & 26 of the judgment
held as under:-
B. Criminal Procedure Code, Svt., 1989, Section 487C-Ranbir Indian Penal Code,
Svt.,1989,Section 498A,304B and 306- Dowry death-Grant of bail-Entire evidence
implicating whole family cropped up after incident-No indication of earlier ever
domestic violence or incident of harassment, violence relating to demand of dowry by
petitioners- Bar under proviso of Section 497C not attracted- Petitioner husband and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175133831/ 3
Mohinder Singh Age 24 Years vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir ... on 9 May, 2023
mother- in-law in custody for more than one years-Refusing bail nothing but
punishing petitioners for alleged involvement in death of deceased -Bal allowed.
17. In the case on hand, it has been noticed that the marriage of the couple had taken
place more than two years prior to the unfortunate incident. The marriage had
procreated a male child. There seems substance in the argument of learned counsel
for the petitioners that entire evidence implicating the hole family including
parents-in-law and brother-in-law of the deceased, besides the husband, cropped up
after the incident and that the material collected by the I.O. does not indicate that
earlier ever there had been any report of any domestic violence or an incident of
harassment and violence relating to demand of dowry by the petitioners and also that
the I.O did not even investigate whether the brother-in-law was also present in the
house during those days or not.
25. Experience would show that whenever a woman dies an unnatural death shortly
after her marriage or within seven years of the marriage, her parents feel that her
husband and in-laws are responsible for such death.
That feeling of the parents of the deceased itself becomes a sufficient ground for booking the
husband and the parents and quite often siblings and other relatives of the husband. Whether they
were responsible for the death of the deceased or not can be ascertained only after investigation and
verified after trial but they are arrested in any case. The important question relating to their liberty,
thus, arises for consideration of the bail/trial court.
26. As said above, petitioners had been and presently two of them, that is mother-in-law and
husband of the deceased are in custody for last more than one year. Charges against them have been
framed by the trial court on 07.09.2015. Minutes recorded in the trial court file would show that but
for one witness whose statement has been recorded on 22.12.2015, prosecution has not produced
any other witnesses or even parents of the deceased during three or four calendars fixed by the
court. The accusations do not merit refusal of bail to the mother-in-law and the brother-in-law of
the deceased at this stage after more than a year of their arrest. All the material witnesses are family
members of the parents of the deceased inasmuch as no apprehension of the petitioners(cid:128) tampering
with the evidence or jumping over the bail has been expressed by the State nor can be visualized.
Refusing bail to them at this stage would be nothing but punishing them for their alleged
involvement in the death of the deceased which is not permissible under law.
Ratio of judgment (Supra) further makes the proposition of law abundantly clear, that refusing bail
is nothing but punishing the accused, whether the accused is responsible for the death of the
deceased has to be verified during trial and material witnesses viz; family members of deceased
cannot be win over. Ratios of the judgments of "Jagdish Kumar(cid:128)s Case" & "Arjun Katal(cid:128)s Case",
(Supra) settles the legal controversy at rest and makes it abundantly clear, that the approach of the
court in matter of bail should not be that accused should be detained by way of punishment but
whether his/her presence would be readily available for trial & material witnesses viz; family
members of the deceased cannot be win over.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175133831/ 4
Mohinder Singh Age 24 Years vs Union Territory Of Jammu And Kashmir ... on 9 May, 2023
6. Applying the ratios of the judgments (Supra) to the facts of the bail application in hand,
applicants for the last almost 2 years are languishing in District Jail Udhampur and even the
proxecutrix in her deposition before the trial court has totally exonerated the applicants from
commission of crime and has not even identified them in the court. The apprehension of the
prosecution that the grant of bail to applicants/accused would win over/tamper the prosecution
evidence is therefore ruled out. In light of ratios of the judgments (Supra) the law is no longer
res-integra, and it is now settled cardinal principle of criminal jurisprudence that approach of the
court in the matters of bail should be that the accused should not be detained by way of punishment
which can only be inflicted upon the accused after the regular trial and if he is found guilty. The
powers to grant bail has to be considered in the backdrop of the constitutional guarantees contained
in Article-21 of the Constitution of India which guarantees right to liberty of an individual [vide
Jagir Singh Vs. Jagat Singh & Anr. 2012 (2) JKJ 231 (HC)]. Every accused has right to defend his
case and by keeping the accused in detention, it would defeat his right to defend his case.
Applicants/accused in the case in hand cannot be kept in incarceration for an indefinite long period
of time, as the same would amount to inflicting pre-trial punishment which is against the basic
tenets of criminal jurisprudence. Speedy trial is one of the fundamental rights of an accused which
could get defeated if the prosecution shows slackness and delay in examining its witnesses,
therefore, the trial court is within its bounded duty to concluded the trial expeditiously. The
apprehension of the prosecution that petitioner will abscond can be secured by way of sufficient
surety from petitioner. In view of the aforesaid discussion, applicants/accused have carved out a
strong case for grant of bail in their favour. Accordingly, applicants/accused are admitted to bail
subject to their furnishing surety bonds in the sum of Rs. 50000/- each before Registrar Judicial of
this court with the direction to furnish personal recognizances of the like amounts before
Superintendent District Jail Udhampur. However, before parting the following conditions are
imposed upon the applicants/accused:-
(i) that the applicants/accused shall appear before the trial court on each and every
date of hearing except exempted by the trial court;
(ii) that in case the prosecution collects any material that during the bail period
applicants/accused have influenced any of the prosecution witnesses or tried to
intimidate them, the prosecution would be well within its rights to move an
application before this court for cancellation of their bails.
7. Disposed of accordingly.
(MOHAN LAL) JUDGE SRINAGAR 09.05.2023 Ishaq Whether the judgement is speaking ? Yes/No
Whether the judgement is reportable ? Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/175133831/ 5
