Moinuddin And Ors. vs State Of U.P. And Anr. on 1 May, 2025
Moinuddin And Ors. vs State Of U.P. And Anr. on 1 May, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:25258
Court No. - 27
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 1278 of 2017
Applicant :- Moinuddin And Ors.
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And Anr.
Counsel for Applicant :- Sheikh Wali Uz Zaman,Arunendra Nath Mishra
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Govt. Advocate,Akhil Bhatt,Ramakant Dixit
Hon'ble Ajai Kumar Srivastava-I,J.
1. Heard learned counsel for the applicants, learned A.G.A. for the State and perused the material
available on record.
2. No one appears on behalf private opposite party.
3. The instant application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. has been filed by the applicants for quashing
the entire criminal proceeding of Criminal Complaint Case No.397 of 2016 : Smt. Rihana vs.
Moinuddin and others, under Sections 498A, 323, 504, 506 I.P.C. and Section 4 of Dowry
Prohibition Act, 1961, Police Station Bangarmau, District Unnao pending before learned Additional
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court No.1, Hardoi as well as summoning order dated 09.09.2016 passed
by learned Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court No.1, Unnao (Annexure No.1).
4. The parties, out of their own free will, have settled their dispute amicably and in furtherance
thereof, they have filed a compromise deed dated 30.08.2022 alongwith the affidavit dated
01.09.2022 filed by the applicants. Thereafter, a Co-ordinate Bench of this Court, vide order
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20695979/ 1
Moinuddin And Ors. vs State Of U.P. And Anr. on 1 May, 2025
21.03.2023, has sent the said compromise deed to the trial court with a direction to get the same
verified and submit a report.
5. It is not disputed that the parties have settled their dispute amicably and they have filed
compromise deed dated 30.08.2022 and the same has been verified by the trial Court, vide order
dated 06.04.2023, a certified copy of order dated 06.04.2023 produced by learned counsel for the
applicants in Court today. The same is taken on record.
6. Hon'ble Supreme Court in Parbatbhai Aahir @ Parbatbhai Bhimsinhbhai Karmur and Others Vs.
State of Gujarat and another, (2017) 9 SCC 641 has laid down the following guidelines with regard to
quashing of criminal proceedings as well regarding compromise in criminal proceedings in
paragraphs 16 to 16.10 of the judgement, which is quoted below:
"16. The broad principles which emerge from the precedents on the subject, may be
summarised in the following propositions.
16.1. Section 482 preserves the inherent powers of the High Court to prevent an
abuse of the process of any court or to secure the ends of justice. The provision does
not confer new powers. It only recognizes and preserves powers which inhere in the
High Court;
16.2. The invocation of the jurisdiction of the High Court to quash a First Information
Report or a criminal proceeding on the ground that a settlement has been arrived at
between the offender and the victim is not the same as the invocation of jurisdiction
for the purpose of compounding an offence. While compounding an offence, the
power of the court is governed by the provisions of Section 320 of the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973. The power to quash under Section 482 is attracted even if
the offence is non-compoundable.
16.3. In forming an opinion whether a criminal proceeding or complaint should be
quashed in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482, the High Court must
evaluate whether the ends of justice would justify the exercise of the inherent power;
16.4. While the inherent power of the High Court has a wide ambit and plenitude it
has to be exercised; (i) to secure the ends of justice or (ii) to prevent an abuse of the
process of any court;
16.5. The decision as to whether a complaint or First Information Report should be
quashed on the ground that the offender and victim have settled the dispute, revolves
ultimately on the facts and circumstances of each case and no exhaustive elaboration
of principles can be formulated;
16.6. In the exercise of the power under Section 482 and while dealing with a plea
that the dispute has been settled, the High Court must have due regard to the nature
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20695979/ 2
Moinuddin And Ors. vs State Of U.P. And Anr. on 1 May, 2025
and gravity of the offence. Heinous and serious offences involving mental depravity
or offences such as murder, rape and dacoity cannot appropriately be quashed
though the victim or the family of the victim have settled the dispute. Such offences
are, truly speaking, not private in nature but have a serious impact upon society. The
decision to continue with the trial in such cases is founded on the overriding element
of public interest in punishing persons for serious offences;
16.7. As distinguished from serious offences, there may be criminal cases which have
an overwhelming or predominant element of a civil dispute. They stand on a distinct
footing in so far as the exercise of the inherent power to quash is concerned;
16.8. Criminal cases involving offences which arise from commercial, financial,
mercantile, partnership or similar transactions with an essentially civil flavour may
in appropriate situations fall for quashing where parties have settled the dispute;
16.9. In such a case, the High Court may quash the criminal proceeding if in view of
the compromise between the disputants, the possibility of a conviction is remote and
the continuation of a criminal proceeding would cause oppression and prejudice; and
16.10. There is yet an exception to the principle set out in propositions 16.8 and 16.9
above. Economic offences involving the financial and economic well-being of the
state have implications which lie beyond the domain of a mere dispute between
private disputants. The High Court would be justified in declining to quash where the
offender is involved in an activity akin to a financial or economic fraud or
misdemeanour. The consequences of the act complained of upon the financial or
economic system will weigh in the balance."
7. The Hon'ble Supreme Court in Criminal Appeal No. 1489 of 2012 (Ramgopal and Another Vs. The
State of M.P.), 2021 SCC OnLine SC 834, has reiterated the guidelines regarding quashing of
criminal proceedings in view of compromise. Following has been observed in paragraph 18-19:-
"18. It is now a well crystalized axiom that plenary jurisdiction of this Court to impart
complete justice under Article 142 cannot ipso facto be limited or restricted by
ordinary statutory provisions. It is also noteworthy that even in the absence of an
express provision akin to Section 482 Cr.P.C. conferring powers on the Supreme
Court to abrogate and set aside criminal proceedings, the jurisdiction exercisable
under Article 142 of the Constitution embraces this Court with scopious powers to
quash criminal proceedings also, so as to secure complete justice. In doing so, due
regard must be given to the overarching objective of sentencing in the criminal justice
system, which is grounded on the sub-lime philosophy of maintenance of peace of the
collective and that the rationale of placing an individual behind bars is aimed at his
reformation.
19. We thus sum-up and hold that as opposed to Section 320 Cr.P.C. where the Court
is squarely guided by the compromise between the parties in respect of offences
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20695979/ 3
Moinuddin And Ors. vs State Of U.P. And Anr. on 1 May, 2025
'compoundable' within the statutory framework, the extra-ordinary power enjoined
upon a High Court under Section 482 Cr.P.C. or vested in this Court under Article
142 of the Constitution, can be invoked beyond the metes and bounds of Section 320
Cr.P.C. Nonetheless, we reiterate that such powers of wide amplitude ought to be
exercise carefully in the context of quashing criminal proceedings, bearing in mind:
(i) Nature and effect of the offence on the conscious of the society; (ii) Seriousness of
the injury, if any; (iii) Voluntary nature of compromise between accused and the
victim; & (iv) Conduct of the accused persons, prior to and after the occurrence of the
purported offence and/or other relevant considerations."
(Emphasis supplied)
8. Hon'ble Supreme Court in Ramawatar v. State of M.P., 2021 SCC OnLine SC 966, while adverting
its judgment rendered in Ramgopal (Supra), in para no.11 has held as under:-
"11. The Court in Ramgopal (Supra) further postulated that criminal proceedings
involving non-heinous offences or offences which are predominantly of a private
nature, could be set aside at any stage of the proceedings, including at the appellate
level. The Court, however, being conscious of the fact that unscrupulous offenders
may attempt to escape their criminal liabilities by securing a compromise through
brute force, threats, bribes, or other such unethical and illegal means, cautioned that
in cases where a settlement is struck post-conviction, the Courts should, inter-alia,
carefully examine the fashion in which the compromise has been arrived at, as well
as, the conduct of the accused before and after the incident in question. While
concluding, the Court also formulated certain guidelines and held:
"19? Nonetheless, we reiterate that such powers of wide amplitude ought to be
exercised carefully in the context of quashing criminal proceedings, bearing in mind :
(i) Nature and effect of the offence on the conscious of the society; (ii) Seriousness of
the injury, if any; (iii) Voluntary nature of compromise between the accused and the
victim; & (iv) Conduct of the accused persons, prior to and after the occurrence of the
purported offence and/or other relevant considerations."
9. Considering the aforesaid facts and circumstances of the present case, submissions made by
counsel for the applicants and upon perusal of material on record, it appears that during pendency
of the present application, parties have already settled their dispute voluntarily and amicably. The
dispute between the parties is an overwhelming element of a private dispute. Compromise so
entered into by parties have been verified by learned trial court concerned. As such, on date, no
difference exists between parties. Consequently, this Court is of the considered opinion that no
useful purpose shall be served by prolonging the proceedings of above mentioned cases. In view of
compromise entered into by the parties, chances of conviction of accused applicant is also remote
and bleak. Resultantly, continuation of proceedings would thus, itself cause injustice to parties. The
instant trial would only entail loss of precious judicial time in a futile pursuit.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20695979/ 4
Moinuddin And Ors. vs State Of U.P. And Anr. on 1 May, 2025
10. In view of above, the instant application succeeds and is liable to be allowed.
11. Accordingly, the entire proceeding of Criminal Complaint Case No.397 of 2016 : Smt. Rihana vs.
Moinuddin and others, under Sections 498A, 323, 504, 506 I.P.C. and Section 4 of Dowry
Prohibition Act, 1961, Police Station Bangarmau, District Unnao pending before learned Additional
Chief Judicial Magistrate, Court No.1, Hardoi is, hereby, quashed in respect of the present
applicants.
12. The instant application under Section 482 Cr.P.C. is allowed.
13. Interim order, if any, stands discharged.
14. Office is directed to send a copy of this order to the Court concerned through email/fax
immediately for necessary compliance.
(Ajai Kumar Srivastava-I, J.) Order Date :- 1.5.2025 Shubhankar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/20695979/ 5
