Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O
Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
-1-
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834
RSA No. 7382 of 2011
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
KALABURAGI BENCH
DATED THIS THE 29TH DAY OF AUGUST, 2023
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MRS JUSTICE K S HEMALEKHA
REGULAR SECOND APPEAL NO.7382 OF 2011 (INJ)
BETWEEN:
MOINUDDIN
S/O ABDUL RAHMAN SAB
AGED ABOUT: 61 YEARS
OCC: AGRICULTURE
R/O NEEM HOSSALLI VILLAGE
TQ: CHINCHOLI - 585 306
DIST: GULBARGA - 585 101.
...APPELLANT
(BY SRI SANKET APPAJI
SRI HARSHAVARDHAN R MALIPATIL, ADVOCATES)
AND:
1. CHANDRAPPA @ CHANDAPPA
S/O BHEEMSHA PUJARI
AGED ABOUT:58 YEARS
OCC: AGRICULTURE & COOLIE
R/O NEEM HOSSALLI VILLAGE
Digitally signed TQ: CHINCHOLI - 585 306
by DIST: GULBARGA
LUCYGRACE
Location: HIGH 2. KAIRUNNISA BEGUM @ QAIRUNNISSA BEGUM
COURT OF
KARNATAKA W/O KHAJA MOINUDDIN BAGLI
AGED ABOUT:59 YEARS
OCC: HOUSEHOLD,R/O NEEM HOSSALLI
TQ: CHINCHOLI - 585 306
DIST: GULBARGA- 585101.
...RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI. ABDUL MUQHTADIR, ADVOCATE FOR R-1 AND 2)
THIS RSA IS FILED U/S 100 CPC, PRAYING TO ALLOW THE
APPEAL AND SET ASIDE THE JUDGMENT AND DECREE DATED
30.07.2011 PASSED IN R.A.NO.64/2009 BY THE LEARNED CIVIL JUDGE
(SR.DN) CHINCHOLI, RESTORE THE JUDGMENT AND DECREE DATED
27.10.2009 OF CIVIL JUDGE (JR.DN) AT CHINCHOLI IN O.S.NO.76 OF
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 1
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
-2-
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834
RSA No. 7382 of 2011
2001 AND TO GRANT ANY OTHER APPROPRIATE RELIEF, IN THE
INTEREST OF JUSTICE AND EQUITY.
THIS APPEAL COMING ON FOR DICTATING JUDGMENT, THIS DAY,
THE COURT DELIVERED THE FOLLOWING:
JUDGMENT
The present regular second appeal by the plaintiff is directed against the judgment and decree dated
30.07.2011 in R.A.No.64/2009 on the file of the Senior Civil Judge, Chincholi, reversing the
judgment and decree dated 27.10.2009 in O.S.No.76/2001 on the file of the Addl. Civil Judge
(Jr.Dn.) at Chincholi, whereby the suit of the plaintiff seeking declaration and possession was
dismissed by the first appellate Court and the judgment and decree of the trial Court was set aside.
2. The parties herein are referred to as per their ranking before the trial Court for the sake of
convenience.
3. This Court, on 13.10.2020, while admitting the appeal has framed the following substantial
questions of law:
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 (1) Whether the first appellate court is justified in holding
that the defendant No.1 has perfected his title by adverse possession in view of his
possession under Ex.D.16 /Agreement of sale?
(2) Whether the first appellate court is justified in holding that, the suit of plaintiff is
barred by law of limitation for entire suit property?
(3) Whether the first appellate court is justified in holding that defendant No.2
derived valid title under sale deed Ex.P.13?
4. Sri. Sanket Appaji, learned counsel for Sri. Harshavardhan R. Malipatil, learned counsel for the
appellant-plaintiff and Sri. Abdul Muqhtadir, learned counsel for the respondents-defendants have
been heard on the substantial questions of law framed by this Court.
5. The undisputed facts are that,
(i) The land in Sy.No.178 measuring 8 guntas including the house was in the ownership of one Abdul
Rehamansab son of Alisab Jantiwale father of the plaintiff.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 2
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834
(ii) On the death of the father of plaintiff, the plaintiff was the owner of the land bearing Sy.No.178
measuring 8 guntas.
(iii) The defendants are not related to the plaintiff.
(iv) The plaintiff applied for permission to construct a room in the suit land in the year 1981 and
obtained permission from the panchayat and constructed a house in the suit land.
(v) Defendant No.1 is in permissive possession of the suit property as per his own contention in his
written statement that, defendant No.1, his wife and his mother by name Shivamma have orally
purchased open space from the father of the plaintiff and started to reside in the suit land by
erecting a hut and later constructed a pucca house and they are residing there since 1979 and the
plaintiff has not raised any objection.
(vi) Defendant No.1 states that he is the owner of the suit schedule property having purchased by
him and his mother from Abdul Rahman.
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834
(vii) Defendant No.1 sold the open space to defendant No.2 measuring 54 ft. east to west and 52 ft.
north to south, which is part and parcel of house No.3/10 belonging to defendant No.1 as stated in
his written statement
(viii) Defendant No.1 also contends that he claims possession by way of Ex.D-16 - agreement of sale
by the plaintiff in favour of defendant No.1 and he has perfected his title by adverse possession.
(ix) Defendant No.2 contends that the suit property, open space has been sold by defendant No.1
under registered sale deed dated 12.04.1999 and he is a bona fide purchaser.
6. The trial Court, while answering issue Nos.1 to 3 and additional issue No.1, has held that the
plaintiff has established his ownership over the suit schedule property and also that defendant No.1
is in permissive possession of the suit house situated in Sy.No.178 and that defendant No.1 failed to
prove the ingredients of adverse possession NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 and is not entitled for
declaration of ownership over the suit property by way of adverse possession, accordingly, decreed
the suit of the plaintiff and further declared that the sale deed executed by defendant No.1 in favour
of defendant No.2 is not binding on the plaintiff and directed to vacate and handover possession of
the suit schedule property within three months from the date of the order.
7. Aggrieved by which, the defendants have preferred an appeal before the first appellate Court. The
first appellate Court reversed the judgment and decree of the trial Court and held that defendant
No.1 has proved his possession based on Ex.D.16 and Ex.D.17 and the possession of defendant No.1
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 3
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
under the said document is an adverse possession and also arrived at a conclusion that defendant
No.1 is the actual purchaser of the suit schedule property on basis of sale and consequently,
dismissed the suit of the plaintiff. Aggrieved by which, the present second appeal by the plaintiff.
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834
8. In order to answer the substantial questions of law framed by this Court, the principles governing
the adverse possession needs to be looked into. The concept of adverse possession in India is more
than a century old concept of law which is primarily based on three fundamental principles:
(i) That the person is in possession of the property continuously with the knowledge
of the true owner and hostile to the knowledge of the plaintiff.
(ii) To succeed in a plea of adverse possession, mere proof of long lasting
unauthorized possession is not sufficient, the requirement or rather the first and
foremost requirement is the assertion and proof of hostile title by the possessor in
denial of the title of the true owner.
(iii) The hostility of title would mean claim to the property as owner by clearly
denying title of the true owner. Thereafter, the uninterrupted, open and hostile
possession has to be followed for a period of twelve years as prescribed under Article
65 of the Limitation Act.
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834
9. The requisite ingredient of animus possidendi (intention to possess) adversely should be present
when claiming ownership and taking the plea of adverse possession.
10. The judgment of the Apex Court in the case of Karnataka Board of Wakf vs. Government of India
& others1 has dealt with the aspect of nature and acts amounting to adverse possession. The Apex
Court at paragraph Nos.11 to 13 has held as under:
"11. In the eye of the law, an owner would be deemed to be in possession of a property so long as
there is no intrusion. Non-use of the property by the owner even for a long time won't affect his title.
But the position will be altered when another person takes possession of the property and asserts a
right over it. Adverse possession is a hostile possession by clearly asserting hostile title in denial of
the title of the true owner. It is a well-settled principle that a party claiming adverse possession must
prove that his possession is "nec vi, nec clam, nec precario", that is, peaceful, open and continuous.
The possession must be adequate in continuity, in (2004)10 SCC 779 NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834
publicity and in extent to show that their possession is adverse to the true owner. It must start with a
wrongful disposition of the rightful owner and be actual, visible, exclusive, hostile and continued
over the statutory period. (See S.M. Karim v. Bibi Sakina, Parsinni v. Sukhi and D.N.
Venkatarayappa v. State of Karnataka.) Physical fact of exclusive possession and the animus
possidendi to hold as owner in exclusion to the actual owner are the most important factors that are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 4
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
to be accounted in cases of this nature. Plea of adverse possession is not a pure question of law but a
blended one of fact and law. Therefore, a person who claims adverse possession should show: (a) on
what date he came into possession, (b) what was the nature of his possession, (c) whether the
factum of possession was known to the other party, (d) how long his possession has continued, and
(e) his possession was open and undisturbed. A person pleading adverse possession has no equities
in his favour. Since he is trying to defeat the rights of the true owner, it is for him to clearly plead
and establish all facts necessary to establish his adverse possession. [Mahesh Chand Sharma (Dr.) v.
Raj Kumari Sharma']
12. A plaintiff filing a title suit should be very clear about the origin of title over the property. He
must specifically plead it. (See S.M. Karim v. Bibi Sakina)
- 10 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 In P. Periasami v. P Periathambi this Court ruled that:
"Whenever the plea of adverse possession is projected, inherent in the plea is that
someone else was the owner of the property."
The pleas on title and adverse possession are mutually inconsistent and the latter does not begin to
operate until the former is renounced. Dealing with Mohan Lal v. Mirza Abdul Gaffar that is similar
to the case in hand, this Court held:
"4. As regards the first plea, it is inconsistent with the second plea. Having come into
possession under the agreement, he must disclaim his right thereunder and plead
and prove assertion of his independent hostile adverse possession to the knowledge
of the transferor or his successor in title or interest and that the latter had acquiesced
to his illegal possession during the entire period of 12 years i.e. up to completing the
period his title by prescription nec vi, nec clam, nec precario. Since the appellant's
claim is founded on Section 53-A, it goes without saying that he admits by
implication that he came into possession of land lawfully under the agreement and
continued to remain in possession till date of the suit. Thereby the
- 11 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 plea of adverse possession is not available to the appellant."
13. As we have already found, the respondent obtained title under the provisions of the Ancient
Monuments Act. The element of the respondent's possession of the suit property to the exclusion of
the appellant with the animus to possess it is not specifically pleaded and proved. So are the aspects
of earlier title of the appellant or the point of time of disposition. Consequently, the alternative plea
of adverse possession by the respondent is unsustainable. The High Court ought not to have found
the case in their favour on this ground."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 5
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
11. The Apex Court in the recent decision in the case of Govt. of Kerala & Anr. vs. Joseph & Ors.2
stated supra has held at para No.30 to 55, as under:
"30. Before proceeding to do so, it is essential to take note of the law governing such a
claim. After a perusal and consideration of various judgments rendered by this Court,
the following principles can be observed:
31. Possession must be open, clear, continuous and hostile to the claim or possession
of the other party; all three classic requirements must coexist- nec vi, i.e., adequate in
continuity; nec clam, i.e., adequate in 2023 SCC Online SC 961
- 12 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 publicity; and nec precario, i.e., adverse to a competitor, in denial of title
and knowledge;
(a) In Radhamoni Debi v. Collector of Khulna, the Privy Council held that-
"The possession required must be adequate in continuity, in publicity, and in extent
to show that it is possession adverse to the competitor."
(b) Further, the Council Maharaja Sri Chandra Nandi v. Baijnath Jugal Kishore observed-
"It is sufficient that the possession should be overt and without any attempt at
concealment, so that the person against whom time is running ought, if he exercises
due vigilance, to be aware of what is happening."
(c) A Bench of three judges of this Court in Parsinni v. Sukhi held that "Party claiming adverse
possession must prove that his possession must be 'nec vi, nec clam, nec precario' i.e. peaceful, open
and continuous. The possession must be adequate, in continuity, in publicity and in extent to show
that their possession is adverse to the true owner."
(d) In Karnataka Board of Wakf v. Govt. of India (two-Judge Bench) it was held:--
- 13 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 "It is a well-settled principle that a party claiming adverse
possession must prove that his possession is "nec vi, nec clam, nec precario", that is,
peaceful, open and continuous. The possession must be adequate in continuity, in
publicity and in extent to show that their possession is adverse to the true owner. It
must start with a wrongful disposition of the rightful owner and be actual, visible,
exclusive, hostile and continued over the statutory period."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 6
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
This case was relied on in the case of M. Venkatesh v. Bangalore Development
Authority (three-Judge Bench), Ravinder Kaur Grewal v. Manjit Kaur (three-Judge
Bench).
(e) This Court in a recent case of M Siddiq (D) through LRs v. Mahant Suresh Das
(five-Judge Bench) reiterated this principle as under -
"748. A person who sets up a plea of adverse possession must establish both
possession which is peaceful, open and continuous - possession which meets the
requirement of being 'nec vi nec claim and nec precario'. To substantiate a plea of
adverse possession, the character of the possession must be adequate in continuity
and in the public because the possession has to be to the knowledge of the true owner
in order for it to be adverse. These requirements have to be
- 14 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 duly established first by adequate pleadings and second by
leading sufficient evidence."
32. The person claiming adverse possession must show clear and cogent evidence substantiate such
claim;
33. This Court in Thakur Kishan Singh v. Arvind Kumar (two-Judge Bench) held that -
"5. A possession of a co-owner or of a licensee or of an agent or a permissive
possession to become adverse must be established by cogent and convincing evidence
to show hostile animus and possession adverse to the knowledge of real owner. Mere
possession for howsoever length of time does not result in converting the permissive
possession into adverse possession..."
34. Reference may also be made to M. Siddiq (supra).
35. Mere possession over a property for a long period of time does not grant the right of adverse
possession on its own;
(a) In Gaya Prasad Dikshit v. Dr. Nirmal Chander (two-Judge Bench),this court observed-
"1... It is not merely unauthorised possession on termination of his licence that
enables the licensee to claim title by adverse possession but there must be some overt
act on the part of the licensee to show that he is claiming adverse title. It is possible
that the licensor may not file an action for the purpose
- 15 -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 7
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 of recovering possession of the premises from the licensee
after terminating his licence but that by itself cannot enable the licensee to claim title
by adverse possession. There must be some overt act on the part of the licensee
indicating assertion of hostile title. Mere continuance of unauthorised possession
even for a period of more than 12 years is not enough."
36. Reference may also be made to Arvind Kumar (supra); Mallikarjunaiah v. Nanjaiah (two-Judge
Bench); Uttam Chand (supra).
37. Such clear and continuous possession must be accompanied by animus possidendi - the
intention to possess or in other words, the intention to dispossess the rightful owner; in Karnataka
Board of Wakf (supra) it was observed-
"...Physical fact of exclusive possession and the animus possidendi to hold as owner
in exclusion to the actual owner are the most important factors that are to be
accounted in cases of this nature..."
(a) The case of Annakili v. A. Vedanayagam (two- Judge Bench) also shed light on this principle as
under -
"24. Claim by adverse possession has two elements : (1) the possession of the
defendant should become adverse to the plaintiff; and (2) the defendant must
continue to remain in possession for a period of 12 years thereafter.
- 16 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 Animus possidendi as is well known is a requisite ingredient
of adverse possession. It is now a well-settled principle of law that mere possession of
the land would not ripen into possessory title for the said purpose. Possessor must
have animus possidendi and hold the land adverse to the title of the true owner. For
the said purpose, not only animus possidendi must be shown to exist, but the same
must be shown to exist at the commencement of the possession..."
(b) In Des Raj v. Bhagat Ram (two-Judge Bench) this Court observed -
"21. In a case of this nature, where long and continuous possession of the plaintiff-
respondent stands admitted, the only question which arose for consideration by the
courts below was as to whether the plaintiff had been in possession of the properties
in hostile declaration of his title vis-à-vis his co-owners and they were in know
thereof."
(c) This court in L.N. Aswathama v. P. Prakash (two- Judge Bench) had observed that permissive
possession or possession in the absence of Animus possidendi would not constitute the claim of
adverse possession.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 8
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
(d) It was also held in the case of Chatti Konati Rao v. Palle Venkata Subba Rao (two-Judge Bench) -
- 17 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 "15. Animus possidendi as is well known is a requisite ingredient of adverse
possession. Mere possession does not ripen into possessory title until the possessor holds the
property adverse to the title of the true owner for the said purpose. The person who claims adverse
possession is required to establish the date on which he came in possession, nature of possession,
the factum of possession, knowledge to the true owner, duration of possession and that possession
was open and undisturbed..."
(Emphasis supplied)
38. Referring to the above judgment Subha Rao (supra) this Court has reiterated the cardinality of
the presence of Animus possidendi in a case concerning adverse possession in Brijesh Kumar v.
Shardabai (dead) by LRs. (two-Judge Bench).
39. Such a plea is available not only as a defence when title is questioned, but is also available as a
claim to a person who has perfected his title;
40. The prior position of law as set out in Gurudwara Sahab v. Gram Panchayat Village Sirthala
(two-Judge Bench) was that the plea of adverse possession can be used only as a shield by the
defendant and not as a sword by the plaintiff. However, the position was changed later by the
decision of this Hon'ble Court in
- 18 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 the case of Ravinder Kaur (supra) had held that -
"...Title or interest is acquired it can be used as a sword by the plaintiff as well as a
shield by the defendant within ken of Article 65 of the Act and any person who has
perfected title by way of adverse possession, can file a suit for restoration of
possession in case of dispossession..."
41. The position in Ravinder Kaur (supra) was followed in Narasamma v. A. Krishnappa (Dead)
Through LRs. (three-Judge Bench).
42. Mere passing of an ejectment order does not cause brake in possession neither causes his
dispossession;
43. In Balkrishna v. Satyaprakash (two-Judge Bench) this Court held:
"...Mere passing of an order of ejectment against a person claiming to be in adverse
possession neither causes his dispossession nor discontinuation of his possession
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 9
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
which alone breaks the continuity of possession."
44. When the land subject of proceedings wherein adverse possession has been claimed, belongs to
the Government, the Court is duty-bound to act with greater seriousness, effectiveness, care and
circumspection as it may lead to Destruction of a right/title of the State to immovable property. In
State
- 19 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 of Rajasthan v. Harphool Singh (two-Judge Bench) it was held:
"12. So far as the question of perfection of title by adverse possession and that too in
respect of public property is concerned, the question requires to be considered more
seriously and effectively for the reason that it ultimately involves destruction of
right/title of the State to immovable property and conferring upon a third-party
encroacher title where he had none."
45. Further, in Mandal Revenue Officer v. Goundla Venkaiah (two-Judge Bench) it was stated:
"...It is our considered view that where an encroacher, illegal occupant or land
grabber of public property raises a plea that he has perfected title by adverse
possession, the court is duty-bound to act with greater seriousness, care and
circumspection. Any laxity in this regard may result in destruction of right/title of the
State to immovable property and give an upper hand to the encroachers,
unauthorised occupants or land grabbers."
46. A plea of adverse possession must be pleaded with proper particulars, such as, when the
possession became adverse. The court is not to travel beyond pleading to give any relief, in other
words, the plea must stand on its own two feet. This Court has held this
- 20 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 in the case of V. Rajeshwari v. T.C. Saravanabava (two- Judge Bench):
"...A plea not properly raised in the pleadings or in issues at the stage of the trial,
would not be permitted to be raised for the first time at the stage of appeal..."
47. It has also been held in the case of State of Uttrakhand v. Mandir Sri Laxman Sidh Maharaj
(two- Judge Bench):
"...The courts below also should have seen that courts can grant only that relief which
is claimed by the plaintiff in the plaint and such relief can be granted only on the
pleadings but not beyond it. In other words, courts cannot travel beyond the
pleadings for granting any relief..."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 10
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
48. Mandir Sri Laxman Sidh Maharaj (supra) was relied on in Dharampal (Dead) v. Punjab Wakf
Board (two- Judge Bench) on the same principle.
49. Claim of independent title and adverse possession at the same time amount to contradictory
pleas. The case of Annasaheb Bapusaheb Patil v. Balwant (two- Judge Bench) elaborated this
principle as:
"15. Where possession can be referred to a lawful title, it will not be considered to be
adverse. The reason being that a person whose possession can be referred to a lawful
title will not be permitted to show that his possession was hostile to another's title.
One
- 21 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 who holds possession on behalf of another, does not by mere
denial of that other's title make his possession adverse so as to give himself the
benefit of the statute of limitation. Therefore, a person who enters into possession
having a lawful title, cannot divest another of that title by pretending that he had no
title at all."
50. This principle was upheld in the case of Mohan Lal v. Mirza Abdul Gaffar (two-Judge Bench) -
"4. As regards the first plea, it is inconsistent with the second plea. Having come into
possession under the agreement, he must disclaim his right thereunder and plead
and prove assertion of his independent hostile adverse possession to the knowledge
of the transferor or his successor in title or interest and that the latter had acquiesced
to his illegal possession during the entire period of 12 years, i.e., up to completing the
period of his title by prescription nec vi, nec clam, nec precario. Since the appellant's
claim is founded on Section 53-A, it goes without saying that he admits by
implication that he came into possession of the land lawfully under the agreement
and continued to remain in possession till date of the suit. Thereby the plea of
adverse possession is not available to the appellant."
51. The Court in Uttam Chand (supra) has reiterated this principle of adverse possession.
- 22 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834
52. Burden of proof rests on the person claiming adverse possession.
53. This Court, in P.T. Munichikkanna Reddy v. Revamma (two-Judge Bench), it held that initially
the burden lied on the landowner to prove his title and title. Thereafter it shifts on the other party to
prove title by adverse possession. It was observed:--
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 11
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
"34. The law in this behalf has undergone a change. In terms of Articles 142 and 144
of the Limitation Act, 1908, the burden of proof was on the plaintiff to show within 12
years from the date of institution of the suit that he had title and possession of the
land, whereas in terms of Articles 64 and 65 of the Limitation Act, 1963, the legal
position has underwent complete change insofar as the onus is concerned : once a
party proves its title, the onus of proof would be on the other party to prove claims of
title by adverse possession...."
54. The Court reiterated this principle in the case of Janata Dal Party v. Indian National Congress
(two-Judge Bench):
"...the entire burden of proving that the possession is adverse to that of the plaintiffs,
is on the defendant..."
55. The State cannot claim the land of its citizens by way of adverse possession as it is a welfare
State.
- 23 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 [State of Haryana v. Mukesh Kumar (two-Judge Bench)].
12. The well settled principles that laid down in Karanatka Wakf Board and Government of Kerala is
that the party claiming adverse possession must prove that his possession is: 'nec vi, nec clam, nec
precario' that is, peaceful, open and continuous. The possession must adequate in publicity and in
extent to show that their possession is adverse to the true owner. It must start with a wrongful
disposition of the rightful owner, and the actual visible, exclusive, hostile and continuity over the
statutory relief.
13. This being the position of the law, the facts in the present scenario needs to be looked into. In the
present case, the defendants set up two contentions:
(i) Defendant No.1 has purchased the suit schedule property by way of oral purchase
from the father of plaintiff.
- 24 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834
(ii) Ex.D-16 - agreement of sale in favour of defendant No.1 by the plaintiff and he has perfected the
title of adverse possession.
14. Defendant No.1 claims his title over the suit schedule property and also set up a plea of adverse
possession. Defendant No.1 cannot set up a plea of title and plea of adverse possession
simultaneously and would amount to contradictory plea.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 12
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
15. The material on record would prove otherwise that he has been in possession of the suit schedule
property as a permissive possessor and not adverse to the title of the plaintiff. Section 53A of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882 ("the TP ACT" for short) cannot be taken as a ground, which is
inconsistent with each other i.e., the plea of adverse possession and retaining the possession by
operation of Section 53A of the TP Act. On one hand, the defendants tried to put up a claim that he
is in possession of the suit schedule property by oral purchase and also by way of an agreement of
sale in view
- 25 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 of operation of Section 53A of the TP Act and on the other hand, the plea of
adverse possession i.e., possession of the suit schedule property to the knowledge and hostility of the
plaintiff which cannot go together. The plea of adverse possession would not be available to the
defendants unless it has been asserted and pointed out that it is hostile animus against the true
owner and the entire exercise of the defendants is contrary to the material placed before the Court.
The pleadings of defendant No.1 at paragraph No.5 and at paragraph No.10 are inconsistent, which
reads as under:
"5. That the contents of para No.5 of the plaint are true so needs no reply. It is
submitted that the defendant No.1 his mother Shivamma, and father Bheemsha were
previously residing at Chincholi. After the death of Bheemsha the father of defendant
No.1 both defendant No.1 and his mother Shivamma shifted to Neema Hosalli village.
That the suit land was barren land and un-worthy for agriculture, and it is in the out
skirts of the village. The defendant No.1 and his mother Shivamma orally purchased
the open space from Abdul Rahaman started to reside in the suit land by
- 26 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 erecting a hut. Later on gradually they have constructed a
pukka house. The defendant No.1 started to reside there since 1979. The plaintiff has
not at all raised any objection at that time. The defendant No.1 was illiterate person
he has not taken any permission for constructing the house. But actually defendant
No.1 and his mother are residing in the suit house by and the said house is
constructed by defendant No.1. And it is pertinent to mention here that the defendant
No.1 has given application for permission an also paid necessary amount to Gram
panchayat in the year 1998.
xxx xxx xxx
10. That the contents of para N.10 of the plaint are false and created for the purpose
of suit. That it is pertinent to mention here that, later on the plaintiff taking undue
advantage of the suit land and suit house being mutated in his name raised objection
so under those circumstances there was a settlement between the plaintiff and
defendant No.1 before the elder of the village and as per the settlement, defendant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 13
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
No.1 was directed to pay Rs.2000-00 and the plaintiff after receiving the said amount
he has given up his rights whatsoever in the suit house and suit open space in favour
of defendant No.1. And accordingly to evidence this fact, An agreement deed was
executed by the plaintiff in this regard. On 2-6-1982. The said
- 27 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 agreement deed is attested by witnessess. And later on the
defendant got mutated the suit house in his name. And at the time of mutation in the
year 1987, the plaintiff has filed objection. After detailed enquiry the
mandalpanchayath got mutated the suit house in the name of defendant No.1, by
rejecting the objection of the plaintiff on 28-10-1987. The copy of said proceedings is
filed herewith. The plaintiff has not challenged the said mutation proceeding uptill
now."
(Emphasis supplied)
16. The plea of adverse possession is to be taken against a right owner. Defendant No.1 tries to set up
his title over the suit schedule property and also takes up a plea of adverse possession. The plea of
adverse possession by a party cannot be taken when the party is in permissive possession. The Apex
Court in the case of Thakur Kishan Singh vs. Arvind Kumar3, wherein it has held that the permissive
possession to become adverse must be established by cogent and convincing evidence to show
hostile, animus and possession adverse to the knowledge of true owner. Mere possession for (1994)
6 SCC 591
- 28 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 howsoever length of time does not result in converting the permissive
possession into adverse possession. This possession was also reaffirmed by the Apex Court in the
case of Ram Nagina Rai and another Vs. Deo Kumar Rai (Deceased) By Legal Representatives and
another4, the essential ingredient to fulfill the plea of adverse possession in cases of permissive
possession would arise when such permissive possession becomes hostile and adverse to the true
and real owner.
17. In the present facts, the defendant was in permissive possession as contended in his written
statement and the defendant has failed to place material as to when his permissive possession has
become hostile and adverse to the true and real owner. The other averment in the written statement
as pleaded is that, he is in possession of the property as part performance pursuant to an agreement
of sale, a person claiming to come into possession of a property by virtue of Section (2019) 13 SCC
324
- 29 -
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 14
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 53A of the TP Act cannot claim possession by simultaneously taking the plea
of adverse possession as both the pleas are inconsistent with each other as held by the Apex Court in
the case of Mohan Lal (deceased) through his LRs. Kachru & Others Vs. Mirza Abdul Gaffar &
Another5
18. The First Appellate Court has totally misread the entire pleadings and has arrived at a conclusion
that the document at Ex.D.16-the agreement of sale is an invalid deed of transfer and the possession
under the deed can be held to be in adverse possession and goes to the extent of holding the
possession of the suit property is on the basis of a sale, Ex.D.16 is totally misinterpreted by the First
Appellate Court without taking note of the averment and pleadings of defendant No.1. The judgment
relied by the learned counsel appearing for the respondents in the case of Bondar Singh and others
Vs. Nihal Singh and (1996) 1 SCC 639
- 30 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 Others6 was considered in Avinash Kumar Chauhan vs. Vijay Krishna
Mishra7 and at paragraph Nos.19, 20, 21 and 22 as under:
"19. The contention of learned counsel for the appellant that the document was admissible for
collateral purpose, in our opinion, is not correct. In Bondar Singh this Court was not concerned with
the provisions of the Act. Only interpretation of the provisions of the Registration Act, 1908 was in
question. It was opined:
"The main question, as we have already noted, is the question of continuous
possession of the plaintiffs over the suit lands. The sale deed dated 9-5-1931 by Fakir
Chand, father of the defendants in favour of Tola Singh, the predecessor- in-interest
of the plaintiffs, is an admitted document in the sense its execution is not in dispute.
The only defence set up against the said document is that it is unstamped and
unregistered and therefore it cannot convey title to the land in favour of the plaintiffs.
Under the law a sale deed is required to be properly stamped and (2003) 4 SCC 161
AIR 2009 SC 1489
- 31 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 registered before it can convey title to the vendee. However, legal position is
clear law that a document like the sale deed in the present case, even though not admissible in
evidence, can be looked into for collateral purposes. In the present case the collateral purpose to be
seen is the nature of possession of the plaintiffs over the suit land. The sale deed in question at least
shows that initial possession of the plaintiffs over the suit land was not illegal or unauthorised...."
In the present case, by reason of the statutory interdict, no transfer at all is permissible. Even
transfer of possession is also not permissible. (See Pandey Oraon v. Ram Chander Sahu [1992 Supp
(2) SCC 77] and Amrendra Pratap Singh v. Tej Bahadur Prajapati [(2004) 10 SCC 65]:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 15
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
20. The Registration Act, 1908 provides for such a contingency in terms of the
proviso appended to Section 49 thereof, which reads as under:-
"49. Effect of non-registration of documents required to be registered.--
No document required by Section 17 or by any provision of the Transfer of Property
Act, 1882 (4 of 1882), to be registered shall--
- 32 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834
(a) affect any immovable property comprised therein, or
(b) confer any power to adopt, or
(c) be received as evidence of any transaction affecting such property or conferring such power,
unless it has been registered:
Provided that an unregistered document affecting immovable property and required
by this Act or the Transfer of Property Act, 1882 (4 of 1882), to be registered may be
received as evidence of a contract in a suit for specific performance under Chapter II
of the Specific Relief Act, 1877 (1 of 1877) or as evidence of any collateral transaction
not required to be effected by registered instrument."
21. Section 35 of the Act, however, rules out applicability of such provision as it is
categorically provided therein that a document of this nature shall not be admitted
for any purpose whatsoever. If all purposes for which the document is sought to be
brought in evidence are excluded, we fail to see any reason as to how the document
would be admissible for collateral purposes.
22. The view we have taken finds support from the decision of the Privy Council in
Ram Rattan v. Parma nand [(1945-46) 73 IA 28 : AIR 1946 PC 51] wherein it was
held:
"That the words 'for any purpose' in Section 35 of the Stamp Act, should be given
their natural
- 33 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 meaning and effect and would include a collateral purpose
and that an unstamped partition deed cannot be used to corroborate the oral
evidence for the purposes of determining even the factum of partition as distinct from
its terms."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 16
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
The said decision has been followed in a large number of decisions by the said Court. In
Bhaskarabhotla Padmanabhaiah v. B. Lakshminarayana [AIR 1962 AP 132] it has been held:-
"9. In this case, the learned Subordinate Judge has observed that what the plaintiff
was trying to prove was not the division in status but to show that the property was
divided under the partition deed. In any case, the fact that the document is
inadmissible due to want of being stamped is clear. For, in Ram Rattan v. Parma
Nand [(1945-46) 73 IA 28 : AIR 1946 PC 51] Their Lordships of the Privy Council
held that the words 'for any purpose' in Section 35 of the Stamp Act should be given
their natural meaning and effect and would include a collateral purpose and that an
unstamped partition deed cannot be used to corroborate the oral evidence for the
purpose of determining even the factum of partition as distinct from its terms."
It was furthermore held :
- 34 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 "10. In the result, I agree with the learned Munsif Magistrate
that the document is 'an instrument of partition' under Section 2(15) of the Stamp Act
and it is not admissible in evidence because it is not stamped. But, I further hold that
if the document becomes duly stamped, then it would be admissible in evidence to
prove the division in status but not the terms of the partition."
In Sanjeeva Reddi v. Johanputra Reddi [AIR 1972 AP 373] it has been held :
"9. While considering the scope of Section 35 of the Stamp Act we cannot bring in the
effect of non- registration of a document under Section 49 of the Registration Act.
Section 17 of the Registration Act deals with documents, the registration of which is
compulsory and Section 49 is concerned only with the effect of such non-registration
of the documents which require to be registered by Section 17 or by any provision of
the Transfer of Property Act. The effect of non-registration is that such a document
shall not affect any immovable property covered by it or confer any power to adopt
and it cannot be received as evidence of any transaction affecting such property or
conferring such power. But there is no prohibition under Section 49 to receive such a
document which requires registration to be used for a collateral purpose i.e. for an
entirely different and
- 35 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 independent matter. There is a total and absolute bar as to
the admission of an unstamped instrument whatever be the nature of the purpose or
however foreign or independent the purpose may be for which it is sought to be used,
unless there is compliance with the requirements of the provisos to Section 35. In
other words if an unstamped instrument is admitted for a collateral purpose, it would
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 17
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
amount to receiving such a document in evidence for a purpose which Section 35
prohibits. There is nothing in B. Rangaiah v. B. Rangaswamy [(1970) 2 AnWR 181]
which supports the contention of the petitioner. That was a case as pointed out by
Kuppuswami, J., where there were two instruments though contained in one
document, one a settlement in favour of the fourth defendant therein and the other a
will. It was therefore held that part of the instrument which constitutes a will did not
require any stamp and will be admissible in evidence for proving the bequest
contained therein. It was for that reason that the learned Judge said that Section 35
of the Stamp Act has no application to a case where one of the separate instruments
relating to one such matter would not at all be chargeable under the Act as in the case
before him."
In T. Bhaskar Rao v. T. Gabriel [AIR 1981 AP 175] it has been held :
"5. Section 35 of the Stamp Act mandates that an instrument chargeable with duty
should be
- 36 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 stamped so as to make it admissible in evidence. Proviso (a)
to Section 35 of the Stamp Act enables a document to be received in evidence on
payment of stamp duty and penalty if the document is chargeable, but not stamped or
on payment of deficit duty and penalty, if it is insufficiently stamped. The bar against
the admissibility of an instrument which is chargeable with stamp duty and is not
stamped is of course absolute whatever be the nature of the purpose, be it for main or
collateral purpose, unless the requirements of proviso (a) to Section 35 are complied
with. It follows that if the requirements of proviso (a) to Section 35 are satisfied, then
the document which is chargeable with duty, but not stamped, can be received in
evidence."
It was further held :
"7. It is now well settled that there is no prohibition under Section 49 of the
Registration Act, to receive an unregistered document in evidence for collateral
purpose. But the document so tendered should be duly stamped or should comply
with the requirements of Section 35 of the Stamp Act, if not stamped, as a document
cannot be received in evidence even for collateral purpose unless it is duly stamped or
duty and
- 37 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 penalty are paid under Section 35 of the Stamp Act."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 18
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
(See also Firm Chuni Lal Tukki Mal v. Firm Mukat Lal Ram Chandra [AIR 1968 All 164] and
Chandra Sekhar Misra v. Gobinda Chandra Das [AIR 1966 Ori 18].
19. However, in the present facts, the parties are not relying on an unregistered sale deed. The Apex
Court in the case of Avinash has held that the unregistered sale deed which required payment of
stamp duty could not be admitted for any purpose whatsoever.
20. In the present facts, the defendant has not claimed his title on an unregistered sale deed but on
the agreement of sale that he is in possession adverse to the knowledge of the plaintiff.
21. This Court in the case of Chepudira Madaiah v. Mallengada Chengappa & others at para No.17
has held as under:
"17. As held by the Hon'ble Apex Court in Dagadabai (Dead) by Legal Representatives
v. Abbas alias Gulab Rustum Pinjari, reported in
- 38 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 (2017) 13 SCC 705 : (AIROnline 2017 SC 602), the person
raising plea of adverse possession must necessarily first admit the ownership of true
owner of relevant property to the knowledge of that owner. In the instant case, the
defendants in their written statement have admitted the ownership of the plaintiffs
over the suit schedule property. Apart from the defendants raising the plea of adverse
possession and admitting the ownership of the true owner of relevant property to the
knowledge of the said owner, they should also prove that their possession is an
actual, open, exclusive, hostile and continued over statutory period by wrongful
dispossession of rightful owner. Thus, animus possidendi is essential. Therefore,
mere possession cannot be deemed to be adverse possession merely on the basis of
denial of another's title over property for that would be violative of basic rights of
actual owner. Until the defendants' possession becomes adverse to that of the real
owner, the defendants continue in permissive possession of the property. Only if the
defendants' possession becomes adverse to the interest of the real owner and the real
owner fails to file the suit for possession within twelve years, as prescribed under
Article 65 of the Limitation Act, from the point of time the possession by the
defendants becomes adverse to the plaintiffs, the real owner loses his
- 39 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 title over the property. Every possession is not an adverse possession. The
defendants will not acquire adverse possession by simply remaining in permissive possession for
howsoever long it may be."
22. The Apex Court, in the case of Roop Singh (Dead) through L.Rs. vs. Ram Singh (Dead) through
L.Rs.8 at para Nos. 8 and 9 has held as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 19
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
"8. It also appears that the High Court has ignored the finding of fact to the effect that
the defendant has failed to prove the so-called agreement to sale in his favour. He has
not produced on record the said sale deed or a letter executed by the plaintiff in
favour of the defendant or his brother. The Appellate Court has further observed that
the defendant has not led the evidence of the witnesses in whose presence the said
document was executed. In our view, there being no document on record, the alleged
contents of the deed could not have been considered by referring to the oral say of the
defendant.
9. Further, even with regard to appreciation of evidence the High Court materially
erred in considering the evidence of Anoop Singh for holding AIR 2000 SC 1485
- 40 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 that defendant had been in possession for 15-16 years from
the date of the suit and that possession being not permissive and adverse to the title
of the plaintiff, would ripen into perfect title. This finding is quite contrary to the
evidence of Anoop Singh and the finding given by both the Courts below who after
appreciating the evidence of witnesses have specifically arrived at the conclusion that
the witnesses have nowhere stated that defendant asserted his hostile title. From the
deposition of the said witnesses and the revenue records, the Courts arrived at the
conclusion that since 1956-57 the defendant was in possession but that possession
was as a bataidar. As the suit was filed on 04.2.1969, it cannot be said that defendant
has perfected his title by adverse possession. In the written statement, the defendant
has only asserted that about 14 years ago plaintiff gave this land by executing the sale
agreement for Rs.611/-; the sale deed was written in presence of two persons of the
same village and hence since 1955 defendant is in possession of the land as an
owner/purchaser. Therefore, he has become owner of the suit property by adverse
possession. Except this bare evidence, there is no other evidence on record to
establish that defendant got possession of the property by purchasing the same. As
against this, the revenue record clearly establishes that plaintiff was the owner of the
- 41 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 property and that he had handed over the possession of the
suit land to the defendant for cultivation as bataidar. It appears that the High Court
materially erred in not referring to the evidence of plaintiff who has specifically
deposed that in the year 1956-57 he had given the suit land to the defendant for two
years on batai. It is also to be stated that plea of adverse possession and retaining the
possession by operation of Section 53-A of the Transfer of Property Act are
inconsistent with each other. Once it is admitted by implication that plaintiff came
into possession of the land lawfully under the agreement and continued to remain in
possession till the date of the suit, the plea of adverse possession would not be
available to the defendant unless it has been asserted and pointed out hostile animus
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 20
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
of retaining possession as an owner after getting in possession of the land. (Re:
Mohan Lal vs. Mirza Abdul Gaffar, (1996) 1 SCC 639 : (1996) AIR SCW 306 : AIR
1996 SC 910."
23. The Apex Court, in the case of Ghanshyam vs. Yogendra Rathi9 at para Nos.14 to 17, has held as
under:
"14. In connection with the general power of attorney and the will so executed, the
practice, if (2023) 7 SCC 361
- 42 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 any, prevalent in any State or the High Court recognising these documents
to be documents of title or documents conferring right in any immovable property is in violation of
the statutory law. Any such practice or tradition prevalent would not override the specific provisions
of law which require execution of a document of title or transfer and its registration so as to confer
right and title in an immovable property of over Rs 100 in value. The decisions of the Delhi High
Court in Veer Bala Gulati v. MCD [Veer Bala Gulati v. MCD, following the earlier decision of the
Delhi High Court itself in Asha M. Jain v. Canara Bank holding that the agreement to sell with
payment of full consideration and possession along with irrevocable power of attorney and other
ancillary documents is a transaction to sell even though there may not be a sale deed, are of no help
to the plaintiff- respondent inasmuch as the view taken by the Delhi High Court is not in consonance
with the legal position which emanates from the plain reading of Section 54 of the Transfer of
Property Act, 1882.
15. In this regard, reference may be had to two other decisions of the Delhi High Court in Imtiaz Ali
v. Nasim Ahmed and G. Ram v. DDA which inter alia observe that an agreement to sell or the power
of attorney are not documents of transfer and as such the right, title and interest of an immovable
property do not stand transferred by mere execution
- 43 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 of the same unless any document as contemplated under Section 54 of the
Transfer of Property Act, 1882, is executed and is got registered under Section 17 of the Registration
Act, 1908. The decision of the Supreme Court in Suraj Lamp & Industries (P) Ltd. v. State of
Haryana also deprecates the transfer of immovable property through sale agreement, general power
of attorney and will instead of registered conveyance deed.
16. Legally an agreement to sell may not be regarded as a transaction of sale or a document
transferring the proprietary rights in an immovable property but the prospective purchaser having
performed his part of the contract and lawfully in possession acquires possessory title which is liable
to be protected in view of Section 53A of the Transfer of Property Act, 1882. The said possessory
rights of the prospective purchaser cannot be invaded by the transferor or any person claiming
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 21
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
under him.
17. Notwithstanding the above as the respondent- plaintiff admittedly was settled with possessory
title in part performance of the agreement to sell dated 10.04.2002 and that the appellant-
defendant has lost his possession over it and had acquired the right of possession under a licence
simpliciter, exhausted his right to continue in possession after the licence has been determined.
Thus, the appellant-defendant parted with the
- 44 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 possession of the suit property by putting the respondent- plaintiff in
possession of it under an agreement to sell. The plaintiff-respondent in this way came to acquire
possessory title over the same. The appellant- defendant, as such, ceased to be in possession of it as
an owner rather occupied it as a licencee for a fixed period which stood determined by valid notice,
leaving the appellant- defendant with no subsisting right to remain in possession of the suit
premises."
24. The Apex Court has held that the plea of adverse possession and retaining the possession by
operation of Section 53A of the TP Act are in consistent with each other and further held that, when
a person contends that he is in possession under an agreement and continue to remain in possession
till the date of the suit, the plea of adverse possession is not available to the defendants unless and
until he has asserted and pointed out and hostile animus of retaining possession as an owner after
getting in possession of the land. In light of the law declared by the Apex Court and the judgments of
the Co-
ordinate Bench of this Court, this Court is of the
- 45 -
NC: 2023:KHC-K:6834 considered view that the mere possession for a long time does not convert
the permissive possession into adverse possession and accordingly, the first appellate Court was not
justified in reversing the judgment and decree of the trial Court and the substantial questions of law
framed by this Court need to be answered in favour of the appellant.
Accordingly, this Court pass the following:
ORDER
(i) The regular second appeal filed by the plaintiff is hereby allowed.
(ii) The judgment and decree of the first appellate Court dated 30.07.2011 in
RA.No.64/2009 is hereby set aside and the judgment and decree of the trial Court
dated 27.10.2009 in O.S.No.76/2001 stands confirmed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 22
Moinuddin S/O Abdul Raheman Sab vs Chandrappa S/O Bheemsha Pujari Anr on 29 August, 2023
(iii) The respondents are directed to handover possession of the suit property
forthwith.
Sd/-
JUDGE S*/MBM
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/10447934/ 23
