Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on 27 September, 2024
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on
27 September, 2024
Author: A.Guneshwar Sharma
Bench: A.Guneshwar Sharma
REPORTABLE
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
MC (El Pet) No.5 of 2022 with
El.Pet No.15 of 2022 with
El Recr Pet No.11 of 2022 with
MC (El Pet) No.100 of 2022 with
MC (El Pet) No.78 of 2022
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh, aged
about 60 years, s/o (late) M.Ningthou
Singh of Tentha Khongbal, PO
Wangjing & PS Khongjom, Thouobal
District, Manipur 795148
... Applicant
-Versus-
1. Shri Paonam Brojen Singh, aged
About 56 years, s/o Paonam Birahari Singh
of Wangjing Wangkhei, PO & PS Thoubal,
Thoubal District, Manipur 795148.
2. Shri Usham Manglem, aged about
26 years, s/o Usham Gopi of Kairembikhok
Awang Leikai, PO Wangjing & PS Thoubal,
Thoubal District, Manipur 795148
... Respondents
BEFORE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A.GUNESHWAR SHARMA For the Applicant :: Mr. M. Rendy,
Advocate For the Respondents :: Mr. HS Paonam, Sr.Advocate Ms.Malemleima, Advocate Date of
hearing :: 13.05.2024 Date of order :: 27.09.2024 JUDGMENT & ORDER (C A V) [1] The applicant,
who is the petitioner in Election Petition, being EP No.05 of 2022, has filed the present application
praying for leave of this Court to file the document annexed herewith in (Annexure R/1), which is a
part of the Affidavit[Form- 26] filed along with nomination paper before the Returning Officer,
34-Wangjing Tentha Assembly Constituency for the election of the 12th Manipur Legislative
Assembly and also for allowing to insert the same as page 95A between Pages 95 and 96 of the main
Election Petition, under order VII Rule 14 of the Civil Procedure Code, 1908 [in short, CPC] and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39079183/ 1
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on 27 September, 2024
Section 87 of the Representation of the People Act, 1951 [in short, RP Act or RPA].
[2] The applicant/Election Petitioner challenged the election of the respondent No.1 herein for
non-disclosure of material information in para 4, 7 and 8 of the affidavit filed along with
Nomination paper of the respondent No.1 in the 12th Manipur Legislative Assembly Election.
[3] It is stated that through bona fide/inadvertent mistake of the Junior Counsel of the applicant,
the document annexed herewith had been left out at the time of presenting the Election Petition, i.e.
Non-Agricultural Land Location(s) Survey number(s). Area/Total measurement in sq.ft), whether
inherited property (Yes or No). Date of purchase in case of Self acquired property and cost of land
(in case of purchase) at the time of purchase, of the affidavit [Form-26] along with Nomination
Paper filed by the respondent No.1, before the Returning Officer, 34-Wangjing Tentha AC of the
present election petition in Annexure A/5 which is required to be inserted as page No.95A between
the pages 95 and 96 of the present Election Petition No.15 of 2022 in order to avoid further
complicacies to the party/respondents and hence, the present application.
[4] Further, it is stated that unless the humble applicant be allowed to file the proposed document
(page 95A) would cause irreparable injury and that the said document is necessary for deciding the
matter and shall not cause any prejudice to the respondent No.1.
[5] In the objection filed by respondent No.1, it is stated that filing such document is not permissible
after expiry of the 45 days from the date of declaration of election held on 25th April, 2022 and that
the present Misc Case is filed only on 7.5.2022 in violation of provisions of Section 81 of the
Representation of People's Act, 1951. It is also argued that amendment of Election petition is not
permissible in terms of Section 81 of the Representation of People's Act, 1951.
[6] In reply to the objection of respondent No.1, applicant submits that insertion of the left out
important document between page No.95 and 96 i.e. 95A is very much necessary to avoid any
further unwanted complicacies for not annexing the relevant evidence/particulars in the main
Election Petition. Further, it is stated that expiry of 45 days from the date of declaration of election
(25.4.2022) is not so relevant since the present application is not an amendment application under
Order VI Rule 17 CPC, 1908 and that the present document proposed for insertion is not a new
document, nor a document which has no relevance with the main Election Petition and the fact of
the said document has already been contended in the above-referred Election petition precisely in
para 12(B)(iii).
[7] Mr. M. Rendy, learned counsel for the applicant/ election petitioner submits that as mandated
by the provisions of Section 83(1)(a) of RP Act, the petitioner has pleaded all the averments which
are materials for deciding the disputes involved in the election petition. It is pointed out that the
election of the returned candidate has been challenged by way of the election petition being EP No.
15 of 2022 on various grounds such as non- disclosure of materials facts in the affidavit Form-26
filed at the time of submission of nomination paper and corrupt practices. The petitioner has
already pleaded in the election petition all the instances of suppression/concealment of material
information in the affidavit and every minute details of the factum of corrupt practices. However,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39079183/ 2
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on 27 September, 2024
due to inadvertence and oversight at the time of the filing of the election petition, one page of the
affidavit, ie, Form-26 submitted by the returned candidate [between pages 95 to 96] has been
missed out. By the present application under Order 7 Rule 14 CPC, the applicant/election petitioner
seeks leave of this Court to file the missing page of the affidavit as Page 95A and to be inserted
between pages 95 to 96 of the election petition. It is urged that by inserting page 95A in the election
petition, the same will not amount to amendment of election petition within the meaning of Order 6
Rule 17 CPC. It is highlighted that necessary particulars about the concealment of vital information
regarding immovable property of the returned candidate/respondent No.1 have already been
mentioned in the petition as contemplated by the provisions of Section 83(1)(a) of RP Act and no
new fact is proposed to be added by the present application. It is just a prayer for furnishing a
missing page from Form-26 of the returned candidate and is proposed to supply material particular
of a material fact that has already be included in the petition. Since the application is not in the
nature of an amendment, there is no impediment for supplying such document after expiry of 45
days stipulation. It is also urged the provisions of CPC is applicable in an election petition as nearly
as possible as postulated in Section 87 of RP Act. [8] Mr. M. Rendy, learned counsel for the
applicant relies on the following case laws in support of his submission:
(i) Anil Vasudev Salgaonkar v. Naresh Kushali Shigaonkar: (2009) 9 SCC 310: All
'material facts' must be pleaded by the party in support of the case set up by him.
Since the object and purpose is to enable the opposite party to know the case he has to meet with, in
the absence of pleading, a party cannot be allowed to lead evidence. Failure to state even a single
material fact, hence, will entail dismissal of the suit or petition. Particulars, on the other hand, are
the details of the case which is in the nature of evidence a party would be leading at the time of trial.
(ii) Ram Sukh v. Dinesh Aggarwal: (2009) 10 SCC 541, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that averments
of all material facts have to pleaded in the petition and failure to plead even a single material fact
will be fatal. Material particulars are not required to be pleaded in the petition.
(iii) Jitu Patnaik v. Sanatan Mohakud: (2012) 4 SCC 194: Material facts are those bundle of facts
upon which the claim or defence of the party are based whereas material particulars amplify the
material facts during the trial. [9] Learned counsel for the applicant submits that the application
may be allowed and the document at Annexure R-1 be permitted to be placed as Page 95A between
Pages 95 and 96 in the election petition and in doing so, no new case will be made out. [10] On the
other hand, Mr. HS Paonam, learned counsel for respondent No.1/returned candidate draws the
attention of this Court the provisions of Section 81 of RP Act which mandates the filing of election
petition within 45 days of the from the date of the election of the returned candidate. As per Section
83(1)(a) of the Act, all the material facts have to be pleaded in the election petition and such facts
have to be supported by material particulars. In short, material particulars have to be filed along
with the election petition within the stipulated 45 days, otherwise the same will be in violation of the
condition laid down in Section 81. Learned senior counsel emphasises the fact that supplying
additional page for incorporating in the affidavit Form-26 will amount to amendment of the election
petition in disguise after the stipulated period of 45 days. It is pointed out that election result was
declared on 10.03.2022 and the present application was filed on 07-05-2022, ie, after lapse of 58
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39079183/ 3
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on 27 September, 2024
days and document at Annexure R-1 proposed to be inserted as Page 95A cannot be accepted.
[11] Mr. HS Paonam, learned counsel for returned candidate refers to a decision of this Court in the
case of Shri Jyotin Waikhom v. Shri Khumukcham Joykishan [ MC(EP) No. 24 of 2017 in EP No. 8
of 2017]. Relying on various case laws laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court, it has been held that the
replication introducing new facts cannot be entertained as the same would amount to amendment of
the petition and that too after lapse of the stipulated period of 45 days. It would be in violation of the
provisions of Section 81 of RP Act. It is prayed that the present application be dismissed with heavy
cost.
[12] This has perused the materials on record including the election petition and considered the
submissions made at bar and relevant law in this regard.
[13] Avoiding full quotation of the provisions of the law, this Court intends to summarise the settle
propositions of law in this regard. The substantial points for determination involved in the present
application are (I) Whether supplying of a missing page of the Form-26 of the returned candidate is
a material fact or material particular?
(II) If the document is a material particular, shall the same be submitted within 45 days?
(III) Whether supplying of a missing page will amount to amendment of election petition?
[14] Section 81 of RP Act provides that an election petition has to be filed within 45 days from the
date of the declaration of the result of the returned candidate. In view of provisions of Section
83(1)(a) of the Act, the material facts for relying the claim in the petition have to be pleaded and
failure to plead a single material fact constituting the cause of action will be fatal. Section 87 of the
Act makes the provisions of CPC to be application in an election trial as far as practicable thereby
meaning that amendment of petition, etc. from CPC are applicable in election proceeding. Any
amendment has to be made within 45 days as stipulated in Section 81. [15] In the case of Anil
Vasudev Salgaonkar v. Naresh Kushali Shigaonkar: (2009) 9 SCC 310, Hon'ble Supreme Court
discussed the difference between material facts and material particulars as contained in Section 83
of RP Act and held as below:
52. In V. Narayanaswamy v. C.P. Thirunavukkarasu10 this Court reiterated the legal
position that an election petition is liable to be dismissed if it lacks in material facts.
In L.R. Shivaramagowda v. T.M. Chandrashekar11 this Court again considered the
importance of pleadings in an election petition alleging corrupt practice falling within
the scope of Section 123 of the Act and observed as under: (SCC p. 677, para 11)
"11. This Court has repeatedly stressed the importance of pleadings in an election petition and
pointed out the difference between 'material facts' and 'material particulars'. While the failure to
plead material facts is fatal to the election petition and no amendment of the pleading could be
allowed to introduce such material facts after the time-limit prescribed for filing the election
petition, the absence of material particulars can be cured at a later stage by an appropriate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39079183/ 4
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on 27 September, 2024
amendment."
53. In Udhav Singh case9 this Court observed as under:
(SCC pp. 522-23, para 41) "41. Like the Code of Civil Procedure, this section also
envisages a distinction between 'material facts' and 'material particulars'. Clause (a)
of sub-section (1) corresponds to Order 6 Rule 2, while clause (b) is analogous to
Order 6 Rules 4 and 6 of the Code. The distinction between 'material facts' and
'material particulars' is important because different consequences may flow from a
deficiency of such facts or particulars in the pleading. Failure to plead even a single
material fact leads to an incomplete cause of action and incomplete allegations of
such a charge are liable to be struck off under Order 6 Rule 16, Code of Civil
Procedure. If the petition is based solely on those allegations which suffer from lack
of material facts, the petition is liable to be summarily rejected for want of a cause of
action. In the case of a petition suffering from a deficiency of material particulars, the
court has a discretion to allow the petitioner to supply the required particulars even
after the expiry of limitation." (emphasis in original)
54. In H.D. Revanna case2 the appeal was filed by the candidate who had succeeded in the election
and whose application for dismissal of the election petition in limine was rejected by the High Court.
This Court noticed that it has been laid down by this Court that non-compliance with the provisions
of Section 83 may lead to dismissal of the petition if the matter falls within the scope of Order 6 Rule
16 and Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code of Civil Procedure. In Harmohinder Singh Pradhan v. Ranjeet
Singh Talwandi12 this Court observed thus: (SCC p. 51, para 14) "14. Necessary averment of facts
constituting an appeal on the ground of 'his religion' to vote or to refrain from voting would be
material facts within the meaning of clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 83 of the Act. If such
material facts are missing, they cannot be supplied later on, after the expiry of period of limitation
for filing the election petition and the plea being deficient, can be directed to be struck down under
Order 6 Rule 16 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 and if such plea be the sole ground of filing an
election petition, the petition itself can be rejected as not disclosing a cause of action under clause
(a) of Rule 11, Order 7 of the Code."
55. In Harkirat Singh v. Amrinder Singh13 this Court again reiterated the distinction between
"material facts" and "material particulars" and observed as under: (SCC p. 527, paras 51-52) "51. A
distinction between 'material facts' and 'particulars', however, must not be overlooked. 'Material
facts' are primary or basic facts which must be pleaded by the plaintiff or by the defendant in
support of the case set up by him either to prove his cause of action or defence. 'Particulars', on the
other hand, are details in support of material facts pleaded by the party. They amplify, refine and
embellish material facts by giving distinctive touch to the basic contours of a picture already drawn
so as to make it full, more clear and more informative. 'Particulars' thus ensure conduct of fair trial
and would not take the opposite party by surprise.
52. All 'material facts' must be pleaded by the party in support of the case set up by him. Since the
object and purpose is to enable the opposite party to know the case he has to meet with, in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39079183/ 5
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on 27 September, 2024
absence of pleading, a party cannot be allowed to lead evidence. Failure to state even a single
material fact, hence, will entail dismissal of the suit or petition. Particulars, on the other hand, are
the details of the case which is in the nature of evidence a party would be leading at the time of
trial."
56. In Sudarsha Avasthi v. Shiv Pal Singh14 this Court observed as under: (SCC p. 612, para 20) "20.
The election petition is a serious matter and it cannot be treated lightly or in a fanciful manner nor
is it given to a person who uses this as a handle for vexatious purpose."
57. It is settled legal position that all "material facts" must be pleaded by the party in support of the
case set up by him within the period of limitation. Since the object and purpose is to enable the
opposite party to know the case he has to meet with, in the absence of pleading, a party cannot be
allowed to lead evidence. Failure to state even a single material fact will entail dismissal of the
election petition. The election petition must contain a concise statement of "material facts" on which
the petitioner relies.
58. There is no definition of "material facts" either in the Representation of the People Act, 1951 nor
in the Code of Civil Procedure. In a series of judgments, this Court has laid down that all facts
necessary to formulate a complete cause of action should be termed as "material facts". All basic and
primary facts which must be proved by a party to establish the existence of cause of action or
defence are material facts. "Material facts" in other words mean the entire bundle of facts which
would constitute a complete cause of action. This Court in Harkirat Singh case13 tried to give
various meanings of "material facts". The relevant para 48 of the said judgment is reproduced as
under: (SCC pp. 526-27) "48. The expression 'material facts' has neither been defined in the Act nor
in the Code. According to the dictionary meaning, 'material' means 'fundamental', 'vital', 'basic',
'cardinal', 'central', 'crucial', 'decisive', 'essential', 'pivotal', 'indispensable', 'elementary' or 'primary'.
[Burton's Legal Thesaurus (3rd Edn.), p.
349.] The phrase 'material facts', therefore, may be said to be those facts upon which a party relies
for its claim or defence. In other words, 'material facts' are facts upon which the plaintiff's cause of
action or the defendant's defence depends. What particulars could be said to be 'material facts'
would depend upon the facts of each case and no rule of universal application can be laid down. It is,
however, absolutely essential that all basic and primary facts which must be proved at the trial by
the party to establish the existence of a cause of action or defence are material facts and must be
stated in the pleading by the party."
59. In the context of a charge of corrupt practice, "material facts" would mean all basic facts
constituting the ingredients of the particular corrupt practice alleged, which the petitioner (the
respondent herein) is bound to substantiate before he can succeed on that charge. It is also well
settled that if "material facts" are missing they cannot be supplied after expiry of period of limitation
for filing the election petition and the pleading becomes deficient.
60. According to the appellant, in the election petition, there was no averment whether the bore
wells were dug with the consent and/or active knowledge of the appellant. This averment was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39079183/ 6
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on 27 September, 2024
absolutely imperative and the failure to mention such an important averment in the petition is fatal
for the election petitioner (the respondent herein) and the election petition is liable to be summarily
dismissed on that ground.
61. The legal position has been crystallised by a series of the judgments of this Court that all those
facts which are essential to clothe the election petitioner with a complete cause of action are
"material facts" which must be pleaded, and the failure to place even a single material fact amounts
to disobedience of the mandate of Section 83(1)(a) of the Act.
2 (1999) 2 SCC 217 12 (2005) 5 SCC 46 13 (2005) 13 SCC 511 14 (2008) 7 SCC 604 [16] In the case of
Ram Sukh v. Dinesh Aggarwal:
(2009) 10 SCC 541, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that averments of all material facts
have to pleaded in the petition and failure to plead even a single material fact will be
fatal. Material particulars are not required to be pleaded in the petition. Relevant
para are reproduced for clarity.
14. The requirement in an election petition as to the statement of material facts and the
consequences of lack of such disclosure with reference to Sections 81, 83 and 86 of the Act came up
for consideration before a three-Judge Bench of this Court in Samant N. Balkrishna v. George
Fernandez4. Speaking for the three-Judge Bench, M. Hidayatullah, C.J., inter alia, laid down that:
(i) Section 83 of the Act is mandatory and requires first a concise statement of
material facts and then the fullest possible particulars;
(ii) omission of even a single material fact leads to an incomplete cause of action and
statement of claim becomes bad;
(iii) the function of particulars is to present in full a picture of the cause of action and
to make the opposite party understand the case he will have to meet;
(iv) material facts and particulars are distinct matters--material facts will mention
statements of fact and particulars will set out the names of persons with date, time
and place; and
(v) in stating the material facts it will not do merely to quote the words of the section
because then the efficacy of the material facts will be lost.
15. At this juncture, in order to appreciate the real object and purport of the phrase "material facts",
particularly with reference to election law, it would be appropriate to notice the distinction between
the phrases "material facts" as appearing in clause (a) and "particulars" as appearing in clause (b) of
sub-section (1) of Section 83. As stated above, "material facts" are primary or basic facts which have
to be pleaded by the petitioner to prove his cause of action and by the defendant to prove his
defence. "Particulars", on the other hand, are details in support of the material facts, pleaded by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39079183/ 7
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on 27 September, 2024
parties. They amplify, refine and embellish material facts by giving distinctive touch to the basic
contours of a picture already drawn so as to make it full, more clear and more informative. Unlike
"material facts"
which provide the basic foundation on which the entire edifice of the election petition
is built, "particulars" are to be stated to ensure that the opposite party is not taken by
surprise.
16. The distinction between "material facts" and "particulars" and their requirement in an election
petition was succinctly brought out by this Court in Virender Nath Gautam v. Satpal Singh5 wherein
C.K. Thakker, J., stated thus: (SCC pp. 631-32, para 50) "50. There is distinction between facta
probanda (the facts required to be proved i.e. material facts) and facta probantia (the facts by means
of which they are proved i.e. particulars or evidence). It is settled law that pleadings must contain
only facta probanda and not facta probantia. The material facts on which the party relies for his
claim are called facta probanda and they must be stated in the pleadings. But the facts or facts by
means of which facta probanda (material facts) are proved and which are in the nature of facta
probantia (particulars or evidence) need not be set out in the pleadings. They are not facts in issue,
but only relevant facts required to be proved at the trial in order to establish the fact in issue."
17. Now, before examining the rival submissions in the light of the aforestated legal position, it
would be expedient to deal with another submission of the learned counsel for the appellant that the
High Court should not have exercised its power either under Order 6 Rule 16 or Order 7 Rule 11 of
the Code to reject the election petition at the threshold. The argument is twofold viz.:
(i) that even if the election petition was liable to be dismissed ultimately, it should
have been dismissed only after affording an opportunity to the election petitioner to
adduce evidence in support of his allegation in the petition, and
(ii) since Section 83 does not find a place in Section 86 of the Act, rejection of the
petition at the threshold would amount to reading into sub-section (1) of Section 86
an additional ground.
In our opinion, both the contentions are misconceived and untenable.
18. Undoubtedly, by virtue of Section 87 of the Act, the provisions of the Code apply to the trial of an
election petition and, therefore, in the absence of anything to the contrary in the Act, the court
trying an election petition can act in exercise of its power under the Code, including Order 6 Rule 16
and Order 7 Rule 11 of the Code. The object of both the provisions is to ensure that meaningless
litigation, which is otherwise bound to prove abortive, should not be permitted to occupy the judicial
time of the courts. If that is so in matters pertaining to ordinary civil litigation, it must apply with
greater vigour in election matters where the pendency of an election petition is likely to inhibit the
elected representative of the people in the discharge of his public duties for which the electorate
have reposed confidence in him. The submission, therefore, must fail. 4 (1969) 3 SCC 238 5 (2007) 3
SCC 617 [17] In the case of Jitu Patnaik v. Sanatan Mohakud:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39079183/ 8
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on 27 September, 2024
(2012) 4 SCC 194, Hon'ble Apex Court distinguished between material facts and
material particulars or evidences as below:
43. Order 6 Rule 2 CPC, to the extent it is relevant, reads as under:
"2. Pleading to state material facts and not evidence.--(1) Every pleading shall
contain, and contain only, a statement in a concise form of the material facts on
which the party pleading relies for his claim or defence as the case may be, but not
the evidence by which they are to be proved. (2)-(3) * * *"
44. Section 83(1)(a) of the 1951 Act is as follows:
"83. Contents of petition.--(1) An election petition--
(a) shall contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the petitioner
relies;"
45. A bare perusal of the above provisions would show that the first part of Order 6 Rule 2 CPC is
similar to sub-section (1)(a) of Section 83 of the 1951 Act. It is imperative for an election petition to
contain a concise statement of the material facts on which the election petitioner relies. What are the
material facts? All basic and primary facts which must be proved at the trial by a party to establish
the existence of a cause of action or defence are material facts. The bare allegations are never treated
as material facts. The material facts are such facts which afford a basis for the allegations made in
the election petition. The meaning of "material facts" has been explained by this Court on more than
one occasion. Without multiplying the authorities, reference to one of the later decisions of this
Court in Virender Nath Gautam v. Satpal Singh8 shall suffice.
46. In Virender Nath Gautam8 this Court referred to the leading case of Philipps v. Philipps9 and
the subsequent decision in Bruce v. Odhams Press Ltd.10 that referred to Philipps9 and observed in
paras 34 and 35 of the Report as follows: (Virender Nath case8, SCC p. 629) "34. A distinction
between 'material facts' and 'particulars', however, must not be overlooked. 'Material facts' are
primary or basic facts which must be pleaded by the plaintiff or by the defendant in support of the
case set up by him either to prove his cause of action or defence. 'Particulars', on the other hand, are
details in support of material facts pleaded by the party. They amplify, refine and embellish material
facts by giving distinctive touch to the basic contours of a picture already drawn so as to make it full,
more clear and more informative. 'Particulars' thus ensure conduct of fair trial and would not take
the opposite party by surprise.
35. All 'material facts' must be pleaded by the party in support of the case set up by him. Since the
object and purpose is to enable the opposite party to know the case he has to meet with, in the
absence of pleading, a party cannot be allowed to lead evidence. Failure to state even a single
material fact, hence, will entail dismissal of the suit or petition. Particulars, on the other hand, are
the details of the case which is in the nature of evidence a party would be leading at the time of
trial."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39079183/ 9
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on 27 September, 2024
47. Whether the averments in the election petition constitute material facts or not would depend
upon the facts of each case. As stated by this Court in Virender Nath Gautam8, no rule of universal
application can be applied in finding out whether the statements of fact made in the election petition
amount to material facts or not. It is, therefore, necessary to consider the pleadings with regard to
suppression of 319 votes in Para 7(D) of the election petition.
8 (2007) 3 SCC 617 9 (1878) 4 QBD 127 (CA) 10 (1936) 1 KB 697 : (1936) 1 All ER 287 (CA) [18]
From the above cited decisions, it is clear that the election petition is to be filed within 45 days as
stipulated under Section 81 of RP Act and concise material facts have to pleaded and failure to do
shall be liable for its outright rejection at threshold under Order 7 Rule 11 CPC. Any amendment has
to be made within 45 days as laid down by Section 81. Material particulars are facts required for
proving the material facts as evidence and hence not parts of the pleadings.
[19] On perusal of the election petition, specially, the contents of para 10, 11 and 12, it is found that
the applicant/ election petitioner has pleaded all instances of concealment of material information
in the affidavit Form-26 by the returned candidate. However, one page of the affidavit with respect
to non- movable property has been missing and the same is said due to inadvertence. By the present
application, the election petitioner seeks leave of this Court for inserting this particular (Annexure
R-1 to the application) as page 95A in between pages 95 and 96. This Court is of the firmed opinion
that missing document from the affidavit Form-26 (Annexure R-1) is a material document only and
the fact relating to this document has already been pleaded in the election petition. Accordingly, first
point is answered in favour of the applicant.
[20] It is the settled position of law that only material facts are to be pleaded in an election petition
as stipulated under Section 83(1)(a) of RP Act and such a petition has to be filed within 45 days of
the declaration of the election result in terms of Section 81 of the Act. However, material particulars
which are explanatory facts/documents of the material facts pleaded in the election petition are in
the nature of evidence and are not required to be pleaded in the petition. It is held in para 18 above
that missing document from the affidavit Form-26 [Annexure R-1] is only a material particular and
as such the same is not required to be filed within 45 days in terms of Section 81 of the Act. Second
point is also decided in favour of the applicant.
[21] The principle of amendment as embodied in Order 6 Rule 17 CPC provides for amendment of
the pleadings of the parties generally prior to the commencement of trial for determining the true
dispute between the parties. However, no new case can be introduced by such amendment. Section
87 of RP Act permits the application of the rules of CPC in an election petition as far as practicable
and in case of inconsistency, the provisions of RP Act shall prevail. Reading together the provisions
of Order 6 Rule 17 CPC with Section 81 of RP Act, any amendment to election petition has to be
made within the stipulated 45 days.
[22] In the present case, the election petitioner prays for introducing a missing page of the affidavit
Form-26 of the returned candidate. The issue is whether such an endeavour amounts to amendment
of the election petition. If the answer is YES, such an amendment after 58 days will be barred by
Section 81 of RP Act. As already observed above, the missing document, ie, Annexure R-1 is only a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39079183/ 10
Moirangthem Hemanta Singh vs Shri Paonam Brojen Singh on 27 September, 2024
material document and inserting the same as page 95A will not amount to amendment of election
petition, as the necessary material facts have already been averred in para 10, 11 and 12 of the
election petition. Accordingly, third point is also decided in favour of the applicant.
[23] In view of the findings of all points for determination in favour of the applicant/election
petitioner, the application is allowed and missing document marked as Annexure R-1 is permitted to
be inserted as Page 95A in between Pages 95 and 96 of the election petition, subject to the payment
of cost of Rs. 10,000/- (Rupees ten thousand) only in favour of High Court Bar Association,
Manipur for relief purpose.
[24] MC(EP) No. 5 of 2022 is allowed and disposed. List election petition with the pending
applications on 09.10.2024 for further proceedings. Applicant is directed to submit proof of
payment of the cost before the next date.
JUDGE FR/NFR Priyojit RAJKUMAR Digitally signed by RAJKUMAR PRIYOJIT PRIYOJIT
SINGH Date: 2024.09.27 SINGH 13:12:56 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/39079183/ 11
