Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
Author: Rajendra Badamikar
Bench: Rajendra Badamikar
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 21ST DAY OF APRIL, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJENDRA BADAMIKAR
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.748/2011
BETWEEN:
MR.H.C.SRIDHARA,
S/O CHELUVEGOWDA,
VILLAGE ACCOUNTANT,
DODDAKAVALANDHE HOBLI, NANJANGUD.
...APPELLANT
(BY SRI.BRIJESH PATIL, ADV.)
AND:
STATE OF KARNATAKA
THROUGH KARNATAKA LOKAYUKTA POLICE,
MYSORE.
...RESPONDENT
(BY SRI.B.S.PRASAD, SPL.PP.)
THIS APPEAL IS FILED UNDER SECTION 374(2) OF
CR.P.C. SEEKING TO SET ASIDE THE JUDGMENT DATED
23.06.2011 PASSED BY THE DISTRICT AND SESSIONS JUDGE,
MYSORE IN SPECIAL CASE NO.64/2008 AND CONSEQUENTLY
ACQUIT THE APPELLANT FROM THE CHARGES UNDER
SECTIONS 7, 13(1)(d) R/W SECTION 13(2) OF PREVENTION OF
CORRUPTION ACT, 1988.
THIS APPEAL HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED FOR
JUDGMENT ON 11.03.2022 COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT
OF JUDGMENT THIS DAY THROUGH VIDEO CONFERENCE AT
DHARWAD, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:
2
JUDGMENT
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92260518/ 1
Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
The appellant/accused has filed this appeal under Section 374(2) of Cr.P.C. challenging the
judgment of conviction and order of sentence passed by the Principal Sessions Judge and Special
Judge, Mysuru in Spl.Case No.64/2008 dated 23.06.2011 whereby the learned Special Judge has
convicted the accused appellant herein for the offence punishable under Sections 7, 13(1)(d) r/w
13(2) of Prevention of Corruption Act, 1988 (hereinafter referred to as 'P.C.Act' for short) and
imposed sentence of imprisonment and fine on him.
2. For the sake of convenience, parties herein shall be referred with the original ranks occupied by
them before the trial court.
3. The brief factual matrix leading to the case are as under:
That the accused was working as a village accountant in the office of Tahasildar at
Nanjangud. The complainant was in need of genealogical tree of his family and on
28.06.2007 he approached the accused/village accountant in the office of Tahasildar,
Nanjangud requesting for the same. It is the specific case of the prosecution that
accused has taken necessary information from the complainant and demanded
Rs.300/- from him for issuing genealogical tree. When the complainant has
expressed his inability to pay Rs.300/-, the accused asked him to come along with the
money on the next day for collection of genealogical tree. As the complainant was not
willing to pay the bribe, he lodged a complaint with the Lokayukta Police in Mysuru.
In pursuance of the complaint, crime was registered and trap was arranged. It is
further case of the prosecution that investigating officer has secured the panchas and
after conducting pre-trap procedure, a trap was arranged on 02.07.2007 and the
accused was apprehended red- handedly when he received illegal gratification of
Rs.300/-. Then trap mahazar was drawn by the investigating officer and he has also
recorded the statement of the accused. Thereafter, he conducted further investigation
and then submitted charge sheet against the accused for the offence punishable
under Sections 7, 13(1)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the P.C.Act. The accused was arrested
on the date of the trap and subsequently he was enlarged on bail.
4. After submission of the charge sheet, as there are sufficient grounds to proceed against the
accused, the learned Special Judge has taken cognizance of the offence. The accused was
represented by his counsel and prosecution papers have been furnished to the defence counsel.
5. After hearing the learned Special Public Prosecutor and defence counsel, the charge under
Sections 7, 13(1)(d) r/w Section 13(2) of the P.C.Act is framed against the accused and the same is
read over and explained to the accused. The accused pleaded not guilty and claimed to be tried.
6. To prove the guilt of the accused, the prosecution has examined in all 7 witnesses as P.Ws.1 to 7
and also placed reliance on 14 documents marked at Exs.P1 to P14. Further, M.Os.1 to 7 were also
marked. Ex.D1 came to be marked during the cross examination of P.Ws.2 and 3.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92260518/ 2
Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
7. After conclusion of the evidence of the prosecution, the statement of the accused under Section
313 of Cr.P.C. is recorded to enable the accused to explain the incriminating evidence appearing
against him in the case of the prosecution. The case of accused is of total denial and he did not
choose to lead any oral or documentary evidence in support of his defence. However, he has given
explanation that complainant demanded the genealogical tree by deleting the name of his sister and
as accused did not agree for the same, a false complaint came to be lodged against the accused.
8. After hearing the arguments and after perusing the oral as well as documentary evidence, the trial
court has framed following points for consideration.
1) Whether the prosecution proves beyond reasonable doubt that the accused, being a Village
Accountant at Nanjangud, he demanded an amount of Rs.300/- from the complainant, as illegal
gratification other than legal remuneration as a motive for showing official favour, that is to issue
Genealogical Tree to the complainant, thereby committed an offence punishable under Section 7 of
the Prevention of Corruption act, 1988?
2) Whether the prosecution proves beyond reasonable doubt that the accused on 02.07.2007
obtained the pecuniary advantage to an extent of Rs.300/- as a motive for an act to show the official
favour in order to issue the Genealogical Tree and thereby he has committed an offence of criminal
misconduct under Section 13(1)(d), which is punishable under Section 13(2) of the Prevention of
Corruption Act, 1988?
9. The trial court by the impugned judgment has answered both the points in the affirmative and
convicted the accused/appellant herein by imposing sentence of imprisonment for six months with
fine of Rs.3,000/- for the offence punishable under Section 7 of P.C.Act and simple imprisonment
for a period of two years with fine of Rs.5,000/- with default clauses for the offence punishable
under Section 13(1)(d) r/w 13(2) of the P.C.Act.
10. Being aggrieved by this judgment of conviction and order of sentence, the accused has filed this
appeal.
11. Heard the arguments advanced by the learned counsel for the appellant/accused and learned
Special Public Prosecutor for the Lokayukta. Perused the records of the trial court.
12. Learned counsel for the appellant/accused would contend that the alleged facts do not constitute
the offence as alleged. He would also contend that the trial court lost sight of the fact that accused is
not the final authority to effect change of katha and he is only recommending authority. He would
further contend that the trial court committed a grave error in holding the accused guilty, when
admittedly as could be seen from Ex.P11, was signed and sent by accused as early as 28.06.2007 and
as on the date of filing of the complaint nothing remained to be done on the part of the accused in
respect of the said file. Hence, it is contended that there was no occasion for the accused to seek any
illegal gratification. He would further contend that, P.W.4 has clearly admitted in the cross-
examination that accused has disposed of the application by recommending for issuance of
genealogical tree. Hence, it is contended that indictment of the accused for the alleged act
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92260518/ 3
Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
discharged by other officials calls for interference by this court. He would contend that sanctioning
authority has issued the sanction order in a mechanical way without applying the mind. He would
also contend that the trial court has ignored the explanation offered by the accused at the earliest
point of time, which is natural and worthy of acceptance. He would also contend that hand wash of
the of the accused was also taken only after phenolphthalein powder smeared currency notes were
produced by the accused at the instance of the investigating officer, which discloses that he did not
touch the amount earlier. He would also invite the attention of the court that informant was sent
along with the voice recorder in pre-enquiry stage only and even as on the date of the trap. However,
the investigation records do not reveal recording of conversation, which discloses that there was no
demand for official favour. He would also contend that prosecution is required to prove demand for
illegal gratification as a motive to show official favour and in the absence of demand, mere recovery
of the amount does not conclusively establish the ingredients of the offence. He would also contend
that no work was pending with the accused pertaining to the complainant as on the date of the trap.
He would also contend that allegation of demand were not established with the support of
acceptable evidence. He would also contend that no motive is established as there was no work
pending with the accused. He would also contend that element of recovery is required to be proved
with the hand wash prior to recovery of the tainted currency notes and in the instant case, the hand
wash was subsequent to recovery which completely supports the case of the accused and his defence.
He would also contend that judgment of conviction and order of sentence suffers from infirmity and
it is perverse which has resulted in miscarriage of justice. As such, he would seek for allowing the
appeal.
13. Per contra, learned Special Public Prosecutor would contend that, admittedly the amount was
recovered from the custody of the accused and the serial number of the recovered amount tallies
with the amount entrusted to the complainant under the entrustment mahazar. He would also
contend that evidence of P.Ws.2 and 3 is consistent that the amount was taken from the pant of the
accused only after his hand wash was taken and it is again supported by the evidence of
P.W.7-investigating officer. He would contend that inconsistency in this regard in the evidence of
P.W.1 has no relevancy and P.Ws.2 and 3 are independent witnesses and they had no grievance
against the accused. He would also contend that nothing was elicited from the mouth of P.Ws.2 and
3 in the cross-examination except formal denial and mere pendency of the work is not a criteria. He
would further contend that evidence clearly discloses that sanctioning authority has applied the
mind and has granted sanction and minor typing errors do not have any much relevancy and it has
not prejudiced the accused in any way. He would further contend that defence set up during the trial
regarding thrusting of the amount is not put forward while recording the statement under Section
313 of Cr.P.C. and the explanation of the accused under Section 313 of Cr.P.C. are quite inconsistent
and contrary. He would contend that conduct of the accused itself establish that he was conscious to
receive illegal gratification and there is no proper explanation and he has not made any attempt to
prove his explanation and mere suggestion does not amount to rebuttal of the presumption. As such,
he would contend that the trial court has appreciated all these aspects in proper perspective and
after analyzing oral and documentary evidence has rightly convicted the accused. As such, he would
seek for dismissal of the appeal by confirming the judgment of conviction and order of sentence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92260518/ 4
Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
14. Having heard the arguments and after perusing the oral and documentary evidence, now the
following points would arise for my consideration:
1) Whether the prosecution has proved beyond all reasonable that the accused has demanded and
accepted illegal gratification from the complainant as alleged:
2) Whether the judgment of conviction and order of sentence passed by the trial court
is perverse, arbitrary and capricious so as to call for any interference by this court?
15. It is the case of the prosecution that the accused being the village accountant at Nanjangud,
Tahasildar office has demanded a sum of Rs.300/- from the complainant on 28.06.2007 for
issuance of genealogical tree and on 02.07.2007 he was trapped red-handedly and tainted amount
was recovered from his custody. The complainant is examined as P.W.1, while P.W.2 is a shadow
witness. P.W.3 is the second mahazar witness, who accompanied the raiding party. P.W.4 was the
Tahasildar in whose presence and in his chamber the trap mahazar was drawn, but he has turned
hostile. P.W.5 is the Junior Engineer who has drawn the sketch and his evidence is not challenged.
P.W.6 is the sanctioning authority, while P.W.7 is the investigating officer.
16. Ex.P1 is the complaint, while Ex.P2 is the entrustment mahazar. Ex.P3 is the mahazar in respect
of deferring trap. Ex.P4 is the trap mahazar, Ex.P5 is the portion of the statement of the P.W.4,
while Ex.P6 is the descriptions of the currency notes, Ex.P7 is the explanation given by the accused
immediately after the trap. Ex.P8 is the sketch, Ex.P10 is the sanction order, Ex.P11 is the FIR and
Ex.P14 is the FSL report. M.O.1 is the tainted amount entrusted and recovered from the accused.
M.O.2 is the hand wash of the second pancha during the entrustment mahazar. M.O.3 is the hand
wash of the accused. M.O.4 is the pant of the accused. M.O.5 is the sample phenolphthalein powder.
M.O.6 is the remaining sodium carbonate liquid and M.O.7 is the remaining phenolphthalein
powder.
17. In the instant case, there is no dispute of the fact that accused was working as a village
accountant in Nanjangud. It is also an undisputed fact that complainant has approached the accused
seeking for issuance of genealogical tree. The genealogical tree marked at Ex.D1 itself. The tone of
cross- examination of the accused also discloses that raid is not under serious dispute. Further, it is
also important to note here that accused has not disputed the recovery of the tainted amount from
his custody. But it is the specific case of the accused that amount was thrusted forcibly in his pant
pocket. However, the defence of the accused in this regard is inconsistent. In the explanation
submitted immediately after trap, it is specific contention of the accused that the amount was put
into pocket of the accused by the complainant without his knowledge. But in the cross-examination
a defence was taken that the amount was thrusted forcibly in his pocket. It is also important to note
here that genealogical tree was prepared on 27.06.2007 itself and it is admitted fact. However, it was
not handed over to the complainant and during the trap, it was seized from the custody of the
accused.
18. The complainant was examined as P.W.1 and in his evidence he deposed that on 29.06.2007, he
lodged the complainant against the accused regarding demanding illegal gratification of Rs.300/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92260518/ 5
Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
and on 26.06.2007 and 27.06.2007 there was a demand of illegal gratification. He further deposed
regarding he approaching Lokayukta police and lodging the complaint and trap is being arranged on
29.07.2007 and the accused was not in the office and hence, it was deferred. On 02.07.2007, the
trap was conducted and accused demanding and accepting illegal gratification of Rs.300/- from the
complainant. This witness was treated hostile partially by the prosecution as he has stated in his
examination-in- chief that amount was recovered first from the custody of the accused and later on
the hand wash of the accused was taken. But the witness has denied this aspect and further denied
giving statement in this regard. In the cross-examination, this witness specifically admitted that on
26.06.2007 there was no demand, but on 27.06.2007 there was a demand and admits that Ex.D1
genealogical tree was prepared on 27.06.2007. There are certain inconsistencies elicited in his
cross-examination regarding voice recorder being handed over to him on 27.06.2007 and no voice
recorder is being handed over to him on 29.06.2007. He has also deposed that in RRT branch, he
met the accused and a suggestion was made that while accused was moving towards the chamber of
Tahasildar, the complainant has thrusted the amount in his pant pocket. He denied the said
suggestion. The complainant has supported the case of the prosecution except minor discrepancies.
19. P.W.2-Jagadish is a shadow witness and he has fully supported the case of the prosecution
regarding he being summoned on 29.06.2007 to Lokayukta office, drawing entrustment mahazar
and P.W.3 being present there, complainant producing tainted amount recording serial number etc.
and drawing entrustment mahazar as per Ex.P2. He further deposed that, they went for trap on that
day, but due to absence of the accused, the trap was not successful and as such, they returned and
the amount was kept in almara by drawing mahazar as per Ex.P3. He further deposed that on
02.07.2007, again he and P.W.3 went to Lokayukta office and at about 2.00 p.m. the amount was
removed from the almara and handed over to the complainant and he was also provided a voice
recorder and then they proceeded for trap. He further deposed that at about 3.20 p.m. they went to
the office of the accused and there the complainant met the accused and the accused asked him
whether he brought what he had said and then complainant replied that he brought it and handed
over Rs.300/- and accused received it from right hand and put it in his right side pant pocket and
further stated that in 5-10 minutes he would hand over the genealogical tree. He further deposed
that then signal being passed and trap is being conducted. He specifically deposed that the accused
was taken to the chamber of Tahasildar and his hand wash taken first and then tainted amount was
recovered from his custody. He has also specifically stated that Tahasildar was also present during
this period of drawing mahazar as per Ex.P4. The pant was also marked as per M.O.4. He further
deposed that, on enquiry the accused has given explanation as per Ex.P7 regarding complainant
putting the amount without his knowledge, which is incorrect statement. This witness was
cross-examined at length, but nothing was elicited so as to impeach his evidence. The witness has
consistently deposed that there was a demand and acceptance from the accused and the amount was
paid in record room. A suggestion was made to this witness that first the amount was recovered and
then hand wash was taken, but the he denied the said suggestion and he specifically asserted that
first hand wash of accused was taken and then amount was recovered.
20. P.W.3 is the second pancha and she has also deposed regarding she being summoned to the
Lokayukta police station and entrustment mahazar was drawn on 29.06.2007 and on that day the
trap could not be held due to absence of the accused, drawing mahazar as per Ex.P3 and on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92260518/ 6
Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
02.07.2007 the trap being successful. She has also deposed that, first the hand wash of the accused
was taken and then amount was recovered from the custody of the accused. This witness was also
cross-examined at length, but nothing was elicited so as to impeach her evidence.
21. The evidence of P.Ws.2 and 3 is consistent and corroborative to each other. Further, the evidence
of P.Ws.2 and 3 is again fully corroborated by the evidence of the investigating officer P.W.7. All
along it is argued that genesis of the case itself is not established, as the complainant in the
complaint referred regarding he approaching the accused on 28.06.2007, but his evidence disclose
that on 26th and 27th June, 2007 he has approached. But it does not have any much relevancy as
Ex.D1 itself is prepared on 27.06.2007 as admitted by the accused himself. Further, it is the specific
contention of the accused that, on that day the accused warned the complainant. Hence, this
discrepancy does not go to the root of the case in any way.
22. P.W.4 is the Tahasildar in whose chamber the trap mahazar Ex.P4 was drawn. But he has turned
hostile and he claimed that he returned when the trap mahazar was being typed and it is in last
phase. But as per the case of the prosecution, in his presence only the trap mahazar was drawn. It is
evident that this witness having retired from the service has turned hostile to the case of the
prosecution regarding drawing trap mahazar in his presence. If at all, the trap mahazar was not
drawn in his presence, he being the Taluk Executive Magistrate would not have signed the trap
mahazar Ex.P4, which clearly disclose that he intended to help the accused.
23. P.W.6 is the sanctioning authority and deposed regarding issuing sanction order. However,
much arguments have been advanced by the defence counsel regarding non-application of mind, as
in the sanction order there is reference of taking both hand wash, but admittedly, only right hand
wash of the accused was taken which was tested positive to the phenolphthalein test. There is no
dispute about the fact that there is some reference regarding both hand wash of the accused is taken
in the body of the order, but that itself does not establish that there is no application of mind on the
part of the sanctioning authority. The records does establish that amount was recovered, hand wash
tested positive for the phenolphthalein test and the accused has also admitted recovery of the
amount from his custody. Under such circumstances, these minor discrepancies cannot be so
relevant so as to suspect that the sanction order is without any application of mind.
24. The accused has taken two specific defences. According to him, he did not demand the amount
nor accepted the amount. According to him, the complainant insisted the accused to give
genealogical tree excluding the name of his sister, for which he did not agree and as such, he was
scolded the accused. It is the contention of the accused that, with this vengeance, a false complaint
came to be lodged. Further, according to the accused, the complainant has thrusted the amount in
his pant pocket while he was proceeding to Tahasildar's chamber. However, in Ex.P7, which is the
explanation given by the accused immediately, he asserted that the amount was put in his pant
pocket without his knowledge and in trial he is asserting regarding thrusting of the amount. These
two defences are inconsistent. The evidence clearly discloses that the tainted amount of Rs.300/-
which is marked as M.O.1 was recovered from his custody. Under Section 20 of the P.C.Act, there is
a presumption in favour of the prosecution, which reads as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92260518/ 7
Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
"20. Presumption where public servant accepts any undue advantage.- Where, in any
trial of an offence punishable under section 7 or under section 11, it is proved that a
public servant accused of n offence has accepted or obtained or attempted to obtain
for himself, or for any other person, any undue advantage from any person, it shall be
presumed, unless the contrary is proved, that he accepted or obtained or attempted
to obtain that undue advantage, as a motive or reward under section 7 for performing
or to cause performance of a public duty improperly or dishonestly either by himself
or by another public servant or, as the case may be, any undue advantage without
consideration or for a consideration which he knows to be inadequate under section
11."
25. So the wording used in the section is 'shall' and hence, it is a statutory presumption. When the
amount was found in the custody of the accused, it shall be presumed that he has received it with
dishonest intention and it is misconduct.
26. Learned counsel for the appellant/accused would contend that presumption is available only
under Section 7 and not under Section 13(1)(d). However, prior to amendment, Section 7 deals with
public servant taking gratification other than legal remuneration in respect of an official act. The
learned counsel would further contend that there was no demand and it is not established. However,
the evidence of P.Ws.1 and 2 clearly establish that there was a specific demand. P.W.2 in his
evidence has specifically stated that the accused has asked the complainant (ºÉÃ½zÀÝ£ÀÄß
vÀA¢¢ÝAiÀiÁ) and that itself discloses that he did expected something and there is no explanation
from the accused in this regard.
27. Learned counsel for the appellant/accused has argued that mere recovery of the tainted amount
from the custody of the accused does not amount to demand of illegal gratification. He would also
placed number of citations on this point which were relied before the trial court. He would further
contend that there was no work pending with the accused as on the date of the trap since Ex.D1
genealogical tree was prepared on 27.06.2007 itself as admitted by the parties.
28. Much arguments have been advanced regarding incorporation of Section 161 of IPC, which came
to be deleted by 1988 amendment in view of enactment of P.C.Act. Sections 161 to 164 of IPC prior
to enactment of P.C.Act have dealt with public servant taking illegal gratification, but in view of
enactment of P.C.Act, the said provisions were omitted. It is argued that prosecution is required to
prove the conscious state of mind on the part of the accused in respect of receipt of illegal
gratification. Hence, he would contend that in the present case, as the amount was thrusted in his
pant pocket, the principles are not applicable. He would further contend that considering the
cross-examination of the complainant, it is evident that he is not a bonafide person. He would also
contend that his position is nothing more than that of accomplish. In this context, he placed reliance
on the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Ram Krishnan and Another vs State of Delhi
reported in AIR 1956 SC 476. However, the said argument does not inspire the confidence of the
court in any way. The facts of said case of being different, cannot be made applicable to the case in
hand.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92260518/ 8
Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
29. The Constitutional Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court (Five Judges) in the case of Dhaneshwar
Narain Saxena V. Delhi Administration reported in AIR 1962 SC 195 has specifically held that the
misconduct of the public servant need not be in connection with his own official duty. Further, the
Larger Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court (Four Judges) in the case of Dhanvantrai Balwantrai Desai
v. State of Maharashtra reported in AIR 1964 SC 575 has observed as under:
"Prevention of Corruption Act (2 of 1947), S.4(1) - Accused shown to have accepted
money which was not legal remuneration - Presumption can be raised - Rebuttal
must be by explanation which must be true and not merely plausible -
Presumption under S.4(1) and Evidence Act
S.114, distinction between - Whether
presumption is rebutted is question of fact - Supreme Court will not interfere.
Constitution of India, Art.136 - Evidence Act (1 of 1872), S.114
- Penal Code (45 of 1860), S.161."
30. The Larger Bench of the Hon'ble Apex Court has clearly held that, once it is shown that the
accused has accepted the amount which was not a legal remuneration, the presumption is required
to be raised and rebuttal must be by explanation which must be true.
31. The Hon'ble Apex Court (Three Judges) in the case of V.D.Jhingan vs. State of U.P reported in
AIR 1966 SC 1762 has reiterated the principles enunciated by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of
Dhanvantrai Balwantrai Desai (supra) and observed as under:
"To raise the presumption under S.4(1) of Prevention of Corruption Act, the
prosecution has to prove that the accused has received "gratification other than legal
remuneration".
When it is shown that the accused has received a certain sum of money which was not his legal
remuneration, the condition prescribed by the section is satisfied and the presumption must be
raised. Further the mere receipt of "money" is sufficient to raise the presumption.
The burden of proof lying upon the accused under S.4(1) of the Prevention of Corruption Act will be
satisfied if he establishes his case by a preponderance of probability as is done by a party in civil
proceedings. It is not necessary that he should establish his case by the test of proof beyond a
reasonable doubt."
32. Hence, the Hon'ble Apex Court including the Constitutional Bench consistently held that once
the amount is held to be found in the custody of the accused, presumption shall be drawn. It is
further observed that, rebuttal of the presumption shall be on the basis of preponderance of
probabilities as is done in civil proceedings. Hence, the Hon'ble Apex Court is very much clear on
this point and no doubt in the citations relied on by the learned counsel for the appellant/accused
before the trial court in some of the decisions it is observed that mere recovery of the tainted
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92260518/ 9
Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
amount does not establish demand, but the Constitutional Bench decision and Larger Bench
decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court clarifies this aspect and the decision of the Larger Bench will
prevail as observed by the Hon'ble Apex in the case of Rattiram and Others vs State of Madhya
Pradesh through Inspector of Police reported in (2012) 4 SCC 516. As such, the burden is on the
accused to rebut the said presumption. The evidence discloses that the accused is taking
inconsistent and contrary stands.
33. Apart from that, the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Girija Prasad (Dead) by L.Rs vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh reported in 2007 (7) CC 625, reiterated the said principles once again and
observed that, once it is proved that the amount has been received by the accused, the presumption
shall be drawn. It is further observed that it would be wholly immaterial whether the said
acceptance of amount was for him or for someone else and whether the accused was or was not in a
position to oblige the complainant. It is further observed that, whether no evidence was adduced by
the accused to rebut the presumption raised under the law and he merely took the defence of total
denial and false implication, it is observed that the doctrine of preponderance of probability had no
application.
34. Apart from that, the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of M.Narsinga Rao vs. State of A.P. reported
in AIR 2001 SC 318, has observed that it is compulsory and not discretionary to draw a presumption
when the prosecution has proved that the accused has received gratification and the court required
to draw legal presumption that said gratification was accepted as reward for doing public duty.
35. In the instant case, all along the accused is setting up a defence that complainant has thrusted
the amount in his pocket. It is quite unnatural defence and even in his statement under Section 313
of Cr.P.C., no such defence of thrusting the amount is set up. On the contrary, he admitted that on
27.06.2007, the complainant has approached him and he prepared the genealogical tree, but the
complainant insisted to remove the name of his sister which he did not agree and hence, a false case
has been lodged. No such explanation was given in the statement recorded under Section 313 of
Cr.P.C. On the contrary, under Ex.P7 he has taken a contrary stand stating that on 28.06.2007
complainant approached him and after obtaining necessary information, he was preparing the
genealogical tree, at that time, the complainant went outside under the guise of taking tea and he
did not return and on 02.07.2007, without his knowledge the complainant put the amount in his
pocket. This stand immediately taken under Ex.P7 is not inconsonance with his statement under
Section 313 of Cr.P.C. and defence in trial. Hence, it is evident that the accused is taking inconsistent
and contrary stands. Even in Ex.P7 there is no reference of complainant insisting for removing the
name of his sister. Further, it is evident that accused has not led any rebuttal evidence except
making formal suggestions. His defence of thursting the amount was denied by P.Ws.1 to 3 and his
voluntary statement under Ex.P7 discloses that amount was put in his pocket without his
knowledge. These stands are inconsistent and contrary to each other.
36. Even according to the accused, the genealogical tree Ex.D1 was prepared on 27.06.2007 itself,
but admittedly, it was in his custody when it was seized. He did not disclose why he was continued
to be in possession when the complainant has approached him on 27.06.2007 as well as on
28.06.2007 as per his own case. He could have simply handed over the same and he could have
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92260518/ 10
Mr. H. C. Sridhara vs State Of Karnataka on 21 April, 2022
given explanation in Ex.P7 in this regard, but that was not forthcoming. Mere explanation or denial
does not amount to rebuttal of the statutory presumption available in favour of the prosecution
under Section 20 of the P.C.Act. There are certain minor variances, but they do not affect the merits
of the case and are not fatal to the case of the prosecution. Admittedly, the amount was recovered
from the custody of the accused as admitted by him. The evidence of P.Ws.2, 3 and 7 is consistent
and non-production of voice recorder etc. has no relevancy in this regard. The genealogical tree was
all along in the custody of the accused and hence, the contention of the accused that no work was
pending with him holds no water. Under these circumstances, the evidence on record clearly
establish that the accused has demanded and accepted the illegal gratification being a public servant
and received Rs.300/- from the complainant. However, he has not rebutted the said presumption.
Hence, his act falls under Sections 7 and 13(1)(d) of the P.C.Act and it is punishable under Section
13(2) of the P.C.Act.
37. The trial court has considered all these aspects and analyzed the oral and documentary evidence
in detail. The trial court has answered all the quarries raised by the defence counsel with proper
reasons. The trial court has rightly arrived at a conclusion that prosecution has proved the guilt of
the accused beyond all reasonable doubt. The judgment of conviction and order of sentence does not
suffer from any perversity or illegality so as to call for any interference by this court. Apart from
that, the trial court has also imposed reasonable sentence as prescribed under law and the State has
also not challenged the same. Under these circumstances, question of interfering with the judgment
of conviction and order of sentence does not arise at all. Looking to these facts and circumstances, I
constrained to answer point No.1 in the affirmative and point No.2 in the negative. As such, the
appeal being devoid of any merits and needs to be dismissed. Accordingly, I proceed to pass the
following:
ORDER The criminal appeal is dismissed by confirming the judgment of conviction
and order of sentence dated 23.06.2011 passed by the Principal Sessions Judge and
Special Judge, Mysuru in Spl.Case No.64/2008.
The trial court is directed to secure the accused for undergoing remainder part of the
sentence and his bail bonds stand cancelled.
Sd/-
JUDGE MBS/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92260518/ 11
