Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November,
2023
Author: R. Devdas
Bench: R. Devdas
-1-
R
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 03RD DAY OF NOVEMBER, 2023
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE R. DEVDAS
CRIMINAL PETITION NO.12350 OF 2022
C/W
WRIT PETITON NO.1280 OF 2023(GM-POLICE)
IN CRIMINAL PETITION NO.12350/2022:
BETWEEN
1 . MR. S. K. BASAVARAJAN
S/O. KARISIDDAIAH,
AGED ABOUT 60 YEARS,
R/O. THOTADAMANE,
MARRULAPPA BADAVANE,
MEDIHALLI,
CHITRADURGA-577 501.
2 . SMT. SOWBHAGYA BASAVARAJAN
W/O. S. K. BASAVARAJAN,
AGED ABOUT 49 YEARS,
R/O. THOTADAMANE,
MARRULAPPA BADAVANE,
MEDIHALLI,
CHITRADURGA-577 501.
...PETITIONERS
(BY SRI. HASHMATH PASHA, SR. COUNSEL FOR
SRI.KARIAPPA N A, ADVOCATE)
-2-
AND
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 1
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
1. STATE OF KARNATAKA BY
CHITRADURGA RURAL POLICE STATION,
CHITRADURGA-577 501.
(REPRESENTED BY LEARNED
STATE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR,
HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA-560 001)
2. SRI. BASAVAPRABHU SWAMIJI
SRI MURUGHARAJENDRA BRUHANMATTA,
CHITRADURGA-577 501.
.....RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI.JAGADEESHA B.N, ADDL. SPP A/W
SRI. M.V. ANOOP KUMAR, HCGP FOR R1
SRI. C.V. NAGESH, SR. COUNSEL A/W
SRI. PARAMESHWAR N HEGDE, ADVOCATE FOR R2)
THIS CRL.P IS FILED U/S.482 CR.P.C PRAYING TO
QUASH THE FIR REGISTERED IN CR.NO.484/2022 OF
CHITRADURGA RURAL P.S., CHITRADURGA AND ITS
FURTHER PROCEEDINGS, WHICH IS REGISTERED FOR
OFFENCE U/S 120B,384,420,366A OF IPC, PENDING ON
THE FILE OF THE I ADDL. CIVIL JUDGE (Jr.Dn) AND JMFC,
CHITRDURGA DISTRICT, CHITRADURGA AS AN ABUSE OF
PROCESS OF LAW.
IN W.P. NO.1280/2023
BETWEEN
1. SRI. BASAVAPRABHU SWAMIJI
S/O SHIVAYOGI SWAMY
AGED ABOUT 39 YEARS
IN CHARGE PONTIFF
SRI MURUGHARAJENDRA BRUHANMATA
-3-
CHITRADURGA
KARNATAKA 577502
...PETITIONER
(BY SRI. C.V. NAGESH, SR. COUNSEL A/W
SRI. PARAMESHWAR N HEGDE, ADVOCATE)
AND
1. STATE OF KARNATAKA
REPRESENTED BY
PRINCIPAL SECRETARY
DEPARTMENT OF HOME
VIDHANA SOUDHA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 2
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
BANGALORE 01
2. CHITRADURGA RURAL POLICE
CHITRADURGA
REPRESENTED BY
STATE PUBLIC PROSECUTOR
HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA
BANGALORE 01
3. MR. S. K. BASAVARAJAN
S/O. KARISIDDAIAH,
AGED ABOUT 60 YEARS,
R/O. THOTADAMANE,
MARRULAPPA BADAVANE,
MEDIHALLI,
CHITRADURGA-577 501.
4. SMT. SOWBHAGYA BASAVARAJAN
W/O. S. K. BASAVARAJAN,
AGED ABOUT 49 YEARS,
R/O. THOTADAMANE,
MARRULAPPA BADAVANE,
MEDIHALLI,
CHITRADURGA-577 501.
-4-
.....RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI. K. MANJUNATH, HCGP FOR R1
SRI.JAGADEESHA B.N, ADDL. SPP A/W
SRI. M.V. ANOOP KUMAR, HCGP FOR R2
SRI. HASHMATH PASHA, SR. COUNSEL FOR
SRI. KARIAPPA N.A, ADVOCATE FOR
IMPLEADING APPLICANTS)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES
226 & 227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO
ENTRUST THE INVESTIGATION IN CRIME NO.484/2022
REGISTERED FOR THE OFFENCE PUNISHABLE UNDER
SECTIONS 120B, 384, 420 AND 366A OF IPC PENDING
INVESTIGATION ON THE FILE OF THE R-2 TO ANY SENIOR
LADY POLICE OFFICER.
THESE PETITIONS HAVING BEEN HEARD AND
RESERVED ON 11.10.2023 AND COMING ON FOR
PRONOUNCEMENT OF ORDERS, THIS DAY, THIS COURT
MADE THE FOLLOWING:
COMMON ORDER
"Every trial that fails due to external interference is a tragedy for the victim(s) of the crime. More
importantly, every frustrated trial defies and mocks the society based on the rule of law. Every
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 3
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
subverted trial leaves a scar on the criminal justice system. Repeated scars make the system
unrecognisable and it then loses the trust and confidence of the people" - R.K.Anand Vs. Delhi High
Court.
2. The writ petition has been filed by the complainant-informant seeking direction at the hands of
this Court to entrust the investigation in Crime No.484/2022 to any senior lady Police Officer. The
Criminal Petition is filed by accused Nos.1 and 2 in Crime No.484/2022, later assigned
C.C.No.123/2023, pending on the file of the I Addl. Civil Judge and JMFC, Chitradurga, for
quashing the entire legal proceedings, under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. Since
both the cases arise out of the same criminal case/proceedings, the matters were clubbed, heard and
are being disposed of by this common order. For the sake of convenience, the accused persons No.1
and 2, who are the petitioners in Criminal Petition shall be referred to as 'petitioners'.
3. A brief narration of facts are necessary to understand the background in which the crime was
registered on the basis of information provided by the writ petitioner Sri Basavaprabhu Swamiji,
who calls himself the in-charge Pontiff of Sri Murugharajendra Bruhanmata, Chitradurga. On
24.07.2022, two young girls, inmates of the Hostel run by the Mutt arrived at Bengaluru City Bus
Stand. That night, an autorickshaw driver took them to Cottonpet Police Station and on verification,
since the police came to know that the two young girls were inmates of the Hostel at Chitradurga,
and that the petitioners herein were known to be associated with the Institution, the Cottonpet
police informed them about the two girls who were found in Bengaluru. The petitioners immediately
left Chitradurga and arrived in Bengaluru City and went to Cottonpet Police Station at about 1.00
p.m. With the consent of the police, the two young girls went along with the petitioners, back to
Chitradurga. Nearly after a month, i.e., on 26.08.2022 the two young girls were taken to 'Odanadi
Seva Samsthe', an NGO at Mysuru. The office bearers of the NGO took the two girls to Nazarbad
Police Station at Mysuru and got a complaint registered to the effect that the Pontiff of Sri
Murugharajendra Bruhanmata, Dr.Shivamurthy Muruga Sarana had sexually abused the two young
girls. Since the alleged offence is said to have taken place at Chitradurga, the Nazarbad Police,
Mysuru, transferred the case to Chitradurga Rural Police Station. On 28.08.2022, the statements of
the two young girls were recorded by Chitradurga Police and thereafter, the FIR was registered and
action was taken against the Pontiff of the Mutt.
4. On 13.10.2022 one Smt.Gayatri, who was working as a Cook in the Hostel of the Mutt took her
two daughters to 'Odanadi Seva Samsthe' at Mysuru. Once again similar accusations were made
against the Pontiff of the Mutt and once again a case was registered in Crime No.182/2022 at
Nazarbad Police Station at Mysuru. The case was once again transferred to Chitradurga Rural Police
and on 14.10.2022, the Chitradurga Rural Police registered Crime No.445/2022 against the Pontiff
of the Mutt. The said case is now registered as Spl.C.No.27/2023 on the file of II Addl. District and
Sessions Court, Chitradurga.
5. The present cases do not arise out of the two criminal cases registered against the Pontiff of the
Mutt. On the other hand, a written complaint was given by Sri Basavaprabhu Swamiji, who claims to
be the in-charge Pontiff, on 09.11.2022 at about 6.00 p.m. stating that some persons have conspired
to tarnish the image of the Mutt and the Pontiff by coaxing the two young girls to make unfounded
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 4
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
statements against the Pontiff, on the basis of which a criminal case was earlier registered during the
month of July 2022 and thereafter, a teacher of the school namely Basavarajendra once again
conspired with the Cook Smt.Gayatri, who in turn convinced her two daughters to make statements
against the Pontiff, consequent to which one more criminal case was registered against the Pontiff of
the Mutt. However, the complainant came across a voice recording which was being circulated in the
social media and one of the voices being that of the elder daughter of Smt.Gayatri, speaking to one
of the teachers of the Institution, clearly established the conspiracy hatched against the Pontiff and
an admission on the part of the girl, that they were forced to give such statements. On the basis of
the said information, an FIR was registered in Crime No.484/2022 by the Chitradurga Rural Police
on 26.08.2022 at about 6.00 p.m. and the FIR was forwarded to the I Additional Civil Judge and
JMFC, Chitradurga at about 9.00 p.m. It appears that about 7.30 p.m., the teacher whose voice
appears in the recording was arrested and on the basis of the statement made by the said teacher,
petitioner No.1 herein viz., Sri S.K.Basavarajan was arrested by the police at about 12.30 on the
same night. Sri S.K.Basavarajan, was produced before the Police Inspector and he was interrogated
till 2.30 a.m. and thereafter produced along with a remand application before the I Additional Civil
Judge and JMFC, Chitradurga and he was remanded to police custody till 14.11.2022. It is alleged
that on the basis of the information given by Sri S.K.Basavarajan, the police seized two mobile
phones from his house. Sri S.K.Basavarajan (petitioner No.1) was thereafter remanded to judicial
custody on 14.11.2022. Sri Basavarajan's wife Smt.Sowbhagya (petitioner No.2) was arrested on
16.12.2022. Both the petitioners were granted bail subsequently.
Arguments advanced by Sri Hashmath Pasha, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners
6. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners submits that it is clear from the brief
narration of the facts, that all efforts are being made at the instance of the Pontiff of the Mutt, to
derail the criminal judicial proceedings initiated in accordance with law, only to ensure that the
original complainants and witnesses are terrified and forced to retract and turn hostile to their own
case. Learned Senior Counsel, while taking this Court through the written complaint, submitted that
it is a one page information submitted along with a pen-drive said to contain the voice recording of
the elder daughter of Smt.Gayatri and Sri Basavarajendra, the teacher. The information simply says
that on the basis of the voice recording, it is clear that there is a conspiracy hatched by certain
persons inimically disposed towards the Mutt and the Pontiff, to tarnish the image of the Mutt and
the Pontiff and on the basis of which a criminal case has been registered in Crime No.445/2022
against Dr.Shivamurthy Muruga Sarana. It is stated that Sri Basavarajendra, the teacher has assured
the young girl who has not attained the age of marriage, that he would marry her if no one else
comes forward to marry her. Learned Senior Counsel submits that on the basis of the said
information, FIR was registered under the provisions of Sections 120B, 384, 420, 366(A) of the
Indian Penal Code. Learned Senior Counsel would add at this stage that a chargesheet has been filed
while giving up the charges under Section 420 of IPC, but adding Section 201 of IPC on the ground
that the petitioners herein destroyed one of the mobile phones used by Smt.Sowbhagya and thereby,
causing disappearance of evidence of offence. It is submitted that the written complaint does not
indicate the names of the petitioners herein and therefore, there is no basis for invocation of Section
384 of IPC, punishment for extortion, against the petitioners. Similarly, it is submitted that there is
absolutely no information in the complaint which could implicate the petitioners for an offence
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 5
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
under Section 366A, to induce a minor girl to go from any place or to do any act with intent that
such girl would be forced or seduced to illicit intercourse with another person.
7. Learned Senior Counsel would submit that merely because petitioner No.2 herein had stated that
she had misplaced or lost one of her mobile phones, Section 201 of IPC has been invoked. The
allegation that the destruction of the mobile phone would amount to causing disappearance of
evidence of offence, in the present context cannot be accepted as legal submission, since the written
complaint only speaks of the recorded conversation between Sri Basavarajendra and the elder
daughter of Smt.Gayatri. It is not stated as to how the mobile phone of Smt.Sowbhagya or the
conversation on the mobile phone of Smt.Sowbhagya could be treated as evidence, for the basis of
invocation of the said provision.
8. Most importantly, the learned Senior Counsel would submit that a plain reading of the written
complaint makes it clear that the informant is voicing concerns on behalf of an accused person viz.,
Dr.Shivamurthy Muruga Sarana, the Pontiff of the Mutt, against whom a criminal case has been
registered by Chitradurga Rural Police in Crime No.445/2022. The plain reading of the complaint
would show that the informant is alleging that a criminal case has been falsely registered against the
Pontiff of the Mutt, on the basis of false information given by Smt.Gayatri. The learned Senior
Counsel would therefore submit that at best, the information may attract the provisions contained in
Section 177 of IPC and/or Section 182 of IPC. However, for the invocation of these two provisions,
there is a bar created in Section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, which mandates that no
Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under Sections 172 to 188 (both inclusive) of
IPC, unless the complaint in writing is given by the public servant concerned or of some other public
servant to whom he is administratively subordinate. It is submitted that if cognizance has to be
taken on the basis of such information which makes out a case falling under Sections 172 to 188,
such cognizance can be taken by the Court, only if such complaint is given in writing by the
concerned public servant. In the present case, the public servant would be the Investigating Officer
in Crime No.445/2022 or a higher Officer to whom the Investigating Officer is administratively
subordinate to.
9. In this regard, attention of this Court is drawn to a judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
case of Daulat Ram Vs. State of Punjab, AIR 1962 SC 1206, wherein it was held that having regard to
the express provisions contained in Section 195 of Cr.PC., there is an absolute bar against the court
in taking cognizance of the case except in the manner provided by the section.
10. It is submitted that it is also well established position of law that even in matters of a case and
counter case, the police are not permitted to register two separate crimes. During the course of the
investigation, if any information is received by the Investigating Officer, counter to the information
given by the first informant, then such information should form part of the information received or
recorded by the Investigating Officer, but a separate case cannot be registered. In this regard, the
attention of this Court is drawn to Anju Chaudhary Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and Another (2013) 6
SCC 384, wherein it is held that the police officer is duty bound to register FIR, but not second FIR
in respect of same offence/incident forming part of same transaction as contained in first FIR. It
was held that inbuilt safeguard provided under CrPC, are principles akin to double jeopardy, fair
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 6
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
investigation and prevention of abuse of power by investigating agency. It is submitted that in the
same decision, it has been held that the scheme of the criminal procedure does not provide for any
right of hearing at the time of registration of First Information Report. The very purpose of fair and
just investigation would stand frustrated if pre-registration hearing is required to be granted to a
suspect. The learned Senior Counsel would therefore submit that if the subsequent information
given by the in-charge Pontiff, would in any way belie the truth in the first information given by
Smt.Gayatri, then it can only be placed before the court as a counter evidence but it will not enable
the Investigating Officer to register a separate case and allow him to test the veracity of the
information given by Smt.Gayatri or hold a separate investigation.
11. Having regard to the said position of law, it is submitted that there is no scope under the criminal
justice system of our country to enable the Investigating Officer to register a separate case and go
into the truth and verify the correctness of the statement made by Smt.Gayatri. That exercise can
only be done by the court which is seized of the matter. Having this in mind, the learned Senior
Counsel would submit that if the court trying the case comes to a conclusion that Smt. Gayatri has
given false information, on the basis of which a criminal trial was forced upon the Pontiff of the
Mutt, then in terms of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 195 of Cr.PC., on a complaint in
writing of that court, an FIR can be registered or the same court may take action for offences
punishable under Sections 193 to 196, 199, 200, 205 to 211 and 228 of IPC. Learned Senior Counsel
would submit that the very same information which may constitute false information under Sections
172 to 188 would become offences under Sections 193 to 196, etc., when such information is given on
oath before the court of law.
12. In the same line, the decision in T.T.Antony Vs. State of Kerala and Others (2001) 6 SCC 181 is
relied upon by the learned Senior Counsel. It is held that under the scheme of the provisions of
Sections 154, 155, 156, 157, 162, 169, 170 and 173 Cr.P.C. only the earliest or the first information in
regard to the commission of a cognizable offence satisfies the requirements of Section 154 Cr.P.C.
There can be no second FIR and consequently, there can be no fresh investigation on receipt of
every subsequent information in respect of the same cognizable offence or the same occurrence or
incident giving rise to one or more cognizable offences. On receipt of information about a cognizable
offence or an incident giving rise to a cognizable offence or offences and on entering the FIR in the
Station House Diary, the officer in-charge of the Police Station has to investigate not merely the
cognizable offence reported in the FIR but also other connected offences found to have been
committed in the course of the same transaction or the same occurrence and file one or more
reports as provided in Section 173 Cr.P.C. It is therefore submitted that there is no scope for
registering a separate FIR, having regard to the contents of the information, mentioning the
registration of Crime No.445/2022 and seeking action against the informant/complainant
Smt.Gayatri.
13. Moreover, the names of the petitioners are not mentioned in the complaint. Therefore, it was
impermissible for the Investigating Officer to cause a separate investigation into the allegations
made in the complaint filed by Shri Basavaprabhu Swamiji and implicate the petitioners herein in
the FIR and the final report.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 7
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
14. Another aspect of the matter which was vehemently contended is that for obvious reasons the
relevant provisions of IPC are not quoted in the FIR and the final report, only to avoid the rigors of
Section 195 of Cr.P.C. On a plain reading of the written complaint, at best allegations of giving false
information (Section 177 IPC) and/or giving false information with intent to cause the police to use
lawful power to cause injury to another person (Section 182 IPC) would be attracted. However, since
there is a bar under Section 195 of Cr.P.C. for receiving and registering an FIR at the behest of a
private individual, in matters arising out of Sections 177 and 182 of IPC, the Investigating Officer has
deliberately avoided mentioning the two provisions, while invoking Sections 120B, 384, 366(A) and
later adding Section 201 of IPC, to ensure that there is a cognizable offence which would enable the
Police Officer to register an FIR under Section 154 of Cr.P.C. In this regard, the decision in the case
of Basir-Ul- Huq and Others Vs. State of West Bengal, AIR 1953 SC 293 was cited, wherein it was
held that it has to be borne in mind that the provisions of the relevant section cannot be evaded by
resorting to devices or camouflages. The test whether there is evasion of the section or not is
whether the facts disclose primarily and essentially an offence for which a complaint of the Court or
of the public servant is required. In other words, the provisions of the section cannot be evaded by
the device of charging a person with an offence to which that Section does not apply and then
convicting him of an offence to which it does, upon the ground that such latter offence is a minor
offence of the same character, or by describing the offence as being one punishable under some
other section of the Indian Penal Code, though in truth and substance the offence falls in the
category of sections mentioned in Section 195 of the Criminal Procedure Code. Merely by changing
the garb or label of an offence which is essentially an offence covered by the provisions of Section
195 prosecution for such an offence cannot be taken cognizance of by misdescribing it or by putting
a wrong label on it.
15. To sum up, it is submitted that the registration of the FIR in Crime No.484/2022 is void ab initio
and all further proceedings, including the submission of the final report is illegal, contrary to the
provisions contained in the Cr.P.C. and therefore, the FIR and the entire legal proceedings are
required to be quashed.
ARGUMENTS ADVANCED BY SRI C.V.NAGESH, LEARNED SENIOR COUNSEL APPEARING
FOR THE INFORMANT/COMPLAINANT
16. Before submitting the arguments, the learned Senior Counsel sought to submit the facts and
chronology of events leading to the filing of the written complaint at the hands of Sri Basavaprabhu
Swamiji. It was submitted that the undisputed events that occurred prior to the registration of the
FIRs in Crime No.387/2022 and Crime No.445/2022 (allegations of sexual assault on the Pontiff of
the Mutt), would disclose that there was a conspiracy hatched by the petitioners herein along with
Sri Basavarajendra (teacher) and Smt.Gayatri, to falsely implicate the Pontiff of the Mutt in serious
crime such as sexual assault on the young girls/inmates of the Hostel run by the Mutt. The intention
behind the conspiracy was to ensure that the first petitioner herein (Sri S.K.Basavarajan) is given a
free hand in the control of the administration of the Mutt or to extort money from the Pontiff of the
Mutt, while threatening him of such wild allegations. The learned Senior Counsel read out the
transcription of the recorded conversation between Sri Basavarajendra and the elder daughter of
Smt.Gayatri and submitted that it is clear from the conversation that a conspiracy was indeed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 8
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
hatched to implicate the Pontiff of the Mutt. The young girl admitted in the conversation that she
gave a statement to the police only at the instance of her mother and she was not interested in
pursuing the matter as it would ruin her life and career and no one will come forward to marry her.
The statements given by the inmates of the hostel/institution were read out to fortify the argument
of the learned Senior Counsel that there was no truth in the allegation made against the Pontiff of
the Mutt. It was submitted that the petitioners are guilty of destroying relevant evidence in the form
of the mobile phone of Smt.Sowbhagya, which would show that there was prior conversation
between the petitioners, Sri Basavarajendra (teacher), Smt.Gayatri and her elder daughter,
conspiring to implicate the Pontiff of the Mutt. The learned Senior Counsel also sought to draw the
attention of this Court to the medical examination reports of the four girl students and many other
such inmates of the hostel who had joined the investigation, to contend that the reports would
unequivocally state that the girl students were not sexually abused and everything was intact. It was
submitted that statements of about 26 girl students were recorded during the course of investigation
and none of them reiterated the allegations contained in the complaint made against the Pontiff. On
the other hand, information was made available to the Investigating Officer that the petitioners
herein had instituted various litigations against the Mutt and the Pontiff.
17. It was submitted that Sections 120B and 201 of the IPC are registered against the petitioners
having found during the course of the investigation that the petitioners had hatched a conspiracy to
implicate the Pontiff and that they are also guilty of destroying evidence of offence. It is further
submitted that Section 120B can be a stand alone offence, for which an accused can be punished. In
that regard, the decision in Yogesh alias Sachin Jagdish Joshi vs. State of Maharastra (2008) 10 SCC
394 was relied. It was held that an offence of conspiracy is a substantive offence and renders the
mere agreement to commit an offence punishable, even if an offence does not take place pursuant to
the illegal agreement. Therefore, the registration of the FIR under section 120B of IPC cannot be
faulted. Similarly, since the petitioners are guilty of destroying the mobile phone, which would be
relevant evidence to prove the guilt of the petitioners who had spoken to each other, conspiring to
implicate the Pontiff, the act of destruction of the mobile phone would attract Section 201 of IPC. In
this regard, the decision in Saranya vs. Bharathi and another (2021) 8 SCC 583 was pressed into
service. It was held that during the course of the investigation, the Investigating Officer had
collected very important evidence in the form of call details between A-1 and A-2 which were in the
proximity of the time of commission of offence and even thereafter. It was therefore held that the
High Court committed grave error in quashing the charge sheet/entire criminal proceedings in
exercise of power under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. The learned Senior Counsel submitted that the final
report has been filed by the respondent police having found during the course of investigation that
the petitioners herein had conspired to implicate the Pontiff of the Mutt in serious criminal charges,
only to serve their greed for money and power. It is submitted that both Sections 120B and 201 of
IPC are cognizable offences and therefore the respondent police are competent to register the FIR
and proceed to investigate into the matter.
18. It was submitted that this Court, exercising powers under Section 482 of Cr.P.C. cannot conduct
a mini trial and cannot get into appreciation of evidence. In that regard, the decision in the case of
State of Uttar Pradesh and another vs. Akhil Sharda and others, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 820 was
pressed into service.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 9
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
19. It was pointed out that in Kaptan Singh/vs./ State of Uttar Pradesh and Others (2021) 9 SCC 35,
it has been held that while exercising powers under Section 482 of Cr.P.C., the High Court should
bear in mind the powers exercisable at two different stages, one after the FIR is registered and
before the final report is filed and the second being after the final report is filed. It was held that if
the petition under Section 482 was filed at the stage of FIR, in that case the allegations in the
FIR/complaint only are required to be considered and whether the cognizable offence is disclosed or
not is required to be considered. However, thereafter when the statements are recorded and
evidence are collected and chargesheet is filed after conclusion of the investigation/inquiry, the
matter stands on different footing and court is required to consider the material/evidence collected
during the investigation. Even at this stage also the High Court is not required to go into merit of the
allegation and/or enter into the merits of the case as if the high court is exercising the appellate
jurisdiction and/or conducting the trial in order to examine as to whether the factual contents of the
FIR disclose any cognizable offence or not. The High Court cannot act like an investigation agency
nor can it exercise the powers like an appellate court.
20. It was submitted that since the provisions of Section 177 and/or 182 of IPC were not invoked by
the respondent police, the question of applying Section 195 of Cr.P.C. to the present case would not
arise. Further, it was submitted that the bar is on the Court not to take cognizance, in terms of
Section 195 Cr.P.C. and not a bar on the police.
21. Since it was argued on behalf of the petitioners that their names were not disclosed in the written
complaint and even otherwise, the provisions of Sections 384 and 366-A had nothing to do with the
petitioners, the learned Senior Counsel submitted that sub-section (4) of Section 155 of Cr.P.C.
provides that where a case relates to two or more offences of which atleast one is cognizable, the
case shall be deemed to be a cognizable case, notwithstanding that the other offences are
non-cognizable. Attention of this court was also drawn to the explanation provided to the definition
of "complaint" as found in Section 2(d) of the Cr.P.C. It was submitted that the explanation makes it
clear that a report made by a police officer in a case which discloses, after investigation, the
commission of a non-cognizable offence shall be deemed to be a complaint; and the police officer by
whom such report is made shall be deemed to be the complainant. Attention of this Court was also
drawn to a very recent decision of the Apex Court in the case of M/s.Iveco Magirus
Brandschutztechnik GMBH Vs. Nirmal Kishore Bhartiya and Another in Crl.A.No.1959/2012
decided on 05.10.2023. It was submitted that the Apex Court has held that nothing in the applicable
law prevents a Magistrate from applying his judicial mind to other provisions of law as to ascertain
whether, prima facie, 'an offence', as defined in Section 2(n) of the Cr.P.C. is made out. Without such
opinion being formed, question of 'proceeding' as in Section 204 does not arise. What the law
imposes on the Magistrate as a requirement is that he is bound to consider on such of the materials
that are brought before him in terms of Sections 200 and 202 as well as any applicable provision of
a statute, and what is imposed as a restriction by law on him is that he is precluded from considering
any material not brought on the record in a manner permitted by the legal process.
22. While summing up, the learned Senior Counsel submitted that the action initiated by the
respondent-Police on the basis of the written complaint given by Sri Basavaprabhu Swamiji, is in
accordance with the established procedures and therefore, the proceedings should be permitted to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 10
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
continue, in the interest of justice.
A BRIEF ANALYSIS
23. In Bandekar Brothers Private Limited Vs. Prasad Vassudev Keni and Others (2020) 20 SCC 1,
His Lordship Justice Rohinton Fali Nariman has described a similar situation, lucidly that "the
Court has thus to steer between two opposite poles of a spectrum-the "yin" being the protection of a
person from frivolous criminal complaints, and the "yang" being the right of a victim to ventilate his
grievance and have the Court try the offence". That was also a case arising out of Section 195 of
Cr.P.C., but the distinction is that in that case and a plethora of reported decisions of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court, what fell for consideration is clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 195 of Cr.P.C.
and very few which would fall under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 195 of Cr.P.C. In all the
decisions cited at the Bar and what this Court found in many such cases such as :
1) Basir-Ul-Huq and Others Vs. State of West Bengal, AIR 1953 SC 293
2) Bhima Razu Prasad Vs. State, represented by Deputy Superintendent of Police,
AIR 2021 SC 2090
3) Santokh Singh Vs. Izhar Hussain and Another, AIR 1973 SC 2190
4) M.L.Sethi Vs. R.P.Kapoor and Another, AIR 1967 SC 528
5) R.K.Anand Vs.Registrar, Delhi High Court, (2009) 8 SCC 106
6) Ram Dhan Vs. State of Uttar Pradesh And Another (2012) 5 SCC 536 is that the
cases arose on the basis of allegation of giving false evidence before the court of law
or fabricating false evidence or making use of forged document as genuine etc. Very
few such as Abdul Rehman and Others Vs. K.M.Anees-Ul-Huq (2011) 10 SCC 696
deal with a case falling under clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 195 of Cr.P.C.
However, in Abdul Rehman, though the case arose out of a Magistrate entertaining a complaint
under Section 211 IPC that the accusations made by the appellant therein in the report lodged with
CAWC were totally false and fabricated, nevertheless the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that since
subsequently bail proceedings were conducted by the Court of the Sessions Judge in connection with
the case which the appellants had lodged with CAWC were judicial proceedings and the offence
punishable under Section 211 IPC alleged to have been committed by the appellants related to the
said proceedings, the bar contained in Section 195 Cr.P.C. was clearly attracted. The case is held to
be one falling under Section 195(1)(b)(i), since bail proceedings conducted by the Court of the
Sessions Judge in connection with the case were judicial proceedings.
24. It should be noticed that the Two Judges Bench in Abdul Rehman (supra) has followed a Larger
Bench decision in the case of Kamlapati Trivedi Vs. State of West Bengal (1980) 2 SCC
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 11
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
91. The fact situation there was that having secured an order of discharge, Sri.Satya Narayan Pathak
filed a complaint before the Sub-Divisional Judicial Magistrate accusing Kamlapati Trivedi of the
commission of offences under Sections 211 and 182 of the IPC by reason of Trivedi having lodged
with the police a false complaint against Mr.Pathak. Trivedi appeared in the court of SDJM in
response to a summons only in respect of offence under Section 211 of IPC and was allowed a
fortnight to furnish security while the case itself was adjourned. Trivedi presented a petition to the
High Court of Calcutta praying that proceedings pending against him before the SDJM be quashed
in as much as the latter was debarred from taking cognizance of the offence under Section 211 of the
IPC in the absence of a complaint in writing of the SDJM himself in view of the provisions of clause
(b) of sub-section (1) of Section 195 of the Code. It was argued before the High Court that the part of
the proceedings which started with the registration of the case by the police, at the instance of the
Trivedi and culminated in the order of discharge of Mr.Pathak and five co-accused, constituted
proceedings before a court, that the offence under Section 211 of IPC attributed to Trivedi was
committed in or, in any case, in relation to such part and therefore the case against Trivedi fell
within the ambit of clause (b) of sub- section (1) of Section 195. The High Court did not accept the
contention while stating that the proceedings before the court becomes a criminal proceeding only
when a court takes cognizance and not before. Before the Apex Court it was argued that the SDJM
had passed an order releasing Mr.Pathak on bail and then another order of discharge was passed by
the SDJM acting judicially and therefore as a Court; that it cannot but be held that those orders were
passed in proceedings in relation to which the offence under Section 211 of IPC was alleged to have
been committed and consequently, the SDJM had no jurisdiction to take cognizance of that offence.
25. The Apex Court took up the following two points for determination:
(a) Whether the SDJM has acted as a Court when he passed the orders on the bail
application and the application for discharge or any of them?
(b) If the answer to question (a) is in the affirmative, whether the offence under
Section 211 of IPC attributed to Trivedi could be regarded having been committed in
relation to proceeding culminating in either or both of the said orders?
26. For easy reference, Section 195 of Cr.P.C. is extracted:
"195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, for offences
against public justice and for offences relating to documents given in evidence. (1) No
Court shall take cognizance-
(a) (i) of any offence punishable under sections 172 to 188 (both inclusive) of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ), or
(ii) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence, or
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, except on the complaint in
writing of the public servant concerned or of some other public servant to whom he is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 12
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
administratively subordinate;
(b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following sections of the Indian
Penal Code, 1860 (45 of 1860) namely, sections 193 to 196 (both inclusive), 199, 200,
205 to 211 (both inclusive) and 228, when such offence is alleged to have been
committed in, or in relation to, any proceeding in any court, or
(ii) of any offence described in section 463, or punishable under section 471, section
475 or section 476, of the said Code, when such offence is alleged to have been
committed in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in
any Court, or
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, or the abetment of,
any offence specified in sub-clause (i) or sub- clause (ii), except on the complaint in
writing of that Court, or by such officer of the court as that court may authorise in
writing in this behalf, or of some other court to which that court is subordinate.
(2) Where a complaint has been made by a public servant under clause (a) of sub-
section (1) any authority to which he is administratively subordinate may order the withdrawal of
the complaint and send a copy of such order to the Court; and upon its receipt by the Court, no
further proceedings shall be taken on the complaint:
Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial in the court of first
instance has been concluded.
(3) In clause (b) of sub- section (1), the term "Court" means a Civil, Revenue or
Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial
or State Act if declared by that Act to be a Court for the purposes of this section.
(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-
section (1), a court shall be deemed to be subordinate to the court to which appeals ordinarily lie
from the appealable decrees or sentences of such former court, or in the case of a civil court from
whose decrees no appeal ordinarily lies, to the principal court having ordinary original civil
jurisdiction within whose local jurisdiction such civil court in situate:
Provided that-
(a) where appeals lie to more than one court, the appellate court of inferior
jurisdiction shall be the court to which such court shall be deemed to be subordinate;
(b) where appeals lie to a civil and also to a revenue court, such court shall be deemed
to be subordinate to the civil or revenue court according to the nature of the case or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 13
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
proceeding in connection with which the offence is alleged to have been committed."
27. The Apex Court proceeded to examine the provisions contained in Sections 6, 496 and 497 of
Cr.P.C. Having regard to the fact that Magistrates are specifically labeled as Courts by the statutory
provisions of Section 6 and therefore have to be regarded as such. It was held that Sections 496 and
497 which embrace bail matters specifically describe a magistrate while dealing therewith as Courts
and these sections operate fully at all stages of the case including that when the investigation has
just started. There is nothing in the context the word "Court" is used in these two sections and
Section 195 which would provide an indication that it has been used in two different senses therein
and in such a situation the legislature must be deemed to have used it in one and the same sense
wherever it occurs in the Code. The finding of the Apex Court on the points for consideration are
found in paragraphs 50, 51 and 52 as follows:
"50. Sections 169 and 170 do not talk of the submission of any report by the police to
the Magistrate, although they do state what the police has to do short of such
submission when it finds at the conclusion of the investigation (1) that there is not
sufficient evidence or reasonable ground of suspicion to justify the forwarding of the
accused to a Magistrate (Section 169) or (2) that there is sufficient evidence or
reasonable ground as aforesaid (Section
170). In either case the final report of the police is to be submitted to the Magistrate
under sub-section (1) of Section 173. Sub-
section (3) of that section further provides that in the case of a report by the police that the accused
has been released on his bond (which is the situation envisaged by Section 169), the Magistrate shall
make "such order for the discharge of such bond or otherwise as he thinks fit". Now what are the
courses open to the Magistrate in such a situation? He may, as held by this Court in Abhinandan Jha
v. Dinesh Mishra [(1967) 3 SCR 668 : AIR 1968 SC 117: 1968 Cri LJ 97]:
(1) agree with the report of the police and file the proceedings; or (2) not agree with
the police report and
(a) order further investigation, or
(b) hold that the evidence is sufficient to justify the forwarding of the accused to the
Magistrate and take cognizance of the offence complained of.
51. The appropriate course has to be decided upon after a consideration of the report and the
application of the mind of the Magistrate to the contents thereof. But then the problem to be solved
is whether the order passed by the Magistrate pertains to his executive or judicial capacity. In my
opinion, the only order which can be regarded as having been passed by the Magistrate in his
capacity as the supervisory authority in relation to the investigation carried out by the police is the
one covered by the course 2(a). The order passed by the Magistrate in each of the other two courses,
that is, (1) and (2)(b), follows a conclusion of the investigation and is a judicial order determining
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 14
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
the rights of the parties (the State on the one hand and the accused on the other) after the
application of his mind. And if that be so, the order passed by the Magistrate in the proceeding
before us must be characterised as a judicial act and therefore as one performed in his capacity as a
Court.
52. The reasons which have weighed with me in coming to the conclusion arrived at in the last
paragraph are equally applicable to the consideration of the question whether an order of bail
passed by a Magistrate calls for the performance by him of his judicial functions. Such an order also
decides the rights of the State and the accused and is made by the Magistrate after the application of
his mind and therefore in the discharge of his judicial duties, which factor constitutes it an act of a
Court."
28. With the said finding, the verdict of the Apex Court on the contentious issue can be found in
paragraph No.59 as follows:
"59. As the order releasing Trivedi on bail and the one ultimately discharging him of
the offence complained of amount to proceedings before a Court, all that remains to
be seen is whether the offence under Section 211 of the Indian Penal Code which is
the subject-matter of the complaint against Trivedi can be said to have been
committed "in relation to" those proceedings. Both the orders resulted directly from
the information lodged by Trivedi with the police against Pathak and in this situation
there is no getting out of the conclusion that the said offence must be regarded as one
committed in relation to those proceedings. This requirement of clause (b)
aforementioned is also therefore fully satisfied."
29. Applying the said principles, since the accused person in Crime No.445/2022 applied for bail
and orders were passed, it can be said that the present case falls under Section 195(1)(b)(i) of
Cr.P.C., and therefore, the rigors of the said provisions are attracted and the learned Magistrate
could not have taken cognizance of the FIR which was actuated by the written complaint given by
Sri.Basavaprabhu Swamiji.
30. Having said so and having noticed that in the above two decisions of the Apex Court, Section 211
of the IPC fell for consideration, it would be relevant to have a look at the said provision and
consider whether the said provision would apply to the present set of facts. Section 211 of the IPC
reads as follows:
"211. False charge of offence made with intent to injure. -- Whoever, with intent to
cause injury to any person, institutes or causes to be instituted any criminal
proceeding against that person, or falsely charges any person with having committed
an offence, knowing that there is no just or lawful ground for such proceeding or
charge against that person, shall be punished with imprisonment of either
description for a term which may extend to two years, or with fine, or with both; and
if such criminal proceeding be instituted on a false charge of an offence punishable
with death, imprisonment for life, or imprisonment for seven years or upwards, shall
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 15
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
be punishable with imprisonment of either description for a term which may extend
to seven years, and shall also be liable to fine."
31. There can be no manner of doubt that having regard to the principles laid down in Kamlapati
(supra), and on the admitted facts that the concerned Court has taken cognizance of the offence in
Crime No.182/2022, renumbered as Crime No.445/2022 and having assigned Spl.C.No.27/2023 on
the file of the II Addl. District and Sessions Court, Chitradurga, and the matter is set down for trial,
the subsequent proceedings initiated at the behest of Sri.Basavaprabhu Swamiji, falls squarely in the
teeth of sub-clause (i) of clause (b) of sub-section (1) of Section 195 of the Cr.P.C. Therefore, the
learned Magistrate was clearly barred from taking cognizance of the offence, at the instance of a
third party viz., Sri.Basavaprabhu Swamiji.
32. Before proceeding further, it should be mentioned that here is a unique case where a person not
involved in Crime No.445/2022 has lodged a written complaint, alleging that the said Crime was
registered against the Pontiff of the Mutt, on the basis of false information given by Smt.Gayatri.
The complaint was tendered along with a 'pen-drive' said to be consisting of a voice recording of
conversation between Sri.Basavarajendra (Teacher) and the elder daughter of Smt.Gayatri. It was
stated in the complaint that the said voice recording was being circulated in the social media and it
was clear from the conversation that a conspiracy was hatched by Sri.Basavarajendra and
Smt.Gayatri to falsely implicate the Pontiff of the Mutt in a sexual abuse case. Therefore, this case is
very unique, in the sense that a third party, not being the accused in the previous case, is seeking to
produce information in the form of evidence to demolish the allegation made by the complainant
Smt.Gayatri in Crime No.445/2022, while alleging that a false case has been filed against the Pontiff
of the Mutt.
33. In the considered opinion of this Court, if the learned Magistrate had read the written complaint,
wherein it was mentioned that Smt.Gayatri had given false information in Crime No.445/2022 and
the complainant Sri.Basavaprabhu Swamiji was seeking action against Smt.Gayatri for giving false
information and implicating the Pontiff of the Mutt, the learned Magistrate would have declined to
take cognizance of the complaint.
34. Our criminal justice system will not permit a parallel proceeding to test and verify the
genuineness of the allegations made in a previous complaint. If such proceedings are permitted, the
first informant Smt.Gayatri would be forced to stand trial or justify her allegations, twice. In many
of the reported decisions, as noticed hereinabove, the allegations were regarding fabricating
evidence or presenting evidence as genuine knowing the same to be false etc. While dealing with
such facts, the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the bar created under Section 195 of Cr.P.C., is
an exception to the general rule provided under Section 190 of Cr.P.C., empowering any Magistrate
of First Class to take cognizance of any offence upon receiving a complaint or police report or
information or upon his own knowledge. It was held that it is a well recognized canon of
interpretation that provision curbing the general jurisdiction of the court must normally receive
strict interpretation unless the statute of the context requires otherwise (Abdul Waheed Khan Vs.
Bhawani & Ors. AIR 1966 SC 1718).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 16
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
35. The reason for the enactment of Section 195 of Cr.P.C. has been stated felicitously in Patel
Laljibhai Somabhai Vs. State of Gujarat (1971) 2 SCC 376 as follows:
"7. The underlying purpose of enacting Sections 195(1)(b) and (c) and Section 476,
seems to be to control the temptation on the part of the private parties considering
themselves aggrieved by the offences mentioned in those sections to start criminal
prosecutions on frivolous, vexatious or insufficient grounds inspired by a revengeful
desire to harass or spite their opponents. These offences have been selected for the
court's control because of their direct impact on the judicial process. It is the judicial
process, in other words the administration of public justice, which is the direct and
immediate object or victim of those offence and it is only by misleading the courts
and thereby perverting the due course of law and justice that the ultimate object of
harming the private party is designed to be realised. As the purity of the proceedings
of the court is directly sullied by the crime, the Court is considered to be the only
party to be entitled to consider the desirability of complaining against the guilty
party. The private party designed ultimately to be injured through the offence against
the administration of public justice is undoubtedly entitled to move the court for
persuading it to file the complaint. But such party is deprived of the general right
recognised by Section 190 Cr.P.C., of the aggrieved parties directly initiating the
criminal proceedings. The offences about which the court alone, to the exclusion of
the aggrieved private parties, is clothed with the right to complain may, therefore, be
appropriately considered to be only those offences committed by a party to a
proceeding in that court, the commission of which has a reasonably close nexus with
the proceedings in that court so that it can, without embarking upon a completely
independent and a fresh inquiry, satisfactorily consider by reference principally to its
records the expediency of prosecuting the delinquent party."
(Emphasis supplied)
36. Having regard to the stated objective and purpose underlying the enactment of Section 195 of
Cr.P.C., there cannot be a second opinion that it would be impermissible in law to allow the
proceedings to continue in the present case. This Court cannot permit the complainant Smt.Gayatri
and the petitioners herein to stand trial and justify the allegations made by Smt.Gayatri, in two
proceedings. If permitted, such proceedings would amount to travesty of justice. The registration of
FIR at the hands of the respondent- police is void ab initio. The learned Magistrate could not have
taken cognizance of the complaint lodged by Sri.Basavaprabhu Swamiji, since the complaint
mentioned Crime No.445/2022 and consequently, the bar provided in Section 195 (1)(b)(i) is clearly
attracted.
37. As rightly submitted by the learned Senior Counsel Sri.Hashmath Pasha, the information
provided by Sri.Basavaprabhu Swamiji, could be placed before the court trying the case on the basis
of the complaint filed by Smt.Gayatri, to counter her allegations. If the court comes to a conclusion
that Smt.Gayatri gave false information or that the petitioners herein conspired with Smt.Gayatri or
any other person to falsely implicate the Pontiff of the Mutt, then it is for the learned Judge to take a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 17
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
call as to whether action has to be initiated against such persons in terms of Sections 195 and 340 of
Cr.P.C. It is also permissible for the court to conduct summary proceedings for trial for giving false
evidence in terms of Section 344 of Cr.P.C.
38. Before parting with this case, this Court deems it necessary to notice the dubious conduct of the
respondent-Police in misdescribing or putting a wrong label of the offences, only to facilitate
registration of a cognizable offence, although a plain reading of the written complaint given by
Sri.Basavaprabhu Swamiji does not make out any offence in Sections 384 or 366A of IPC. More
importantly, the learned Magistrate should have been alive to the situation. In Arnab Manoranjan
Goswami Vs. State of Mahashtra and Others (2021) 2 SCC 427, while reiterating the role of courts in
protecting personal liberty and ensuring that the investigations are not used as a tool of harassment,
it was held as follows:
67. [...] Courts must be alive to the need to safeguard the public interest in ensuring
that the due enforcement of criminal law is not obstructed. The fair investigation of
crime is an aid to it. Equally it is the duty of courts across the spectrum - the district
judiciary, the High Courts and the Supreme Court - to ensure that the criminal law
does not become a weapon for the selective the harassment of citizens. Courts should
be alive to both ends of the spectrum - the need to ensure the proper enforcement of
criminal law on the one hand and the need, on the other, of ensuring that the law
does not become a ruse for targeted harassment. Liberty across human eras is as
tenuous as tenuous can be.
Liberty survives by the vigilance of her citizens, on the cacophony of the media and in the dusty
corridors of courts alive to the rule of (and not by) law. Yet, much too often, liberty is a casualty
when one of these components is found wanting.
68. [...] The doors of this Court cannot be closed to a citizen who is able to establish prima facie that
the instrumentality of the State is being weaponized for using the force of criminal law. Our courts
must ensure that they continue to remain the first line of defense against the deprivation of the
liberty of citizens. Deprivation of liberty even for a single day is one day too many. We must always
be mindful of the deeper systemic implications of our decisions."
(emphasis supplied)
39. If our learned Magistrates do not read the complaints and the first information reports and go
about passing orders mechanically, the first line of defense would naturally be breached. It was
submitted on behalf of the petitioners herein that when an application for remand was filed by the
respondent-police, it was brought to the notice of the learned Magistrate that the complaint given by
Sri.Basavaprabhu Swamiji was a counter blast to the crime registered against the Pontiff of the
Mutt. Nevertheless, the learned Magistrate has proceeded to take cognizance, mechanically,
unmindful of the grave consequences that befall the persons targeted in the complaint.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 18
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
40. At this juncture, it would be relevant to notice the words of caution given by the Apex Court in
the case of R.K.Anand Vs. Registrar, Delhi High Court (2009) 8 SCC 106:
"338. We have noted Kulkarni's conduct in course of investigation and at the
commencement of the trial; the fight that broke out in the court premises between
some policemen and a section of lawyers over his control and custody; the manner in
which Hari Shankar Yadav, a key prosecution witness turned hostile in court; the
curious way in which Manoj Malik, another key witness for the prosecution appeared
before the court and overriding the prosecution's protest, was allowed to depose only
to resile from his earlier statement. All this and several other similar developments
calculated to derail the trial would not have escaped the notice of the Chief Justice or
the Judges of the Court. But there is nothing to show that the High Court, as an
institution, as a body took any step to thwart the nefarious activities aimed at
undermining the trial and to ensure that it proceeded on the proper course. As a
result, everyone seemed to feel free to try to subvert the trial in any way they pleased.
339. We must add here that this indifferent and passive attitude is not confined to the
BMW trial or to the Delhi High Court alone. It is shared in greater or lesser degrees
by many other High Courts. From experience in Bihar, the author of these lines can
say that every now and then one would come across reports of investigation
deliberately botched up or of the trial being hijacked by some powerful and
influential accused, either by buying over or intimidating witnesses or by creating
insurmountable impediments for the trial court and not allowing the trial to proceed.
But unfortunately the reports would seldom, if ever, be taken note of by the collective
consciousness of the Court. The High Court would continue to carry on its business
as if everything under it was proceeding normally and smoothly. The trial would fail
because it was not protected from external interferences.
340. Every trial that fails due to external interference is a tragedy for the victim(s) of
the crime. More importantly, every frustrated trial defies and mocks the society based
on the rule of law. Every subverted trial leaves a scar on the criminal justice system.
Repeated scars make the system unrecognisable and it then loses the trust and
confidence of the people.
341. Every failed trial is also, in a manner of speaking, a negative comment on the
State's High Court that is entrusted with the responsibility of superintendence,
supervision and control of the lower courts. It is, therefore, high time for the High
Courts to assume a more proactive role in such matters. A step in time by the High
Court can save a criminal case from going astray. An enquiry from the High Court
Registry to the quarters concerned would send the message that the High Court is
watching; it means business and it will not tolerate any nonsense. Even this much
would help a great deal in insulating a criminal case from outside interferences. In
very few cases where more positive intervention is called for, if the matter is at the
stage of investigation the High Court may call for status report and progress reports
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 19
Mr. S. K. Basavarajan vs State Of Karnataka By on 3 November, 2023
from police headquarter or the Superintendent of Police concerned. That alone would
provide sufficient stimulation and pressure for a fair investigation of the case."
41. This Court is not oblivious of the fact that the two persons named in the written complaint are
not before this Court. Nevertheless, having regard to the firm opinion of this Court that the
proceedings initiated at the behest of the respondent-complainant Sri.Basavaprabhu Swamiji is a
deliberate attempt, calculated to derail the trial against the Pontiff of the Mutt and it is the bounden
duty of this Court to insulate the criminal case from outside interferences, as directed by the Apex
Court in the case of R.K.Anand (supra), this Court is of the considered opinion that the registration
of the FIR and all further proceedings thereto in Crime No.484/2022 of the respondent-Chitradurga
Police cannot be sustained.
42. Consequently, the Criminal Petition No.12350/2022 is allowed. The FIR registered in Crime
No.484/2022 by the respondent-Chitradurga Rural Police and all further proceedings in
C.C.No.123/2023 on the file of I Addl. Civil Judge and JMFC., Chitradurga are hereby quashed and
set aside.
43. Since the entire proceedings are quashed, the prayer made in the Writ Petition No.1280/2023
becomes infructuous. Therefore, Writ Petition No.1280/2023 is dismissed as having become
infructuous.
44. A copy of this order shall be forwarded to the Karnataka Judicial Academy, Bengaluru, to ensure
that the learned Magistrates/Judges understand the efficacy of reading the criminal complaints/first
information reports, before taking cognizance of a case.
In view of the disposal of petitions, pending I.As., if any, stand disposed of accordingly.
Sd/-
JUDGE JT/KLY/DL
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180283117/ 20
