Mr.S.Gopalasubramaniam vs The Assistant Commissioner on 6 December, 2021
Mr.S.Gopalasubramaniam vs The Assistant Commissioner on 6
December, 2021
Author: M.Sundar
Bench: M.Sundar
WP(MD) No.21481 of 2021
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED : 06.12.2021
CORAM
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.SUNDAR
W.P(MD)No.21481 of 2021
and W.M.P.(MD)No.18047 of 2021
Mr.S.Gopalasubramaniam,
The Administrative Trustee
Arulmighu Kulathur Ayyan Sastha Temple,
Sundarapandiapuram Village,
Tenkasi Taluk,
Tenkasi District. ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Assistant Commissioner,
Hindu Religious and Charitable
Endowment Department,
Tirunelveli,
Tirunelveli District.
2.The Executive Officer,
Arulmighu Ilanjikumarar Thirukovil,
Ilanji, Tenkasi,
Tenkasi District. ... Respondents
Prayer: Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, for the
issuance of a Writ of of Certiorari calling for the records relating to show
cause notice bearing Se.Mu.Na.Ka.No.5573/2020/E1 dated 21.11.2020
passed by the 1st respondent and to quash the same as arbitrary.
1/14
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107365826/ 1
Mr.S.Gopalasubramaniam vs The Assistant Commissioner on 6 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) WP(MD) No.21481 of 2021
For Petitioner : Mr.V.Raghavachari for
Mr.Adith Narayan Vijayaraghavan
For Respondents : Mr.T.Amjadkhan,
Govt. Advocate for R1
Mr.M.Muthugeethayan for R2
ORDER
In the captioned main writ petition, an 'order dated 21.11.2020, bearing reference
br/K/e/f/vz;/5573-2020-,1 made by the first respondent' (hereinafter 'impugned order' for the sake
of convenience and clarity) has been called in question.
2. The writ petitioner who has styled himself as Administrative Trustee of 'Arulmighu Kulathur
Ayyan Sastha Temple situate in Sundarapandiapuram Village, Tenkasi Taluk, Tenkasi District'
(hereinafter 'said temple' for the sake of convenience and clarity) has filed the captioned writ
petition.
3. Short facts shorn of elaboration are that said temple is a public temple; that writ petitioner has
styled himself as Administrative Trustee; that https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis said temple is a
non-listed temple qua 'The Tamil Nadu Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowments Act, 1959
(Tamil Nadu Act No.22 of 1959)' [hereinafter 'TN HR & CE Act' for the sake of brevity, convenience
and clarity]; that the writ petitioner had earlier filed another writ petition in this Court being
W.P.(MD)No.12123 of 2020 regarding auction of fishery rights in a tank in Sundarapandiapuram
Village (said tank) by PWD (Public Works Department); that according to the writ petitioner, said
tank belongs to said temple; that in the earlier writ petition, an interim order was granted on
18.09.2020 stating that the auction can go on but the tender process shall not be finalised and the
impugned tender process should abide by the out come of that writ petition; that the earlier writ
petition is pending; that thereafter, the impugned order came to be made by the first respondent;
that vide the impugned order a Fit person has been appointed for said temple and that assailing the
impugned order, captioned writ petition has been filed.
4. After narrating the aforementioned facts, Mr.V.Raghavachari, learned counsel appearing on
behalf of Mr.Adith Narayan Vijayaraghavan, counsel on record for writ petitioner, notwithstanding
very many averments in the writ affidavit and notwithstanding several grounds raised in the writ
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis affidavit made focused submissions in his campaign against the
impugned order and a summation of learned counsel's submissions are as follows:
a) There is complete non-application of mind qua impugned order as it proceeds on
the basis that the aforementioned earlier writ petition i.e., W.P.(MD)No. 12123 of
2020 has been filed by another person, though it has been filed by the writ petitioner;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107365826/ 2
Mr.S.Gopalasubramaniam vs The Assistant Commissioner on 6 December, 2021
b) The writ petitioner has not been put on notice prior to the impugned order and
c) The writ petitioner has taken all efforts to protect the fishery rights in the said tank
belonging to said temple but that has been taken amiss by the first respondent.
5. Mr.T.Amjadkhan, learned Government Advocate accepted notice on behalf of first respondent
and Mr.M.Muthugeethayan, learned private counsel accepted notice on behalf of second respondent
i.e., Executive https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Officer of another temple viz., Arulmighu
Ilanjikumarar Thirukovil, who has been appointed as Fit person of said temple qua impugned order.
Owing to the narrow compass of the captioned matter, with the consent of all the counsel, main writ
petition was taken up and heard out. To be noted there is no disputation or disagreement as
between aforementioned counsel that captioned writ petition can be heard out dehors
aforementioned earlier W.P. (MD)No.12123 of 2020 which is pending.
6. In response to the submissions made by learned counsel for writ petitioner (in his campaign
against the impugned order) learned State Counsel and learned Private Counsel for first and second
respondents respectively made submissions, a summation of which is as follows:
i) it cannot be gainsaid that the impugned order is vitiated by non-application of
mind as the writ petitioner continuously tried to encroach said temple's land;
ii) The question of prior notice will not arise as the statute does not contemplate this
and more importantly writ petitioner is self styled Administrative Trustee of said
temple which is admittedly a non-listed temple;
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
iii) Being a public temple, the first respondent has a duty to protect the properties of said temple
and therefore, the purported efforts taken by the writ petitioner to protect the temple properties
cannot be a ground to assail the impugned order.
7. In reply, learned counsel appearing on behalf of the counsel on record for writ petitioner pointed
out that the writ petitioner has sent a detailed response dated 08.11.2021 to the respondents, this is
in response to the impugned order but the same has not been considered.
8. I carefully considered the rival submissions. I am not inclined to interfere with the impugned
order and the reasons are as follows:
a) As would be evident from the narrative thus far, the said temple is indisputably a
public temple. Therefore, sub-section (3) of Section 1 of TN HR&CE Act operates.
Admittedly, there is no exemption under Section 4 of TN HR & CE Act. Further, admittedly, there is
nothing to https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis demonstrate that the writ petitioner was appointed as
Trustee qua said temple under TN HR&CE Act. In other words, writ petitioner is only acting (self
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107365826/ 3
Mr.S.Gopalasubramaniam vs The Assistant Commissioner on 6 December, 2021
styled) as Administrative Trustee;
b) The impugned order is clearly revisable and statutory revisions have been provided in TN HR&CE
Act. I venture to say revisions in plural as assailing the impugned order can either be under Section
21-A or under Section 21 of TN HR&CE Act. In other words, there is an effective efficacious alternate
remedy. The writ petitioner has not availed this alternate remedy, though the impugned order came
to be made more than one year ago i.e., on 21.11.2020 to be precise. This Court has repeatedly held
in a long line of case laws that TN HR & CE Act is a self- contained code. This itself draws the
curtains on the matter but as other arguments were made, the same are also being dealt with infra;
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
c) The first point of non-application of mind cannot be a ground to interfere on the teeth of alternate
remedy. A careful perusal of the impugned order makes it clear that it is an arguable matter as it
clearly says that the earlier writ petition was filed by Gopalasubramaiam and it further goes on to
say that Gopalasubramaniam has said he does not know anything about the said temple now. This
by itself cannot be conclusively construed as non-application of mind, may be it is not happily
worded;
d) The second point on prior notice, turns on Section 49(1) r/w Section 47(1)(a) of TN HR&CE Act.
The impugned order says the said temple is a non-listed temple under Section 49(1) of TN HR & CE
Act, which is obviously an error in mentioning the provision of law. This should read as Section 46
as Section 46 deals with the Commissioner's powers to publish list of institutions and therefore, the
said temple not having been published in the list would fall under the non-listed category qua
Section 46 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of TN HR&CE Act. Be that as it may, as long as an
authority has power mere quoting of a wrong provision will neither denude the authority of its
power nor vitiate the order. Therefore, I construe the impugned order to have been made under
Section 49(1) and said temple is a non-listed temple qua Section 46 of TN HR & CE Act which is
learned State Counsel's say. If it is an order made under Section 49(1), the said temple being a
non-listed temple, it comes within the sweep of Section 47(1)(a). To be noted, Section 49(1) deals
with two types of situations. One is temples falling under Section 47(2) and the other is temples
falling under Section 47(1)(a). A careful perusal of Section 49(1) read with Section 47(1)(a) makes it
clear that the concept of putting the hereditary trustee on notice, which is ingrained in Section 47(2)
does not apply to Section 47(1)(a). As already alluded to supra in the case on hand writ petitioner is
admittedly not a hereditary trustee, there is no proceedings under Section 63(b) of TN HR&CE Act
there is no other documents to demonstrate that the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis writ
petitioner has been appointed as a trustee qua said temple under the TN HR&CE Act and writ
petitioner has styled himself as Administrative Trustee. This is an admitted position as already
alluded to supra. Therefore, this argument of prior notice also falls flat on its face and in my
considered view this is a non-starter;
e) As regards the efforts said to have been taken by the writ petitioner, a careful perusal of the writ
affidavit and more particularly paragraph 9 of the writ affidavit at page 3, makes it clear that the
writ petitioner talks about revenue authorities and says the revenue authorities did not execute
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107365826/ 4
Mr.S.Gopalasubramaniam vs The Assistant Commissioner on 6 December, 2021
eviction proceedings due to a representation by the occupiers saying that they have to manufacture
earthen utensil for their livelihood. There is a mention about C.M.P.No.12600 of 2004 and an order
dated 23.07.2009. This order has not been placed before me and the main case number has also not
been furnished as part of the case file. However, the law is very clear that if lands belong to a
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis public temple, Section 78 of TN HR&CE Act is available and
Section 78 has not been kick-started. Therefore, this argument of the writ petitioner mearly on the
ground that he had earlier filed a writ petition when the fishery right in said tank belonging to the
said temple were auctioned by the PWD does not come to the aid of writ petitioner in his campaign
against the challenge to the impugned order; and
f) I notice that one year has elapsed qua impugned order and the first respondent has sent as many
as three reminders dated 09.12.2020, 23.12.2020 and 22.10.2021, calling upon him to handover
possession but the writ petitioner has not yielded. This by itself demonstrates that the writ
petitioner is more concerned about his self styled status as Administrative Trustee of said temple
rather than yielding to the statute as the Fit Person will be able to initiate proceedings only if the
records are handed over. In this regard, in addition to the summation of submission made above,
one other submission made by the learned https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis State Counsel is
significant and that is regarding the locus of the writ petitioner. From the narrative thus far, it is
clear that the writ petitioner is self styled and he has no locus really to say that he is legally entitled
qua administration of said temple.
9. In the light of all the reasons given above, I am convinced that there is absolutely no ground to
interfere in writ jurisdiction qua impugned order. This is no doubt a certiorari prayer of the writ
petitioner assailing the impugned order. On an earlier occasion, in a certiorari by a writ petitioner I
had issued a mandamus and that is vide order dated 01.08.2019 in W.P.No. 22634 of 2019. This
matter was carried to Hon'ble Division Bench and Hon'ble Division Bench sustained this aspect of
order vide order dated 06.12.2019 in W.A.No.4073 of 2019. This approach was taken based on
A.A.Gopalakrishnan's case [A.A.Gopalakrishnan v. Cochin Devaswom Board and Ors.,] reported in
(2007) 7 SCC 482, wherein Hon'ble Supreme Court has made it clear that it is the duty of this Court
to protect temple properties. This Court is parens patriae qua temple properties more so public
temples. Law is also well settled that presiding deity is construed to
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis be a minor and this Court is is the guardian. Therefore, I deem it
appropriate to say that the writ petitioner will do well to hand over all the records and the
administration of the said temple forthwith to the Fit person pursuant to the impugned order. The
Fit person should also take charge and forthwith take efforts to retrieve the temple properties if the
allegations of encroachment are true. With regard to the earlier writ petition also, it is open to the
Fit person to either substitute himself or add himself as a co- petitioner, so that the said tank as a
water body is protected and the said temple property is also protected.
10. Ergo, captioned writ petition fails and the same is dismissed albeit with a directive as set out in
this order supra. Consequently, connected W.M.P. is also dismissed. I refrain myself from imposing
costs.
vsm 06.12.2021
Index : Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107365826/ 5
Mr.S.Gopalasubramaniam vs The Assistant Commissioner on 6 December, 2021
Internet : Yes /No
Note :
In view of the present lock down owing to COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the order may be
utilized for official purposes, but, ensuring that the copy of the order that is presented is the correct
copy, shall be the responsibility of the advocate / litigant concerned.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis M.SUNDAR, J.
vsm To
1.The Assistant Commissioner, Hindu Religious and Charitable Endowment Department,
Tirunelveli, Tirunelveli District.
2.The Executive Officer, Arulmighu Ilanjikumarar Thirukovil, Ilanji, Tenkasi, Tenkasi District.
and W.M.P.(MD)No.18047 of 2021 06.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107365826/ 6
