Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14
December, 2022
Author: M. Nagaprasanna
Bench: M. Nagaprasanna
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 14TH DAY OF DECEMBER, 2022 R
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA
WRIT PETITION No.19337 OF 2022 (GM - RES)
BETWEEN:
1. MS.C.UMA REDDY
AGED ABOUT 62 YEARS
D/O C.V.REDDY
RESIDING AT NOS.31-36, II FLOOR
1ST MAIN ROAD, 2ND STAGE
AREKERE MICO LAYOUT
BANNERGHATTA ROAD
BENGALURU - 560 076.
2. MR.SHIVAKUMAR REDDY
AGED ABOUT 59 YEARS
S/O C.VEERA REDDY
RESIDING AT NO.14
RAMANASHREE
29TH MAIN ROAD
BTM LAYOUT II STAGE
BENGALURU - 560 078.
3. R.H.KASTURI
AGED ABOUT 54 YEARS
W/O C.SHIVAKUMAR REDDY
RESIDING AT NO.14, RAMANASHREE
29TH MAIN ROAD
BTM LAYOUT II STAGE
BENGALURU - 560 078.
2
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 1
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
4. KAVVERI TELECOM PRODUCTS LIMITED
REGISTERED AS PRIVATE LIMITED COMPANY
REPRESENTED BY C.SHIVAKUMAR REDDY
31-36, I MAIN, II STAGE
AREKERE MICO LAYOUT
BANNERGHATTA ROAD
BENGALURU - 560 078.
5. M/S KEONA
PROPRIETARY CONCERN.
REPRESENTED BY MS.C.UMA REDDY
1ST FLOOR, 31-36, 1 MAIN, 2ND STAGE
AREKERE MICO LAYOUT
BANNERGHATTA ROAD
BENGALURU - 560 078.
6. M/S SMR TELECOM HOLDING PVT. LTD.,
REGISTERED AS
PRIVATE LIMITED COMPANY
REPRESENTED BY MR.SHIVA REDDY
31-36, 1 MAIN, 2ND STAGE
AREKERE MICO LAYOUT
BANNERGHATTA ROAD
BENGALURU - 560 078.
7. MR.C.ROHIT REDDY
AGED ABOUT 30 YEARS
S/O C.SHIVAKUMAR REDDY
NO.14, RAMANASHREE
29TH MAIN ROAD, BTM LAYOUT
II STAGE, BENGALURU - 560 078.
8. MR.C.MOKSHITH REDDY
AGED ABOUT 25 YEARS
S/O C.SHIVAKUMAR REDDY
NO.14, RAMANASHREEE
29TH MAIN ROAD
BTM LAYOUT II STAGE
3
BENGALURU - 560 078.
9. MR.SANKETHRAM REDDY
AGED ABOUT 23 YEARS
S/O C.SHIVAKUMAR REDDY
NO.14, RAMANASHREE
29TH MAIN ROAD
BTM LAYOUT II STAGE
BENGALURU - 560 078.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 2
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
... PETITIONERS
(BY SRI SANDESH J.CHOUTA, SR.ADVOCATE A/W
SRI SAMPREETH V., ADVOCATE)
AND:
1. DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
BANGALORE ZONAL OFFICE
3RD FLOOR, BLOCK-B
BMTC BUILDING
SHANTHINAGAR
K.H.ROAD
BENGALURU - 560 027.
2. THE ASSISTANT DIRECTOR
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
BANGALORE ZONAL OFFICE
3RD FLOOR, BLOCK-B
BMTC BUILDING
SHANTHINAGAR
K.H.ROAD
BENGALURU - 560 027.
3. THE DEPUTY DIRECTOR
DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT
GOVERNMENT OF INDIA
4
BANGALORE ZONAL OFFICE
3RD FLOOR, BLOCK-B
BMTC BUILDING
SHANTHINAGAR
K.H.ROAD
BENGALURU - 560 027.
4. THE REGISTRAR/ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICER
ADJUDICATING AUTHORITY
PREVENTION OF MONEY LAUNDERING ACT
AND PMLA, ROOM NO.26, 4TH FLOOR
JEEVAN DEEP BUILDING
PARLIAMENT STREET
NEW DELHI - 110 001.
... RESPONDENTS
(BY SRI MADHUKAR DESHPANDE, ADVOCATE)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLE 226 OF THE
CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO CALL FOR THE RECORDS
PENDING ON THE FILE OF R4 WHICH IS PERTAINING TO THE
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 3
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
IMPUGNED ORDER PASSED BY THE R3 IN PAO NO.5/2022 IN ECIR
NO.ECIR/BGZO/04/2019/AD-ACV/1541; QUASH THE PROVISIONAL
ORDER OF ATTACHMENT IN PAO.NO.5/2022 DTD 1.8.2022, ECIR
NO.ECIR/BGZO/04/2019/AD-ACV/1541 WHEREIN THE IMMOVABLE
AND MOVABLE PROPERTIES OF THE PETITIONERS HAVE BEEN
PROVISIONALLY ATTACHED BY THE R3 ALLEGEDLY IN EXERCISE
OF HIS POWERS U/S 5(1) OF THE PREVENTION OF MONEY
LAUNDERING ACT AND ALL SUCH FURTHER STEPS ARISING OUT
OF THE SAID IMPUGNED PROVISIONAL ATTACHMENT ORDER
WHICH IS PRODUCED AS ANNEXURE - A.
5
THIS WRIT PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED
FOR ORDERS ON 03.11.2022, COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT
THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:-
ORDER
The petitioners call in question a provisional attachment order in order No.5/2022 dated
01.08.2022, whereby, the movable and immovable properties of the petitioners are provisionally
attached in exercise of powers conferred under Section 5(1) of the PMLA.
2. Shorn of unnecessary details, facts in brief, that leads the petitioners to this Court, are as follows:
The 1st petitioner runs certain businesses and manages supply and marketing of
flowers purchased from farmers and circulates it into retail market through her
establishment in the name and style of 'M/s Keona'. The other business of the 1st
petitioner concerns telecom infrastructure, through a company established for the
purpose by name Kavveri Telecom Infrastructure Limited (hereinafter referred to as
'the Company' for short). A loan was availed by the Company at the hands of Dena
Bank, J.C.Road Branch. Alleging that the loan had been used for purposes other than
for which it had been taken, certain proceedings come to be initiated against the
petitioners and several others by the Central Bureau of Investigation on 27.07.2017 in
R.C.No.10 of 2017, against the Directors of the Company and arraigning some of the
petitioners as accused in the said case. Pending investigation, the Assistant Director
of Enforcement Directorate communicates to the Bank in which the petitioners had
their accounts to be frozen on account of allegations against the 1st petitioner, in
particular.
3. On completion of investigation, the CBI filed a final report in the case and the said case is pending
as C.C. No.11606 of 2020 before the Special Court for offences punishable under Sections 420, 468,
471 and 120B of the IPC. Being aggrieved by the order of the Special Court taking cognizance of the
offences and issuance of summons, petitioner Nos.1 to 4 and 6 preferred a writ petition before this
Court in Writ Petition No.14431 of 2020 and Criminal Petition No.7949 of 2020. This Court by its
order dated 10.12.2020 stayed all further proceedings against petitioner Nos.1 to 4 and 6 who are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 4
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
arrayed as accused.
4. On the basis of the case registered by the CBI in the aforesaid R.C. and in C.C.No.11606 of 2020,
the Enforcement Directorate registers an Enforcement Case Information Report ('ECIR') in ECIR
No.ECIR/BGZO/04/2019/AD-AKV/1541 for offences punishable under Sections 3 and 4 of the
PMLA. In those proceedings on 01-08-2022, the Deputy Director of Enforcement Directorate passes
a provisional order in Provisional Order No.5 of 2022 ordering provisional attachment of movable
and immovable properties of the petitioners to the total value of Rs.40,14,26,327/-.
The order of attachment so made by the 3rd respondent is what drives the petitioners to this Court
in the subject petition.
5. Heard the learned senior counsel Sri Sandesh J.Chouta, appearing for the petitioners and Sri
Madhukar Deshpande, learned counsel for the respondents/Enforcement Directorate.
6. The learned senior counsel would contend that registration of ECIR against the petitioners is
wholly on the basis of the case registered by the CBI and the charge sheet so filed in those
proceedings. Therefore, there is a link with the offences under the IPC as alleged in C.C.No.11606 of
2020. He would contend that the order taking cognizance in the aforesaid C.C.No.11606 of 2020
and all further proceedings are stayed by this Court. In the light of the interim order granted, the
basis itself is stayed and, therefore, consequent action of attachment of movable and immovable are
all required to be stayed, till the conclusion of the case pending in C.C.No.11606 of 2020.
6.1. He would place reliance upon a judgment of the Apex Court in the case of VIJAY MADANLAL
CHOUDARY v. UNION OF INDIA1 and a judgment rendered by the High Court of Madras following
the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of B.SHANMUGAM AND OTHERS v. KARTHIK
DASARI, DEPUTY DIRECTOR, DIRECTORATE OF ENFORCEMENT2, to contend that the Apex
Court has clearly held that if the accused are acquitted in the predicate offence, the offence under
the PMLA cannot be sustained. Therefore, in the light of the link, the order of attachment by the 3rd
respondent is erroneous and requires to be obliterated.
7. On the other hand, the learned counsel Sri Madhukar Deshpande, who has filed the statement of
objections takes this Court through the statement of objections and submits that there is 2022 SCC
Online SC 929 2022 SCC OnLine Mad.4417 a clear case of money laundering against the petitioners.
Therefore, the registration of crime for the scheduled offences under the PMLA cannot be quashed
merely because there has been an interim order of stay in the predicate offence, against the
petitioners. The two are independent offences. He would contend that against the order of
attachment, writ petition would not be maintainable and they have to approach the appropriate
Court by challenging the said order of attachment. He would submit that on the ground that there is
an interim order operating in the predicate offence, if the impugned proceedings were to be
quashed, it would defeat the very object of the Act and would submit that the petition be dismissed
and further proceedings be permitted to be continued in terms of the proceedings impugned.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 5
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
8. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions made by the respective learned counsel
and perused the material on record.
9. The afore-narrated facts of trail of money that comes into the accounts of the petitioners and its
spending for the purposes other than for which it was taken from Dena Bank, need not, at this
juncture, be gone into. The questions that arise for consideration qua the contentions in the case at
hand are:
(i) Whether the Enforcement Directorate had the right to attach the properties of the
petitioners? and
( i i ) W h e t h e r t h e p r o c e e d i n g s u n d e r P M L A i n E C I R
No.ECIR/BGZO/04/2019/AD-AKV/1541 should be permitted to be continued in the
teeth of the interim order of stay of further proceedings granted in the offences
relating to IPC i.e., predicate offences?
10. Before embarking upon consideration of the points at hand, I deem it appropriate to notice the
provisions of the PMLA that are germane to be considered. Sections 3, 4 and 5 of the PMLA read as
follows:
"3. OFFENCE OF MONEY-LAUNDERING-- Whosoever directly or indirectly
attempts to indulge or knowingly assists or knowingly is a party or is actually
involved in any process or activity connected with the proceeds of crime including its
concealment, possession, acquisition or use and projecting or claiming it as untainted
property shall be guilty of offence of money-laundering.
Explanation.--For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that,--
(i) a person shall be guilty of offence of money laundering if such person is found to
have directly or indirectly attempted to indulge or knowingly assisted or knowingly is
a party or is actually involved in one or more of the following processes or activities
connected with proceeds of crime, namely--
(a) concealment; or
(b) possession; or
(c) acquisition; or
(d) use; or
(e) projecting as untainted property; or
(f) claiming as untainted property, in any manner whatsoever;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 6
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
(ii) the process or activity connected with proceeds of crime is a continuing activity
and continues till such time a person is directly or indirectly enjoying the proceeds of
crime by its concealment or possession or acquisition or use or projecting it as
untainted property or claiming it as untainted property in any manner whatsoever.
4. PUNISHMENT FOR MONEY-LAUNDERING.--
Whoever commits the offence of money-laundering shall be punishable with rigorous imprisonment
for a term which shall not be less than three years but which may extend to seven years and shall
also be liable to fine:
Provided that where the proceeds of crime involved in money-laundering relates to
any offence specified under paragraph 2 of Part A of the Schedule, the provisions of
this section shall have effect as if for the words "which may extend to seven years",
the words "which may extend to ten years" had been substituted.
5. ATTACHMENT OF PROPERTY INVOLVED IN MONEY-LAUNDERING.--(1) Where the Director
or any other officer not below the rank of Deputy Director authorised by the Director for the
purposes of this section, has reason to believe (the reason for such belief to be recorded in writing),
on the basis of material in his possession, that--
(a) any person is in possession of any proceeds of crime; and
(b) such proceeds of crime are likely to be concealed, transferred or dealt with in any
manner which may result in frustrating any proceedings relating to confiscation of
such proceeds of crime under this Chapter, he may, by order in writing, provisionally
attach such property for a period not exceeding one hundred and eighty days from
the date of the order, in such manner as may be prescribed:
Provided that no such order of attachment shall be made unless, in relation to the
scheduled offence, a report has been forwarded to a Magistrate under Section 173 of
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (2 of 1974), or a complaint has been filed by a
person authorised to investigate the offence mentioned in that Schedule, before a
Magistrate or court for taking cognizance of the scheduled offence, as the case may
be, or a similar report complaint has been made or filed under the corresponding law
of any other country:
Provided further that, notwithstanding anything contained in first proviso, any
property of any person may be attached under this section if the Director or any other
officer not below the rank of Deputy Director authorised by him for the purposes of
this section has reason to believe (the reasons for such belief to be recorded in
writing), on the basis of material in his possession, that if such property involved in
money-laundering is not attached immediately under this Chapter, the non-
attachment of the property is likely to frustrate any proceeding under this Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 7
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
Provided also that for the purposes of computing the period of one hundred and
eighty days, the period during which the proceedings under this section is stayed by
the High Court, shall be excluded and a further period not exceeding thirty days from
the date of order of vacation of such stay order shall be counted.
(2) The Director, or any other officer not below the rank of Deputy Director, shall,
immediately after attachment under sub-section (1), forward a copy of the order,
along with the material in his possession, referred to in that sub-section, to the
Adjudicating Authority, in a sealed envelope, in the manner as may be prescribed and
such Adjudicating Authority shall keep such order and material for such period as
may be prescribed.
(3) Every order of attachment made under sub-
section (1) shall cease to have effect after the expiry of the period specified in that sub-section or on
the date of an order made under sub-section (3) of Section 8, whichever is earlier.
(4) Nothing in this section shall prevent the person interested in the enjoyment of the immovable
property attached under sub-section (1) from such enjoyment.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this sub-section, "person interested", in relation to any
immovable property, includes all persons claiming or entitled to claim any interest in the property.
(5) The Director or any other officer who provisionally attaches any property under sub- section (1)
shall, within a period of thirty days from such attachment, file a complaint stating the facts of such
attachment before the Adjudicating Authority."
(Emphasis supplied) Section 3 of the PMLA deals with offence of money laundering, Section 4
makes the offences of money laundering punishable and Section 5 which comes under Chapter-III,
deals with attachment of property, adjudication and confiscation with attachment of property
involved in money laundering. Section 5 of PMLA is what is germane to be considered, in the case at
hand.
11. Point No.i : Whether the Enforcement Directorate had the right to attach the properties of the
petitioners?
The afore-narrated facts that lead registration of ECIR against the petitioners are not in dispute. The
registration of the case comes about on account of CBI registering a case against the petitioners in
RC No.10 of 2017. The CBI after investigation filed its final report in C.C.No.11606 of 2020. It is
then, based upon those offences so registered against the petitioners, the impugned ECIR comes to
be registered. Therefore, the link or the foundation lies in the offences alleged in C.C.No.11606 of
2020 and as such, it becomes a predicate offence. Section 5 of the PMLA empowers the Enforcement
Directorate, that if the Deputy Director has reasons to believe and such reasons are recorded in
writing, may order attachment of the property for a period not exceeding 180 days from the date of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 8
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
said order, which could be extended before the concerned Court, where he has reasons to believe,
that any person is in possession of any proceeds of crime, and such proceeds of crime are likely to be
concealed, transferred or dealt with in any manner, which may result in frustrating any proceedings
relating to confiscation of such proceeds of crime.
12. The other provision in sub-section (5) of Section 5 of the PMLA deals with procedure for such
attachment and what would become after the attachment. The petitioners challenging the order of
the Special Court taking cognizance of offences in C.C.No.11060 of 2020 approached this Court in
Writ Petition No.14431 of 2020 and Criminal Petition No.7949 of 2020. This Court has by its order
dated 10-12-2020, stalled further proceedings and the interim order is in subsistence even as on
date. Therefore, the offences alleged against the petitioners which forms the foundation of the
offences registered against them in the ECIR have been stayed, which would mean that they have
been eclipsed. After granting stay of the said order, the proceedings under the PMLA did not stop.
The 3rd respondent/Competent Authority passes an order on 01.08.2022, issuing a provisional
attachment order in Provisional Order No.5 of 2022 under sub-Section (1) of Section 5 of the PMLA.
To arrive at passing of the order, statements of all the petitioners have been recorded under Section
50 of the PMLA and several documents are scrutinized. A detailed order is passed in terms of
Section 5 of the PMLA and arriving at a conclusion albeit prima facie that he has reason to believe
that proceeds of crime are the result of properties standing in the names of the petitioners either
movable or immovable.
13. It is this attachment order that drives the petitioners to this Court. Therefore, the power under
Section 5 being executed and the considered finding that he has reason to believe to pass the said
order cannot be found fault with. It is in tune with Section 5 of the PMLA. Therefore, the first point
that has arisen for consideration is answered against the petitioners, holding that the 3rd
respondent has the power to attach the properties. What is required is 'there should be reasons to
believe'. The order passed does reflect application of mind and records reasons to believe that they
were proceeds of crime.
14. Point No.ii: Whether the impugned proceedings under PMLA in ECIR
No.ECIR/BGZO/04/2019/AD-AKV/1541 should be permitted to be continued in the teeth of the
interim order of stay of further proceedings granted in the offences relating to IPC i.e., the predicate
offences?
The issue now is, in the teeth of the preceding analysis that the order of attachment cannot be found
fault with, as it is in tune with the PMLA, should it be permitted to be taken to its logical end or
otherwise. Interdiction of attachment order is sought on the ground that there is an interim order of
stay in the predicate offence i.e., offences under the IPC. The link between the two is, what is
considered by the Apex Court in the case of VIJAY MADANLAL CHOUDARY (supra). The Apex
Court in the case of VIJAY MADANLAL CHOUDARY (supra) considers the entire spectrum of
PMLA and at paragraph 467 of the judgment draws up the conclusions. Paragraph 467 reads as
follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 9
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
"CONCLUSION
467. In light of the above analysis, we now proceed to summarise our conclusion on
seminal points in issue in the following terms:--
(i) The question as to whether some of the amendments to the Prevention of Money-
laundering Act, 2002 could not have been enacted by the Parliament by way of a
Finance Act has not been examined in this judgment. The same is left open for being
examined along with or after the decision of the Larger Bench (seven Judges) of this
Court in the case of Rojer Mathew.
(ii) The expression "proceedings" occurring in Clause (na) of Section 2(1) of the 2002
Act is contextual and is required to be given expansive meaning to include inquiry
procedure followed by the Authorities of ED, the Adjudicating Authority, and the
Special Court.
(iii) The expression "investigation" in Clause (na) of Section 2(1) of the 2002 Act does
not limit itself to the matter of investigation concerning the offence under the Act and
is interchangeable with the function of "inquiry" to be undertaken by the Authorities
under the Act.
(iv) The Explanation inserted to Clause (u) of Section 2(1) of the 2002 Act does not
travel beyond the main provision predicating tracking and reaching upto the property
derived or obtained directly or indirectly as a result of criminal activity relating to a
scheduled offence.
(v)(a) Section 3 of the 2002 Act has a wider reach and captures every process and
activity, direct or indirect, in dealing with the proceeds of crime and is not limited to
the happening of the final act of integration of tainted property in the formal
economy. The Explanation inserted to Section 3 by way of amendment of 2019 does
not expand the purport of Section 3 but is only clarificatory in nature. It clarifies the
word "and" preceding the expression projecting or claiming as "or"; and being a
clarificatory amendment, it would make no difference even if it is introduced by way
of Finance Act or otherwise.
(b) Independent of the above, we are clearly of the view that the expression "and"
occurring in Section 3 has to be construed as "or", to give full play to the said
provision so as to include "every"
process or activity indulged into by anyone. Projecting or claiming the property as untainted
property would constitute an offence of money- laundering on its own, being an independent
process or activity.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 10
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
(c) The interpretation suggested by the petitioners, that only upon projecting or claiming the
property in question as untainted property that the offence of Section 3 would be complete, stands
rejected.
(d) The offence under Section 3 of the 2002 Act is dependent on illegal gain of property as a result of
criminal activity relating to a scheduled offence. It is concerning the process or activity connected
with such property, which constitutes the offence of money-laundering. The Authorities under the
2002 Act cannot prosecute any person on notional basis or on the assumption that a scheduled
offence has been committed, unless it is so registered with the jurisdictional police and/or pending
enquiry/trial including by way of criminal complaint before the competent forum. If the person is
finally discharged/acquitted of the scheduled offence or the criminal case against him is quashed by
the Court of competent jurisdiction, there can be no offence of money-laundering against him or any
one claiming such property being the property linked to stated scheduled offence through him.
(vi) Section 5 of the 2002 Act is constitutionally
valid. It provides for a balancing
arrangement to secure the interests of the person as also ensures that the proceeds of crime remain
available to be dealt with in the manner provided by the 2002 Act. The procedural safeguards as
delineated by us hereinabove are effective measures to protect the interests of person concerned.
(vii) The challenge to the validity of sub-section (4) of Section 8 of the 2002 Act is also rejected
subject to Section 8 being invoked and operated in accordance with the meaning assigned to it
hereinabove.
(viii) The challenge to deletion of proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 17 of the 2002 Act stands
rejected. There are stringent safeguards provided in Section 17 and Rules framed thereunder.
Moreover, the pre-condition in the proviso to Rule 3(2) of the 2005 Rules cannot be read into
Section 17 after its amendment. The Central Government may take necessary corrective steps to
obviate confusion caused in that regard.
(ix) The challenge to deletion of proviso to sub-section (1) of Section 18 of the 2002 Act also stands
rejected. There are similar safeguards provided in Section 18. We hold that the amended provision
does not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness.
(x) The challenge to the constitutional validity of Section 19 of the 2002 Act is also rejected. There
are stringent safeguards provided in Section 19. The provision does not suffer from the vice of
arbitrariness.
(xi) Section 24 of the 2002 Act has reasonable nexus with the purposes and objects sought to be
achieved by the 2002 Act and cannot be regarded as manifestly arbitrary or unconstitutional.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 11
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
(xii)(a) The proviso in Clause (a) of sub-section (1) of Section 44 of the 2002 Act is to be regarded as
directory in nature and this provision is also read down to mean that the Special Court may exercise
judicial discretion on case-to-case basis.
(b) We do not find merit in the challenge to Section 44 being arbitrary or unconstitutional.
However, the eventualities referred to in this section shall be dealt with by the Court concerned and
by the Authority concerned in accordance with the interpretation given in this judgment.
(xiii)(a) The reasons which weighed with this Court in Nikesh Tarachand Shah for declaring the twin
conditions in Section 45(1) of the 2002 Act, as it stood at the relevant time, as unconstitutional in no
way obliterated the provision from the statute book; and it was open to the Parliament to cure the
defect noted by this Court so as to revive the same provision in the existing form.
(b) We are unable to agree with the observations in Nikesh Tarachand Shah distinguishing the
enunciation of the Constitution Bench decision in Kartar Singh; and other observations suggestive
of doubting the perception of Parliament in regard to the seriousness of the offence of money-
laundering, including about it posing serious threat to the sovereignty and integrity of the country.
(c) The provision in the form of Section 45 of the 2002 Act, as applicable post amendment of 2018,
is reasonable and has direct nexus with the purposes and objects sought to be achieved by the 2002
Act and does not suffer from the vice of arbitrariness or unreasonableness.
(d) As regards the prayer for grant of bail, irrespective of the nature of proceedings, including those
under Section 438 of the 1973 Code or even upon invoking the jurisdiction of Constitutional Courts,
the underlying principles and rigours of Section 45 may apply.
(xiv) The beneficial provision of Section 436A of the 1973 Code could be invoked by the accused
arrested for offence punishable under the 2002 Act.
(xv)(a) The process envisaged by Section 50 of the 2002 Act is in the nature of an inquiry against the
proceeds of crime and is not "investigation" in strict sense of the term for initiating prosecution; and
the Authorities under the 2002 Act (referred to in Section 48), are not police officers as such.
(b) The statements recorded by the Authorities under the 2002 Act are not hit by Article 20(3) or
Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
(xvi) Section 63 of the 2002 Act providing for punishment regarding false information or failure to
give information does not suffer from any vice of arbitrariness.
(xvii) The inclusion or exclusion of any particular offence in the Schedule to the 2002 Act is a matter
of legislative policy; and the nature or class of any predicate offence has no bearing on the validity of
the Schedule or any prescription thereunder.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 12
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
(xviii)(a) In view of special mechanism envisaged by the 2002 Act, ECIR cannot be equated with an
FIR under the 1973 Code. ECIR is an internal document of the ED and the fact that FIR in respect of
scheduled offence has not been recorded does not come in the way of the Authorities referred to in
Section 48 to commence inquiry/investigation for initiating "civil action" of "provisional
attachment" of property being proceeds of crime.
(b) Supply of a copy of ECIR in every case to the person concerned is not mandatory, it is enough if
ED at the time of arrest, discloses the grounds of such arrest.
(c) However, when the arrested person is produced before the Special Court, it is open to the Special
Court to look into the relevant records presented by the authorised representative of ED for
answering the issue of need for his/her continued detention in connection with the offence of
money- laundering.
(xix) Even when ED manual is not to be published being an internal departmental document issued
for the guidance of the Authorities (ED officials), the department ought to explore the desirability of
placing information on its website which may broadly outline the scope of the authority of the
functionaries under the Act and measures to be adopted by them as also the options/remedies
available to the person concerned before the Authority and before the Special Court.
(xx) The petitioners are justified in expressing serious concern bordering on causing injustice owing
to the vacancies in the Appellate Tribunal. We deem it necessary to impress upon the executive to
take corrective measures in this regard expeditiously.
(xxi) The argument about proportionality of punishment with reference to the nature of scheduled
offence is wholly unfounded and stands rejected."
(emphasis supplied) In clause (d) of the aforesaid conclusion, the Apex Court considers Section 3 of
the Act and later upholds the constitutional validity of Section 5 of the Act in terms of clause (vi)
(supra).
Section 5 of the Act is what deals with the attachment of the properties. Clause (v)(d) of paragraph
467 (supra) establishes the link between the two. The Apex Court holds that in the event the accused
in the PMLA or whose allegations are linked to any persons in the predicate offence, such accused in
the predicate offence gets a clean chit on three circumstances - one by acquittal after a full blown
trial; two on discharge by the competent Court and three on the proceedings being quashed by the
High Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Cr.P.C.
15. In these circumstances the impugned action under the provisions of the PMLA cannot be
permitted to be continued.
Therefore, if the allegations in the predicate offences are considered to be the flesh, the offences
under the PMLA is the blood, they are impregnable. Therefore, if the predicate offences are not
permitted to move forward, the impugned proceedings cannot. It would have been altogether
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 13
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
different circumstance, if the petitioners were all acquitted of the offences under the IPC or any
other predicate offence to which the offence under the PMLA is linked. The situation in the case at
hand is not with regard to acquittal, but the stay of the proceedings. Therefore, they are eclipsed and
not extinguished. The Apex Court does not deal with a circumstance as to what should happen in a
case, where it is eclipsed. The Apex Court only dealt with a situation where there is extinguishment
of predicate offences. Therefore, it is necessary to consider taking cue from the findings of the Apex
Court as to whether attachment order should be permitted to be confirmed or otherwise.
16. It cannot be disputed, that at a later point in time if the petitioners are acquitted, no proceeding
under the ECIR can continue. In the event they are convicted, it is always open to the Enforcement
Directorate to pass any order of attachment or conviction as the case would be. If that be the right of
the Enforcement Directorate, since there is no determination in C.C.No.11606 of 2020 in the light of
the interim order being granted by this Court, so long as the interim order is in operation, the
impugned proceedings, in the considered view of this Court, cannot be permitted to continue, failing
which, it would run completely counter to law as enunciated by the Apex Court.
17. In somewhat similar circumstance, a Division Bench of the High Court of Madras in B.
SHANMUGAM'S case (supra) considers this very point as to what is the effect of the stay order and
has held as follows:
"What is the effect of a stay order?
17. The effect of an order of stay means that the operation of the impugned order is
stayed or stands stalled as if the impugned order does not exist. Therefore, to bring
the parties to the proceedings from taking further action in relation to the subject
matter pending the final adjudication, stay order is granted in the interest of both
parties. During the currency of stay order, if any proceedings are permitted to go on
and in the meanwhile, if any damage has been caused to the reputation or the
goodwill of the parties, the same cannot be compensated. Whereas if the Department
waits for the final outcome of the proceedings, no prejudice would be caused to them.
In all these cases, the admitted case of the respondent Department is that the ECIR
has been initiated based on the three First Information Reports in Crime Nos. 441 of
2015, 298 of 2017, 344 of 2018, which culminated in the proceedings in C.C. No. 24
of 2021, C.C. No. 19 of 2020 and C.C. No. 25 of 2021 respectively and the proceedings
in C.C. No. 25 of 2021 culminating from Crime No. 344 of 2018 have been quashed.
The calendar cases arising out of the other two First Information Reports have been
stayed. As stated supra, since the ECIR itself was only on the basis of the said three
First Information Reports, when the proceedings pursuant to the said First
Information Reports have been stayed by the High Court, whether the ECIR, which is
also pursuant to the First Information Reports, can be proceeded with, is a question
that stares at open. Our considered answer is in the negative.
18. Because, it is not the case of the respondent that apart from the above three First
Information Reports, there are other materials based upon which they have initiated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 14
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
the proceedings under the Prevention of Money-laundering Act. Hence, in our view,
when the calendar cases which culminated from the said two First Information
Reports also have been stayed, the respondent Department should also refrain itself
from proceeding any further, as it is their admitted case that the summons issued to
the petitioners are pursuant to the initiation of ECIR based upon the three First
Information Reports.
19. Learned Senior Counsels appearing for the petitioners in extenso argued that
there is no jurisdictional facts to initiate the proceedings under the Prevention of
Money-laundering Act. According to them, the following jurisdictional facts have to
be there for initiating proceedings under the Prevention of Money-laundering Act.
20. Firstly, there must be predicate/scheduled offence.
21. Secondly, there must be a criminal activity.
22. Thirdly, there must be proceeds of crime which is quintessential to connect the
first and second i.e. Scheduled offence and criminal activities.
23. According to them, except for the three First Information Reports indicating
commission of scheduled offence, there is no document or pleading on the side of the
respondent to substantiate that there are proceeds of crime as per Section 2(l)(u) of
the Prevention of Money- laundering Act and that proceeds had a link with the
scheduled offence. According to them, out of three calendar cases, one has been
quashed and two Calendar Cases have been stayed. Therefore, in the eye of law,
firstly, there is no scheduled offence as per section 2(y) of the Prevention of
Money-laundering Act, 2002 as on this date for the respondent to proceed under the
said Act.
24. On the contrary, Mr. R. Sankaranarayanan, learned Additional Solicitor General
strenuously contended that it is true that the proceedings have been stayed, but that
does not mean the offence has been wiped out. Till it is quashed by a competent
Court or the person is discharged or acquitted, the offence continues to be alive and
the respondent has the authority to proceed under the Act.
25. Let us see what is the jurisdictional fact to be taken into account by a Court before
assuming jurisdiction over a particular matter. The Hon'ble Supreme Court
explaining the above facts in Arun Kumar v. Union of India, (2007) 1 SCC 732, has
held as follows:--
"74. A "jurisdictional fact" is a fact which must exist before a court, tribunal or an
authority assumes jurisdiction over a particular matter. A jurisdictional fact is one on
existence or non-existence of which depends jurisdiction of a court, a tribunal or an
authority. It is the fact upon which an administrative agency's power to act depends.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 15
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
If the jurisdictional fact does not exist, the court, authority or officer cannot act. If a
court or authority wrongly assumes the existence of such fact, the order can be
questioned by a writ of certiorari. The underlying principle is that by erroneously
assuming existence of such jurisdictional fact, no authority can confer upon itself
jurisdiction which it otherwise does not possess.
75. In Halsbury's Laws of England, it has been stated:
"Where the jurisdiction of a tribunal is dependent on the existence of a particular
state of affairs, that state of affairs may be described as preliminary to, or collateral to
the merits of, the issue. If, at the inception of an inquiry by an inferior tribunal, a
challenge is made to its jurisdiction, the tribunal has to make up its mind whether to
act or not and can give a ruling on the preliminary or collateral issue; but that ruling
is not conclusive."
76. The existence of jurisdictional fact is thus sine qua non or condition precedent for the exercise of
power by a court of limited jurisdiction."
26. Further, the Apex Court in the case of State of Punjab v. Davinder Pal Singh Bhullar, (2011) 14
SCC 770, has held that if a foundation is being removed, structure/work falls.
27. A mere perusal of the above judgment clearly shows that the existence of jurisdictional fact is a
condition precedent for the exercise of power by a Court of limited jurisdiction. Therefore, in the
cases on hand, when there is no cause of action, since the proceeding in one of the calendar cases
was quashed by the order dated 30.07.2021 in Criminal Original Petition No. 13374 of 2021 and the
proceedings in two other calendar cases have been stayed by this Court, there is no jurisdictional
fact or cause of action for the respondent/department to initiate any proceedings during the period
of order of stay operating against the two FIRs. Viz. C.C. No. 19/2020 and C.C. No. 24 of 2021.
28. Secondly, as already held by us, when the basis, namely, the proceedings which culminated
through the First Information Reports had been stayed, the respondent should await the result of
such proceedings before continuing any further under the Prevention of Money- laundering Act. It is
the further case of the learned Additional Solicitor General that the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Vijay
Madanlal Choudhary has held that the summons issued to the individual is to collect factual
evidence as regards to the offence of money-laundering. It is his further case that only after
concluding such inquiry, the authorities under the Prevention of Money-laundering Act could
proceed any further as provided under the Act, that is, after ascertaining the proceeds of crime and
its nexus with the scheduled offence. Till the First Information Report is quashed, the scheduled
offence continues to be alive.
29. In our view, the grant of stay of any particular proceedings would amount to eclipsing the
proceedings initiated. An order of stay is interim in nature pending the final proceedings. The
Hon'ble Apex Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal, 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335, in paragraph-5 stated
thus:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 16
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
"Everyone whether individually or collectively is unquestionably under the
supremacy of law. Whoever he may be, however high he is, he is under the law. No
matter how powerful he is and how rich he may be."
30. Therefore, the Apex Court has given the guidelines to be followed by the Courts while exercising
the extraordinary power under Article 226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code
that where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even if they are
taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not constitute any offence or make out a
case against the accused, based on which, when the orders of stay are granted, the parties to the
proceedings bound by the rule of law, should abide by the orders of stay. In this background, when
the learned Additional Solicitor General appearing for the respondent fairly conceded that in view of
the order of quash passed in Criminal Original Petition No. 13374 of 2021 dated 30.07.2021, the
respondent Department would not proceed against the accused therein, the same analogy would
equally apply to the other cases, where orders of stay granted are operating against the C.C. No.
19/2020 and C.C. No. 20 of 2020 based on which the ECIRs are recorded and summons are issued
till the cases are decided.
Therefore, the impugned proceedings/summons do not have any legal sanctity. Interim order of stay
granted will be subject to the final orders in the main proceedings, after which the eclipse would also
wane away. In such circumstances, we are not inclined to enter upon the merits and demerits of the
proceedings initiated by the Department, as it is at the stage of budding. It may either blossom into
a full flower or wither away. Hence, we leave open all the questions that are raised on the merits and
de-merits of the proceedings initiated by the respondent, to be dealt with in appropriate
proceedings.
31. Generally, the summons are issued for appearance of a party on a particular date. If a party does
not appear on the given date, fresh summons demanding the appearance of the person have to be
issued. In the present cases, in view of the reasonings and the findings as stated supra, the last of the
summons issued to the petitioners for their appearance on 09.05.2022 have elapsed. Therefore, as
we have concluded that in view of the quashing of the proceedings in C.C. No. 25 of 2021 and staying
of the proceedings in C.C. No. 19 of 2020 & C.C. No. 24 of 2021 as highlighted above, the scheduled
offence for the present is eclipsed, suspended or stop operating during the period of stay, the
respondent Department has to await the finality of the said proceedings. Needless to mention, if the
proceedings in C.C. No. 19 of 2020 and C.C. No. 24 of 2021 are quashed pursuant to the orders in
the applications filed by the respective persons to quash the proceedings, in which event, the
respondent cannot step in or initiate any proceedings under the Prevention of Money-laundering
Act, as held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Vijay Madanlal Choudhary and in Parvathi Kollur v.
State by Directorate of Enforcement, 2022 Live Law (SC) 688 cited supra. Therefore, the respondent
is hereby refrained from proceeding any further pursuant to the impugned proceedings in
ECIR/MDSZO/21/2021, till the disposal of the Criminal Revision Case No. 224 of 2021, Criminal
Original Petition No. 15122 of 2021 and the SLP (Crl) Diary No. 9957 of 2022 (SLP (Crl) No. 3841 of
2022)."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 17
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
(Emphasis supplied) A Division Bench of the High Court of Madras holds that in the light of the link
between the two and the judgment of the Apex Court in VIJAY MADANLAL CHOUDARY (supra)
further proceedings under the PMLA should not be permitted to be continued, till the disposal of the
case pending before the competent Court in the predicate offence, where there is an interim order of
stay operating. I am in respectful agreement with the judgment rendered by the High Court of
Madras only to the extent of the challenge laid with regard to the impugned proceedings of
attachment.
18. In the light of the judgments rendered by the Apex Court in the case of VIJAY MADANLAL
CHOUDARY and that of the Division Bench of the High Court of Madras interpreting judgment of
the Apex Court in the case of VIJAY MADANLAL CHOUDARY, I deem it appropriate to stall all
further action in the impugned proceedings till conclusion of Writ Petition No.14431 of 2020 and
Criminal Petition No.7949 of 2020. If the proceedings in the predicate offence are stayed, the
impugned proceedings of attachment under the ECIR cannot be permitted to continue. If the
proceedings move on in the predicate offence, the offence under the ECIR should also be permitted
to continue, failing which, it would defeat the proceedings under the PMLA or the IPC and would
fall foul of the judgment of the Apex Court. Therefore, in the event the proceedings in C.C.No.11606
of 2020 are permitted to continue, the interjection of the proceedings in ECIR in this case would
stand automatically vacated and the proceedings would be permitted to be continued. Wherefore,
there cannot be any of the order of attachment as is prayed. These proceedings will have to be kept
in the oblivion, awaiting the result of the proceedings in Writ Petition No.14431 of 2020 and
Criminal Petition No.7949 of 2020.
19. Insofar as the judgments relied on by the learned counsel appearing for the Enforcement
Directorate particularly with reference to the case in J.SEKAR v. UNION OF INDIA3, rendered by
the High Court of Delhi holding that the proceedings under the PMLA and the proceedings under
the IPC or predicate offences are 2018 SCC OnLine Del 6523 completely different and they can go
hand in hand is concerned, there can be no qualm about the principles so laid down at the relevant
point in time. With the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of VIJAY MADANLAL CHOUDARY
(supra), the judgment in J.SEKAR would not become applicable to the facts of the case. The other
judgments relied on would also follow suit in the light of the judgment of the Apex Court rendered in
the case of VIJAY MADANLAL CHOUDARY (supra).
20. For the praedictus reasons, the following:
ORDER
(i) The Writ Petition is allowed in part.
(ii) The Enforcement Directorate is restrained from proceeding further in
No.ECIR/BGZO/04/2019/ AD-
AKV/1541 qua the order dated 01-08-2022 with regard to provisional attachment, till disposal of
Writ Petition No.14431 of 2020 and Criminal Petition No.7949 of 2020.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 18
Ms C Uma Reddy vs Directorate Of Enforcement on 14 December, 2022
(iii) As a result of the aforesaid order (clause (ii)), grant of provisional attachment order dated
01-08-2022 shall be kept in abeyance till disposal of Writ Petition No.14431 of 2020 and Criminal
Petition No.7949 of 2020, which would mean the properties subject to attachment cannot be
released in favour of the petitioners nor can be confirmed or sold by the Enforcement Directorate.
(iv) It is made clear that no particular order from the Court hearing Writ Petition No.14431 of 2020
and Criminal Petition No.7949 of 2020 is required, to continue these proceedings. Once those
proceedings are permitted to continue, the continuation of impugned proceedings then becomes
axiomatic.
Ordered accordingly.
Sd/-
JUDGE nvj CT:MJ
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/14424093/ 19
