Ms.Moturi Lakshmi vs The Income Tax Officer on 17 August, 2020
Ms.Moturi Lakshmi vs The Income Tax Officer on 17 August,
2020
Author: T.S.Sivagnanam
Bench: T.S.Sivagnanam
TCA.No.181 of 2019 IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS DATED : 17.8.2020
CORAM THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE T.S.SIVAGNANAM AND THE HONOURABLE MRS.
JUSTICE V.BHAVANI SUBBAROYAN TAX CASE APPEAL NO.181 OF 2019 (heard through video
conferencing) Ms.Moturi Lakshmi ...Appellant Vs The Income Tax Officer, Non Corporate Ward
3(5), Chennai-34. ...Respondent APPEAL under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 against
the order dated 15.3.2018 made in ITA.No.234/Chny/2017 on the file of the Income Tax Appellate
Tribunal, Chennai ‘D’ Bench for the assessment year 2013-14.
For Appellant : Mr.Ramanakumar
http://www.judis.nic.in
For Respondent : Mrs.R.Hemalatha, SSC
Judgment was delivered by T.S.SIVAGNANAM,J This appeal by the assessee filed under Section
260A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 (for short, the Act) is directed against the order dated 15.3.2018
made in ITA.No.234/Chny/2017 on the file of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Chennai ‘D’
Bench (for brevity, the Tribunal) for the assessment year 2013-14.
2. The appeal has been admitted on 25.2.2019 on the following substantial question of law :
“Whether, for the purpose of Section 54 of the Income Tax Act, the advance payment
made by the assessee for the purchase of a residential flat would constitute a part of
purchase or not, when such advance is made to the seller of flat prior to the date of
sale of capital asset in question ?”
3. We have heard Mr.Ramanakumar, learned counsel appearing for the appellant – assessee and
Mrs.R.Hemalatha, learned Senior Standing Counsel appearing for the respondent – Revenue.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68595595/ 1
Ms.Moturi Lakshmi vs The Income Tax Officer on 17 August, 2020
4. The facts, which are necessary for answering the substantial question of law framed for
consideration, are as follows :
The assessee, who is an individual, filed her return of income for
http://www.judis.nic.in the assessment year under consideration namely 2013-14 on
07.4.2014 for a total income of Rs.2,52,480/-. The return of income was processed
under Section 143(1) of the Act. Subsequently, the case was selected for scrutiny and
the assessment was completed under Section 143(3) of the Act by order dated
23.3.2016 whereby the Assessing Officer disallowed the investments made by the
assessee prior to the sale of asset, which was on 15.11.2012.
5. As against the said order of assessment dated 23.3.2016, the assessee filed an appeal before the
Commissioner of Income Tax (Appeals)-4, Chennai-34 [hereinafter called the CIT(A)]. However, the
appeal was dismissed vide order dated 29.11.2016. Aggrieved by that, the assessee filed further
appeal before the Tribunal, which also dismissed the appeal by the impugned order.
6. The substantial question of law framed for consideration in this appeal has been answered in
several decisions and the issue is no longer res integra. To answer the substantial question of law, we
may have to refer to the two decisions of the Hon’ble Division Bench of this Court namely
(i) in the case of CIT Vs. K.Srinivasan [reported in (2010) 235 CTR 0588] wherein the question,
which was framed for consideration, was as to whether the Tribunal was right in law in
http://www.judis.nic.in holding that the investment in the new asset for the purpose of deduction
under Section 54F need not be out of sale consideration received on sale of the original asset. The
question was answered in the following lines :
“10. Section 54F provides option to the assessee to invest even within a period of one
year before the date on which the transfer takes place. No such precondition to that
effect is imposed by the provision. Only the Assessing Officer assumed that there is a
precondition, which is not contemplated by the provision. Section 54F is clear,
unambiguous and plain. It is only a mere presumption and assumption of the
Revenue. It is well settled principle that taxing statute shall have to be interpreted on
the basis of the language. The often quoted famous observation of Rowlatt,J in the
case of Cape Brandy Syndicate Vs. IRC [(1921) 1 KB 64] are very relevant and at p.71,
it has been held as follows:
‘In a taxing statute, one has to look mainly at what is clearly said. There is no room
for any intendment. There is no equity about a tax. There is no presumption as to a
tax. Nothing is to be read in, nothing is to be implied. One can only look fairly at the
http://www.judis.nic.in language used.’ Section 54F encourages investment in
residential house and the same is required to be interpreted in such a manner as not
to nullify the object. Therefore, we are of the view that the assessee is entitled to the
relief under Section 54F and confirm the concurrent findings given by both the
appellate authorities. The learned counsel appearing for the Revenue is also unable to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68595595/ 2
Ms.Moturi Lakshmi vs The Income Tax Officer on 17 August, 2020
furnish any material or evidence or case law or compelling reason to take a contrary
view of the Tribunal.
11. For the foregoing reasons, we are of the view that the order of the Tribunal is in
conformity with law. Under these circumstances, we are of the view that no question
of law, much less substantial question of law, arises for consideration. Accordingly,
the tax case appeal is devoid of merits and the same is dismissed.” And
(ii) in the case of C.Aryama Sundaram Vs. CIT [reported in (2018) TaxCorp (DT)
73811] wherein one of the substantial questions of law framed for consideration was
when capital gain arises from sale of building and/or land appurtenant thereto and a
residential house is constructed within three years from http://www.judis.nic.in the
date of such sale, whether the cost of the new asset, which is eligible for set-off
against capital gain, would include the cost of the land, if such land had been
purchased three years prior to sale of the property from which capital gain arose.
7. In fact, the argument of the Revenue in the said case is identical to that of the argument made by
Mrs.R.Hemalatha, learned Standing Counsel appearing for the Revenue in the case on hand. She
has argued that the language of Section 54(1) of the Act is very clear and that this being a benefit
given to the assessee, it requires a strict interpretation. In this regard, she has referred to the
decision in the case of Commissioner of Customs (Import), Mumbai Vs. Dilip Kumar & Co. and Ors
[reported in (2018) 9 SCC 1]. The Hon’ble First Bench considered the said argument in the said
judgment and held in favour of the assessee. The relevant portions of the decision of the Hon’ble
First Bench of this Court in the case of C.Aryama Sundaram are as hereunder :
“14. Under Section 54(1) of the said Act, the capital gain arising from transfer of a
residential house is not to be charged to income tax as income of the previous year, if
the assessee has within a period of one year before or two years after the date of
transfer http://www.judis.nic.in of that residential house purchased another
residential house in India or has within a period of three years after the date of
transfer constructed a residential house in India and if the amount of the cost of the
residential house so purchased or constructed is equal to or less than the amount of
capital gain.
15. It is a well settled principle of construction and interpretation of statutes that
statutory provisions should, to the extent feasible, be interpreted and/or construed in
accordance with plain meaning of the language used in those provisions.
16. On a plain reading of Section 54(1) of the said Act, the transfer of a long term
asset, which would include a residential house, would be chargeable to income tax as
a capital gain, except in circumstances specified in the said section.
17. It is not necessary for this Court to go into the question of mode and method of
computation of capital gain as there is no dispute in this regard, which requires
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68595595/ 3
Ms.Moturi Lakshmi vs The Income Tax Officer on 17 August, 2020
adjudication in this appeal.
18. The question is, whether any part of the capital gain from transfer of the
residential house is exempt from the capital gain tax and http://www.judis.nic.in if so
to what extent?
19. The conditions precedent for exemption of capital gain from being charged to
income tax are:
(i)The assessee should have purchased a residential house in India either one year
before or two years after the date of transfer of the residential house which resulted
in capital gain or alternatively constructed a new residential house in India within a
period of three years from the date of the transfer of the residential property which
resulted in the capital gain.
(ii)If the amount of capital gain is greater than the cost of the residential house so
purchased or constructed, the difference between the amount of the capital gain and
the cost of the new asset is to be charged under Section 45 as the income of the
previous year.
(iii)If the amount of the capital gain is equal to or less than the cost of the new
residential house, the capital gain shall not be charged under Section 45.
20. What has to be adjusted and/or set off against the capital gain is, the cost of the residential
house that is purchased or http://www.judis.nic.in constructed. Section 54(1) of the said Act is
specific and clear. It is the cost of the new residential house and not just the cost of construction of
the new residential house, which is to be adjusted. The cost of the new residential house would
necessarily include the cost of the land, the cost of materials used in the construction, the cost of
labour and any other cost relatable to the acquisition and/or construction of the residential house.
21. A reading of Section 54(1) makes it amply clear that capital gain is to be adjusted against the cost
of new residential house. The condition precedent for such adjustment is that the new residential
house should have been purchased within one year before or two years after the transfer of the
residential house, which resulted in the capital gain or alternatively, a new residential house has
been constructed in India, within three years from the date of the transfer, which resulted in the
capital gain. The said section does not exclude the cost of land from the cost of residential house.
22. It is axiomatic that Section 54(1) of the said Act does not contemplate that the same money
received from the sale of a http://www.judis.nic.in residential house should be used in the
acquisition of new residential house. Had it been the intention of the Legislature that the very same
money that had been received as consideration for transfer of a residential house should be used for
acquisition of the new asset, Section 54(1) would not have allowed adjustment and/or exemption in
respect of property purchased one year prior to the transfer, which gave rise to the capital gain or
may be in the alternative have expressly made the exemption in case of prior purchase, subject to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68595595/ 4
Ms.Moturi Lakshmi vs The Income Tax Officer on 17 August, 2020
purchase from any advance that might have been received for the transfer of the residential house
which resulted in the capital gain.
23. At the cost of repetition, it it reiterated that exemption of capital gain from being charged to
income tax as income of the previous year is attracted when another residential house has been
purchased within a period of one year before or two years after the date of transfer or has been
constructed within a period of three years after the date of transfer of the residential house. It is not
in dispute that the new residential house has been constructed within the time stipulated
http://www.judis.nic.in in Section 54(1) of the said Act. It is not a requisite of Section 54 that
construction could not have commenced prior to the date of transfer of the asset resulting in capital
gain. If the amount of capital gain is greater than the cost of the new house, the difference between
the amount of capital gain and the cost of the new asset is to be charged under Section 45 as the
income of the previous year. If the amount of capital gain is equal to or less than the cost of the new
residential house, including the land on which the residential house is constructed, the capital gain
is not to be charged under Section 45 of the said Act.”
8. The Constitution Bench judgment of the Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Dilip Kumar dealt
with the aspect as to how the exemption provisions were to be construed and it has been held that
the provisions had to be construed strictly and the benefit of any ambiguity should lean in favour of
the Revenue.
9. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the case of Sh.Sanjeev Lal Vs. CIT [reported (2014) 365 ITR 0389]
considered the scope of Section 54 of the Act and held as follows :
“In addition to the fact that the term “transfer” has been defined under Section
http://www.judis.nic.in 2(47) of the Act, even if looked at the provisions of Section
54 of the Act which gives relief to a person who has transferred his one residential
house and is purchasing another residential house either before one year of the
transfer or even two years after the transfer, the intention of the Legislature is to give
him relief in the matter of payment of tax on the long term capital gain. If a person,
who gets some excess amount upon transfer of his old residential premises and
thereafter purchases or constructs a new premises within the time stipulated under
Section 54 of the Act, the Legislature does not want him to be burdened with tax on
the long term capital gain and therefore, relief has been given to him in respect of
paying income tax on the long term capital gain. The intention of the Legislature or
the purpose with which the said provision has been incorporated in the Act, is also
very clear that the assessee should be given some relief. Though it has been very often
said that common sense is a stranger and an incompatible partner to the Income Tax
Act and it is also said that equity and tax are strangers to each other, still this Court
has often observed that purposive interpretation http://www.judis.nic.in should be
given to the provisions of the Act. In the case of Oxford University Press v.
Commissioner of Income Tax [(2001) 3 SCC 359] this Court has observed that a
purposive interpretation of the provisions of the Act should be given while
considering a claim for exemption from tax. It has also been said that harmonious
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68595595/ 5
Ms.Moturi Lakshmi vs The Income Tax Officer on 17 August, 2020
construction of the provisions which subserve the object and purpose should also be
made while construing any of the provisions of the Act and more particularly when
one is concerned with exemption from payment of tax. Considering the aforestated
observations and the principles with regard to the interpretation of Statute pertaining
to the tax laws, one can very well interpret the provisions of Section 54 read with
Section 2(47) of the Act, i.e. definition of “transfer”, which would enable the
appellants to get the benefit under Section 54 of the Act.”
10. In the decision in the case of Sh.Sanjeev Lal, the Hon’ble Supreme Court pointed out the
intention of the Legislature i.e to give relief to the assessee in the matter of payment of tax on the
long term capital gains. Therefore, in our considered view, the decision in the case of Sh.Sanjeev Lal
would come to the aid and assistance of the http://www.judis.nic.in assessee.
11. The decision of the Delhi High Court in the case of CIT Vs. Bharti Mishra [reported in (2014) 265
CTR 0374], is referred to support the contention that Sections 54 and 54F are pari materia.
12. In the decision of the Karnataka High Court in the case of CIT Vs. K.Ramachandra Rao [reported
in (2015) 277 CTR 0522], the entire scheme of Section 54 of the Act was explained and it was held
that there was no prohibition for the assessee for putting up construction out of the sale
consideration received by such transfer of site, which was owned by him as it was clear from the
language of the provision. It was further held that though the original asset was sold much after
purchase of vacant site, still the beneficial provision should be extended to the assessee.
13. In another decision of the Karnataka High Court in the case of CIT Vs. J.R.Subramanya Bhat
[reported in (1987) 165 ITR 0571], the Income Tax Officer rejected the claim of the assessee on the
ground that construction of the new building had commenced much earlier to the sale of the old
building. This finding was reversed by the Court by holding that the date of sale of the old building
was immaterial, that what was required to be seen was as to whether the assessee constructed the
building within two years from the date of http://www.judis.nic.in sale of the old building and that
he was entitled to the relief under Section 54F of the Act. The same effect is in the decision of the
Punjab & Haryana High Court in the case of CIT, Faridabad Vs. Shri.Kapil Kumar Agarwal [reported
in (2015) TaxCorp (DT) 62501] wherein it was held that Section 54F of the Act nowhere envisages
that the sale consideration obtained by the assessee from the original capital asset is mandatorily
required to be utilized for the purchase or construction of a house property.
14. In the decision of the Kerala High Court in the case of ITO Vs. K.C.Gopalan [reported in (1999)
107 Taxman 591], a learned Single Judge held that the wording of Section 54 of the Act would make
it clear that the law does not insist that the sale consideration obtained by the assessee itself should
be utilized for the purchase of house property. The same effect is in the decision of the Division
Bench of the Allahabad High Court in the case of CIT Vs. H.K.Kapoor [reported in (1998) 234 ITR
0753].
15. To explain the intention of the Legislature, the learned counsel for the appellant has referred to
the Notes on Clauses of Finance Bill, 1982 wherein in Clause 11 sought to amend Section 54 of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68595595/ 6
Ms.Moturi Lakshmi vs The Income Tax Officer on 17 August, 2020
Act and it has been stated as follows :
“Sub-Clause (a) seeks to amend Sub-
http://www.judis.nic.in Section (1) of Section 54. Under the proposed amendment, in
the case of the assessee being an individual, the long term capital gains arising on the
transfer of a residential house will be exempt from income tax if the assessee has,
within a period of one year before or after that date either purchased or within a
period of three years after that date constructed a residential house. For this purpose,
the long term capital asset means a capital asset, which is not a short term capital
asset.”
16. From the above, it is clear that the intention of the Legislature was to either purchase before or
after the date of sale and the word ‘purchased’ or ‘constructed’ used in the Notes on Clauses amply
makes the intention clear. In the light of the above discussions, we hold that the substantial question
of law is required to be answered in favour of the assessee.
17. In the result, the above tax case appeal is allowed and the substantial question of law is answered
in favour of the assessee. No costs.
17.8.2020 RS http://www.judis.nic.in T.S.SIVAGNANAM, J AND V.BHAVANI SUBBAROYAN, J
RS To
1.The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal, Chennai ‘D’ Bench.
2.The Income Tax Officer, Non Corporate Ward 3(5), Chennai-34.
17.8.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/68595595/ 7
