Mukesh Chandra Gupta vs M.P.State Electricity Board on 2 May, 2019
Mukesh Chandra Gupta vs M.P.State Electricity Board on 2 May,
2019
1
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
Writ Appeal No.47/2014
(Mukesh Chandra Gupta and Others Vs. M.P. State Electricity Board and Others)
Gwalior, dated : 02.05.2019
Shri D.P. Singh, learned counsel for the appellants.
Shri Vivek Jain, learned counsel for the
respondent/Electricity Board.
The issue raised in the present appeal as to whether integration/merger/amalgamation, it is
permissible to have complete denial of promotion forever in the integrated service, has been
answered by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Panchraj Tiwari Vs. M.P. State Electricity
Board and others in Civil Appeal No.4371of 2008 decided on 4 th March, 2014, wherein it is held:
"12. It is the case of the appellant that since the Board of Governors had already been
dissolved and since it had been decided to absorb the employees of the society in the
Board, there was no point in following the process of selection in terms of the
regulations of the society. Thus, the rejection was challenged before the High Court.
18. Instant is a case where there is complete denial of promotion forever which
cannot be comprehended under the constitutional scheme of Articles 14 and 16 of the
Constitution of India. In this context, we shall refer to a beautiful discussion on this
aspect in S. S. Bola case (supra) at paragraph 153. The relevant portion reads as
follows:
"153. xxx xxx xxx xxx AB. A distinction between right to be considered for promotion
and an interest to be considered for promotion has always been maintained. Seniority
is a facet of interest. The rules prescribe the method of recruitment/selection.
Seniority is governed by the rules HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Mukesh
Chandra Gupta and Others Vs. M.P. State Electricity Board and Others) existing as
on the date of consideration for promotion. Seniority is required to be worked out
according to the existing rules. No one has a vested right to promotion or seniority.
But an officer has an interest to seniority acquired by working out the rules. The
seniority should be taken away only by operation of valid law. Right to be considered
for promotion is a rule prescribed by conditions of service. A rule which affects
chances of promotion of a person relates to conditions of service. The rule/provision
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56783759/ 1
Mukesh Chandra Gupta vs M.P.State Electricity Board on 2 May, 2019
in an Act merely affecting the chances of promotion would not be regarded as varying
the conditions of service. The chances of promotion are not conditions of service. A
rule which merely affects the chances of promotion does not amount to change in the
conditions of service. However, once a declaration of law, on the basis of existing
rules, is made by a constitutional court and a mandamus is issued or direction given
for its enforcement by preparing the seniority list, operation of the declaration of law
and the mandamus and directions issued by the Court is the result of the declaration
of law but not the operation of the rules per se." (Emphasis supplied)
19. In the above circumstances, we set aside the judgment in appeal. The absorbed
employees of the Rural Electricity Cooperative Societies, having due regard to their
date of appointment/promotion in each category in the respective societies, shall be
placed with effect from the date of absorption, viz., 15.03.2002 as juniors to the
junior-most employee of the Electricity Board in the respective category. Thereafter,
they shall be considered for further promotions as per the rules/regulations of the
MPSEB. All other principles/conditions of absorption shall remain as such. However,
it is made clear that on such promotions, in the exigencies of service, the employee
concerned would also be liable to be transferred out of the circle, if so required.
20. The appellant accordingly shall be entitled to retrospective promotions at par
with and with effect from the dates on which the junior-most graduate engineer in
the parent service on the date of absorption obtained such promotions. However, we
make it clear that benefits till date need to be worked out only notionally."
Further more, it is observed from the impugned order passed HIGH COURT OF MADHYA
PRADESH (Mukesh Chandra Gupta and Others Vs. M.P. State Electricity Board and Others) by the
learned Single Judge that the same is decided on the anvil of decision by a Division Bench in a Writ
Petition in the case of M.P. Electricity Board Vs. Brajendra Singh Kushwah and Others as reported
in (2012) MPHT 183 (DB).
The judgment in Brajendra Singh Kushwah (supra) has been set aside by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court in SLP(C)28516/2013 on 27.04.2015 wherein on the basis of the statement made by
respondent-Board, the SLP has been disposed of in following terms:
"It is submitted that the Answering Respondent in compliance of the Judgment of
this Hon'ble Court passed in judgment dated 4th March, 2014, in Civil Appeal
No.4371 of 2008 vide order dated 24.12.2014 and clarification order dated
18.04.2014 has decided to grant the benefits to the petitioners at par with the
employees of the Answering Respondents in the matter of pay scale, dearnest
allowance and other fringe benefits w.e.f. 4th March 2014 after calculating the
benefits till 3rd March, 2014 notionally".
In view whereof since the controversy raised in present appeal is set at rest by the decision of the
Supreme Court in the case of Panchraj Tiwari and Brajendra Singh Kushwah (supra), the impugned
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56783759/ 2
Mukesh Chandra Gupta vs M.P.State Electricity Board on 2 May, 2019
order passed in Writ Petition No.304/15 HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH (Mukesh Chandra
Gupta and Others Vs. M.P. State Electricity Board and Others) is set aside. The appeal is disposed of
in the terms of the judgments passed in the case of Panchraj Tiwari and Brajendra Singh Kushwah
(supra).
Let the dues of the appellant be settled within a period of three months from the date of
communication of the order. There shall be no cost.
(Sanjay Yadav) (Vivek Agarwal)
mani Judge Judge
SUBASRI MANI
2019.05.02
18:13:14
-07'00'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/56783759/ 3
