Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
SWP 1753/2018 C/W
SWP No. 1960/2018
Reserved on 11.04.2023.
Pronounced on 20 .04.2023.
Mulakh Raj and others ..... appellant (s)
Rockey Nargotra
Through :- Mr. Pawan Kumar Kundal
Advocate
Mr. Narinder Kumar Attri
Advocate
V/s
State .....Respondent(s)
High Court of Jammu and Kashmir
Through :- Mr. H.A.Siddiqui Advocate
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJESH SEKHRI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
SANJEEV KUMAR, 'J' 1 Respondent No.2, vide Advertisement Notification No. 323 dated
26.05.2017, invited applications in the prescribed format from the permanent residents of the then
State of Jammu and Kashmir for the posts of Junior Assistants in the Jammu and Kashmir
Subordinate Judiciary. The number and breakup of the posts category-wise for Kashmir Division as
indicated in the Advertisement Notification (supra) was as under:
Item Name of the post Cadre No. of posts Prescribed qualification No.1 with pay scale
with breakup 01 Junior Assistant Kashmir OM 72 Graduation from a recognized GP
Division University and six months (5200-2022+ RBA 25 certificate course in
computer SC 18 application.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 1
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
ST 13 ALC 04 OSC 02 TOTAL 134 2 Apart from the aforementioned posts in the Kashmir Division
which were notified for selection, there were 67 posts of Junior Assistants notified for the Jammu
Division as well. Aside the other terms and conditions of eligibility laid down in the Advertisement
Notification, respondent No.2 also imposed a condition that only candidates belonging to the
concerned Division would be eligible to apply for the posts in the said Division. The clause reads
thus:
"3(A) only candidates belonging to the concerned Division can apply"
3 The petitioners are residents of and belong to Jammu Division. They all belong to the Scheduled
Caste category and have applied for the posts in questions. As indicated above, in the Kashmir
Division, 18 posts of Junior Assistant are earmarked for Scheduled Caste category. The petitioners
being possessed of eligibility prescribed in the Advertisement Notification (supra), submitted their
application forms for the posts of Junior Assistants under Scheduled Caste category, but the same
were not entertained by respondent No.2 on the ground that all the posts of Junior Assistant in the
Divisional Cadre Kashmir were meant for the residents of Kashmir Division. 4 Feeling aggrieved, the
petitioners came to this Court through the medium of several writ petitions. The said writ petitions
were entertained by this Court and a direction was issued to the respondents to accept the
application forms of the petitioners for the posts of Junior Assistant, making it clear that submission
of application forms and participation in the written examination would be purely provisional in
nature and would not create any equity in favour of the petitioners. The said writ petitions were
clubbed together and disposed of by this Court by a common judgment dated 28.11.2017 with the
observation that the petitioners had neither brought on record the guidelines, nor had they
challenged the validity of Rule 11 and Rule 12 of the Jammu and Kashmir Ministerial Staff of the
Subordinate Courts (Recruitment and conditions of Services), Rules 2016 [„ the rules of 2016(cid:129)]. The
petitioners were, however, given liberty to challenge the validity of clause 3(A) of the Advertisement
Notification in question as well as the Rule 11 and Rule 12 of the Rules of 2016. It is in the exercise of
that liberty granted by this Court, instant petitions have been filed wherein the petitioners have
specifically challenged clause 3(A) of the Notification and have also thrown challenge to Rule 11,
Rule 12 and Rule 19 of the Rules of 2016. The petitioners have also prayed for quashing of the select
list of Junior Assistants Kashmir Division, issued by respondent No.2 vide order dated 17.08.2017.
The petitioners have prayed for a writ of mandamus to the respondents to declare their result and
on the basis of their performance in the selection process, appoint them against the posts reserved
for Scheduled Caste category in Kashmir Division.
5 Pursuant to the intervention made by this Court, not only the application forms of the petitioners
have been accepted, but they have also been allowed to participate in the selection process by
respondent No.2. Their result, however, has been kept in a sealed cover. The writ petitions are
contested by respondents Nos. 2 to 4. In the reply affidavit filed by the Registrar General of this
Court, it is the stand taken by the High Court that like any other category, Scheduled Caste
candidates were also required to apply from their respective Divisions in view of clause 3(A) of the
Advertisement Notification (supra). It is submitted that, notwithstanding that the writ petitioners
were not eligible to apply for the posts notified for Kashmir Division, they were allowed to submit
their application forms and participate in the selection process pursuant to the interim orders
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 2
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
passed by this Court in different writ petitions details whereof is given by the petitioners in para (10)
of the writ petitions. All these petitions were filed by the Scheduled Caste candidates belonging to
Jammu Division who intended to apply for the posts of Junior Assistants in Kashmir Division. It is
further submitted that before the result of written test could have been compiled, all the writ
petitions referred to in para (10) of the writ petitions came to be disposed of by this Court by a
common judgment dated 28.11.2017. The petitioners could not get any relief from this Court in the
first round of litigation, but in view of the liberty granted, they have filed the instant petitions to
challenge the validity of clause 3(A) of the Advertisement Notification and Rule 11, Rule 12 and Rule
19 of the Rules of 2016.
6 It is further pleaded by the respondents that the claim of the petitioners is primarily based on the
provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services Decentralization and Recruitment Act, 2010
[„Act of 2010(cid:129)] and the Jammu and Kashmir Reservation Act, 2004 [„the Act of 2004(cid:129)] and the
rules framed thereunder and this plea of the petitioners stood rejected in the earlier round of
litigation wherein a Division Bench of this Court in para (8) of the judgment (supra) held that
neither the provisions of the Act of 2010, nor the Act of 2004 and the rules framed thereunder were
applicable to the recruitment carried out by the High Court pursuant to the Advertisement
Notification. It is submitted that, in the exercise of powers conferred under Section 30 of the Jammu
and Kashmir State Civil Courts Act, Svt.1977 [„ the Act of 1977(cid:129)], the High Court has farmed the
Rules of 2016 and all appointments made in the Ministerial Staff in the Subordinate Judiciary are
governed by these Rules. Rule 12 of these Rules provides that appointment of Ministerial staff in the
Subordinate Judiciary shall be made by the Chief Justice in accordance with the Regulations framed
by him. The Rules further provide for constitution of a Selection Committee, either in general, or in
case of specified classes of selection/appointment. It is, thus, submitted that since a special
procedure is prescribed under the Rules of 2016 for recruitment of Ministerial Staff in the
Subordinate Judiciary, as such, by operation of Section 3 of the Act of 2010, the application of the
Act is clearly excluded. There is an additional affidavit filed by the Registrar General of this Court on
04.02.2020 in which it is indicated that so far as 18 vacancies of Junior Assistant under SC category
in the Kashmir Division are concerned, the same have remained unfilled due to non-availability of
eligible candidates belonging to the said category. The Selection Committee of Hon(cid:129)ble Judges has
recommended that further course of action for advertising these vacancies shall be taken up only
after guidelines are laid down by the Chief Justice for the purpose of making reservation in terms of
Rule 11 of the Rules of 2016.
7 Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, it is necessary to
first take note of the fact that the selection and appointment of Ministerial Staff of the Subordinate
Courts is governed by the Rules of 2016 framed by the High Court in the exercise of powers
conferred by Section 30 of the Act of 1977. Rule 2(f) and Rule 2(h) define „District Cadre(cid:129) and
„Divisional Cadre(cid:129) in the following manner:
(f). „District Cadre(cid:129) means a cadre of the Department in the District comprising all
the posts shown in Schedule „A(cid:129) as District Cadre posts; and,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 3
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
(h). „Divisional Cadre(cid:129) means the cadre of the Department in the Division
comprising all posts shown in Schedule „A(cid:129) as Divisional Cadre posts.
Rule 6 deals with Strength and Composition of the Cadre and reads as under:
"The State, Divisional and District Cadre of the Service shall consist of such number
of permanent and temporary posts as stand sanctioned in the respective cadres on
the date of enforcement of these Rules and such number of posts as may be
sanctioned from time to time".
8 The reservation in appointments of the Ministerial staff of the Subordinate Judiciary is dealt with
by Rule 11 which, for facility of reference, is reproduced hereunder:
"11. While making appointments either by direct recruitment or promotion,
reservation shall be made in accordance with the Rules and orders issued from time
to time for members of the Scheduled Caste, Scheduled Tribe or any other category or
class of permanent residents of the State for whom reservation may be made under
orders of the Government subject to such modifications as are deemed necessary by
the High Court . The Chief Justice may from time to time, either generally or with
relation to any particular recruitment, issue guidelines for the purposes of making
such reservation".
9 From reading of Rules of 2016 in their entirety, we could not find any provision which provides or
lays down that for applying the post in a particular District or Divisional Cadre, the candidate must
belong to such District or Division. Rather, clause 2 of Rule 10 of the Rules of 2016 clearly stipulates
that only permanent residents of State of Jammu and Kashmir shall be eligible for appointment in
the service. None of the Rules restrict consideration against the posts borne on the cadre of
Ministerial service of Subordinate Judiciary to the candidates belonging to a District or Division
where the vacancy is available and notified for selection. Insofar as reservation in appointments are
concerned, Rules of 2016 framed by the High Court provide that the reservation in the matter of
appointments, whether by direct recruitment or promotion shall be made in accordance with the
rules and orders issued by the Government of Jammu and Kashmir for various reserved categories
including the members of Scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribe of permanent residents of the State
( now domiciles of UT of Jammu and Kashmir). To simplify it, Rule 11 lays down that the reservation
in appointments as is available to the Government employees serving the Government of Jammu
and Kashmir shall be applicable to the appointments of the Ministerial staff in the Subordinate
Judiciary subject, of course, to such modifications as are deemed necessary by the High Court. Rule
11 also empowers the Chief Justice of this Court to either generally or in relation to any particular
recruitment, issue guidelines for the purpose of making such reservation.
10 We are told that when the recruitment process in question was set in motion in the year 2017,
there was no order issued by the Chief Justice either modifying the reservations applicable to the
employees of the State Government in their application of Ministerial Staff of Subordinate Judiciary,
nor any guidelines for the purpose of making such reservation had been issued by the Chief Justice.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 4
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
Absent any such order of modification or guidelines issued by the Chief Justice, Rule 11 was required
to be given full effect. That would mean that the Reservation Act, 2004 and the rules framed
thereunder were fully applicable. This is so very well understood by the High Court and it is because
of this reason, 18 posts of Jr. Assistants were earmarked for SC category in the Kashmir Division.
While there is no dispute with regard to the applicability of Reservation Act, 2004 and the rules
framed thereunder to the appointments in the Ministerial staff of Subordinate Judiciary for which
the process came to be initiated in the year 2017, yet we are reiterating that the Rules of 2016
empower the Chief Justice to apply the reservation rules applicable to the State Government
employees with modification to the Ministerial Staff in the Subordinate Judiciary. However, it is
necessary to point out that there is no such modification made by the Lord Chief Justice in the
Reservation Rules of the State while applying the same to the Ministerial staff in the Subordinate
Judiciary.
11 In the aforesaid context, and having regard to the admitted position, the only question that begs
determination is whether the High Court could, by laying down clause 3(A) in the Advertisement
Notification, restrict the candidates of a particular District or Division to apply for the posts notified
for the selection in the said District or Division. As we have pointed out, we could not find any
provision in the Rules of 2016.
12 It is trite that no person can be discriminated on the basis of his caste, creed, colour or place of
residence in the matter of appointments to the State services. Article 16 of the Constitution of India
guarantees a fundamental right against such discrimination. The concept of cadres, State, Divisional
or District in a service is a concept which is relevant post recruitment and after appointment. A
person appointed in a particular cadre may have to serve in such cadre during his service career. His
seniority and promotional prospects would also be restricted to the cadre to which he is appointed.
The cadres in the service have absolutely no relevance insofar as recruitment to the posts in such
cadres is concerned. As is vividly clear from clause (ii) of Rule 10 of Rules of 2016, all permanent
residents of State of Jammu are eligible for appointment in the service. The expression used is
„appointment in the service(cid:129) and not „the appointment in a particular cadre(cid:129). Neither any statutory
rule, nor any constitutional provision prohibits a candidate belonging to a particular Division from
applying to a post borne in a different District cadre or Divisional Cadre. Such creation of zones for
selection by restricting the candidates of a particular zone to apply for the post notified in the said
zone is violative of Article 14 and Article 16 of the Constitution and, therefore, ultra vires. The legal
position in this regard is fairly well established. It is, however, a different matter that the
Government of Jammu and Kashmir enacted the Act of 2010 which, inter alia, provided for
constitution of District, Divisional and State cadres of the service. By enacting Rule 13, it was
provided that the Divisional Cadre vacancies of the concerned Division shall be filled up from such
permanent residents of the State, who are residents of that Division and possess prescribed
eligibility. Similarly, the District cadre vacancies of the concerned District were provided to be
supplied by selection and appointment of residents of that District only who possess the prescribed
eligibility. There was however an exception carved out in favour of candidates belonging to SC
category by providing that the vacancies reserved for SC category in any Divisional or District cadre
shall be supplied and filled up by recruitment of eligible candidates belonging to the said category,
irrespective of their residence in the concerned District or Division. The provisions of the Act of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 5
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
2010, as is apparent from Section 3, would apply to all the Gazetted and non-Gazetted posts borne
on the establishment of any Department or service of the Government,but does not include the posts
for which any special procedure is laid down under any enactment of the State Legislature, and such
other posts as may be excluded from the operation of the Act by the notification issued by the
Government in this behalf from time to time.
13 From a bare reading of Section 3, it clearly transpires that the Act was intended to apply only to
the Gazetted and non- Gazetted posts borne on the establishment of a Government Department or
service of the Government. Obviously, and indisputably, the Ministerial staff service of Subordinate
judiciary is not an establishment or service of the Government. The service is constituted by the
High Court in terms of Rules framed by it in the exercise of powers conferred by Section 30 of the
Act of 1977. Absent the applicability of the Act of 2010 and the rules framed thereunder and similar
provision made by the High Court, there was absolutely no mandate with the High Court to
prescribe condition No.3(A) in the Advertisement Notification and restrict the consideration for the
posts borne on the Divisional cadre Kashmir to the candidates belonging to the Kashmir Division
only. The candidates belonging to the Jammu Division fulfilling all eligibility requirements were
entitled to apply for and compete for the selection against the posts borne on the Divisional Cadre
Kashmir. The High Court inserted clause 3(A) in the Advertisement Notification without any
authority of law. 14 It may not be out of context to point out that the issue with regard to the
issuance of guidelines for the purpose of making reservations in terms of Rule 11 of the Rules of
2016 came to be considered by the Lord Chief Justice of this Court on the basis of recommendations
made by the Rule Committee and after due deliberation, the Lord Chief Justice laid down the
guidelines for the purpose of making reservations in appointments in the Subordinate Courts of UT
of Jammu and Kashmir in the exercise of powers conferred upon the Chief Justice under Rule 11 of
Rules of 2016. These guidelines were promulgated by the office of Registrar General vide office
order No. 30 of 2021/RG dated 05.03.2021. The aforesaid order laying down the guidelines for
reservations in appointments in the subordinate Courts of UT of Jammu and Kashmir framed by the
Lord Chief Justice are, for facility of reference, reproduced hereunder:
"I. The Rules and Orders regarding reservations in appointments by direct
recruitment or promotion applicable to Domiciles of the Union Territory of Jammu
and Kashmir shall mutatis mutandis apply to the appointments by direct recruitment
or promotions made under the Jammu and Kashmir Ministerial Staff of the Sub-
ordinate Courts (Recruitment and Condition of Service) Rules 2016.
II. The provisions of the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Services (Decentralization and
Recruitment) Act as amended from time to time shall apply· prospectively to all
appointments made under the Jammu and Kashmir Ministerial Staff of the
Sub-ordinate Courts (Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules 2016, so far as
the same pertain to the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir. Provided that the
expressions "Public Service Commission" and "Service Selection Board" wherever
appearing in the Jammu and Kashmir Civil Service (Decentralization and
Recruitment) Act shall in the case of appointments made under the Jammu and
Kashmir Ministerial Staff of the Sub-ordinate Courts (Recruitment and Condition of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 6
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
Service) Rules 2016, mean the Authority prescribed/ constituted under Rule 12 of the
said Rules. III. Notwithstanding anything contrary contained in any Rule/Order
/Instruction for vacancies reserved for the Scheduled Caste Category in any
Divisional or District Cadre, candidates belonging to that category shall be eligible to
apply for said reserved vacancies irrespective of their residence in the concerned
District or Division.
IV. A member of the State, Divisional or District Cadre shall be transferable only
within his/her own Cadre and shall in no case be transferable from one Divisional
Cadre to another Divisional Cadre or District Cadre, or from any District Cadre to
another District Cadre or Divisional Cadre posts.
V. The above guidelines shall be applicable in cases of appointments and promotions
and transfers pertaining to the posts earmarked for Union Territory of Jammu and
Kashmir.
15 From a perusal of the aforesaid order, it clearly transpires that it was only on 05.03.2021 the
formal guidelines for the purpose of making reservations in appointments in the Subordinate Courts
of Jammu and Kashmir were laid down by the Lord Chief Justice and the provisions of the Act of
2010 as amended from time to time were applied to all the appointments to be made under the
Rules of 2016. From a careful reading of clause (II) of the guidelines aforesaid, it is abundantly clear
that the adoption of the provisions of the Act of 2010 was prospective in nature and, therefore, was
not applicable to the selections and appointments already made.
16 In view of the adoption of the Act of 2010 in terms of the guidelines framed by the Lord chief
Justice under Rule 11 of the Rules of 2016, the candidates belonging to SC category have been
permitted to apply for the posts they are eligible for in any District or Divisional cadre irrespective of
their residence. The aforesaid guidelines provide that the Act of 2010 would apply prospectively but
the position was not different even prior to the issuance of the said guidelines. This has been amply
explained hereinabove in this judgment.
17 As already pointed out, the Rules of 2016 framed by the High Court in the exercise of powers
conferred on it by Section 30 of the Act of 1977 do not lay down any such restriction. That apart, any
such restriction laid down in the Rules governing the recruitment to a post would be tantamount to
discrimination on the basis of place of birth or place of residence and, therefore, ultra vires the
Constitution.
18 Article 16 of the Constitution of India guarantees to all citizens equality of opportunity in the
matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State and prohibits
discrimination in the matter on the grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth,
residence or any of them. So far as the discrimination on the ground only of residence is concerned,
the same is subject to the exception carved out in the Article by virtue of clause (3). To understand it
better, we seize this opportunity to set out Article 16 of the Constitution of India herein below:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 7
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
"16. Equality of opportunity in matters of public employment:-
(1) There shall be equality of opportunity for all citizens in matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State;
(2) No citizen shall, on grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of
birth, residence or any of them, be ineligible for, or discriminated against in respect
or, any employment or office under the State;
(3) Nothing in this article shall prevent Parliament from making any law prescribing,
in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under the
Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union territory, any
requirement as to residence within that State or Union territory prior to such
employment or appointment;
(4) Nothing in this article shall prevent the State from making any provision for the
reservation of appointments or posts in favor of any backward class of citizens which,
in the opinion of the State, is not adequately represented in the services under the
State; and, (5) Nothing in this article shall affect the operation of any law which
provides that the incumbent of an office in connection with the affairs of any religious
or denominational institution or any member of the governing body thereof shall be a
person professing a particular religion or belonging to a particular denomination".
19 From a plain reading of clauses (1) and (2) of Article 16 of the Constitution together, it is
abundantly clear that to ensure equality of opportunity for all the citizens in the matters relating to
employment or appointment to any office under the State, there shall be no discrimination with any
citizen on the grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of
them. The exception carved out by clause (3) of Article 16 enables the Parliament to make law
prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under the
Government of, or any local or other authority within, a State or Union Territory, any requirement
as to residence within that State or Union Territory prior to such employment or appointment. It is,
thus, evident that a State or the UT cannot declare any citizen to be ineligible for or discriminate
him in respect of any employment or office under it. The State or the UT, as the case may be, is not
even permitted to declare a citizen, who may not be a resident of that State or Union Territory to be
ineligible to apply for a post under it on the ground only of residence. In terms of clause (3) of
Article 16 of the Constitution, the power to lay down requirement as to residence within a State or
UT is vested in the Parliament. The Parliament, in the exercise of powers conferred by clause (3) of
Article 16 of the Constitution, has enacted the Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence)
Act, 1957 [„the Act of 1957(cid:129)]. By operation of Section 2 of the Act of 1957, any law in force in any
State or Union Territory at the time of commencement of the said Act prescribing requirement as to
residence shall cease to have effect and is repealed. However, by virtue of the provisions of Section 3
of the Act of 1957, the Central Government is empowered by a Notification in the official Gazette to
make rules prescribing, in regard to appointments to any subordinate service or post under the
control of Andhra Pradesh or Administrator of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur or Tripura or any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 8
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
service or post under a local or other authority within Telangana area of Andhra Pradesh or within
Union Territory of Himachal Pradesh, Manipur or Tripura, any requirement as to residence, prior to
such appointment. Section 5 of the Act of 1957, however, lays down that Section 3 and all Rules
made thereunder by the Government of India shall cease to have effect on the expiration of 15 years
from the commencement of the said Act. 20 That being the position, we can safely say that, apart
from the Act of 1957, the Parliament has not legislated in respect of requirement as to residence for
the purpose of employment or appointment to an office under any State or the Union Territory.
Absent the legislation by the Parliament, the requirement as to residence in any State or Union
Territory in respect of any employment or appointment to an office under the said State or Union
Territory is not constitutionally permissible, as such, the High Court had no legal competence or
authority to lay down the condition as to residence as has been done by it by inserting clause 3(A) in
the Advertisement Notification. We would like to make it clear that in terms of clause 3 (A) of the
Advertisement Notification (supra) which provides that the candidates belonging to the Division
other than the Division for which the posts have been notified are ineligible, the respondents have,
in essence, prescribed requirement as to residence. For the posts borne on the Divisional Cadre
Kashmir, only candidates belonging to the Kashmir Division are eligible to apply under the
Advertisement Notification in question and the candidates belonging to Jammu Division are
declared ineligible. This is exactly what is prohibited by Article 16 of the Constitution of India.
21 In Dr. Pardeep Jain and others vs. Union of India, (1984) 3 SCC 654, three Judge Bench of the
Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court, while dealing with the institutional preference/institutional reservation in
the matter of admission to Medical Colleges, also considered the import of Article 16(2) of the
Constitution of India. The discussion made by the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in paras (4) and (5) of
the Judgment is noteworthy and, therefore, we reproduce the same herein below:
"4.But, unfortunately, we find that in the last few years, owing to the emergence of
narrow parochial loyalties fostered by interested parties with a view to gaining
advantage for themselves, a serious threat has developed to the unity and integrity of
the nation and the very concept of India as a nation is in peril. The threat is obtrusive
at some places while at others it is still silent and is masquerading under the guise of
apparently innocuous and rather attractive clap-trap. The reason is that when the
Constitution came into operation, we took the spirit of nation-hood for granted and
paid little attention to nourish it, unmindful of the fact that it was a hard-won
concept. We allowed `sons of the soil' demands to develop claiming special treatment
on the basis of residence in the concerned State, because recognising and conceding
such demands had a populist appeal. The result is that `sons of the soil' claims,
though not altogether illegitimate if confined within reasonable bounds, are breaking
asunder the unity and integrity of the nation by fostering and strengthening narrow
parochial loyalties based on language and residence within a state. Today
unfortunately, a citizen who has his permanent residence in a state entertains the
feeling that he must have a preferential claim to be appointed to an office or post in
the state or to be admitted to an educational institution within the state vis-a-vis
citizen who has his permanent residence in another state, because the latter is an
outsider and must yield place to a citizen who is a permanent resident of the state,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 9
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
irrespective of merit. This, in our opinion, is a dangerous feeling which, if allowed to
grow, indiscriminately, might one day break up the country into fragments, though,
as we shall presently point out, the principle of equality of opportunity for education
and advancement itself may justify, within reasonable limits, a preferential policy
based on residence.
5.We may point out at this stage that though Article 15 (2) clauses (1) and (2) bars
discrimination on grounds not only of religion, race, caste or sex but also of place of
birth, Article 16 (2) goes further and provides that no citizen shall on grounds only of
religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of them be ineligible
for or discriminated against in state employment. So far as employment under the
state, or any local or other authority is concerned, no citizen can be given preference
nor can any discrimination be practised against him on the ground only of residence.
It would thus appear that residential requirement would be unconstitutional as a
condition of eligibility for employment or appointment to an office under the State
and having regard to the expansive meaning given to the word `State' in Ramana
Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India & Ors., it is obvious that
this constitutional prohibition would also cover an office under any local or other
authority within the State or any corporation, such as a public sector corporation
which is an instrumentality or agency of the State.
But Article 16 (3) provides an exception to this rule by laying down that Parliament may make a law
"prescribing, in regard to a class or classes of employment or appointment to an office under the
government of, or any local or other authority, in a state or union territory, any requirement as to
residence within that state or union territory prior to such employment." or appointment
Parliament alone is given the right to enact an exception to the ban on discrimination based on
residence and that too only with respect to positions within the employment of a State Government.
But even so, without any parliamentary enactment permitting them to do so, many of the State
Governments have been pursuing policies of localism since long and these policies are now quite
wide spread. Parliament has in fact exercised little control over these policies States. The only action
which Parliament has taken under Article 16 (3) giving it the right to set residence requirements has
been the enactment of the Public Employment (Requirement as to Residence) Act, 1957 aimed at
abolishing all existing residence requirements in the States and enacting exceptions only in the case
of the special instances of Andhra Pradesh, Manipur, Tripura and Himchal Pradesh. There is
therefore at present no parliamentary enactment permitting preferential policies based on residence
requirement except in the case of Andhra Pradesh, Manipur Tripura and Himachal Pradesh where
the Central Government has been given the right to issue directions setting residence requirements
in the subordinate services. Yet, in the face of Article 16 (2), some of the States are adopting `sons of
the soil' policies prescribing reservation or preference based on domicile or residence requirement
for employment or appointment to an office under the government of a State or any local or other
authority or public sector corporation or any other corporation which is an instrumentality or
agency of the State. Prima facie this would seem to be constitutionally impermissible though we do
not wish to express any definite opinion upon it, since it does not directly arise for consideration in
these writ petitions and civil appeal."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 10
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
(underlined to lay emphasis) 22 The Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court was though dealing directly with the
interpretation of Article 15 of the Constitution of India , but in reference to Article 16(2) of the
Constitution, strongly deprecated the „sons of the soil(cid:129) policies of some of the States prescribing
reservation or preference based on domicile or residence requirement for employment or
appointment to an office under the Government of a State or any local or other authority or public
sector corporation or any other Corporation which is an instrumentality or agency of the State. The
Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court virtually held such prescription of residence requirement for employment
as unconstitutional, but stopped sort of declaring the same as such on the ground that the issue had
not fallen directly for consideration in the writ petitions and the civil appeals under consideration of
the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in the case of Pardeep Jain (supra). 23 True it is, the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme
Court has not made a specific declaration of law in respect of clauses (1) and (2) of Article 16 of the
Constitution of India, but has indicated sufficient reasons to enable this Court to hold that with a
view to achieving the equality of opportunity for all citizens in the matters relating to employment or
appointment to any office under the State or Union Territory, there could be practised no
discrimination on the grounds only of place of birth or residence or any of them. Exception to this
ban on discrimination can be prescribed by the Parliament only, that too, by making a law
prescribing thereby any requirement as to residence within a State or Union Territory prior to
employment or appointment to a class or classes of such employment or appointment. Other than
the Act of 1957, there is no law made by the Parliament prescribing any such requirement as to
residence for employment to an office under any State or Union Territory. 24 Viewed thus, clause
3(A) of the Advertisement besides being without any authority and jurisdiction of the High Court, is
also ultra vires Article 16 of the Constitution of India. The State or the Union territory cannot
restrict employment in any District or Divisional cadre only to the candidates belonging to such
District or Division as the case may be. The residents of Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir,
irrespective of their domicile or residence, are entitled to apply for any post under the Union
Territory to which they are eligible to apply. The residents of Jammu Division can very well apply for
the posts of Kashmir Division notified by the Selection Body for recruitment and vice versa. The
word "State" used in clause (1) and clause (2) of Article 16 is wide enough to comprehend within its
sweep the High Court as well.
25 Under somewhat similar circumstances, the Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court in Kailash Chand Sharma
vs. State of Rajasthan and others, (2002) 6 SCC 562 was confronted with a circular dated
10.06.1998 issued by the Government of Rajasthan providing for bonus marks for the residents of a
particular District and the rural areas within that District. The Hon(cid:129)ble Supreme Court found the
said circular issued by the Government of Rajasthan constitutionally impermissible. The relevant
discussion finds place in paras (11) to (14) of the judgment, which are, for facility of reference, set
out below:
"11.The first and foremost question that would arise for consideration in this group of
appeals is, whether the circular dated 10.6.1998 providing for bonus marks for
residents of the concerned district and the rural areas within that district is
constitutionally valid tested on the touch stone of Article 16 read with Article 14 of the
Constitution? It is on this aspect, learned senior counsel appearing for the candidates
concerned have argued at length with admirable clarity, making copious reference to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 11
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
several pronouncements of this Court.There can be little doubt that the impugned
circular is the product of the policy decision taken by the State Government. Even
then, as rightly pointed out by the High Court, such decision has to pass the test of
Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution. If the policy decision, which in the present case
has the undoubted effect of deviating from the normal and salutary rule of selection
based on merit is subversive of the doctrine of equality, it cannot sustain. It should be
free from the vice of arbitrariness and conform to the well- settled norms both
positive and negative underlying Articles 14 and 16, which together with Article 15
form part of the Constitutional code of equality.
12. In order to justify the preferential treatment accorded to residents of the district
and the rural areas of the district in the matter of selection to the posts of teachers,
the State has come forward with certain pleas either before the High Court or before
this Court. Some of these pleas are pressed into service by the learned counsel
appearing for the parties who are the possible beneficiaries under the impugned
order of the Govt. Such pleas taken by the State Government and from which support
is sought to be drawn by the individual parties concerned will be referred to a little
later.
13. Before proceeding further we should steer clear of a misconception that surfaced
in the course of arguments advanced on behalf of the State and some of the parties.
Based on the decisions which countenanced geographical classification for certain
weighty reasons such as socio- economic backwardness of the area for the purpose of
admissions to professional colleges, it has been suggested that residence within a
district or rural areas of that district could be a valid basis for classification for the
purpose of public employment as well. We have no doubt that such a sweeping
argument which has the overtones of parochialism is liable to be rejected on the plain
terms of Article 16(2) and in the light of Article 16(3). An argument of this nature flies
in the face of the peremptory language of Article 16 (2) and runs counter to our
constitutional ethos founded on unity and integrity of the nation. Attempts to prefer
candidates of a local area in the State were nipped in the bud by this Court since long
past. We would like to reiterate that residence by itself be it be within a State, region,
district or lesser area within a district cannot be a ground to accord preferential
treatment or reservation, save as provided in Article 16(3). It is not possible to
compartmentalize the State into Districts with a view to offer employment to the
residents of that District on a preferential basis. At this juncture it is appropriate to
undertake a brief analysis of Article 16.
14. Article 16 which under clause (1) guarantees equality of opportunity for all citizens
in matters relating to employment or appointment to any office under the State
reinforces that guarantee by prohibiting under clause (2) discrimination on the
grounds only of religion, race, caste, sex, descent, place of birth, residence or any of
them. Be it noted that in the allied Article Article 15, the word 'residence' is omitted
from the opening clause prohibiting discrimination on specified grounds. Clauses (3)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 12
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
and (4) of Article 16 dilutes the rigor of clause (2) by
(i) conferring an enabling power on the Parliament to make a law prescribing the
residential requirement within the State in regard to a class or classes of employment
or appointment to an office under the State and (ii) by enabling the State to make a
provision for the reservation of appointments or posts in favour of any backward
class of citizens which is not adequately represented in the services under the State.
The newly introduced clauses (4-A) and (4-B), apart from clause (5) of Article 16 are
the other provisions by which the embargo laid down in Article 16 (2) in somewhat
absolute terms is lifted to meet certain specific situations with a view to promote the
overall objective underlying the Article. Here, we should make note of two things:
firstly, discrimination only on the ground of residence (or place of birth) in so far as
public employment is concerned is prohibited; secondly, Parliament is empowered to
make the law prescribing residential requirement within a State or Union Territory,
as the case may be, in relation to a class or classes of employment. That means, in the
absence of parliamentary law, even the prescription of requirement as to residence
within the State is a taboo. Coming to the first aspect, it must be noticed that the
prohibitory mandate under Article 16(2) is not attracted if the alleged discrimination
is on grounds not merely related to residence, but the factum of residence is only
taken into account in addition to other relevant factors. This, in effect, is the import
of the expression 'only'.
(underlined to lay emphasis)
26. From the discussion made and the case law cited above, the legal position is crystal clear. No
citizen should be discriminated against for the purpose of employment to any office under the State
or Union. The prohibited grounds of discrimination under Article 16(2) of the Constitution of India,
inter alia, are religion, race, caste, place of birth and residence. The only exception that is carved out
by clause (3) of Article 16 of the Constitution is in relation to requirement as to residence within a
State or Union Territory prior to employment or appointment of a candidate to an office under the
State or Union Territory or any local or other authority within such State or Union Territory etc. and
this exception can be made only by law made by the Parliament prescribing such requirement as to
residence. 27 As noted above, the Parliament has not made any such law prescribing any
requirement as to residence within a State or Union Territory in regard to any class or classes of
employment or appointment under the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir. That being the
position, neither the Union Territory of Jammu and Kashmir, nor the High Court can prescribe any
such requirement as to residence in regard to any class or classes of employment or appointment
under it. Clause 3(A) of the Advertisement Notification (supra), therefore, flies on the face of clauses
1 and 2 of Article 16 of Constitution of India. Clause 3 (A) of the Advertisement Notification
impugned in this petition is declared ultra vires the Constitution and, therefore, shall not be given
effect to.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 13
Mulakh Raj And Others vs State on 20 April, 2023
28 For the foregoing reasons, we allow this petition and direct respondent No.2 to declare the result
of the petitioners and subject them to the process of interview. Since the petitioners, who have
participated in the selection process pursuant to the interim directions passed by this Court are less
than the posts of Junior Assistant earmarked/reserved for SC category, as such, it is expected that
all the petitioners must have qualified the written test. Be that as it may, let the candidature of the
petitioners be considered ignoring their ineligibility in terms of clause 3(A) of the Advertisement
Notification and the selection process for 18 posts of Junior Assistants earmarked for SC category in
Kashmir Division be finalized within a period of two months. Needles to say that in case the
petitioners or any of them make it to the selection, their appointments shall be retrospective from
the date the candidates who had participated along with the petitioners herein have been appointed.
The retrospective appointment of the petitioners shall be notional and without any monetary
benefits.
In this petition, there is a dispute as to whether the petitioner has applied for the post of Junior
Assistant Kashmir Division. It is the specific averment made by the petitioner that he had submitted
his application form for the post of Junior Assistant both in Jammu Division as well as the Kashmir
Division, whereas, in the reply affidavit filed by the High Court, this factual assertion of the
petitioner is denied. It is submitted that the High Court has not received any application from the
petitioner for the post in question in the Kashmir Division.
Without going into the aforesaid disputed question of fact, we leave it to the High Court to find out
as to whether the petitioner has applied for the post of Junior Assistant in Kashmir Division either
of his own or through the intervention of this Court and participated in the written test. Depending
upon the enquiry, the High Court shall take a decision in light of the judgment passed in SWP No.
1753/2018.
(RAJESH SEKHRI) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
Jammu
20.04.2023
Sanjeev
Whether order is reportable:Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/187923400/ 14
