Municipal Corporation Katni vs Mahendra Kumar Champuria on 27 March, 2023
Municipal Corporation Katni vs Mahendra Kumar Champuria on
27 March, 2023
Author: Vishal Dhagat
Bench: Vishal Dhagat
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH
AT JABALPUR
MA No. 684 of 2021
(MUNICIPAL CORPORATION KATNI Vs MAHENDRA KUMAR CHAMPURIA AND OTHERS)
Dated : 27-03-2023
Shri H.S.Ruprah, learned counsel for appellant.
None appears for respondents
Counsel for appellant prays for short time to argue the matter. Prayer is allowed.
Division Bench of this Court has taken suo motu cognizance of communication made by Chairman
of State Bar Council of M.P asking entire Lawyer community in State of M.P. to abstain from Court
work. In PIL vide order dated 24.3.2023 passed in W.P.No.7295/2023 in para-18 following
directions were issued:-
"18. Under these circumstances, since the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court
has been violated and keeping in mind the interest of the poor litigants, we deem it
just and necessary to issue the following directions:-
( i ) All the advocates throughout the State of Madhya Pradesh are hereby directed to
attend to their court work forthwith. They shall represent their clients in the
respective cases before the respective courts forthwith;
(ii) If any lawyer deliberately avoids to attend the court, it shall be presumed that
there is disobedience of this order and he will be faced with serious consequences
including initiation of proceedings for contempt of court under the Contempt of
Courts Act;
(iii) If any lawyer prevents any other lawyer from attending the court work, the same
would be considered as disobedience of these directions and he will be faced with
serious consequences including initiation of proceedings under the Contempt of
Courts Act;
(iv) Each of the judicial officers are directed to submit a report as to which lawyer has
deliberately abstained from attending the court;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21608467/ 1
Municipal Corporation Katni vs Mahendra Kumar Champuria on 27 March, 2023
( v ) The judicial officers shall also mention the names of advocates who have prevented other
advocates from entering the court premises or from conducting their cases in the court;
(vi) Such advocates shall be dealt with seriously which may even include proceedings under the
Contempt of Courts Act as well as being debarred from practice."
Division Bench had issued directions to Advocates to attend the Court wo rk forthwith and to
represent their clients in their respective cases. If abstention from work is deliberate then Advocate
will have to face serious consequences including initiation of contempt petition.
In view of same, as Advocate for the petitioner is not appearing in the case, Registry is directed to
issue show cause notice to counsel for respondent(s), whose name appears in the Vakalatnama to
give explanation that why Contempt Proceedings may not be initiated against him/her/them for
deliberate violation of order dated 24.3.2023 passed in W.P No.7295/2023.
Notices shall not be issued to Government Advocates appearing for State since they remained
present in Court and complied with directions passed in WP No.7295/2023.
List the matter after four weeks.
(VISHAL DHAGAT) JUDGE nd
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/21608467/ 2
