Murugesan vs The Superintendent Of Police on 23 November, 2021
Murugesan vs The Superintendent Of Police on 23 November,
2021
Author: M.Sundar
Bench: M.Sundar
WP(MD) No.20847 of 2021
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED : 23.11.2021
CORAM
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M.SUNDAR
W.P(MD) No.20847 of 2021
Murugesan ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Superintendent of Police,
O/o. Superintendent of Police,
Madurai.
2.The Inspector of Police,
Melur Police Station-anit liquor Division,
Madurai.
3.The Deputy Superintendent of Police,
Prohibition and Enforcement Wing (PEW),
Melur Division, Madurai District. ... Respondents
(3rd respondent suo-motu impleaded
as per order of this Court dated 23.11.2021)
PRAYER: Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, for
the issuance of a Writ of Mandamus, directing the respondents to consider
petitioner's representation dated 18.11.2021 and release the petitioner's
vehicle bearing registration No.TN 59 CV 4071 Hero Spelendor seized on
14.11.2021 and hand over the vehicle to the petitioner.
1/14
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19703014/ 1
Murugesan vs The Superintendent Of Police on 23 November, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) WP(MD) No.20847 of 2021
For Petitioner : Ms.A.Rajini
For Respondents : Mr.A.Baskaran,
Additional Government pleader.
ORDER
Ms.Rajini, learned counsel for lone writ petitioner and Mr.A.Baskaran, learned Additional
Government Pleader, who accepts notice on behalf of both the respondents are before this Court.
2. Owing to the short point on which the captioned main matter turns and owing to the fact that
orders have been made by another Hon'ble Single Judge in similar matter and I have made orders
taking the same view (which I propose to replicate) main writ petition was taken up with the consent
of both sides.
3. Before I proceed further, it comes to light that the Deputy Superintendent of Police, Prohibition
and Enforcement Wing (PEW), Melur Division, Madurai District is the authority concerned, but he
has not been arrayed as respondent. I suo-motu implead him as the third respondent.
Registry to carry out necessary and consequential amendments in the case file as well as the order
copy before uploading / re-issuing copy of the order.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
4. The allegation against the writ petitioner is that on 14.11.2021, writ petitioner was carrying liquor
(small 180ml brandy bottles) which admittedly is available in the TASMAC outlets. The allegation
turns on Section 4(1)(a) of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act, 1937, as inter alia the quantum appears
to be above the permissible limits. I do not express any opinion on the same as the matter is at FIR
stage.
5. In a similar matter, following the order made by another Hon'ble Single Judge, release of
two-wheeler was ordered and that order reads as follows:
Mr.K.Sathish Kumar, learned Counsel on record for writ petitioner is before this
Court. Mr.S.R.A.Ramanchandran, learned Additional Government Pleader accepts
notice on behalf of all the three respondents.
2.With the consent of both sides, the captioned main writ petition is taken up and
heard out.
3.There is no disputation or disagreement that in a similar matter another Hon'ble
Single Judge has ordered release of the seized vehicle on certain terms. To be noted,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19703014/ 2
Murugesan vs The Superintendent Of Police on 23 November, 2021
this is a case of alleged violation of Sections 4(1)(a) and 4(1)(i) of the Tamil Nadu
Prohibition Act, 1937.
4.In the light of there being no disputation or disagreement
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis that this matter is similar to the case in which
another Hon'ble Single Judge has directed release of the vehicle by imposing certain
conditions, it is not necessary to dilate further on facts. The order made by the other
Hon'ble Judge with the consent of both sides is as follows:
'Heard the learned counsel on either side. By consent of both parties, this writ
petition is taken up for final disposal at the admission stage itself.
2. The petition mentioned vehicle was seized in connection with Crime No.57 of 2020
registered on the file of the second respondent for the offence under Sections 4(1)(a)
and 4(1)(i) of Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act. It is not in dispute that till now no
confiscation order under Section 14 of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act has been
passed. It is also not in dispute that the vehicle has not been produced before the
jurisdictional Criminal Court.
3.In similar circumstances, this Court vide order dated 09.07.2020 in
W.P.(MD)No.2679 of 2020 (Sathiah v. The State of Tamil Nadu and Others) has
passed the following order:-
“Heard the learned counsel on either side.
2. The petition mentioned vehicle belongs to the petitioner herein. It appears that the
said vehicle was involved in Crime No.231 of 2019, registered on the file of the third
respondent under Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act, 1937. The petitioner's son Karthick
was arrested and he was found in possession of 384 Brandy Bottles. The petitioner's
son was said to have driven the said vehicle at https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the
relevant point of time. The grievance of the petitioner is that the vehicle in question
has not been produced before the Judicial Magistrate till date. His further
apprehension is that even without complying the necessary procedures, the second
respondent is likely to auction the vehicle, which necessitated the petitioner to file the
present Writ Petition.
3. The learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on the order dated
06.06.2019 made in Crl.O.P.No. 11945 of 2019, wherein the learned judge has
observed as follows:-
11. The provisions of Section 49A of the Tamil Nadu Forest Act does not in any way
take away the jurisdiction of the Magistrate Court to exercise its power under Section
451 or 457 of Cr.P.C. The confiscation of a vehicle involved in the commission of an
offence under the Tamil Nadu Forest Act is not only punitive in nature but also a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19703014/ 3
Murugesan vs The Superintendent Of Police on 23 November, 2021
deterrent. When a vehicle is involved in the commission of offence under the Tamil
Nadu Forest Act and there are prima facie materials to show that the owner of the
vehicle did not have any knowledge or connivance in the commission of the offence,
he can always file an application for return of vehicle under Section 451 or 457 of
Cr.P.C.
But, however the Court while exercising its https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis powers will have to do
it with care and caution and should provide an opportunity to the Public Prosecutor and also must
keep in mind the spirit behind Section 49A of the Tamil Nadu Forest Act, 1882 and its benevolent
object.
12. Even though, the Judgment cited by the learned counsel for the petitioner deals with the case
under the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act, the ratio in the said Judgment can be applied even in a case
where confiscation proceedings have been initiated under the Tamil Nadu Forest Act.
13. In view of the above, the reason given by the Court below for returning the petition filed by the
petitioner is unsustainable and the same is hereby setaside. The Court below is directed to consider
the petitioner afresh by keeping in mind the judgment of the Hon'ble Division bench referred supra
and after affording an opportunity to the prosecution. This exercise shall be completed by the Court
below within a period of one month from the date of a receipt of copy of this order.
4. The learned Government counsel wanted to rely upon G.O.Ms.No.39 dated 22.10.2019, Home,
Prohibition https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Excise (VIII) Department to sustain his
contention that the second respondent can very well auction the vehicle in question. But the said
Government order will come into play after the confiscation is done under Section 14 of Tamil Nadu
Prohibition Act 1937. In this case, there is nothing on record to show the fulfillment of formalities
set out in Section 14(4) of the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Act. Therefore, the question of auctioning the
vehicle even without formal confiscation does not arise at all. Also, it does not mean that the vehicle
involved in criminal case should not be produced before the Jurisdictional Court. In fact, the
provisions of Criminal Procedure Code envisage that the seized vehicle should be produced before
the Jurisdictional Court and the party concerned can avail the right to claim the vehicle by way of
interim or final custody.
5.Therefore, I direct the respondents to produce the vehicle in question before the jurisdictional
criminal Court without any further delay. Upon such production, it is open to the petitioner to apply
for return under Section 451 of Cr.P.C. Of course, the authorities are at liberty to take action to
confiscate the vehicle as per law.
6. In the above terms, the Writ Petition is allowed. No costs.'
4.The petitioner's counsel on instructions gives an undertaking that the petitioner will not alienate
the petition mentioned vehicle till the confiscation proceedings are over.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19703014/ 4
Murugesan vs The Superintendent Of Police on 23 November, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis She also gives a further undertaking that the petitioner will also
produce the vehicle as and when the respondents call for the vehicle for enquiry and cooperate with
the enquiry to be conducted by the respondents.
5. I make it clear that it is very much open to the respondents herein to initiate and conclude the
confiscation proceedings. The only relief that I am granting is interim custody of the vehicle. I have
not gone into the merits of the matter.
6. Therefore, the respondents are directed to release the said vehicle subject to the following
conditions:-
a) The petitioner is directed to pay a sum of Rs.2,000/-
(Rupees Two Thousand only) in favour of the Officer- in-Charge, High Court Legal Services
Committee, Madurai Bench of Madras High Court, Madurai, S.B.A/c.No.496037387, IFSC :
IDIB000H040, Indian Bank, High Court Branch, Madurai. It will be a non refundable payment. The
Registrar (Judicial) is directed to spend the amount for appropriate welfare activities such as
feeding the disadvantaged communities in Madurai District.
b) The petitioner shall not alienate or encumber the vehicle in question till the proceedings are
completed.
c) petitioner shall produce all the documents pertaining to the ownership of the seized vehicle.
d) and when the respondents call for the vehicle for enquiry, the petitioner has to produce the
vehicle in https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis question and he shall cooperate with the enquiry to be
conducted by the respondents.
7. Upon completion of these formalities, the respondents shall release the vehicle forthwith without
any delay. If this undertaking given by the petitioner is breached, the petitioner will not be entitled
to interim release of the vehicle in future. The Writ Petition is allowed accordingly. There shall be no
order as to costs.'
5.The conditions imposed and the release of the vehicle post compliance of the conditions have been
set out by the Hon'ble Single Judge in paragraph Nos.5, 6 & 7.
6.Therefore, there shall be a similar order in the captioned matter. The order is a follows:
6.1. I make it clear that it is very much open to the respondents herein to initiate and
conclude the confiscation proceedings. The only relief that I am granting is interim
custody of the vehicle. I have not gone into the merits of the matter.
6.2. Therefore, the respondents are directed to release the said vehicle subject to the
following conditions:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19703014/ 5
Murugesan vs The Superintendent Of Police on 23 November, 2021
a) The petitioner is directed to pay a sum of Rs.2,000/-
(Rupees Two Thousand only) to the credit of the Officer-in-Charge, High Court Legal Services
Committee, Madurai Bench of Madras High Court, Madurai, S.B.A/c.No.496037387, IFSC :
IDIB000H040, Indian Bank, High Court Branch, Madurai. It will
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis be a non refundable payment. The Registrar
(Judicial) is directed to spend the amount for appropriate welfare activities such as
feeding the disadvantaged communities in Madurai District;
b) The petitioner shall not alienate or encumber the vehicle in question till the
proceedings are completed;
c) The petitioner shall produce all documents pertaining to ownership of the seized
vehicle;
and
d) when the respondents call for the vehicle for enquiry, the petitioner has to produce
the vehicle in question and he shall cooperate with the enquiry to be conducted by the
respondents.
6.3.Upon completion of these formalities, the respondents shall release the vehicle forthwith
without any delay. If aforementioned undertaking given by the petitioner is breached, the petitioner
will not be entitled to interim release of the vehicle in future.
7.Captioned Writ Petition is disposed of in aforesaid manner i.e., with aforementioned directive
without any order as to costs.'
6. Therefore, there shall be a similar order in the captioned matter.
The order is as follows:
6.1. I make it clear that it is very much open to the respondents herein to initiate and
conclude the confiscation proceedings. The only relief that I am
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis granting is interim custody of the vehicle. I have
not gone into the merits of the matter.
6.2. Therefore, the respondents are directed to release the said vehicle subject to the
following conditions:
a) The petitioner is directed to pay a sum of Rs.2,000/- (Rupees Two Thousand only)
to the credit of the Officer-in-Charge, High Court Legal Services Committee, Madurai
Bench of Madras High Court, Madurai, S.B.A/c.No.496037387, IFSC :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19703014/ 6
Murugesan vs The Superintendent Of Police on 23 November, 2021
IDIB000H040, Indian Bank, High Court Branch, Madurai. It will be a non
refundable payment. The Registrar (Judicial) is directed to spend the amount for
appropriate welfare activities such as feeding the disadvantaged communities in
Madurai District;
b) The petitioner shall not alienate or encumber the vehicle in question till the
proceedings are completed;
c) The petitioner shall produce all documents pertaining to ownership of the seized
vehicle;
and
d) when the respondents call for the vehicle for https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
enquiry, the petitioner has to produce the vehicle in question and he shall cooperate
with the enquiry to be conducted by the respondents.
6.3. Upon completion of these formalities, the respondents shall release the vehicle forthwith
without any delay. If aforementioned undertaking given by the petitioner is breached, the petitioner
will not be entitled to interim release of the vehicle in future.
7. Captioned Writ Petition is disposed of in aforesaid manner i.e., with aforementioned directive
without any order as to costs.
23.11.2021 Index : Yes/No Internet : Yes /No vsm https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Note :
In view of the present lock down owing to COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the
order may be utilized for official purposes, but, ensuring that the copy of the order
that is presented is the correct copy, shall be the responsibility of the advocate /
litigant concerned.
To
1.The Superintendent of Police, O/o. Superintendent of Police, Madurai.
2.The Inspector of Police, Melur Police Station-anit liquor Division, Madurai.
3.The Deputy Superintendent of Police, Prohibition and Enforcement Wing (PEW),
Melur Division, Madurai District.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis M.SUNDAR, J.
vsm 23.11.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19703014/ 7
