Mushtaq Ahmad Jan vs Govt. Of J&K Through Commissioner/ on 11 July, 2025
Mushtaq Ahmad Jan vs Govt. Of J&K Through Commissioner/
on 11 July, 2025
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
Reserved on: 03.07.2025
Pronounced on: 11.07.2025
LPA No. 55/2024
1. Mushtaq Ahmad Jan, Age 73 Years
2. Khurshid Ahmad Jan, Age 76 Years
Sons of Namdaar Jan
3. Farooq Ahmad Jan, Age 65 Years
4. Khalid Ahmad Jan, Age 69 years
5. Irshad Ahmad Jan, Age 59 Years
6. Zaffar Ahmad Jan, Age 53 years Sons of
Ghulam Mohammad Jan
7. Mustaseen Yaseen Jan, Age 51 Years
S/o Mohammad Yaseen Jan
8. Aadil Ahmad Jan, Age 44 Years
9. Sameer Ahmad Jan, Age 46 Years
Sons of Late Bashir Ahmad Jan
All residents of Kaloosa, Bandipora (Appellant
No.7 at present resident of Shaltang, Srinagar) ...Petitioner(s)/Appellant(s)
Through: Mr. Shafqat Nazir, Adv.
Versus
1. Govt. of J&K through Commissioner/
Secretary to Government , Rural
Development and Panchayati Raj Department,
Civil Secretariat Srinagar;
2. Director, Rural Development and Panchayati
Raj Department Kashmir, Srinagar;
3. Deputy Commissioner/ District
Collector Bandipora;
4. Assistant Commissioner Development,
Bandipora;
5. Block Development Officer, ...Respondent(s)
Bandipora.
Through: Mr. Mohd Younus Hafiz, AC vice
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107130578/ 1
Mushtaq Ahmad Jan vs Govt. Of J&K Through Commissioner/ on 11 July, 2025
Mr. Abdul Rashid Malik, Sr. AAG
Mohd Altaf Nima
I attest to the accuracy
LPA No. 55/2024
and authenticity of this
document Page 1 of 12
14.07.2025
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY PARIHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Per Sanjeev Kumar
1. The appellants nine in number have filed this intra-court appeal to throw challenge to an order
and judgment dated 6 th December 2023 ["impugned judgment"] passed by the learned Single
Judge of this Court [the "Writ Court"] in WP (C) No. 2300/2022 titled Mushtaq Ahmad Jan & Ors.
vs. Govt. of JK & Ors. whereby the writ petition filed by the appellants to direct the respondents to
pay compensation for land measuring 8 Kanals and 13 marlas falling under Survey Nos. 945/946
["subject land"] situate at Muslimabad, Kaloosa Nathpora, Bandipora has been dismissed on the
ground of delay and laches.
2. The impugned judgment is assailed by the appellants primarily on the ground that in view of the
clear position of law laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Vidya Devi vs. State of
Himachal Pradesh & Ors. reported in 2020(2) SCC 569, the Writ Court ought not to have dismissed
the writ petition on the ground of unexplained delay in invoking the writ jurisdiction. It is argued
that the State which has forcibly occupied the land of a citizen without following the due process of
law can neither plead adverse possession nor can set-up delay and laches to deny the right of such
citizen to be compensated for deprivation of his land.
3. Before we proceed to appreciate the arguments of Mr. Shafqat Nazir, learned counsel for the
appellants and the learned AAG appearing for the respondents, we deem it appropriate to briefly
state few relevant facts.
4. One Namdaar Jan, the predecessor-in-interest of the appellants was owner in possession of
subject land which, on the death of Namdaar Jan, devolved upon them. The mutation of inheritance
bearing No. 358 stands testimony of this fact. The subject land, as per the revenue record, continues
to be reflected in the ownership of appellants though under occupation/physical possession of the
Department of Rural Development. Mohd Altaf Nima I attest to the accuracy and authenticity of this
14.07.2025 This is the position in the revenue records even as on date. It is not in dispute that the
subject land was taken possession of by the Rural Development somewhere prior to 1958-59 for
construction of Block building in Bandipora.
5. There is also no dispute with regard to the fact that the said land belonging to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107130578/ 2
Mushtaq Ahmad Jan vs Govt. Of J&K Through Commissioner/ on 11 July, 2025
Predecessor-in-interest of the appellants was taken possession of by the respondents for
construction of Block building without following any due process of law and without payment of any
compensation. Ever since the aforesaid land is in possession of the Rural Development Department
and the building housing the Block Development Office exists on spot.
6. Late Namdaar Jan who was owner in the year 1958-59 did not agitate the matter with regard to
the illegal possession of the Rural Development Department over his land nor did he lay a claim for
compensation before any authority during his lifetime. It is only in the year 2013, the appellants
approached the Deputy Commissioner, Bandipora by way of a written representation seeking
compensation of the subject land under the occupation of the Rural Development Department. The
representation came to be processed in the Office of Deputy Commissioner, Bandipora, who vide its
communication dated 02.01.2017 called upon the Assistant Commissioner, Development,
Bandipora to take up the matter with the Director, Rural Development Department, Kashmir for
release of land compensation to the land owners under norms.
7. The matter was taken up by Assistant Commissioner, Development with the Director, Rural
Development Department, Kashmir vide communication dated 09.01.2017. The Assistant
Commissioner, Rural Development Department while enclosing the relevant documents showing
the proprietorship of the appellants in respect of the subject land also made a request to the
Director, for release of adequate funds to pay compensation in the matter. The communication of
the Assistant Commissioner, Development, Bandipora was forwarded by the Director, Rural
Development Department, Kashmir to the Administrative Department of Rural Development and
Panchayati Raj, vide communication dated 21st November 2017. The Administrative Department
took cognizance of the Mohd Altaf Nima I attest to the accuracy and authenticity of this 14.07.2025
communication of the Assistant Commissioner, Development, Bandipora and asked the Director.
Rural Development Department to furnish reply to the following three queries:
1. When was the office constructed and since when has the land been under the
possession of Rural Development Department.
2. Was any element of donation involved. How was the construction allowed in the
first place without acquisition.
3. What is the status as per Revenue record.
8. The Assistant Commissioner, Development, Bandipora conveyed to the
Administrative Department the point-wise reply which is contained in its
communication dated 16th December 2019. The para-wise reply reads thus:
1. Office building of Block Bandipora has been constructed prior to 1958-59 since
then the land is under possession of the department (RDD) as per his letter No.
BB/Pyt/2018- 19/3795-96 dated 06.12.2018.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107130578/ 3
Mushtaq Ahmad Jan vs Govt. Of J&K Through Commissioner/ on 11 July, 2025
2. Records pertaining to land under possession may be available in ACD office
Baramulla as the Administrative Control was within the ambit of ACD Baramulla.
3. Land under possession of the Block has been taken prior to 1958-59, however the
land is under possession of the department and the status shown in the Girdawari as
per 1968-69 as Maqboozi Makhami Dehat Sudhar. It was also intimated by the
Assistant Commissioner, Development, Baramulla that with regard to point No. 2,
the matter was also taken up with Assistant Commissioner, Development, Baramulla
who has intimated that there is no record available with regard to the possession of
the subject land.
9. From the aforesaid narration, it is abundantly established on facts that subject
land belongs to the appellants and the same was taken in possession by the Rural
Development Department prior to 1958-59 and since then the land has been under
actual and physical possession of the Department. There is also no whisper in the
aforesaid communications written by different authorities for processing the request
of the appellants for payment of Mohd Altaf Nima I attest to the accuracy and
authenticity of this 14.07.2025 compensation to the extent that subject land was ever
donated or voluntarily given by the predecessor-in-interest of the appellants to the
Rural Development Department for construction of its office of Block Development
Officer.
10. Be that as it may, in the background of aforesaid facts and having been denied the
compensation by the respondents, the appellants filed WP (C) No. 2300/2022 before
this Court seeking inter alia a direction to the respondents to formally acquire the
subject land under land acquisition law and pay them compensation at market rates.
The appellants also prayed in the writ petition that major portion of the subject land
which is not in actual use of the Department may be returned to them.
11. The writ petition was contested by the respondents. Apart from the plea of delay
and laches in approaching the Writ Court, the respondents also took the plea that the
subject land was voluntarily given/donated by the predecessor-in-interest of the
appellants and, therefore, the respondents are not obliged to pay any compensation.
12. The matter was considered by the Writ Court and in terms of the judgment
impugned, the writ petition was dismissed being barred by delay and laches. Relying
upon a couple of judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, the Writ Court came to
the conclusion that a petition filed more than 62 years after the subject land was
taken possession of by the respondents was hopelessly time barred and hit by delay
and laches. On this sole ground, the appellants have been non-suited by the Writ
Court.
13. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record, we are of the
considered opinion that the judgment passed by the Writ Court runs contrary to the view taken by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107130578/ 4
Mushtaq Ahmad Jan vs Govt. Of J&K Through Commissioner/ on 11 July, 2025
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Vidya Devi supra. Under somewhat similar circumstances,
a case of one Amina Begum was considered by a Division Bench of this Court in LPA No. 105/2019
titled Amina Begum vs. State of JK & Ors. The Division Bench relying upon the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in Vidya Devi and the other one titled State of UP & Ors. vs. Manohar
reported in AIR 2005 SC 488 rejected the similar plea of delay and laches put forth by the Union
Territory of J&K in the aforesaid case. Paragraphs Mohd Altaf Nima I attest to the accuracy and
authenticity of this 14.07.2025 12.1 to 12.12 of Vidya Devi are worthy taking note of and are thus
set-out below:-
"12.1. The Appellant was forcibly expropriated of her property in 1967, when the right
to property was a fundamental right guaranteed by Article 31 in Part III of the
Constitution. Article 31 guaranteed the right to private property which could not be
deprived without due process of law and upon just and fair compensation.
12.2. The right to property ceased to be a fundamental right by the Constitution
(Forty Fourth Amendment) Act, 1978, however, it continued to be a human right 2 in
a welfare State, and a Constitutional right under Article 300 A of the Constitution.
Article 300 A provides that no person shall be deprived of his property save by
authority of law. The State cannot dispossess a citizen of his property except in
accordance with the procedure established by law. The obligation to pay
compensation, though not expressly included in Article 300 A, can be inferred in that
Article.
12.3. To forcibly dispossess a person of his private property, without following due
process of law, would be violative of a human right, as also the constitutional right
under Article 300 A of the Constitution.
Reliance is placed on the judgment in Hindustan Petroleum Corporation Ltd. v.
Darius Shapur Chenai4, wherein this Court held that: (SCC p.634, para 6) "6. ...
Having regard to the provisions contained in Article 300A of the Constitution, the
State in exercise of its power of "eminent domain" may interfere with the right of
property of a person by acquiring the same but the same must be for a public purpose
and reasonable compensation therefor must be paid."
(emphasis supplied) 12.4. In N. Padmamma v. S. Ramakrishna Reddy, this Court held that: (SCC
p.526, para 21) "21. If the right of property is a human right as also a constitutional right, the same
cannot be taken away except in accordance with law.
Mohd Altaf Nima I attest to the accuracy and authenticity of this 14.07.2025 Article 300A of the
Constitution protects such right. The provisions of the Act seeking to divest such right, keeping in
view of the provisions of Article 300A of the Constitution of India, must be strictly construed."
(emphasis supplied) 12.5. In Delhi Airtech Services Pvt. Ltd. & Ors. v. State of U.P.& Ors. this Court
recognized the right to property as a basic human right in the following words (SCC p.379, para 30)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107130578/ 5
Mushtaq Ahmad Jan vs Govt. Of J&K Through Commissioner/ on 11 July, 2025
"30. It is accepted in every jurisprudence and by different political thinkers that some amount of
property right is an indispensable safeguard against tyranny and economic oppression of the
Government. Jefferson was of the view that liberty cannot long subsist without the support of
property. "Property must be secured, else liberty cannot subsist"
was the opinion of John Adams. Indeed, the view that property itself is the seed bed
which must be conserved if other constitutional values are to flourish is the
consensus among political thinkers and jurists." (emphasis supplied) 12.6. In
Jilubhai Nanbhai Khachar v. State of Gujarat, this Court held as follows: (SCC p.627,
para 48) "48. ...In other words, Article 300A only limits the powers of the State that
no person shall be deprived of his property save by authority of law. There has to be
no deprivation without any sanction of law. Deprivation by any other mode is not
acquisition or taking possession under Article 300A. In other words, if there is no
law, there is no deprivation." (emphasis supplied) 12.7. In this case, the Appellant
could not have been forcibly dispossessed of her property without any legal sanction,
and without following due process of law, and depriving her payment of just
compensation, being a fundamental right on the date of forcible dispossession in
1967.
Mohd Altaf Nima I attest to the accuracy and authenticity of this 14.07.2025 12.8.
The contention of the State that the Appellant or her predecessors had "orally"
consented to the acquisition is completely baseless. We find complete lack of authority and legal
sanction in compulsorily divesting the Appellant of her property by the State.
12.9. In a democratic polity governed by the rule of law, the State could not have deprived a citizen
of their property without the sanction of law. Reliance is placed on the judgment of this Court in
Tukaram Kana Joshi & Ors. v. M.I.D.C. & Ors.8 wherein it was held that the State must comply with
the procedure for acquisition, requisition, or any other permissible statutory mode. The State being
a welfare State governed by the rule of law cannot arrogate to itself a status beyond what is provided
by the Constitution.
12.10. This Court in State of Haryana v.
Mukesh Kumar held that the right to property is now considered to be not only a constitutional or
statutory right, but also a human right. Human rights have been considered in the realm of
individual rights such as right to shelter, livelihood, health, employment, etc. Human rights have
gained a multifaceted dimension.
12.11. We are surprised by the plea taken by the State before the High Court, that since it has been in
continuous possession of the land for over 42 years, it would tantamount to "adverse"
possession. The State being a welfare State, cannot be permitted to take the plea of adverse
possession, which allows a trespasser i.e. a person guilty of a tort, or even a crime, to gain legal title
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107130578/ 6
Mushtaq Ahmad Jan vs Govt. Of J&K Through Commissioner/ on 11 July, 2025
over such property for over 12 years. The State cannot be permitted to perfect its title over the land
by invoking the doctrine of adverse possession to grab the property of its own citizens, as has been
done in the present case.
12.12. The contention advanced by the State of delay and laches of the Appellant in moving the Court
is also liable to be rejected. Delay and laches cannot be raised in a case of a continuing cause of
action, or if the circumstances shock the judicial conscience of the Court. Condonation of delay is a
matter of judicial discretion, which must be Mohd Altaf Nima I attest to the accuracy and
authenticity of this 14.07.2025 exercised judiciously and reasonably in the facts and circumstances
of a case. It will depend upon the breach of fundamental rights, and the remedy claimed, and when
and how the delay arose. There is no period of limitation prescribed for the courts to exercise their
constitutional jurisdiction to do substantial justice."
14. From reading of the extracted portion of the judgment rendered in Vidya Devi, it is abundantly
clear that a legal position on the subject is fairly well settled. The State being a welfare State cannot
be permitted to raise the plea of adverse possession over the property of its citizen occupied forcibly
without following due process of law. The State cannot be permitted to perfect its title over the land
by invoking the doctrine of adverse possession to denude its owner of his right quo the property. The
plea of delay and laches cannot be raised in case of a continuing cause of action. So long as State
remains in unauthorized possession of landed property of its citizens taken possession of by it
without following due process of law, the cause of action to seek restoration of possession or
compensation in lieu thereof would arise every-day. The Constitutional Court exercising its writ
jurisdiction may also ignore the delay if the circumstances of the case shock the judicial conscious of
the Court.
15. Before we advert to the factual scenario of the case, we deem it appropriate to set out observation
of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Manohar supra hereinbelow:-
"We are satisfied that the case projected before the Court by the appellants is utterly
untenable and not worthy of emanating from any State which professes the least
regard to being a welfare State. When we pointed out to the learned counsel that at
this stage at least, the State should be gracious enough to accept its mistake and
promptly pay the compensation to the respondent, the State has taken an intractable
attitude and persisted in opposing what appears to be a just and reasonable claim of
the respondent. Ours is a constitutional democracy and the rights available to the
citizens are declared by the constitution. Although article 19(1) (f) was deleted by the
44th amendment to the Constitution. Article 300 A has been placed in the
Constitution."
Mohd Altaf Nima I attest to the accuracy and authenticity of this 14.07.2025
16. When we examine the case, which was set up by the appellants before the Writ Court, in light of
the legal position adumbrated hereinabove, we clearly find that in the instant case, the subject
property belonging to predecessor-in-interest of the appellants was taken into forcible possession by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107130578/ 7
Mushtaq Ahmad Jan vs Govt. Of J&K Through Commissioner/ on 11 July, 2025
the State in the year 1958-59 when right to hold a property was a fundamental right guaranteed to
the citizens of this country. Even after the Constitution (Forty Fourth Amendment) Act 1978,
whereby Right to Property ceased to be a fundamental right, the right continued to be a human right
in a welfare State and a Constitutional right under Article 300-A of the Constitution of India. The
forcible dispossession of a person of his private property without following due process of law prior
to Forty Fourth Amendment, was violative of fundamental right and, thereafter, violative of a
human right as also a constitutional right under Article 300-A of the Constitution. The fundamental
right guaranteed to a citizen cannot be said to have been waived by a citizen for remaining silent for
long time more particularly when the State has failed in its constitutional obligation to follow the
process of land acquisition before taking over the private property of a citizen.
17. A specious plea sought to be raised before us which was also raised before the Writ Court that the
subject land was voluntarily given/donated by the predecessor-in-interest of the appellants and,
therefore, the appellants are estopped by their conduct and acquiescence to claim compensation of
the land donated by their ancestors.
18. We have examined this contention of learned counsel for the appellants in light of the material
available on record.
19. We have referred to the several inter and intra departmental communications in the factual
narration, a bare perusal whereof, would clearly indicate that this was not the case of the
respondents any time before filing of reply-affidavit before the Writ Court that the subject land in
possession of the respondent-department was voluntarily given/donated by the ancestor of the
appellants.
20. The Assistant Commissioner, Development who has taken this plea in the affidavit does not
support his bald assertion by reference to any record in the office. Admittedly, the Assistant
Commissioner, Development who filed Mohd Altaf Nima I attest to the accuracy and authenticity of
this 14.07.2025 the reply affidavit before the Writ Court was not the officer incharge of the Rural
Development Department, Bandipora in the year 1958-59. In the absence of any record maintained
in the office of respondents, an oral plea by a person who was not privy to what happened in the year
1958-59 is worthy of outright rejection. It needs to be said that even in the case of Vidya Devi, a
similar plea was taken by the State of Himachal Pradesh that predecessors of the appellants before
the Hon'ble Supreme Court had orally consented to the acquisition, but the Hon'ble Supreme Court
rejected the same terming it as a case of lack of authority and legal sanction in compulsorily
divesting the appellants of her property by the State.
21. The plea of the donation of subject matter is a plea of fact which needs to be proved by reference
to evidence whether documentary or oral. The respondents seem to have presumed the donation of
the subject land on the ground that the predecessor-in-interest of the appellants during his lifetime
and, thereafter, appellants for pretty long time did not dispute the possession of the respondents by
approaching them for payment of compensation. It needs no emphasis that the presumption cannot
take place of a proof. The appellants have clearly denied that their ancestors ever donated the land
and we find truth in the submissions made by the appellants. We see no reason or justification to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107130578/ 8
Mushtaq Ahmad Jan vs Govt. Of J&K Through Commissioner/ on 11 July, 2025
donate 8 kanals and 13 marlas of land to the State free of cost. Possibly, the predecessor-in-interest
of the appellants was allowed to part with the subject land on the promise that his case for
compensation would be taken up by the higher authorities, however after taking over the possession
and constructing the building of Block Development Office, nobody processed the case for
compensation.
22. Be that as it may, the fact remains that the appellants are entitled to be compensated for
deprivation of their property. The judgment of the Writ Court dismissing the petition of the
appellants and denying them the compensation on the ground of delay and laches is not sustainable
in law.
23. In view of aforesaid discussion, this appeal is allowed and the impugned judgment passed by the
Writ Court is set-aside. A direction is given to the respondents to immediately and forthwith initiate
the process of acquisition in accordance with 'The Right to Fair Compensation and Transparency in
Land Acquisition, Rehabilitation and Resettlement Act, Mohd Altaf Nima I attest to the accuracy
and authenticity of this 14.07.2025 2013' (the "Act of 2013") and determine the compensation
payable to the owners of the subject land under possession of the Rural Development Department of
the Government of J&K. The process shall be initiated within a period of four weeks from the date a
copy of this judgment is served upon the respondents and shall be concluded as per the timeline
given in the Act of 2013.
(SANJAY PARIHAR) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
SRINAGAR:
11.07.2025
Altaf
Whether approved for reporting? Yes
Mohd Altaf Nima
I attest to the accuracy
and authenticity of this
14.07.2025
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/107130578/ 9
