Musharraf Beg And 3 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 April, 2025
Musharraf Beg And 3 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1
April, 2025
Author: Raj Beer Singh
Bench: Raj Beer Singh
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44833
Court No. - 71
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 7378 of 2020
Applicant :- Musharraf Beg And 3 Others
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- B.N.Singh,Santosh Kumar Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Siddharth Singh,Sudeep Dwivedi
Hon'ble Raj Beer Singh,J.
1. Heard learned counsel for the applicants, learned counsel for the opposite party no.2, learned
A.G.A. for the State and perused the record.
2. This application u/s 482 Cr.P.C. has been preferred for quashing of the entire proceeding,
including summoning order dated 31.01.2017, of Complaint Case No. 542 of 2015 (Hazi Bedar
Ahmad Vs. Musharraf Beg and others), under Sections 498-A, 323, 504, 506 IPC, P.S.- Khetasarai,
District- Jaunpur, pending in the court of 1st Additional Chief Judicial Magistrate, Jaunpur.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44848152/ 1
Musharraf Beg And 3 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 April, 2025
3. It has been submitted by learned counsel for the applicants that applicant no.1 is husband and
applicant no.2 and 3 are sister-in-law and brother-in-law of the daughter of opposite party no.2 /
complainant and applicant no.4 is maternal aunt (Mausi) of the daughter of opposite party no.2 /
complainant. The marriage of daughter of opposite party no.2 / complainant has taken place with
applicant no.1 on 14.04.2012. The allegation of dowry demand and harassment of victim (daughter
of complainant) made against applicants are wholly false. The victim has not sustained any injury.
The allegation that applicants have indulged in trafficking of victim are wholly absurd and baseless
and there is no evidence to support the same. It was submitted that after thorough investigation
police have submitted final report with conclusion that no case is made out. The protest petition
preferred by complainant was registered as a complaint case and thereafter applicants have been
summoned. It was submitted that applicant no.2 Smt. Sagufta Beg is married sister-in-law (Nanad),
applicant no.3 is brother-in-law and applicant no.4 is maternal aunt of the victim and no specific
allegation has been made against them. Referring to facts of the matter, it was submitted that no
prima facie case is made out against applicants. In support of his contentions, learned counsel has
placed reliance upon following case laws:
(i) Achin Gupta Vs. State of Haryana and another [2024] 6 S.C.R. 129 : 2024 INSC
369,
(ii) Kahkashan Kausar @ Sonam and others Vs. State of Bihar and others 2022 0
Supreme(SC)117 and;
(ii) Dara Lakshmi Narayana & others Vs. State of Telangana & another (2024) 12
S.C.R. 559: 2024 INSC 953.
4. Learned counsel for the opposite party No.2 and learned AGA have opposed the application and
submitted that there is evidence that the daughter of complainant was harassed by applicants on
account of dowry and they used to assault her. Learned counsel for the opposite party No. 2 /
complainant has referred statement of PW-2 Surendra Prasad Singh, examined under Section 202
CrPC, and pointed out that applicants have even agreed to sell the victim for Rs.15,00,000/- and
they have obtained Rs.5,00,000/- as part payment. Thus, the applicants have indulged in human
trafficking in respect the victim. It was submitted that there are serious allegations against
applicants and a prima facie case is made out against applicants.
5. I have considered the rival submissions and perused the record.
6. The legal position on the issue of quashing of criminal proceedings is well-settled that the
jurisdiction to quash a complaint, FIR or a charge-sheet should be exercised sparingly and only in
exceptional cases. However, where the allegations made in the FIR or the complaint and material on
record even if taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute
any offence or make out a case against the accused, the charge-sheet may be quashed in exercise of
inherent powers underSection 482of the Cr.P.C. In well celebrated judgement reported inAIR 1992
SC 605 State of Haryana and others Vs. Ch. Bhajan Lal, Supreme Court has carved out certain
guidelines, wherein FIR or proceedings may be quashed but cautioned that the power to quash FIR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44848152/ 2
Musharraf Beg And 3 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 April, 2025
or proceedings should be exercised sparingly and that too in the rarest of rare cases.
7. It would be pertinent to mention that in case ofArnesh Kumar Vs. State of Bihar and Anr.(2014) 8
SCC 273 , the Hon'ble Apex Court has held as under:-
"4. There is a phenomenal increase in matrimonial disputes in recent years. The
institution of marriage is greatly revered in this country.Section 498-AIPC was
introduced with avowed object to combat the menace of harassment to a woman at
the hands of her husband and his relatives. The fact thatSection 498-AIPC is a
cognizable and non-bailable offence has lent it a dubious place of pride amongst the
provisions that are used as weapons rather than shield by disgruntled wives. The
simplest way to harass is to get the husband and his relatives arrested under this
provision. In a quite number of cases, bed- ridden grand- fathers and grand-mothers
of the husbands, their sisters living abroad for decades are arrested."
8. In Preeti Gupta & Anr. Vs. State of Jharkhand & Anr.(2010) 7 SCC 667, the Hon'ble Apex Court
held:-
"32. It is a matter of common experience that most of these complaints undersection
498AIPC are filed in the heat of the moment over trivial issues without proper
deliberations. We come across a large number of such complaints which are not even
bona fide and are filed with oblique motive. At the same time, rapid increase in the
number of genuine cases of dowry harassment are also a matter of serious concern.
33. The learned members of the Bar have enormous social responsibility and
obligation to ensure that the social fiber of family life is not ruined or demolished.
They must ensure that exaggerated versions of small incidents should not be reflected
in the criminal complaints. Majority of the complaints are filed either on their advice
or with their concurrence. The learned members of the Bar who belong to a noble
profession must maintain its noble traditions and should treat every complaint under
section 498A as a basic human problem and must make serious endeavour to help
the parties in arriving at an amicable resolution of that human problem. They must
discharge their duties to the best of their abilities to ensure that social fiber, peace
and tranquility of the society remains intact. The members of the Bar should also
ensure that one complaint should not lead to multiple cases."
9. In Geeta Mehrotra & Anr. Vs. State of UP & Anr.(2012) 10 SCC 741 , the Hon'ble Apex Court has
held as under:-
"21. It would be relevant at this stage to take note of an apt observation of this Court
recorded in the matter ofG.V. Rao vs. L.H.V. Prasad & Ors.reported in (2000) 3 SCC
693 wherein also in a matrimonial dispute, this Court had held that the High Court
should have quashed the complaint arising out of a matrimonial dispute wherein all
family members had been roped into the matrimonial litigation which was quashed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44848152/ 3
Musharraf Beg And 3 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 April, 2025
and set aside. Their Lordships observed therein with which we entirely agree that:
"there has been an outburst of matrimonial dispute in recent times. Marriage is a
sacred ceremony, main purpose of which is to enable the young couple to settle down
in life and live peacefully. But little matrimonial skirmishes suddenly erupt which
often assume serious proportions resulting in heinous crimes in which elders of the
family are also involved with the result that those who could have counselled and
brought about rapprochement are rendered helpless on their being arrayed as
accused in the criminal case. There are many reasons which need not be mentioned
here for not encouraging matrimonial litigation so that the parties may ponder over
their defaults and terminate the disputes amicably by mutual agreement instead of
fighting it out in a court of law where it takes years and years to conclude and in that
process the parties lose their "young" days in chasing their cases in different courts."
The view taken by the judges in this matter was that the courts would not encourage
such disputes."
10. In K. Subba Rao v. The State of Telangana(2018) 14 SCC 452 , the Hon'ble Apex Court has held
as under:-
"6. The Courts should be careful in proceeding against the distant relatives in crimes
pertaining to matrimonial disputes and dowry deaths. The relatives of the husband
should not be roped in on the basis of omnibus allegations unless specific instances of
their involvement in the crime are made out."
11. The above pronouncements of Apex Court show that there is tendency of implicating the relatives
of husband in matrimonial dispute. It was held that false implication by way of general and omnibus
allegations made in the course of matrimonial dispute, if left unchecked would result in misuse of
the process of law.In this connection, a reference may also be made to case ofKahkashan Kaushar @
Sonam & Others Vs. State of Bihar & Others(2022) 6 SCC 599.
12. In the instant matter perusal of record shows that applicant no.1 is husband, applicant no.2 and
3 are sister-in-law and brother-in-law and applicant no.4 is maternal aunt (Mausi) of the daughter
of opposite party no.2 / complainant. The marriage of victim (daughter of opposite part no.2) with
applicant no.1 has taken place on 14.04.2012. The victim has not sustained any injury. Mainly the
allegations of dowry demand and harassment of victim have been levelled against applicant No. 1/
husband. In respect of applicant No. 2, 3 and 4 only general and vague allegations have been levelled
and no specific role has been assigned to them. Even otherwise the applicants No. 2, 3 and 4 were
not going to be benefited by fulfilment of any dowry demand. The allegations of trafficking in
respect of victim are absurd and baseless and it appears that the same have been made with
intention to blow the matter out of proportion. Considering entire material on record a prima facie
case against the applicant No. 1 is made out but the impugned proceedings against applicant No. 2, 3
and 4 are nothing but abuse of the process of court. They can not be prosecuted on such vague
allegations as levelled against them and even no prima case is made out against them. Thus, the
impugned proceedings against applicant No. 2, 3 and 4 are liable to be quashed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44848152/ 4
Musharraf Beg And 3 Others vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 April, 2025
13. In view of aforesaid, the application of behalf of applicant no.1 Musharraf Beg is dismissed.
14. The impugned proceedings against applicant No. 2, 3 and 4, namely, Smt. Sagufta Beg, Furkan
Beg and Sahana, are hereby quashed. The application under section 482 CrPC on behalf of applicant
No. 2 , 3 and 4 is allowed.
15. The impugned summoning order stand altered accordingly. The case against applicant
Musharraf Beg would proceed further in accordance with law.
16. The application u/s 482 Cr.P.C. is disposed of in the above terms.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 RKM
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/44848152/ 5
