Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July,
2025
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND
LADAKH AT SRINAGAR
Reserved on: 19.05.2025
Pronounced on:04.07.2025
WP (C) Nos. 708/2023, 249/2025, 209/2021,
376/2024, 612/2025, 608/2023, 665/2023,
283/2023, 362/2023, 129/2023, 3132/2023,
543/2025, CCP(S) 49/2024, WP(C)
Nos.731/2022, 706/2023, 321/2023,
126/2024, 527/2025, 269/2023, 621/2024,
CCP(S) 206/2024, WP(C) Nos.322/2023,
3290/2023, 169/2024, 2983/2024, CCP(S)
Nos.62/2024 & 88/2025.
MUSHTAQ AHMAD SHAH
SADIA SHAH
SHABIR AHMAD AKHOON & ORS.
DR. ISHFAQ NAZIR WANI
MOHAMMAD ASHRAF
MOHAMMAD AMIN MEER
NAIYARA KHAN
NUSRAT AHAD PANDIT
DR. ASHAQ HUSSAIN SOFI & ANR.
MOHAMMAD YOUNUS THOKAR
DANISH YAQOOB & ORS.
MASARAT MAJEES & ORS.
DR. NOOR AFSHAN
AAQIB HUSSAIN & ORS.
DR. RUKHSANA RAHIM & ANR.
DR. SABA MANZOOR GANAI & ORS.
...PETITIONER(S)
Through: - Mr. G.A. Lone, Advocate Mr. Mujeeb Andrabi,
Advocate. Mr. Sheikh Mushtaq, Advocate, Mr.
Owais Shafi, Advocate, Mr. Manzoor Ahmad
Ganai, Advocate, Mr. Arif Sikandar, Advocate
with Ms. Asifa Padder & Ms. Laraib Anjeelena,
Advocates & Mr. S.M. Saleem, Advocate.
Vs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 1
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
UNIVERSITY OF KASHMIR & ORS. ...RESPONDENT(S)
Through: - Mr. Syed Faisal Qadiri, Sr Advocate with Mr.
Khursheed Dar, Advocate. Mr. Asif Maqbool,
Advocate. Mr. Mansoor Bukhari, Advocate.
Ms. Mariya, Advocate.
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with
connected matters Page No. 1 of 45
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1) The writ petitioners in all the afore-titled writ petitions have been engaged on academic
arrangement basis by respondent University and their engagement has been extended from time to
time either by virtue of interim orders passed by this Court or otherwise. One of the main legal
issues that has arisen out of the afore-titled writ petitions is as to whether services of a candidate
engaged on academic arrangement basis can be put to an end after the culmination of the session
and be replaced by a similar arrangement. Therefore, all these writ petitions have been clubbed
together for their analogous hearing/ consideration.
2) Before going to the fact situation of the individual writ petitions, it would be apt to refer to the
submissions made by learned counsels appearing for the writ petitioners and the learned Senior
Counsel appearing for the respondent institutes on the issue of legality of replacing a candidate
engaged on academic arrangement basis by a similar arrangement. Learned counsels appearing for
the writ petitioners have contended that it has been the consistent view of the Supreme Court as also
the view of various High WP(C) No.708/2023 along with Court of the Country including this Court
that a contractual or an ad hoc employee cannot be replaced by another set of contractual/ad hoc
employee and that such an employee can be replaced only by a candidate who has been appointed
on substantive basis by following the regular procedure prescribed under the rules. In this regard,
the learned counsels for the writ petitioners have placed heavy reliance upon the judgment of the
Supreme Court in the case of Manish Gupta & another etc. etc. vs. President Jan Bhagidari Samiti &
Ors., 2022 SCC OnLine SC 485, which has been followed by this Court in the case of Murad Ali
Sajan & Ors. Vs. UT of J&K and others (WP(C) No.2635/2022 decided on 06.12.2022).
3) The stand of the respondent Institutes is that the engagement of the writ petitioners was for a
specific academic session which stands expired, therefore, they are debarred from approaching this
Court for invoking extraordinary writ jurisdiction. According to the respondent institutes, service
conditions of the writ petitioners were governed by the terms and conditions laid down in the
advertisement notices, pursuant to which they were engaged and after their engagement, they had
furnished undertakings with the respondent institutes wherein they WP(C) No.708/2023 along with
had declared that they would not be claiming regularization and that they would adhere to the terms
and conditions of their engagement. It is the further stand of the respondent institutes that there is
requirement of updated and talented candidates for performing the functions as contractual
lecturers and in case fresh advertisement notices for subsequent academic sessions are not issued,
not only the rights of new talented and qualified persons to participate in the selection process
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 2
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
would be infringed but even the student community will be deprived of quality education. To
support these contentions, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents has placed
reliance upon the judgments of this Court in the cases of State of J&K & Ors. Vs. Afshan Majid &
Ors. 2008 (2) JKJ[HC] 550, Rajani Kumari & Ors. Vs. State & Ors. 2017 (1) JKJ[HC] 310, and
judgement of Madhya Pradesh High Court in the case of State of Madhya Pradesh & Ors. vs. Rajeev
Singh and Ors. (2024) IV LLJ 320MP.
4) It has been further argued that merely because the writ petitioners continue to perform their
duties on the strength of interim orders passed by this Court from time to time, they cannot claim
right to continue on permanent basis. In this regard reliance has been placed upon the WP(C)
No.708/2023 along with judgments of the Supreme Court in the cases of State of U.P and others vs.
Raj Karan Singh, (1998) 8 SCC 529, and State of Rajasthan and others vs. Daya Lal and others,
(2011) 2 SCC 429.
5) I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused record of the case.
6) So far as the position of law as regards the replacement of contractual/ad hoc employees engaged
on academic arrangement basis by similar set of employees, is concerned, the same is more or less
settled. The Supreme Court has, in the case of Rattan Lal and others vs. State of Haryana and others,
(1985) 4 SCC 43, while dealing with the cases where the State Government had resorted to practice
of appointing teachers on ad hoc basis at the commencement of an academic year and terminating
their services before the commencement of next summer vacation and to reappoint them on ad hoc
basis at the commencement of next academic year, deprecated this policy of the State Government
to appoint teachers on ad hoc basis and terminate their services and then appoint them on ad hoc
basis. In this regard, it would be apt to refer to the relevant observations of the Supreme Court,
which are reproduced as under:
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with "In all these petitions the common question which
arises for decision is whether it is open to the State Government to appoint teachers
on an ad hoc basis at the commencement of an academic year and terminate their
services before the commencement of the next summer vacation, or earlier, to
appoint them again on an ad hoc basis at the commencement of next academic year
and to terminate their services before the commencement of the succeeding summer
vacation or earlier and to continue to do so year after year. A substantial number of
such ad hoc appointments are made in the existing vacancies which have remained
unfilled for three to four years. It is the duty of the State Government to take steps to
appoint teachers in those vacancies in accordance with the rules as early as possible.
The State Government of Haryana has failed to discharge that duty in these cases. It
has been appointing teachers for quite some time on an ad hoc basis for short periods
as stated above without any justifiable reason. In some cases the appointments are
made for a period of six months only and they are renewed after a break of a few
days. The number of teachers in the State of Haryana who are thus appointed on such
ad hoc basis is very large indeed. If the teachers had been appointed regularly, they
would have been entitled to the benefits of summer vacation along with the salary
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 3
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
and allowances payable in respect of that period and to all other privileges such as
casual leave, medical leave, maternity leave etc. available to all the Government
servants. These benefits are denied to these ad hoc teachers unreasonably on account
of this pernicious system of appointment adopted by the State Government. These ad
hoc teachers are unnecessarily subjected to an arbitrary "hiring and firing" policy.
These teachers who constitute the bulk of the educated unemployed are compelled to
accept these jobs on an ad hoc basis with miserable conditions of service. The
Government appears to be exploiting this situation. This is not a sound personnel
policy. It is bound to have serious repercussions on the educational institutions and
the children studying there. The policy of "ad hocism" followed by the State
Government for a long period has led to the breach of Article 14 and Article 16 of the
Constitution. Such a situation cannot be permitted to last any longer. It is needless to
say that the State Government is expected to function as a model employer."
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with
7) Replacement of ad hoc or temporary employees with another set of temporary or
ad hoc employees was deprecated by the Supreme Court in the case of State of
Haryana and others vs. Piara Singh and others, (1992) 4 SCC 118. In the said case, the
Supreme Court made the following observations"
"21. Ordinarily speaking, the creation and abolition of a post is the prerogative of the
Executive. It is the Executive again that lays down the conditions of service subject, of
course, to a law made by the appropriate legislature. This power to prescribe the
conditions of service can be exercised either by making rules under the proviso to
Article 309 of the Constitution or (in the absence of such rules) by issuing
rules/instruct-ions in exercise of its executive power. The court comes into the
picture only to ensure observance of fundamental rights, statutory provisions, rules
and other instructions, if any, governing the conditions of service. The main concern
of the court in such matters is to ensure the rule of law and to see that the Executive
acts fairly and gives a fair deal to its employees consistent with the requirements of
Articles 14 and 16. It also means that the State should not exploit its employees nor
should it seek to take advantage of the helplessness and misery of either the
unemployed persons or the employees, as the case may be. As is often said, the State
must be a model employer....."
8) In the case of Hargurpratap Singh vs. State of Punjab & Ors. (2007) 13 SCC 292, the Supreme
Court has, while dealing with the cases where appointment of the employees was made on ad hoc
basis in several colleges, observed as under:
"3. We have carefully looked into the judgment of the High Court and other pleadings
that have WP(C) No.708/2023 along with been put forth before this Court. It is clear
that though the appellants may not be entitled to regular appointment as such it
cannot be said that they will not be entitled to the minimum of the pay scale nor that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 4
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
they should not be continued till regular incumbents are appointed. The course
adopted by the High Court is to displace one ad hoc arrangement by another ad hoc
arrangement which is not at all appropriate for these persons who have gained
experience which will be more beneficial and useful to the colleges concerned rather
than to appoint persons afresh on ad hoc basis. Therefore, we set aside the orders
made by the High Court to the extent the same deny the claim of the appellants of
minimum pay scale and continuation in service till regular incumbents are
appointed. We direct that they shall be continued in service till regular appointments
are made on minimum of the pay scale. The appeals shall stand allowed in part
accordingly".
9) The Supreme Court in the case of Mohd. Abdul Kadir and another vs. Director General of Police,
Assam and others, (2009) 6 SCC 611, which was a case wherein servicemen were being subjected to
re-selection after the expiry of their contracts despite the fact that the scheme under which they
were appointed was not discontinued, held as under:
"17. When the ad hoc appointment is under a scheme and is in accordance with the
selection process prescribed by the scheme, there is no reason why those appointed
under the scheme should not be continued as long as the scheme continues. Ad hoc
appointments under schemes are normally coterminous with the scheme (subject of
course to earlier termination either on medical or disciplinary grounds, or for
unsatisfactory service or on attainment of normal age of retirement). Irrespective of
the length of their ad hoc service or the scheme, they will not be entitled to WP(C)
No.708/2023 along with regularisation nor to the security of tenure and service
benefits available to the regular employees. In this background, particularly in view
of the continuing Scheme, the ex-serviceman employed after undergoing the
selection process, need not be subjected to the agony, anxiety, humiliation and
vicissitudes of annual termination and re- engagement, merely because their
appointment is termed as ad hoc appointments.
18. We are therefore of the view that the learned Single Judge was justified in
observing that the process of termination and reappointment every year should be
avoided and the appellants should be continued as long as the Scheme continues, but
purely on ad hoc and temporary basis, coterminous with the Scheme...."
10) Relying upon the upon the ratio laid down in Rattan Lal's case (supra) followed in Hargurpratap
Singh's case (supra), the Supreme Court has, in Manish Gupta and anr. (supra), while dealing with a
case where teachers were appointed as guest faculty for a particular academic year and after the end
of the academic year their services were discontinued whereafter fresh advertisements were issued
for next academic year, observed as under:
"13. A perusal of the advertisement dated 24-6- 2016 issued by the Principal,
Government Kamla Raja Girls Post Graduate Autonomous College, Gwalior, which is
at Annexure P-2 of the appeal paperbook and the advertisement dated 2-7-2016
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 5
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
issued by the Principal, SMS Government Model Science College, Gwalior, M.P.,
which is at Annexure P-3 of the appeal paperbook, would show that the appointments
were to be made after the candidates had gone through due selection procedure.
Though Shri Nataraj, learned ASG has strenuously urged that the appointments of
the appellants were WP(C) No.708/2023 along with as guest lecturers and not as ad
hoc employees, from the nature of the advertisements, it could clearly be seen that
the appellants were appointed on ad hoc basis. It is a settled principle of law that an
ad hoc employee cannot be replaced by another ad hoc employee and he can be
replaced only by another candidate who is regularly appointed by following a regular
procedure prescribed. Reliance in this respect can be placed on the judgment of this
Court in Rattan Lal v. State of Haryana , (1985) 4 SCC 43 and on the order of this
Court in Hargurpratap Singh v. State of Punjab v. State of Punjab, (2007) 13 SCC
292."
11) This Court in the case of Murad Ali Sajan & Ors. (supra), after following the ratio laid down by
the Supreme Court in Munish Gupta's case (supra), came to the conclusion that the action of
respondents in the said case in inviting applications from the candidates for filling up of posts of
Staff Nurses on academic arrangement basis after disengaging the services of the petitioners therein
who were already working on a similar arrangement with the respondents therein, was not in
accordance with law. It was further observed by this Court that the respondents therein can replace
the writ petitioners therein only by filling up the vacant posts of Staff Nurses on substantive basis.
12) Recently, a Division Bench of Delhi High Court in the case of Delhi Skill and Entrepreneurship
University vs. Neeru Kalher and Ors. (LPA No.615/2023 decided on WP(C) No.708/2023 along with
31.08.2023), after considering various decisions of the Supreme Court on the issue, summed up the
legal principles in the following manner:
"23. The principles emerging from the afore- stated precedents are squarely
applicable to the case at hand. The Appellant University, without effecting any
change to their scheme of employing Master Trainers sought to replace the
Respondents with similarly situated fresh contractual employees. It is pertinent to
note that the Appellant University has not alleged any deficiency in services provided
by the Respondents or any instance of misconduct. They have failed to provide any
rationale justifying the replacement of the Respondents other than asserting their
desire to attract fresh talent. The action of replacing contractual faculty members
who possess experience is not only unfair to the Respondents but is also detrimental
for the University and its students. Under these circumstances, this Court finds no
reason to interfere with the finding of the Learned Single Judge that the action of the
Appellant University is untenable by virtue of being contrary to the law laid down in
Piara Singh (supra)."
13) Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents has contended that the basic principle
relating to impermissibility of replacing a contractual employee by a similar arrangement has been
laid down in Piara Singh's case (supra) but the Supreme Court in its later Constitution Bench
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 6
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
judgment in the case of Secretary, State of Karnataka and others vs. Uma Devi and others, (2006) 4
SCC 1, has impliedly overruled the ratio laid down in Piara Singh's case, therefore, the very basis of
the legal principle WP(C) No.708/2023 along with that a contractual employee cannot be replaced
by a similar arrangement stands knocked down by the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in Uma
Devi's case (supra).
14) The contention of the learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents appears to be
misconceived for the reason that the direction in Piara Singh's case (supra) that ad hoc or temporary
employees should not be replaced by another ad hoc or temporary employees and should only be
replaced by regularly selected employees, though considered in Uma Devi's case (supra), was not
disagreed with. In this regard, it would be apt to refer to the relevant paras of Uma Devi's judgment
wherein Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court considered the ratio laid down in Piara Singh's
case. The same are reproduced as under:
"23. We may now consider State of Haryana v. Piara Singh. There, the Court was
considering the sustainability of certain directions issued by the High Court in the
light of various orders passed by the State for the absorption of its ad hoc or
temporary employees and daily-wagers or casual labour. This Court started by saying
: (SCC p. 134, para 21) "21. Ordinarily speaking, the creation and abolition of a post is
the prerogative of the executive. It is the executive again that lays down the
conditions of service subject, of course, to a law made by the appropriate legislature.
This power to prescribe the conditions of service can be exercised either by making
rules under the proviso to Article 309 of the Constitution or (in the absence of such
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with rules) by issuing rules/instructions in exercise of its
executive power. The court comes into the picture only to ensure observance of
fundamental rights, statutory provisions, rules and other instructions, if any,
governing the conditions of service."
24. This Court then referred to some of the earlier decisions of this Court while stating : (SCC p. 134,
para 21) "The main concern of the court in such matters is to ensure the rule of law and to see that
the executive acts fairly and gives a fair deal to its employees consistent with the requirements of
Articles 14 and 16. It also means that the State should not exploit its employees nor should it seek to
take advantage of the helplessness and misery of either the unemployed persons or the employees,
as the case may be. As is often said, the State must be a model employer. It is for this reason, it is
held that equal pay must be given for equal work, which is indeed one of the directive principles of
the Constitution. It is for this very reason it is held that a person should not be kept in a temporary
or ad hoc status for long. Where a temporary or ad hoc appointment is continued for long the court
presumes that there is need and warrant for a regular post and accordingly directs regularisation.
While all the situations in which the court may act to ensure fairness cannot be detailed here, it is
sufficient to indicate that the guiding principles are the ones stated above."
25. This Court then concluded in paras 45 to 49 : (SCC p. 152) "45. The normal rule, of course, is
regular recruitment through the prescribed agency but exigencies of administration may sometimes
call for an ad hoc or temporary appointment to be made. In such a situation, effort should always be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 7
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
to replace such an ad hoc/temporary employee by a regularly selected employee as early as possible.
Such a temporary employee may also compete along with others for such regular
selection/appointment. If he gets selected, well and good, but if he does not, he WP(C) No.708/2023
along with must give way to the regularly selected candidate. The appointment of the regularly
selected candidate cannot be withheld or kept in abeyance for the sake of such an ad hoc/temporary
employee.
46. Secondly, an ad hoc or temporary employee should not be replaced by another ad hoc or
temporary employee; he must be replaced only by a regularly selected employee. This is necessary to
avoid arbitrary action on the part of the appointing authority.
47. Thirdly, even where an ad hoc or temporary employment is necessitated on account of the
exigencies of administration, he should ordinarily be drawn from the employment exchange unless
it cannot brook delay in which case the pressing cause must be stated on the file. If no candidate is
available or is not sponsored by the employment exchange, some appropriate method consistent
with the requirements of Article 16 should be followed. In other words, there must be a notice
published in the appropriate manner calling for applications and all those who apply in response
thereto should be considered fairly.
48. An unqualified person ought to be appointed only when qualified persons are not available
through the above processes.
49. If for any reason, an ad hoc or temporary employee is continued for a fairly long spell, the
authorities must consider his case for regularisation provided he is eligible and qualified according
to the rules and his service record is satisfactory and his appointment does not run counter to the
reservation policy of the State."
26. With respect, why should the State be allowed to depart from the normal rule and indulge in
temporary employment in permanent posts? This Court, in our view, is bound to insist on the State
making regular and proper recruitments and is bound not to encourage or shut its eyes to the
persistent transgression of the rules of regular recruitment. The direction to make permanent--the
distinction between regularisation and making permanent, was not emphasised here--can only
encourage the State, WP(C) No.708/2023 along with the model employer, to flout its own rules and
would confer undue benefits on a few at the cost of many waiting to compete. With respect, the
direction made in para 50 (of SCC) of Piara Singh is to some extent inconsistent with the conclusion
in para 45 (of SCC) therein. With great respect, it appears to us that the last of the directions clearly
runs counter to the constitutional scheme of employment recognised in the earlier part of the
decision. Really, it cannot be said that this decision has laid down the law that all ad hoc, temporary
or casual employees engaged without following the regular recruitment procedure should be made
permanent."
15) From the above, it nowhere comes to the fore that the ratio laid down in Piara Singh's case
(supra) that an ad hoc or temporary employee should not be replaced by a similar arrangement has
been dissented to in Uma Devi's case. The argument of learned Senior Counsel in this regard is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 8
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
without any merit.
16) Thus, right from Rattan Lal's case (supra) to Manish Gupta's case (supra), it has been the
consistent view of the Supreme Court that an ad hoc or temporary employee cannot be replaced by a
similar arrangement and such an employee can be replaced only by a regularly selected employee.
17) So far as the contention of respondent institutes that by inviting fresh applications, fresh talent
would be engaged for imparting quality education to the student's community and in case the
respondent institutes are stopped from WP(C) No.708/2023 along with inviting fresh applications
at the end of academic sessions, it would be detrimental to the larger interests of student community
and also to the interests of new candidates, is concerned, the same also appears to be without any
merit. This aspect of the matter has been dealt with by the Supreme Court in the case of
Hargurpratap Singh's case (supra), wherein it has been held that continuing the ad hoc arrangement
of already engaged persons who have gained experience would be more beneficial and useful to the
colleges rather than to appoint candidates afresh on ad hoc basis.
18) Apart from the above, replacing teaching faculty after every academic session, breaks continuity
which is ultimately detrimental to the academic career of the students. A teacher who is engaged to
impart education to students has not only to be abreast with the knowledge of the relevant subject
but he has to relate to the students and to strike a chord with them. This he/she can do only by
interacting with the students for a sufficiently long period of time. If we keep on replacing teaching
faculty at short intervals, it will have deleterious consequences on the quality of education that
would be imparted to the students. The argument of learned Senior Counsel for the WP(C)
No.708/2023 along with respondents is, therefore, specious and deserves to be rejected outrightly.
19) So far as the judgment of this Court in Afshan Majid & Ors case (supra), relied upon by learned
Senior Counsel appearing for the respondents, is concerned, this Court had no occasion to consider
the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in Munish Gupta's case (supra), obviously because the
said judgment was delivered only in the year 2022. Similarly, in Rajani Kumari & Ors case (supra)
also, the ratio laid down in Munish Gupta's case (supra) has not been considered.
20) So far as judgment of Madhya Pradesh High Court in Rajeev Singh and Ors. case (supra) is
concerned, in the said case the post of Data Entry Operator had been created only for two years. It is
in those circumstances that the Court held that the State had no interest of creating any permanent
post of Data Entry Operator, as such, the contract of the writ petitioners therein could not have been
extended beyond the prescribed period.
21) For what has been discussed hereinbefore, there is no doubt in holding that the faculty engaged
on academic arrangement basis or contractual basis to impart education to the students cannot be
replaced by a similar WP(C) No.708/2023 along with arrangement after conclusion of the contract
period or after conclusion of the academic session. They can be replaced only by regularly
selected/appointed candidates. Merely because the candidates have executed undertakings wherein
they have declared that they will not claim regularization and that they would adhere to the terms
and conditions of the advertisement notice(s) does not give a licence to the respondent institutes to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 9
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
resort to hire and fire policy. Having regard to the consistent legal position on the subject,
notwithstanding the undertakings executed by the writ petitioners, they cannot be replaced by a
similar arrangement. They can be replaced only by filling up the posts on substantive basis in
accordance with the relevant rules. It is also clear that the respondent institutes cannot be forced to
continue the candidates engaged on academic arrangement/contractual basis in perpetuity in case
there is no requirement for the respondent institutes to make such engagements/arrangements.
22) In the light of the aforesaid legal position on the subject, the fact situation in individual writ
petitions is required to be analyzed.
23.1) Through the medium of this writ petition, the petitioner has challenged advertisement notice
dated WP(C) No.708/2023 along with 31.01.2023 issued by the respondent University to the extent
of inviting applications for filling up of two positions of contractual lecturers in the discipline of
Foreign Language for the Session 2023. The petitioner claims to be working as a contractual lecturer
with the respondent University in the said discipline having been engaged as such since the
academic session 2018.
23.2) In view of the legal position discussed hereinbefore, the writ petition is disposed of with a
direction to the respondents not to replace the petitioner with a similar arrangement till such time
regular selection to the post, which the petitioner is holding, is made in accordance with the relevant
Recruitment Rules. The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to dispense with the services of the
petitioner on the ground of non-performance or on disciplinary grounds.
24.1) The petitioner, through the medium of present writ petition, has challenged advertisement
notice dated 09.01.2025 issued by the respondent University to the extent of inviting applications
for engagement of contractual Assistant Professors on academic arrangement basis for Session 2025
in the discipline of Electrical WP(C) No.708/2023 along with Engineering. The petitioner claims to
have been engaged on academic arrangement basis in the aforesaid discipline in the year 2023 and
is stated to be working as such till date. 24.2) In view of the legal position discussed hereinbefore,
the writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents not to replace the petitioner with
a similar arrangement till such time regular selection to the post, which the petitioner is holding, is
made in accordance with the relevant Recruitment Rules. The respondents shall, however, be at
liberty to dispense with the services of the petitioner on the ground of non-performance or on
disciplinary grounds.
25.1) The writ petitioners claim to be working as Lecturers/Assistant Professors on contractual basis
in various disciplines with the respondent University. The petitioners claim that they have been
appointed on academic arrangement basis and are working as such since the year 2020.
25.2) Vide writ petition bearing WP(C) No.209/2021, the petitioners have sought a direction upon
the respondents that they should not be replaced by a similar arrangement WP(C) No.708/2023
along with whereas vide writ petition bearing WP(C) No.376/2024, they have challenged
advertisement notification dated 15.01.2024, whereby applications have been invited by the
respondent University for engagement of contractual Lecturers for academic Sessions 2024 in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 10
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
respect of the disciplines in which the petitioners are presently working. 25.3) In view of the legal
position discussed hereinbefore, both these writ petitions are disposed of with a direction to the
respondents not to replace the petitioners with a similar arrangement till such time regular selection
to the posts, which the petitioners are holding, is made in accordance with the relevant Recruitment
Rules. The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to dispense with the services of the petitioners
on the ground of non-performance or on disciplinary grounds.
26.1) The petitioner claims to be working as contractual Assistant Professor in the discipline of Urdu
with the respondent University in South Campus, Anantnag, for the last eight years. He has laid
challenge to the advertisement notice dated 09.01.2025 issued by respondent University, whereby
fresh applications have been invited for engagement of contractual Assistant Professors for the
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with academic Session 2025 in the discipline in which the petitioner is
presently working.
26.2) In view of the legal position discussed hereinbefore, the writ petition is disposed of with a
direction to the respondents not to replace the petitioner with a similar arrangement till such time
regular selection to the post, which the petitioner is holding, is made in accordance with the relevant
Recruitment Rules. The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to dispense with the services of the
petitioner on the ground of non-performance or on disciplinary grounds.
27.1) The petitioner claims to be working as contractual Lecturer in Iqbal Institute of Culture and
Philosophy, University of Kashmir since the year 2022. He has challenged advertisement notice
dated 31.01.2023 issued by the respondent University, whereby applications have been invited for
engagement of contractual Lecturers for the Sessions 2023 in the aforesaid discipline. 27.2) The
petitioner has, besides laying challenge to the aforesaid advertisement notice on the ground that he
cannot be replaced by a contractual/academic arrangement, also contended that the criteria
prescribed in WP(C) No.708/2023 along with the advertisement notice as regards the desirable
qualification/specialization is irrational. 27.3) Since the writ petition involves determination of an
additional issue, therefore, the same is directed to be delinked for its separate consideration. It is,
however, provided that the interim order passed in the writ petition shall continue till next date of
hearing. 27.4) The Registry shall renotify this writ petition on 25.08.2025.
28.1) The petitioner claims to be working as an Assistant Professor against the sanctioned post in
the discipline of Civil Engineering in the respondent University on contractual/academic
arrangement basis. She has laid challenge to advertisement notice dated 31.01.2023, whereby
applications for engagement of contractual Lecturers for the academic Sessions 2023 in the
discipline in which she is presently working.
28.2) In view of the legal position discussed hereinbefore, the writ petition is disposed of with a
direction to the respondents not to replace the petitioner with a similar arrangement till such time
regular selection to the post, WP(C) No.708/2023 along with which the petitioner is holding, is
made in accordance with the relevant Recruitment Rules. The respondents shall, however, be at
liberty to dispense with the services of the petitioner on the ground of non-performance or on
disciplinary grounds.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 11
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
29.1) The petitioner claims to be working as a Contractual Lecturer in the Department of Law,
University of Kashmir, since the year 2022. She has, besides seeking a direction upon the
respondents not to replace her with a similar arrangement, sought regularization of her services.
29.2) The relief of regularization claimed by the petitioner, being a "service matter" as defined under
Section 2(q) of the Administrative Tribunals Act, is cognizable by Central Administrative Tribunal.
Therefore, the writ petition is transferred to the Central Administrative Tribunal, Srinagar, for its
disposal in accordance with law. Till such time the matter is considered by the Tribunal, the interim
order passed by this Court on 15.02.2023 shall remain in operation.
29.3) The Registry shall transmit the record of this petition to the Central Administrative Tribunal,
Srinagar, where the parties shall appear on 04.08.2025.
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with 30.1) Initially this writ petition was filed by four writ petitioners but
later on, two of the writ petitioners withdrew the writ petition and presently it is confined to
petitioners Dr. Ashaq Hussain and Dr. Baseerat Hamza only. They claim to be working as Lecturers
in various disciplines with the respondent University since the year 2022. The petitioners have laid
challenge to advertisement notice dated 31.01.2023 to the extent of their disciplines, whereby
applications have been invited for engagement of contractual Lecturers for the academic Sessions
2023. 30.2) In view of the legal position discussed hereinbefore, the writ petition is disposed of with
a direction to the respondents not to replace the petitioners with a similar arrangement till such
time regular selection to the posts, which the petitioners are holding, is made in accordance with the
relevant Recruitment Rules. The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to dispense with the
services of the petitioners on the ground of non-performance or on disciplinary grounds.
31.1) The petitioners claim to be working as contractual Lecturers on academic arrangement basis
with the WP(C) No.708/2023 along with respondent University in various disciplines since the year
2022. They have sought a direction upon the respondents to allow them to continue as contractual
Lecturers and not to replace them by another set of contractual engagees. 31.2) In view of the legal
position discussed hereinbefore, the writ petition is disposed of with a direction to the respondents
not to replace the petitioners with a similar arrangement till such time regular selection to the posts,
which the petitioners are holding, is made in accordance with the relevant Recruitment Rules. The
respondents shall, however, be at liberty to dispense with the services of the petitioners on the
ground of non-performance or on disciplinary grounds.
32) WP(C) Nos.3132/2023 & 543/2025 32.1) The petitioners claim to be working as Instructors on
contractual basis in the discipline of Sculpture, Art History and Applied Art with the respondent
University for the last several years against sanctioned posts. 32.2) Vide writ petition bearing WP(C)
No.3132/2023, the petitioners have sought a direction upon the respondents not to initiate fresh
selection process for the engagement of contractual Lecturers in the aforesaid disciplines whereas
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with vide writ petition bearing WP(C) No.543/2025, they have laid
challenge to advertisement notice dated 05.02.2025 issued by the respondent University, whereby
applications have been invited for engagement of contractual Assistant Instructors/Instructors on
academic arrangement basis for Session 2025 in the disciplines in which the petitioners are
working.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 12
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
32.3) In view of the legal position discussed hereinbefore, both the writ petitions are disposed of
with a direction to the respondents not to replace the petitioners with a similar arrangement till
such time regular selection to the posts, which the petitioners are holding, is made in accordance
with the relevant Recruitment Rules. The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to dispense with
the services of the petitioner on the ground of non-performance or on disciplinary grounds.
32.4) Since the main writ petition(s) stand already disposed of, as such, the interim orders out of
which contempt petition bearing CCP(S) No.49/2024 has arisen, have merged with the final order.
The contempt proceedings, therefore, do not survive for any further consideration and the same are,
accordingly, closed. The contempt petition shall stand disposed of.
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with 33.1) The petitioner claims to be working as Lecturer on contractual
basis in the discipline of Arabic in the respondent University since the year 2017. 33.2) Vide writ
petition bearing WP(C) No.731/2022, the petitioner has sought a direction upon the respondents
that she should not be disengaged till such time the post held by her is filled up in accordance with
rules on substantive basis. Vide writ petition bearing WP(C) No.706/2023, the petitioner has laid
challenge to advertisement notice dated 31.01.2023 issued by the respondent University, whereby
applications have been invited for engagement of contractual Lecturers for academic Sessions 2023
in the discipline in which the petitioner is working. 33.3) In view of the legal position discussed
hereinbefore, both these writ petitions are disposed of with a direction to the respondents not to
replace the petitioner with a similar arrangement till such time regular selection to the post, which
the petitioner is holding, is made in accordance with the relevant Recruitment Rules. The
respondents shall, however, be at liberty to dispense with the services of the petitioner on the
ground of non-performance or on disciplinary grounds.
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with 34.1) WP(C) No.321/2023 has been filed by Aaqib Hussain, who
claims to be working as a contractual Lecturer in the Department of Computer Science Engineering
since the year 2022.
34.2) WP(C) No.126/2024 had been initially filed by above named Aaqib Hussain and eight more
writ petitioners, out of whom two writ petitioners, namely, Ishfaq Ahmad Dar and Waseem Gulzar,
have withdrawn the writ petition. The writ petition is being now prosecuted by petitioners, namely,
Aaqib Hussain, Dr. Ashaq Hussain Sofi, Dr. Baseerat Hamza, Sania Qadri, Dr. Kaleem Ahmad
Najar, Dr. Arjumand Rasool and Naiyara Khan. They claim to be working as contractual Lecturers
against the sanctioned posts in the discipline of Mechanical Engineering, Physics, Mathematics,
Chemistry and Civil Engineering. 34.3) WP(C) No.527/2025 has been filed by Aaqib Hussain, Dr.
Ashaq Hussain Sofi, Dr. Baseerat Hamza, Sania Qadri, Dr. Kaleem Ahmad Najar, Dr. Arjumand
Rasool and Naiyara Khan. By virtue of the said writ petition, they have challenged advertisement
notice dated 09.01.2025 issued by the respondent University, whereby applications have WP(C)
No.708/2023 along with been invited for engagement of contractual Assistant Professors for
academic Session 2025 in the disciplines in which the petitioners are stated to be worked. 34.4) In
view of the legal position discussed hereinbefore, all these three writ petitions are disposed of with a
direction to the respondents not to replace the petitioners with a similar arrangement till such time
regular selection to the posts, which the petitioners are holding, is made in accordance with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 13
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
relevant Recruitment Rules. The respondents shall, however, be at liberty to dispense with the
services of the petitioners on the ground of non- performance or on disciplinary grounds.
35) WP(C) No.269/2023, 35.1) WP(C) No.269/2023 has been filed by Dr. Rukhsana Rahim whereas
WP(C) No.621/2024 has been filed by Dr. Rukhsana Rahim and Dr. Mohammad Amin Meer.
Petitioner Dr. Rukhsana Rahim claims that she is serving on academic basis on the position of Urdu
Lecturer in Iqbal Institute of Culture & Philosophy for the last three consecutive years whereas
petitioner Dr. Mohammad Amin Meer has also claimed that he is working as a contractual Lecturer
in the aforesaid discipline with the respondent WP(C) No.708/2023 along with University since the
year 2022. They have laid challenge to advertisement notices issued by the respondent University
whereby applications have been invited for engagement of Lecturers on contractual basis for the
academic Session 2023 and academic Sessions 2024, on the grounds that it is not open to the
respondents to replace the petitioners with a similar arrangement and also on the ground that the
desirable qualification/specialization prescribed by the respondent University in respect of the
discipline of Iqbal Institute of Culture and Philosophy is not in accordance with the requirements of
the job.
35.2) Since these writ petitions involve determination of an additional issue, therefore, the same are
directed to be delinked for their separate consideration. It is, however, provided that the interim
orders passed in the writ petitions shall continue till next date of hearing. 35.3) List along with
WP(C) No.608/2023 on 25.08.2025. CCP(S) Nos.62/2024 & 88/2025 36.1) The petitioners in these
writ petitions claim to be working as contractual Lecturers on academic arrangement basis in the
Department of Law/School of WP(C) No.708/2023 along with Law, University of Kashmir, for the
last more than five years.
36.2) Vide WP(C) No.322/2023, the petitioners have challenged advertisement notice dated
31.01.2023, whereby the respondent University has invited applications for engagement of
contractual Lecturers on academic arrangement basis for the Session 2023 for 12 positions in School
of Law. Vide WP(C) No.3290/2023, the petitioners have challenged communication dated 8th
December, 2023, whereby, in response to their joint representation, the respondent University has
informed them that the engagement of contractual Lecturers working on Court directions would be
governed by the terms and conditions as envisaged in their previous engagement orders. Vide
WP(C) No.169/2024, the petitioners have laid challenge to advertisement notice dated 05.01.2024
whereby the respondent University has invited applications for engagement of contractual lecturers
on academic arrangement basis for the Session 2024 in respect of various subjects in the School of
Law. Vide WP(C) No.2983/2024, the petitioners have challenged order dated 27th May, 2024,
issued by the respondent University, wherein it has been provided that order dated 29.03.2024
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with issued in favour of nine contractual Lecturers in Department of
Law shall be valid upto to the end of academic Session, 2024 or till the interim orders passed in the
matter are vacated/modified by the High Court, whichever is earlier.
36.3) So far as the legal position as regards the permissibility of replacing the teaching faculty of an
educational institution engaged on contractual basis or academic arrangement basis by a similar
arrangement is concerned, the same, as already discussed hereinbefore, is beyond any cavil,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 14
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
inasmuch it is not permissible for an institute to resort to hire and fire policy and to replace
contractual/temporary arrangement by a similar arrangement. The replacement can only be
resorted through regularly appointed staff/teaching faculty. However, in the present case, the
affidavits filed by the respondent University raise additional issues which are required to be dealt
with separately.
36.4) It has been contended by the respondent University that they have invited applications for
vacant posts of Assistant Professors and have almost culminated the process of filling up these
vacant posts on substantive basis, therefore, the respondent University cannot be forced WP(C)
No.708/2023 along with to continue with the engagement of the petitioners whose terms of
engagement are strictly governed by the terms and conditions laid down in the advertisement
notice(s) pursuant to which they had submitted their applications. In the affidavit filed by the
respondent University, it has been submitted that the last regular appointments were made in the
year 2017 and the process of regular appointments did not take place until issuance of notification
dated 19.12.2023, in terms whereof the vacant positions in various subjects including the subjects of
the petitioners were put to advertisement. It has been submitted that in view of the appointment of
Assistant Professor in various faculties on permanent basis, there is no need for contractual
engagements on academic arrangement basis in the faculties of Law, Urdu, Arabic, Zoology and
Institute of Culture & Philosophy. It has been submitted that the sanctioned strength of Assistant
Professors is 354 and at present, 288 posts of Assistant Professors have been filled up whereas the
process for filling up of 66 posts has been initiated. It has been further contended that even the
petitioners herein have participated in the selection process initiated for filling up the posts on
substantive basis.
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with 36.5) Regarding the faculty of Law, the respondent University has
taken a stand that it is drawing faculty from other departments for teaching law and non-law
subjects which has been the practice adopted by the University so as to encourage
inter-departmental faculty exchange for teaching inter-disciplinary subjects. It has been further
submitted that the School of Law has an understanding with the School of Legal Studies, Central
University of Kashmir and, therefore, a consistent practice of faculty exchange is being followed.
36.6) According to the respondent University, Dr. Hilal Ahmad Najar and Dr. Mudasir are serving
as Senior Assistant Professor and Assistant Professor in the School of Legal Studies, Central
University, Kashmir, and their services are being engaged in consonance with the understanding
with the Central University of Kashmir. Similarly, services of Professor Mushtaq Ahmad Dar, who is
teaching in the Department of Distance Education, University of Kashmir, are also being utilized.
Besides this, the respondent University has submitted that in the past, the Department of Law had
intake of more than 120 students for each programme of BA. LL.B and LL.B since 2017 batch
onwards and now the student intake has been WP(C) No.708/2023 along with reduced to about 65
students for each programme. It has been submitted that it is not necessary for introduction of every
new course that a faculty ought to be sanctioned for it prior to the introduction. It has been further
submitted that there are a number of courses being run within each department of the University
where the faculty is drawn not only from the parent department but from other allied disciplines
also to engage classes.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 15
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
36.7) On the basis of the affidavits filed by the respondent University, it is being contended that it is
not necessary for the respondent University to continue with the contractual engagement of the
petitioners once the vacant posts in the Department have been filled up on substantive basis and the
shortfall, if any, is taken care by visiting/guest lecturers from other departments/ universities.
36.8) If we have a look at advertisement notice dated 19th December, 2023 so far as it relates to the
Law Department, it is revealed that 03 posts of Assistant Professors have been advertised. The
process of selection is stated to be at the final stage. If we have a look at the advertisement notice
issued by the respondent University for the Department of Law for the academic Sessions 2023,
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with 12 positions of contractual Lecturers were advertised, meaning
thereby that in the year 2023, there was a requirement of 12 Lecturers in the Department of Law. It
is the case of the respondent University that since the year 2017 uptill the year 2023, no
advertisement notices were issued for filling up the posts of Assistant Professors on substantive
basis, meaning thereby that the requirement of faculty at the time of issuance of advertisement
notice in the year 2023 for filling up the posts on contractual basis was similar to the one as at the
time of initiation of process of selection on substantive basis in December, 2023. In other words,
there was requirement of 12 faculty members in the Law Department but the selection process on
substantive basis is going on only in respect of three posts leaving a shortfall of nine
teachers/lecturers. The respondent University, it seems, is trying to makeup this shortfall in the
faculty by getting guest/visiting lecturers from other departments and other universities. The
question arises as to whether such a methodology that is being adopted by the respondent
University is, in any manner, going to benefit the student community and whether the same is
permissible in law.
WP(C) No.708/2023 along with 36.9) In order to find answer to the aforesaid question, it has to be
noted that the Bar Council of India has issued Rules of Legal Education, 2008, for prescribing
standards of legal education and recognition of degrees in law for the purposes of enrolment as
advocates. It lays down guidelines with regard to academic infrastructure of institutes imparting
education in law. The rules which are relevant to the context are reproduced hereinbelow:
15. Minimum Library requirement: To start with, a Law Library shall have a set of
AIR manual, Central Acts and Local Acts, Criminal law journal, SCC, Company cases,
Indian Bar Review, selected Judgements on Professional Ethics and Journals with
the back volumes for at least ten years and also such number of text books in each
subjects taught during the period according to the minimum standard ratio of ten
books for each registered students. For running integrated program, text books of
such other subjects are also to be kept in the similar minimum ratio. The minimum
investment in Library in each academic year must shall be Rupees Fifty thousand for
one stream and Rupees One Lakh for both the streams.
16 Whole time Principal/ Head/Dean: There shall be a Principal for each constituent
or affiliated Centre of Legal Education of a University and a Dean for the University
Department, who shall have minimum prescribed qualification in law as prescribed
by the UGC for respective position like Principal of a Centre of Legal Education or a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 16
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
Professor of Law to hold Deanship, as the case may be.
17. Core Faculty: There shall be sufficient number of full time faculty members in
each Centre of Legal Education (i.e., Department, constituent or affiliated college) to
teach each subject at all point of time for running courses who can be supported by
part time or visiting faculty. Such a core faculty shall in no case be less than six in the
first year of the approval with both streams in operation, eight in the second year and
ten in the case of third year of law courses. In addition, for the integrated course
there shall be adequate faculty in the subjects offered in the liberal educational
subjects as WP(C) No.708/2023 along with part of the course by the institution.
These faculties in the liberal educational discipline in Arts, Science, Management,
Commerce, Engineering, Technology or any other discipline shall possess
qualification as is required under the UGC guideline or under such other standard
setting body as the discipline is allotted to by any Act, statute, or Rules of the
Government of India or of a State.
For the Three Year Bachelor of Law degree course only with two sections without the Honour
program, there shall be minimum of 4 core faculty in the first year six in the second and eight in the
third year in addition to the Principal/Head or Dean as the case may be. Provided that an institution
intending to run any specialized or honours course must have at least three faculty in the group in
which specialization and honours courses are offered.
Provided further that each full time faculty shall take as many classes in the subject or subjects as
may be assigned to them on the basis of standard prescribed by 'the standard setting institution' like
UGC. Provided further, if any institution of a University, which was already affiliated to the
University and approved to run professional courses of either scheme or both by the Bar Council of
India after inspection of the University, falls short of required full time faculty, the new admission in
courses may be required to remain suspended until new required number of faculty is procured. The
University shall before starting a new academic session, notify which institutions are only be
allowed to admit fresh students.
Provided further that if while inspecting the University it was found that in any institution of the
University adequate number of full time faculty was not there in the staff, the Bar Council after
giving notice to the University might give a public notice directing the University not to admit
students in the new academic year in that institution.
36.10) From the perusal of aforesaid Rules, it is clear that an institute imparting education in law
has to have a minimum library as prescribed in Rule 15. It has to be headed by a whole time
Principal/Head/Dean having a minimum prescribed qualification in law as laid down by WP(C)
No.708/2023 along with the UGC. As per Rule 17, there has to be full-time faculty members in each
Centre of Legal Education to teach each subject at all point of time for running courses who can be
supported by part time or visiting faculty. Such a core faculty, in no case, can be less than six in the
first year of the approval with both streams in operation, eight in the second year and ten in case of
third year of law courses. In addition to this, in the case of integrated course, there has to be an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 17
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
adequate faculty in the subjects offered as part of the course by the institution. It is also provided
that for three-year Bachelors Law degree course only with two sections, there has to be a minimum
of four core faculty in the first year, six in the second and eight in the third year in addition to the
Principal/Head or Dean. 36.11) In the instant case, if we have a look at the documents produced by
the respondent University, there is a sanctioned strength of 14 Assistant Professors, 03 Associated
Professors and 01 Professor in the Department of Law, out of which only 13 Assistant Professors are
presently in place leaving a vacancy of 05 posts. The respondent University is running three years
LLB course as well as five years integrated BA. LLB course. Besides this, the respondent University
is also running the course of LLM WP(C) No.708/2023 along with and PhD courses. The intake
capacity for BA. LLB five-year course is 120 seats, the intake capacity in LLB three years course is
120 seats, intake capacity in LLB Supplementary shift is 66 seats and the intake capacity in LLM
course is 24 seats.
36.12) In the face of the standards prescribed by Bar Council of India, as per the Rules of Legal
Education, 2008, it is well neigh impossible for the respondent University to cater to the needs of
student community with a teaching faculty of 13 people. It appears that it is for this reason that the
respondent University has been engaging the faculty on contractual basis from time to time. It also
appears that the respondent University has not till date created sufficient number of permanent
posts so as to provide a permanent faculty to the student community which has compelled them to
resort to contractual engagements on academic arrangement basis.
36.13) Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the respondent University has submitted that there is a
difference between 'position' and a 'post'. On this basis, it has been contended that while a
contractual employee can be allowed to continue till a post is filled up on substantive basis but a
contractual appointee cannot be allowed to WP(C) No.708/2023 along with continue if there is no
substantive post in existence. It is being contended that because there are no vacant posts available
in the Law Department, as such, the contractual engagement of the petitioners cannot be continued.
36.14) There can be no quarrel with the proposition of law that in service jurisprudence the terms
"post" and "position" carry distinct legal and functional meaning. A "post" refers to a sanctioned
cadre created by the competent authority and it has a designated pay scale, rank and duties. A "post"
exists independent of the person who holds it. However, a "position" does not necessarily have a
legal or sanctioned existence. A person may hold a position without holding a substantive post.
Nonetheless, a position created for a specific purpose or period is based on the requirement of an
employer. The fact that respondent University had advertised 12 positions of contractual Lecturers
in the year 2023 means that there was requirement of 12 faculty members out of which, at best, the
respondent University may have filled up three posts but still then, there is shortfall in the faculty of
the respondent University so far as the Department of Law is concerned.
36.15) Having regard to the number of law courses which the respondent University is running and
keeping in WP(C) No.708/2023 along with view the intake capacity in such courses, it is imperative
for the University to create a core faculty in accordance with the Rules of Legal Education, 2008. It
is not a happy situation that the respondent University is running the show with ad hocism by
engaging Lecturers on academic arrangement basis. It seems that they want to perpetuate this
situation by getting visiting/guest lecturers from other Universities and other departments so as to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 18
Mushtaq Ahmad Shah vs University Of Kashmir & Ors on 4 July, 2025
avoid continuing the services of the petitioners. The respondent University, as already stated,
cannot deny the fact that there is requirement of faculty in the Department of Law having regard to
the number of courses which they are running and having regard to the huge intake capacity of
students in these courses.
36.16) The action of the respondents in disengaging the services of the petitioners and replacing
them by ad hoc arrangements like visiting lecturers and guest lecturers is nothing but a malafide
exercise of power. By doing so, the respondent University intends to do away with the service
contracts of the petitioners but in the process, they are also doing a great disservice to the students'
community who are being left to the mercy of guest/visiting lecturers without there being any
continuity. Instead of creating a core WP(C) No.708/2023 along with faculty, as envisaged under
Rule 17 of the Rules of Legal Education, 2008, the respondent University, it seems, is resorting to
hire and fire policy which is detrimental to the interests of not only the petitioners but also to the
larger interests of the student community.
36.17) In view of the aforesaid reasons, continuation of the contractual engagement of the
petitioners who have by now gained sufficient experience, till such time a core faculty is created and
put in place, would be in the interests of the student community. The same would also be in tune
with the legal position that one ad hoc/temporary arrangement cannot be replaced by another
arrangement of similar nature. This Court is of the view that dispensing with the engagement of the
petitioners and replacing them with visiting/guest lecturers would amount to perpetuating ad
hocism and indirectly doing an act which is impermissible in law.
36.18) Accordingly, the writ petitions are allowed and the respondents are directed to allow the
petitioners to continue as contractual Lecturers in the Department of Law till such time the
respondents create and put in place a core faculty for imparting education to the students in the
Department of Law. However, the respondent University is WP(C) No.708/2023 along with at
liberty to dispense with the engagement of the petitioners on the grounds of non-performance or on
disciplinary grounds.
36.19) Since the main writ petition(s) stand already disposed of, as such, the interim orders out of
which the contempt petitions bearing CCP(S) Nos.62/2024 CCP(S) No.88/2025 have arisen, have
merged with the final order. The contempt proceedings, therefore, do not survive for any further
consideration and the same are, accordingly, closed. The contempt petitions shall stand disposed of.
24) Copies of this judgment be placed on each file.
(Sanjay Dhar) Judge Srinagar, 04.07.2025 "Bhat Altaf"
Whether the order is reportable: YES/NO WP(C) No.708/2023 along with
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28237552/ 19
