Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21
February, 2025
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
S. No. 6
Regular Cause List
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
CRMC No. 405/2018
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard ...Appellant/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Mujeeb Andrabi, Advocate
Vs.
State of J&K and Ors. ...Respondent(s)
Through: Ms. Nadiya Abdullah, Assisting Counsel
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
ORDER
21.02.2025
1. Quashing of FIR No. 13/2012, registered with Police Station, Vigilance Organization Kashmir, for
the offences under Section 5(1)(c),(d) read with 5(2) JK PC Act Svt. 2006 and Sections 467, 468,
471, 120-B RPC, insofar as the name of petitioner figures therein; sanction granted for prosecution
of petitioner; and also, police report filed under Section 173 Cr.P.C, insofar as involvement of
petitioner is concerned, is sought for in this petition.
2. Before appreciating and looking into the merits of the case, it will be profitable to give a brief
account of the facts as noted in petition along with grounds taken for quashment of FIR in question,
Sanction and police report filed under Section 173 Cr.P.C:-
(i) That for purposes of widening of National Highway-IA, the land was required for
acquisition which included a huge chunk of land situate within the limits of Tehsil
Awantipora. It is necessary to state that land falling under Survey No. 426 and a
non-existent survey No. 1298/1 was not included in the Notification issued under
Section 4 of the Acquisition Act.
After passing of award (tentative), the file was placed before the Collector, Land Acquisition
National Highway-IA, Shri Mohammad Rajab Bhat, byname. It seems that at that stage, Ghulam
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 1
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
Mohammad and Mst. Taja pretending to be the landowners whose land has been acquired,
approached the Collector in league with Patwari Halqa for ascertaining the authenticity and
verification of their ownership about the aforesaid land covered by two Survey Nos. and to find out
whether compensation has been awarded. The office of the Collector may have referred the matter
for re-verification of the facts and authenticity of the claims made together with verification about
the Shajra and Khasra of the land. This is borne from the orders and endorsements made in the
record pertaining to the acquisition of the land relating to Khasra Paimaish. The matter went to
Assistant Commissioner, Revenue, who on 15-06-2009 submitted further to Collector for perusal
and orders in the light of observations made earlier when the matter was referred by the Collector
for verification. The Collector called the Patwari with records. Nothing is known of the orders which
were to be passed by the Collector, but fact of the matter is that amount has been paid for land
falling under Khasra No. 426 measuring 6 kanals-09 marlas and for land falling under non-existent
survey No. 1289/1 measuring 2 kanals & 06 marlas by the Collector, Land Acquisition, with which
the petitioner has no concern. No report seems to have been made about the aforesaid payments
made for the land in question. During the investigation of case FIR No. 37/2010 investigated by the
Vigilance Organization, Kashmir, it transpired that Shri Mohammad Rajab Bhat, the then Assistant
Commissioner (Revenue) and Collector, Land Acquisition National Highway Four Lanning,
Pulwama (now retired), Shri Rafiq Ahmad Wani S/o Sonaullah Wani Rio Dadsara, Tral, the then
Patwari Haiqa Awantipora, Shri Farukh Jahanzeb S/o Ghulam Mohi-ud-din Bhat R/o Awantipora
(private person) and Shri Mohammad Abdullah Pandith S/o Rehman Pandith R/o Awantipora
(private person) and others entered into a criminal conspiracy among themselves during the year
2007-08 and in pursuance thereof the accused public servants fraudulently, dishonestly and by
abusing their respective official position, processed, prepared and paid compensation in lieu of
acquisition of land to the tune of Rs. 18,30,340/- in favour of the private persons which was actually
not due to them thereby causing wrongful loss to the state exchequer and corresponding wrongful
gain to the accused persons. The FIR further reveals that the accused Patwari submitted Khasra
Paimaish showing the land for acquisition in respect of construction of Four Lane National Highway
in village Awantipora and fraudulently included 6 kanals land to the actual existingland measuring 9
marlas only in survey No. 426 in estate Awantipora, in the name of Ghulam Mohammad Bhat &
Mst. Taja R/o Awantipora, thereby wrongly making the total land as 06 kanal and 09 marlas even
though this existing land measuring 09 marlas only falling under survey No. 426 was also not
coming under the alignment of the National Highway Four Lanning Programme. In the FIR, it is
further stated that Shri. Mohammad Rajab Bhat, the then Assistant Commissioner (Revenue) and
Collector Land Acquisition National Highway Four Lanning Pulwama (now retired) prepared
apportionment statement and Acquittance Roll in respect of village Awantipora, and fraudulently
included non- existent 06 kanal of land to the actual existing 09 marlas of land falling under survey
No. 426 and an amount of Rs. 13,64,820/- was released by Shri Mohammad Rajab Bhat illegally and
fraudulently (towards 80% of land compensation amount) in favour of Shri Ghulam Mohammad
Bhat and Mst. R/o Awantipora vide Cheque No. 22566547 dated 09-07-2008 and theafore said
cheque was handed over to Shri Farukh Jahanzeb, nephew of Ghulam Mohammad Bhat and son of
Mst. Taja Begum. The amount was withdrawn by Shri Farukh Jahanzeb by depositing the cheque in
a fake bank account No. SB-9902 at J&K Bank Branch Awantipora, opened in the name of Shri
Ghulam Mohammad Bhat & Mst. Taja, by forging their signatures. The further revelation made in
the FIR is that accused Patwari Halqa Awantipora, included land measuring 02 kanals and 04
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 2
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
marlas against a non-existent survey No. 1289/1 countersigned by the then Girdawar Circle E
Awantipora, and Naib Tehsildar and, subsequently authenticated by then Tehsildar Awantipora,
against the actual 03 kanals 16 marlas belonging to Shri Mohammad Abdullah Pandith and
facilitated excess drawl of land compensation amount in favour of the above said beneficiary to the
tune of Rs. 4,65,520/- towards 80% of total compensation. Shri Bhat the then Collector wrongly
authenticated/approved the details prepared by aforementioned officers/officials of revenue
department and facilitated illegal payments in favour of Shri Mohammad Abdullah Pandith. The
total amount of Rs. 13.00 lacs was released by Shri Mohammad Rajab Bhat vide cheque No. 369914
dated 11-01-2008 (Rs. 8.00 lacs) and cheque No. 165835 dated 14-03-2008 (Rs. 5.00 lacs) including
excess payment of Rs. 4,65,520/- in favour of the beneficiary in respect of non-existent land
measuring 02 kanals 04 marlas showing falling under non-existent survey No. 1289/1. On the basis
of the report, a case FIR No. 13/2012 was registered for investigation by the Vigilance Organization,
Kashmir. During the course of investigation, petitioner was given a questionnaire by the
Organization. The petitioner replied the questionnaire and submitted details about insertions made
in the record and about the payments fraudulently obtained by the land holders. It was, however,
specifically brought to the notice of the Investigating Officer that Girdawar of the Land Acquisition
posted in Collectorate has pointed out in his additional report that survey Nos. 426 and 1289/1 does
not figure or fall in Khasra Paimaish for which payments have been made fraudulently at the level of
Collectorate. The petitioner further informed the Investigating Officer that he was not connected
with any part of the exercise illegally conducted, but has only put his signature on the report of
Office Qanoongoh, Girdawar Qanoongoh and concerned Naib Tehsildar who had recorded that
entries are correct according to the original record. No criminal liability can be fastened upon the
petitioner as mere endorsement made on the report of Office Qanoongoh or Girdawar Qanoongoh,
cannot bring him within the mischief of offences punishable under section 5(1 )(c), (d) read with
5(2) of J.K. P.C. ACT SVT. 2006 or within the mischief of offences punishable under sections 467,
468, 471, 120 B RPC. It was also brought to the notice of the Investigating Officer that tentative
award, does not show the existence of survey No. 426 and 1289/1 and, therefore, there was no
question of preparation of false and fabricated record by any of the officers before the tentative
award was passed. It seems that whole game has started at the level of the Collectorate to whom the
reports marked Annexure-"B" were sent, but despite the report submitted, he ordered Patwari to
come to his office along with record and there was, thus, an end game executed at that level
regarding payments of the amount embezzled in the case by fraudulent means.
(ii) That the petitioner only countersigned the signature of the Naib Tehsildar, who in turn had
played the same role of countersigning the report prepared by the Patwari and Girdawar. A close
look upon the report of Patwari and Girdawar does not give any indication that Khasra Paimaish has
been changed and there is no mention of survey nos. They have reported that Khasra Paimaish and
the site position of record tally with each other.
(iii) That during the investigation of the case despite replying the questionnaire petitioner got
suspicion that he may be falsely implicated in the case. The petitioner, therefore, filed a
representation before the Senior Superintendent of Police, Vigilance Organization (ABP), Srinagar,
bringing it to his notice that he joined as Tehsildar, Awantipora on 08-12-2007. The notice was
issued on 11-06-2007, which does not include survey No. 426 or 1289/1. Patwari seems to have
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 3
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
committed forgery and manipulation by preparing a second Khasra Paimaish fraudulently and
intentionally to insert two survey Nos. 426 and 1289/1 in order to defraud the State Exchequer. It
was also submitted in the representation that petitioner as Tehsildar has only to put his signatures
on the record of Office Qanoongoh, Girdawar Qanoongoh and Niab Tehsildar, who had recorded
that entries are correct according to the original record. The representation was endorsed to
Inspector Hilal (IO) with the remarks to go through the contents of the representation and come up
with the conclusion of this file. The Investigating Officer does not seem to have taken any
cognizance of the representation, ignoring the rightful claim of the petitioner that he is not involved
in the case and mere endorsement on a report submitted to him by Naib Tehsildar and Girdawar
does not attribute any mens rea and nor can this endorsement bring him within the mischief of
commission of offences as indicated in the FIR.
(iv) That to the utter chagrin and surprise, the petitioner came to know that Vigilance Organization
has submitted an application to the State Government to the address of Commissioner/Secretary to
Government, General Administration Department, with a request that sanction in the case may be
granted for prosecuting the accused in which name of petitioner also figures. The sanction to the
knowledge of petitioner has been granted, but despite efforts copy of sanction was not provided by
General Administration Department as it was reported through his emissary that record cannot be
provided as it is a secret record. The petitioner is, therefore, unable to produce the sanction order
for which quashment is also sought.
(v) That the petitioner also came to know that Naib Tehsildar and Girdawar, whose reports
petitioner has signed, are not arrayed as accused in the case. The investigation of the case is, thus,
discriminatory and selective liable to be quashed in so far as it relates to the petitioner. It is further
submitted that in so far as the payments made to Mohammad Abdullah Pandith are concerned, it
has surfaced later about which petitioner has no knowledge and has never endorsed their claim. As a
matter of fact, the questionnaire does not ask anything with regard to the land and the alleged
manipulation or forgery. The questionnaire is vague and uncertain, but despite that full reply was
given by the petitioner about the entire gamete of facts which have resulted in the embezzlement of
the amount and registration of the case of which no liability can be fastened upon the petitioner.
(vi) That sanction obtained against the petitioner has been issued without application of mind. The
arbitrariness and hostile discrimination meted out to the petitioner is writ large. The Naib Tehsildar
and Girdawar, who have signed and endorsed the statement of Patwari and Girdawar, have been left
out, but petitioner has been made scape goat for none of his faults.
(vii) That a report under section 173 Cr.P.C. has been prepared, but the challan is yet to be presented
before the Court. The presentation of the case against the petitioner will be an abuse of process of
law and abuse of process of court. The petitioner in the circumstances of the case in which his name
has been shown in the case requires re-investigation to pinpoint the culprits in the case.
(viii) That the case registered and the challan presented in the circumstances of the case in which
name of the petitioner seems to have been virtually inserted, will remain hanging upon the
petitioner's head. The cherished constitutional right of liberty is thereby deprived. To save the ends
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 4
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
of justice from being defeated the Court may order re-investigation of the case by quashing the
report prepared under Section 173 Cr.P.C. as also the sanction granted by the Government.
3. Respondents have filed their status report, wherein it is stated as under:-
(a) FIR was registered on the basis of outcome of investigation conducted during case
FIR No.37/2010 registered at P/S Vigilance Organization, Kashmir, under section
5(1)(c)(d)r/w 5(2) J&K PC Act Samvat 2006, Sections 409,467,468, 471,120-
13 of RPC, pertaining to misappropriation of more than Rs.20.00 crores meant for compensation of
land to those landowners whose land was falling under four lanning NHW Pulwama, during which it
surfaced that Mohammad Rajab Bhat S/o Ghulam Ahmad Bhat R/o Salia Anantnag, at present
Dangerpora Pulwama, Muhammad Rafiq Ahmad Wani S/o Sona ullah Wani R/o Dadsara Tral and
others in connivance with officers/officials of Revenue Department and private persons Farukh
Jahanzeb alias Rinku and Muhammad Abdullah Pandith have also misappropriated compensation
amount of Rs.18,30,340/- by abusing official positions and releasing of compensation in lieu of
non-existent land and excess land in favour of the Private accused persons and accordingly the
Vigilance Organization Kashmir (now ACB) registered case FIR No. 13/2012 u/s 5(1) (d) r/w 5(2) of
J&K P.C. Act Samvat 2006, Sections 120-13,420,467,468 & 471 RPC against the accused persons for
in-depth investigation.
Allegations in brief:-
(b) During course of investigation, it was revealed that Mohammad Rajab Bhat, then
Assistant Commissioner (Revenue) and Collector, Land Acquisition National
Highway, Four Lanning Pulwama, (now retired), Rafiq Ahmad Wani S/o Sona-ullah
Wani R/o Dadsara Tral; then Patwari Haiqa Awantipora, Farukh Jahanzeb S/o
Ghulam Mohi-ud-din Bhat R/o Awantipora (private person) and Mohammad
Abdullah Pandit S/o Rahman Pandith R/o Awantipora (private person) and others,
including petitioner, entered into a criminal conspiracy among themselves during the
year 2007-08 and in pursuance thereof the accused public servants fraudulently,
dishonestly and by abusing their respective official positions processed, prepared and
paid compensation in lieu of acquisition of non-
existent land to the tune of Rs.18,30,340/- in favour of private persons which was actually not due
to them thereby causing wrongful loss to the state exchequer to the tune of Rs.18,30,340/- and
corresponding wrongful gain to the accused persons.
(c) The investigation conducted has revealed that the accused Patwari submitted Khasra Paimaish
showing the land for acquisition in respect of construction of Four Lane National Highway in village
Awantipora and fraudulently included 06 Kanals of land to the actual existing 09 Marla's only in
survey No. 426 in estate Awantipora in the name of Ghulam Mohammad Bhat &Mst. Taja R/o
Awantipora, thereby wrongly making and showing the total land as 06 Kanals 09 Marla's. The said
existing land measuring 09 Marlas under the aforesaid survey number was not even falling under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 5
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
alignment of National Highway Four Lanning Programme. It has also been revealed that
Mohammed Rajab Bhat, then Assistant Commissioner (Revenue)/Collector Land Acquisition
National Highway Four Lanning Pulwama (now retired), prepared Apportionment statement and
Acquaintance Roll in respect of village Awantipora and fraudulently included the aforementioned 06
Kanal 09 Marla's of land falling under the. survey No. 426. An amount of Rs. 13,64,820/- was
released by Mohammed Rajab Bhat illegally and fraudulently (towards 80 percent of land
Compensation amount) in favour of Ghulam Mohammed Bhat & Mst. Taja R/o Awantipora vide
cheque No. 22566547 dated 09-07-2008 and the aforesaid cheque was handed over to the accused
Farukh Jahanzeb who is the nephew of Ghulam Mohammed Bhat and son of Mst. Taja Begum.
Accused Farukh Jahanzeb withdrew the aforesaid amount by depositing the cheque in a fake bank
account No. SB-9902 at Jammu and Kashmir Bank, Branch Awantipora, opened on 18.01.2007 in
the name of above said Ghulam Mohammad Bhat and Mst. Taja by way of forging their
signatures/thumb impressions which stand established during the course of investigation.
(d) The investigation conducted has revealed that accused Patwari Halqa Awantipora, Rafiq Ahmad
Wani also included land measuring 02 Kanal 04 Marlas against a non-existent survey No. 1289/1,
countersigned by then Girdawar circle Awantipora, Asadullah Sheikh, Naib Tehsildar Shafiq Ahmad
Wafai and subsequently authenticated by accused/petitioner Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard then Tehsildar
Awantipora against the actual 03 Kanal and 16 Marlas belonging to Muhammad Abdullah Pandit
and as such facilitated excess drawl of land compensation amount in favour of the aforesaid
beneficiary to the tune of Rs.4,65,520/- towards 80% of total compensation. Accused, Muhammad
Rajab Bhat, the then Assistant Commissioner (Revenue) and Collector Land Acquisition National
Highway Four Lanning Pulwama (now retired) wrongly authenticated/approved the details
prepared by the officers and officials of Revenue Department and facilitated illegal payment in
favour of Muhammad Abdullah Pandit. Thus the accused officers and officials of DC Office Pulwama
and Tehsil office, Awantipora by way of abusing of their official positions as public servants and in
conspiracy with private accused persons namely Farukh Jahanzeb and Mohammed Abdullah
Pandit, defrauded the State Exchequer after obtaining undue pecuniary advantage during period
2007-08 to the tune of Rs. 18,30,340/-.
(e) The investigation also revealed that the revenue authorities have also shown Survey Nos.1273
and 1274 village Awantipora land measuring 01 Kanal and 02 Maria's under survey No. 1273 and 17
Marlas of land under survey No. 1274 falling under the alignment of Four Lanning NHW, Pulwama.
During spot inspection it was observed that the survey No. 1273 is not falling under the alignment of
Four Lanning NHW, Pulwama, as such the whole area 01 kanal 02 Marla's shown acquired is
exceeding from the acquisition. Similarly, khasra No 1274 measuring 17 Maria's has been shown
coming under NHW Four lanning while as during spot inspection only 13 Marla 01 Sirsai was found
coming under acquisition and thus 03 Marlas 08 Sirsai is exceeding from acquisition.
(f) During the course of investigation of the case the relevant records having bearing on the case
were collected from various offices, Banks, etc. and were seized under separate seizure memos in
presence of the witnesses and recorded their statements accordingly. The statements of the
witnesses having knowledge about the facts of the case were recorded and placed on record. The
Expert opinion was also sought in respect of Revenue records from the Revenue Expert. The hand
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 6
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
writings, Signatures, initials both admitted/specimen and thumb impressions wherever required
were also obtained for comparison with original seized records in the case. The relevant records
having direct bearing on the case were forwarded to FSL for their expert opinion into the visible
insertions in the records, identification of hand writings, signatures, initials, thumb impressions,
etc. of the accused persons and the expert opinion was accordingly sought and obtained from FSL
Srinagar. The records collected during the course of investigation were scrutinized in detail with the
help of expert which established the commission of offences by the accused persons in connivance
with each other. During course of investigation Ghulam Mohammad Bhat S/o Mohammad Sultan
R/o Awantipora while recording statement u/s 164-A Cr.P.C deposed that he has not operated the
account No.SB- 9902 at J&K Bank Awantipora, nor has obtained/received any type of compensation
from the office of Collector Land Acquisition Pulwama, as his land is not falling under the alignment
of four Lanning NHW, Pulwama. Similarly, during investigation Mst. Taja w/o Ghulam
Mohi-ud-din Bhat M/o accused Farukh Jahanzeb R/o Awantipora also deposed before the Judicial
Magistrate while recording statement u/s 164-A Cr.P.C. that she has not operated account No.
SB-9902 at J&K Bank Awantipora. Both PW's deposed that he or she has not obtained any type of
compensation from Collector Land Acquisition Office Pulwama nor has he or she made any kind of
sale deeds with Collector Land Acquisition Pulwama.
(g) On the strength of evidence physical, oral and documentary collected during the course of
investigation it has been established that accused Mohammad Rajab Bhat, then Assistant
Commissioner (Revenue) and Collector Land Acquisition National Highway Four Lanning Pulwama
(now retired), accused/Petitioner Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard then Tehsildar / Girdawar, accused Rafiq
Ahmad Wani S/o Sona ullah Wani R/o Dadsara Tral then Patwari Haiqa Awantipora, accused
Farukh Jahanzeb S/o Ghulam Mohi-ud-din Bhat R/o Awantipora (private person) and accused
Mohammad Abdullah Pandit S/o Rahman Pandit R/o Awantipora (private person) and others have
prima facie committed offences punishable under sections 5(1) (d) r/w 5(2) of J&K P.C. Act Samvat
2006, and Sections 120-13, 420, 467, 468, & 471 RPC.
(h) The case file along with the related records was placed before the competent authority for accord
of sanction for launching prosecution against in service public as envisaged under section 6 of J&K,
P.C Act, Svt. 2006. The competent authority vide Govt. Order No.38-GAD (Vig.) of 2018 dated
20.08.2018 has accorded sanction for launching prosecution against accused/petitioner Mushtaq
Ahmad Bajard in case FIR No. 13/2012 P/S VOK.
(i) Finally, after obtaining the sanction in terms of Section 6 of J&K P.C. Act Svt. 2006, the final
report in terms of Section 173 Cr.P.C was produced before Hon'ble Additional Anti- Corruption
Court Pulwama and the said case is presently subjudice before the said Hon'ble Court.
Individual Liability: -
(j) During the course of investigation, it transpired that during posting of
accused/Petitioner w.e.f. 08/12/2007 to 24/06/2009 as Tehsildar Awantipora, the
accused/petitioner 14 , has been found instrumental in embezzlement by way of
issuing/certifying/authenticating the forged Revenue documents pertaining to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 7
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
non-existing land or showing excess land falling under NHW four lanning Pulwama
in Estate Awantipora in furtherance of criminal conspiracy, in league with other
accused persons and paved the way for illegal drawl of money meant for the legal
owners of the land, whose land was falling under NHW Four lanning Pulwama, which
resulted in transfer of the illegal money to the accounts of private persons not legally
entitled for the same which resulted in loss of Rs.25,80,445/-. to the State Exchequer.
(k) The investigation conducted has proved the accused/petitioner is signatory to the
Khasra Paimaish dated 28/01/2008 forwarded to Collector Land Acquisition
Pulwama, which resulted in the illegal and fraudulent payment in favour of private
accused persons.
4. I have heard learned counsel for parties and perused the material on the file and considered the
matter.
5. According to prosecution, petitioner being Tehsildar, Awantipora, misused his official position
and had involved himself in the offences in respect of which impugned FIR was registered. It is
stated that there is sufficient evidence collected by prosecution, which support the commission of
offences committed by petitioner.
6. Record of the Trial Court would reveal that investigation of the case has resulted in presentation
of challan after offences were established. Detailed investigation was conducted in the case and after
conclusion of investigation, offences have been established in respect of which trial is pending
before the Trial Court.
7. The Supreme Court in State of Orissa v. Suraj Kumar Sahoo, (2005) 13 SCC 540, has sounded a
note of caution about the powers of High Court to be exercised in terms of Section 561-A Cr.P.C,
corresponding to Section 482 of Central Code. Their lordships enunciated that the High Court being
the highest Court of a State should normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case
where the entire facts are incomplete and hazy, more so, when the evidence has not been collected
and produced before the Court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, being of magnitude
and cannot be seen in their true perspective without sufficient material before the Court. While
exercising inherent jurisdiction as observed by their Lordships, it is not permissible for the Court to
act as if it was a Trial Court. It would be none of the duties of the High Court to appreciate the
evidence to conclude whether the material produced are sufficient or not for holding the accused
guilty.
8. It would also be proper to refer to judgment of the Supreme Court in Janta Dal v. H. S.
Chowdhary, AIR 1993 SC 892, while summarizing the principles in the light of which inherent
powers can be exercised, has observed:
"132. The criminal Courts are clothed with inherent power to make such orders as
may be necessary for the ends of justice. Such power though unrestricted and
undefined should not be capriciously or arbitrarily exercised, but should be exercised
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 8
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
in appropriate cases, ex debito justitiae to do real and substantial justice for the
administration of which alone the Courts exist. The powers possessed by the High
Court under Section 482 of the Code are very wide and the very plenitude of the
power requires great caution in its exercise. Courts must be careful to see that its
decision in exercise of this power is based on sound principles.
133. The Judicial Committee in (1) Emperor v. Nazir Ahmad and (2) Lala Jai Ram
Das v. Emperor has taken the view that Section 561-A of the old Code gave no new
powers but only provided that those which the Court already inherently possessed
should be preserved. This view holds the field till date.
134. This Court in Dr Raghubir Sharon v. The State of Bihar had an occasion to
examine the extent of inherent power of the High Court and its jurisdiction when to
be exercised. Mudholkar, J speaking for himself and Raghubar Dayal, J after
referring a series of decisions of the Privy Council and of the various High Courts
held thus:
...every High Court as the highest court exercising criminal jurisdiction in a State has
inherent power to make any order for the purpose of securing the ends of justice....
Being an extraordinary power it will, however, not be pressed in aid except for
remedying a flagrant abuse by a subordinate Court to is powers....
135. See Talab Hazi Hussain v. Madhukar Purshottam Mondkar and Anr., [1958] SCR
1226 and Pampapathy v. State of Mysore[1966] (Supp.) SCR
477.
136. Thus, the inherent power under this Section can be exercised by the High Court
(1) to give effect to any order passed under the Code; or (2) to prevent abuse of the
process of any Court; or (3) otherwise to secure the ends of justice. In relation to
exercise of inherent powers of the High Court, it has been observed in Madhu Limaye
v. State of Maharashtra that the power in not to be resorted to if there is a specific
provision in the Code for the redress of grievance of the aggrieved party and that it
should be exercised very sparingly to prevent abuse of process of any Court or
otherwise to secure the ends of justice and that it should not be exercised as against
the express bar of law engrafted in any other provision of the Code. Vide (1) Talab
Hazi Hussain v. Madhukar Purshotam; (2) Khushi Ram v. Hashim and Ors. AIR 1959
SC 542; and (3) State of Orissa v. Ram Chander Agarwala.
137. This inherent power conferred by Section 482 of the Code should not be
exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution. The High Court being the highest Court of
a State should normally retrain from giving a premature decision in a case wherein
the entire facts are extremely incomplete and hazy, more so when the evidence has
not been collected and produced before the Court and the issues involved whether
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 9
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
factual or legal are of great magnitude and cannot be seen in their true perspective
without sufficient material. Of course, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in
regard to the cases in which the High Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction
to quashing the proceedings at any stage. This Court in State of Haryana and Ors. v.
Ch. Bhajan Lal and Ors [1990] 3 Supp. SCR 256 to which both of us were parties have
dealt with this question at length and enunciated the law listing out the
circumstances under which the High Court can exercise its jurisdiction in quashing
proceedings. We do not, therefore, think it necessary in the present case to
extensively deal with the import and intendment of the powers under Sections 397,
401 and 482 of the Code.
9. The Supreme Court in Satvinder Kaur v. State, AIR 1999, SC 3597, has held that appreciation of
evidence is the function of the Court when seized of the matter. At the stage of investigation, the
material collected by an investigating officer cannot be judicially scrutinized for arriving at a
conclusion (in the said case about the jurisdiction of the police station). It was also observed that for
the purpose of exercising its power under Section 482 Cr. PC, to quash an FIR or a complaint, the
High Court would have to proceed entirely on the basis of the allegation made in the complaint or
the documents accompanying the same per se, it has no jurisdiction to examine the correctness of
otherwise of the allegations.
10. In the light of settled legal position, it requires to be underscored that the inherent jurisdiction
under Section 561-A Cr. PC has to be exercised sparingly, carefully and with caution.
11. Since there is sufficient material on record regarding prima facie involvement of petitioner in the
case and police having conducted investigation concluded that the offences against accused are
proved.
12. Having regard to allegations and report of investigation, it cannot be said that the petitioner is
being prosecuted falsely or the investigation of trial would amount to abuse of process of law.
13. The Supreme Court in another case of State of Andhra Pradesh v. Golconda Linga Swamy,
reported in (2004) 6 SCC 522, while dealing with inherent powers of the High Court under Section
482 Cr. P.C., has observed and held as under:
"5. Exercise of power under Section 482of the Code in a case of this nature is the
exception and not the rule. The Section does not confer any new powers on the High
Court. It only saves the inherent power which the Court possessed before the
enactment of the Code. It envisages three circumstances under which the inherent
jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code,
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of
justice. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible rule which
would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative enactment dealing
with procedure can provide for all cases that may possibly arise. Courts, therefore,
have inherent powers apart from express provisions of law which are necessary for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 10
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
proper discharge of functions and duties imposed upon them by law. That is the
doctrine which finds expression in the Section which merely recognizes and preserves
inherent powers of the High Courts. All courts, whether civil or criminal possess, in
the absence of any express provision, as inherent in their constitution, all such
powers as are necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong in course of
administration of justice on the principle quando lex aliquidaliqueconcedit,
conceditur et id sine quo res ipsaesse non potest (when the law gives a person
anything it gives him that without which it cannot exist). While exercising powers
under the Section, the Court does not function as a court of appeal or revision.
Inherent jurisdiction under the Section though wide has to be exercised sparingly,
carefully and with caution and only when such exercise is justified by the tests
specifically laid down in the Section itself. It is to be exercised ex debito justitiae to do
real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone courts exist.
Authority of the court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to
abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power to prevent such
abuse. It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would
result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercises of the powers court
would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that initiation or continuance of
it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of these proceedings would
otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the complaint,
the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to be
quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the complainant
has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted
in toto. xxxxxx
7. In dealing with the last category, it is important to bear in mind the distinction
between a case where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is
clearly inconsistent with the accusations made, and a case where there is legal
evidence which, on appreciation, may or may not support the accusations. When
exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court would not
ordinarily embark upon an enquiry whether the evidence in question is reliable or not
or whether on a reasonable appreciation of it accusation would not be sustained. That
is the function of the trial Judge. Judicial process no doubt should not be an
instrument of oppression, or, needless harassment. Court should be circumspect and
judicious in exercising discretion and should take all relevant facts and circumstances
into consideration before issuing process, lest it would be an instrument in the hands
of a private complainant to unleash vendetta to harass any person needlessly. At the
same time the Section is not an instrument handed over to an accused to short-circuit
a prosecution and bring about its sudden death. The scope of exercise of power under
Section 482 of the Code and the categories of cases where the High Court may
exercise its power under it relating to cognizable offences to prevent abuse of process
of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice were set out in some detail by
this Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (1992 Supp (1) SCC 335)......
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 11
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
xxxxxxx 8 As noted above, the powers possessed by the High Court under Section
482 of the Code are very wide and the very plenitude of the power requires great
caution in its exercise. Court must be careful to see that its decision in exercise of this
power is based on sound principles. The inherent power should not be exercised to
stifle a legitimate prosecution. High Court being the highest Court of a State should
normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case where the entire facts
are incomplete and hazy, more so when the evidence has not been collected and
produced before the Court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of
magnitude and cannot be seen in their true perspective without sufficient material.
Of course, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in regard to cases in which the High
Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the proceeding at any
stage. (See : The Janata Dal etc. v. H.S. Chowdhary and others, etc. (AIR 1993 SC
892), Dr. Raghubir Saran v. State of Bihar and another (AIR 1964 SC 1)). It would not
be proper for the High Court to analyse the case of the complainant in the light of all
probabilities in order to determine whether a conviction would be sustainable and on
such premises, arrive at a conclusion that the proceedings are to be quashed. It would
be erroneous to assess the material before it and conclude that the complaint cannot
be proceeded with. In proceeding instituted on complaint, exercise of the inherent
powers to quash the proceedings is called for only in a case where the complaint does
not disclose any offence or is frivolous, vexatious or oppressive. If the allegations set
out in the complaint do not constitute the offence of which cognizance has been taken
by the Magistrate, it is open to the High Court to quash the same in exercise of the
inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code. It is not, however, necessary that
there should be meticulous analysis of the case before the trial to find out whether the
case would end in conviction or acquittal. The complaint/F.I.R. has to be read as a
whole. If it appears that on consideration of the allegations in the light of the
statement made on oath of the complainant or disclosed in the F.I.R. that the
ingredients of the offence or offences are disclosed and there is no material to show
that the complaint/F.I.R. is mala fide, frivolous or vexatious, in that event there
would be no justification for interference by the High Court. When an information is
lodged at the police station and an offence is registered, then the mala fides of the
informant would be of secondary importance. It is the material collected during the
investigation and evidence led in Court which decides the fate of the accused person.
The allegations of mala fides against the informant are of no consequence and cannot
by itself be the basis for quashing the proceeding."
14.Even the Supreme Court in the case of State of Maharashtra v. Arun Gulab Gawali, (2010) 9 SCC
701, set-aside the order passed by the High Court of Judicature at Bombay, by which criminal
complaint/FIR was quashed on prayer made by complainant himself. While quashing and
setting-aside the order passed by the High Court, the Supreme Court in paras 13 and 27 to 29 has
observed and held as "13. The power of quashing criminal proceedings has to be exercised very
sparingly and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases and the Court cannot be
justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of
allegations made in the F.I.R./Complaint, unless the allegations are so patently absurd and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 12
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
inherently improbable so that no prudent person can ever reach such a conclusion. The
extraordinary and inherent powers of the Court do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the Court
to act according to its whims or caprice. However, the Court, under its inherent powers, can neither
intervene at an uncalled for stage nor it can `soft-pedal the course of justice' at a crucial stage of
investigation/ proceedings. The provisions of Articles 226, 227 of the Constitution of India and
Section 482of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (hereinafter called as „Cr.P.C.(cid:129)) are a device to
advance justice and not to frustrate it. The power of judicial review is discretionary, however, it must
be exercised to prevent the miscarriage of justice and for correcting some grave errors and to ensure
that esteem of administration of justice remains clean and pure. However, there are no limits of
power of the Court, but the more the power, the more due care and caution is to be exercised in
invoking these powers. (Vide State of W.B. v. Swapan Kumar Guha [(1982) 1 SCC 561 : 1982 SCC
(Cri) 283 :
AIR 1982 SC 949] , Pepsi Foods Ltd. v. Special Judicial Magistrate [(1998) 5 SCC 749
: 1998 SCC (Cri) 1400] , G. Sagar Suri v. State of U.P. [(2000) 2 SCC 636 : 2000 SCC
(Cri) 513 :
AIR 2000 SC 754] and Ajay Mitra v. State of M.P. [(2003) 3 SCC 11 : 2003 SCC (Cri)
703] ) xxx xxxxxxxx
27. The High Court proceeded on the perception that as the complainant himself was
not supporting the complaint, he would not support the case of the prosecution and
there would be no chance of conviction, thus the trial itself would be a futile exercise.
Quashing of FIR/Complaint on such a ground cannot be held to be justified in law.
Ordinarily, the Court of Sessions is empowered to discharge an accused under
Section 227 Cr.P.C.
even before initiating the trial. The accused can, therefore, move the Trial Court itself for such a
relief and the Trial Court would be in a better position to analyse and pass an order as it is possessed
of all the powers and the material to do so. It is, therefore, not necessary to invoke the jurisdiction
under Section 482 Cr.P.C. for the quashing of a prosecution in such a case. The reliance on affidavits
by the High Court would be a weak, hazy and unreliable source for adjudication on the fate of a trial.
The presumption that an accused would never be convicted on the material available is too risky a
proposition to be accepted readily, particularly in heinous offences like extortion.
28. A claim founded on a denial by the complainant even before the trial commences coupled with
an allegation that the police had compelled the lodging of a false FIR, is a matter which requires
further investigation as the charge is leveled against the police. If the prosecution is quashed, then
neither the Trial Court nor the Investigating Agency has any opportunity to go into this question,
which may require consideration. The State is the prosecutor and all prosecution is the social and
legal responsibility of the State. An offence committed is a crime against a society and not against a
victim alone. The victim under undue pressure or influence of the accused or under any threat or
compulsion may resile back but that would not absolve the State from bringing the accused to book,
who has committed an offence and has violated the law of the land.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 13
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
29. Thus, while exercising such power the court has to act cautiously before proceeding to quash a
prosecution in respect of an offence which hits and affects the society at large. It should be a case
where no other view is possible nor any investigation or inquiry is further required. There cannot be
a general proposition of law, so as to fit in as a straitjacket formula for the exercise of such power.
Each case will have to be judged on its own merit and the facts warranting exercise of such power.
More so, it was not a case of civil nature where there could be a possibility of compromise or
involving an offence which may be compoundable under Section 320 Cr.P.C., where the Court could
apply the ratio of the case in Madhavrao Jiwaji Rao Scindia [(1988) 1 SCC 692 : 1988 SCC (Cri) 234 :
AIR 1988 SC 709]."
15.As bare perusal of afore-quoted paragraphs of the ruling of the Supreme Court in Arun Gulab
Gawali (supra) would show that it was observed that the High Court in the said case proceeded on
the perception that since complainant therein had not supported the complaint, he would not
support the case of prosecution and there would be no chance of conviction, thus the trial itself
would be a futile exercise. The Supreme Court held that quashing of FIR/complaint on such a
ground cannot be held to be justified in law. It was said by the Supreme Court that ordinarily, the
court of Sessions was empowered to discharge an accused under Section 227 Cr.P.C. even before
initiating the trial. The accused could, therefore, move the Trial Court itself for such a relief and the
Trial Court would be in a better position to analyse and pass an order as it is possessed of all the
powers and the material to do so. It was, therefore, unnecessary to invoke jurisdiction under Section
482 Cr.P.C. to quash a prosecution in such a case. The reliance on affidavits by the High Court
would be a weak, hazy and unreliable source for adjudication on the fate of a trial and the
presumption that an accused would never be convicted on the material available was too risky. The
Supreme Court further elaborated that a claim founded on a denial by complainant even before trial
commences coupled with an allegation that police had compelled lodging of a false FIR, was a
matter that required further investigation. If prosecution was quashed, then neither Trial Court nor
Investigating Agency had any opportunity to go into that question, which might have required
consideration. The State was the prosecutor and all prosecution was social and legal responsibility of
the State. The Supreme Court also went to say that an offence committed is a crime against a society
and not against a victim alone. The victim, under undue pressure or influence of the accused or
under any threat or compulsion, may resile back but that would not absolve the State from bringing
the accused to book, who has committed an offence and has violated the law of the land.
16.Power of quashing criminal proceedings has to be exercised very sparingly and with
circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases. The Court cannot be justified in embarking
upon an enquiry about reliability or genuineness or otherwise of allegations made in the
F.I.R./Complaint, unless the allegations are so patently absurd and inherently improbable so that no
prudent person can ever reach such a conclusion.
17.The judicial conscience of the High Court should persuade it to quash such criminal proceedings
in exercise of the powers vested in it under Section 482 Cr.P.C., if answer to all the steps, as
enumerated herein after, is in affirmative, has been so said by the Supreme Court in Rajiv Thapar v
Madan Lal Kapoor, 2013 (3) SCC 330:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 14
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
"Based on the factors canvassed in the foregoing paragraphs, we would delineate the
following steps to determine the veracity of a prayer for quashing, raised by an
accused by invoking the power vested in the High Court under Section 482 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure:
i. Step one, whether the material relied upon by the accused is sound, reasonable, and
indubitable, i.e., the material is of sterling and impeccable quality?
ii. Step two, whether the material relied upon by the accused, would rule out the
assertions contained in the charges levelled against the accused, i.e., the material is
sufficient to reject and overrule the factual assertions contained in the complaint, i.e.,
the material is such, as would persuade a reasonable person to dismiss and condemn
the factual basis of the accusations as false.
iii. Step three, whether the material relied upon by the accused, has not been refuted
by the prosecution/complainant; and/or the material is such, that it cannot be
justifiably refuted by the prosecution/complainant?
iv. Step four, whether proceeding with the trial would result in an abuse of process of
the court, and would not serve the ends of justice?"
18.The Supreme Court in State of Telangana v. Habib Abdullah Jeelani, reported in 2017 (2) SCC
779, has held that the powers under Section 482 Cr.P.C. or under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, to quash the FIR, is to be exercised in a very sparing manner as is not to be used to choke or
smother the prosecution that is legitimate. The inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary
jurisdiction on the High Court to act according to whim or caprice. Such power has to be exercised
sparingly, with circumspection and in the rarest of rare cases. The inherent powers in a matter of
quashing FIR have to be exercised sparingly and with caution and only when such exercise is
justifying by the test specifically laid down in the provision itself. The power under Section 482
Cr.P.C, is a very wide, but conferment of the wide power requires the Court to be more conscious. It
casts an onerous and more diligent duty on the Court.
19.It cannot be said that a complaint does not disclose commission of offence. Merely because
offence was committed during the course of a commercial transaction, would not be sufficient to
hold that the complaint does not warrant a trial. Whether or not allegations in complaint are true is
to be decided on the basis of evidence to be led at the trial in the complaint case. It certainly is not a
case in which criminal trial should be cut short inasmuch as quashing of complaint would result in
grave miscarriage of justice. The Supreme Court in Nagpur Steel & Alloys (P) Ltd v. P.
Radhakrishna, 1997 SCC (Cri) 1073, after saying that restored the complaint and directed the
Magistrate to proceed with the complaint.
20.The above settled position of law has also been reiterated by the Supreme Court in Priti Saraf
&anr v. State of NCT of Delhi &anr, (2021) 16 SCC 142, and it has been said that inherent power of
the High Court is an extraordinary power which has to be exercised with great care and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 15
Mushtaq Ahmad Bajard vs State Of J&K And Ors on 21 February, 2025
circumspection before embarking to scrutinize a complaint / FIR/ charge-sheet in deciding whether
the case is the rarest of rare cases, to scuttle the prosecution at its inception. It has also been held by
the Supreme Court whether allegations in the complaint are otherwise correct or not has to be
decided on the basis of evidence to be led during the course of trial.
21. Viewing the matter in the above backdrop, I am of the opinion that this Court would not be
justified in embarking upon an enquiry as sought for by the petitioner herein regarding his stand
about the prosecution story or for returning any finding as to the nature of allegations levelled in the
FIR. The facts as projected by the petitioner before this Court are half backed and it is not deemed
apt at this stage to conclude that the allegations levelled against the petitioner are vexatious in
nature and so there is abuse of process of Court. Therefore, the petition of petitioner entails
dismissal and is, accordingly, dismissed. The Trial Court shall proceed with the trial expeditiously.
(VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL) JUDGE SRINAGAR 21.02.2025 Manzoor
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72820444/ 16
