Mustaq Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 March, 2019
Mustaq Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 March,
2019
1
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH:
BENCH AT INDORE
W.P.No.4958/2019
(Mushtaq Khan & Another Vs. State of M.P.& Others)
Indore, Dated: 13.03.2019
Shri Sachin Parmar, learned counsel for the
petitioners.
Shri Arvind Sharma, learned GA for the
respondents/State.
This writ petition has been filed by the petitioners seeking police protection on the ground that their
relatives and member of the society are harassing them on account of their entering into the
wedlock.
It is submitted by the petitioners that they are major and they have entered into the marital relation
voluntarily. In order to prove their age they have filed photocopy of ID and in order to prove
marriage they filed photographs and marriage certificate.
The petitioners are apprehending threat to their life, therefore, they immediately approached this
court seeking police protection.
If the petitioners are major and entered into the marriage voluntarily, then they should not be
harassed by any one, just because they have objection with their marriage. In order to avoid any
harassment, the petitioners are certainly entitled for police protection.
That, in case of Lata Singh Vs. State of U.P. Another reported in AIR 2006 SC 2522, the Apex Court
has observed as under:
"this is free and democratic country and once a person becomes a major he or she
likes. If the parents of the boy or girl do not approve of such inter caste of inter
religious marriage the maximum they can do is that they can cut-off social relation
with the son or daughter, but they can give threats or commit of instigate acts of
violence and cannot harass the person undergoes such inter caste or inter religious
relationship marriage. We therefore direct that the administrative/ police authorities
throughout the country will see to it that if any boy or girl who is major, the couple
are harassed by any one nor subjected to threats or acts of violence and may one who
gives such threats or harass or commit acts of violence either himself of at his
instigation is taken to task by instituting criminal proceedings, by the police against
such person and further stem action is taken against such persons as provided by
law"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4164885/ 1
Mustaq Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 March, 2019
The Apex Court in the matter of "Khap Panchayat"
has taken up the issue of Honuor Killing'' very seriously and issued certain
preventive, remedial punitive measures to all the State Governments. The relevant
direction passed in case No. 231/2010 (Shakti Vahini vs. State of M.P.) decided on
27.03.2018 are as under:-
"To meet the challenges of the agonising effect of honour crime, we think that there
has to be preventive, remedial and punitive measures and,accordingly, we state the
broad contours and the modalities with liberty to the executive and the police
administration of the concerned States to add further measures to evolve a robust
mechanism for the stated purposes.
I. Preventive Steps:-
(a) The State Governments should forthwith identify Districts, Sub-Divisions and/or
Villages where instances of honour killing or assembly of Khap Panchayats have been
reported in the recent past, e.g., in the last five years.
(b) The Secretary, Home Department of the concerned States shall issue
directives/advisories to the Superintendent of Police of the concerned Districts for
ensuring that the Officer Incharge of the Police Stations of the identified areas are
extra cautious if any instance of inter-caste or inter- religious marriage within their
jurisdiction comes to their notice.
(c) If information about any proposed gathering of a Khap Panchayat comes to the
knowledge of any police officer or any officer of the District Administration, he shall
forthwith inform his immediate superior officer and also simultaneously intimate the
jurisdictional Deputy Superintendent of Police and Superintendent of Police.
(d) On receiving such information, the Deputy Superintendent of Police (or such
senior police officer as identified by the State Governments with respect to the
area/district) shall immediately interact with the members of the Khap Panchayat
and impress upon them that convening of such meeting/gathering is not permissible
in law and to eschew from going ahead with such a meeting. Additionally, he should
issue appropriate directions to the Officer Incharge of the jurisdictional Police
Station to be vigilant and, if necessary, to deploy adequate police force for prevention
of assembly of the proposed gathering.
(e) Despite taking such measures, if the meeting is conducted, the Deputy
Superintendent of Police shall personally remain present during the meeting and
impress upon the assembly that no decision can be taken to cause any harm to the
couple or the family members of the couple, failing which each one participating in
the meeting besides the organisers would be personally liable for criminal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4164885/ 2
Mustaq Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 March, 2019
prosecution. He shall also ensure that video recording of the discussion and
participation of the members of the assembly is done on the basis of which the law
enforcing machinery can resort to suitable action.
(f ) If the Deputy Superintendent of Police, after interaction with the members of the Khap
Panchayat, has reason to believe that the gathering cannot be prevented and/or is likely to cause
harm to the couple or members of their family, he shall forthwith submit a proposal to the District
Magistrate/Sub-Divisional Magistrate of the District/ Competent Authority of the concerned area
for issuing orders to take preventive steps under the Cr.P.C., including by invoking prohibitory
orders under Section 144 Cr.P.C. and also by causing arrest of the participants in the assembly
under Section 151 Cr.P.C. (g) The Home Department of the Government of India must take initiative
and work in coordination with the State Governments for sensitising the law enforcement agencies
and by involving all the stake holders to identify the measures for prevention of such violence and to
implement the constitutional goal of social justice and the rule of law.
(h) There should be an institutional machinery with the necessary coordination of all the
stakeholders. The different State Governments and the Centre ought to work on sensitization of the
law enforcement agencies to mandate social initiatives and awareness to curb such violence.
II. Remedial Measures:-
(a) Despite the preventive measures taken by the State Police, if it comes to the notice
of the local police that the Khap Panchayat has taken place and it has passed any
diktat to take action against a couple/family of an inter-caste or inter-
religious marriage (or any other marriage which does not meet their acceptance), the jurisdictional
police official shall cause to immediately lodge an F.I.R. under the appropriate provisions of the
Indian Penal Code including Sections 141, 143, 503 read with 506 of IPC.
(b) Upon registration of F.I.R., intimation shall be simultaneously given to the Superintendent of
Police/ Deputy Superintendent of Police who, in turn, shall ensure that effective investigation of the
crime is done and taken to its logical end with promptitude.
(c) Additionally, immediate steps should be taken to provide security to the couple/family and, if
necessary, to remove them to a safe house within the same district or elsewhere keeping in mind
their safety and threat perception. The State Government may consider of establishing a safe house
at each District Headquarter for that purpose. Such safe houses can cater to accommodate (i) young
bachelor- bachelorette couples whose relationship is being opposed by their families /local
community/Khaps and (ii) young married couples (of an inter-caste or inter-religious or any other
marriage being opposed by their families/local community/Khaps). Such safe houses may be placed
under the supervision of the jurisdictional District Magistrate and Superintendent of Police.
(d) The District Magistrate/Superintendent of Police must deal with the complaint regarding threat
administered to such couple/family with utmost sensitivity. It should be first ascertained whether
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4164885/ 3
Mustaq Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 March, 2019
the bachelor-bachelorette are capable adults. Thereafter, if necessary, they may be provided
logistical support for solemnising their marriage and/or for being duly registered under police
protection, if they so desire. After the marriage, if the couple so desire, they can be provided
accommodation on payment of nominal charges in the safe house initially for a period of one month
to be extended on monthly basis but not exceeding one year in aggregate, depending on their threat
assessment on case to case basis.
(e) The initial inquiry regarding the complaint received from the couple (bachelor-bachelorette or a
young married couple) or upon receiving information from an independent source that the
relationship/marriage of such couple is opposed by their family members/local community/Khaps
shall be entrusted by the District Magistrate/ Superintendent of Police to an officer of the rank of
Additional Superintendent of Police. He shall conduct a preliminary inquiry and ascertain the
authenticity, nature and gravity of threat perception. On being satisfied as to the authenticity of such
threats, he shall immediately submit a report to the Superintendent of Police in not later than one
week.
(f ) The District Superintendent of Police, upon receipt of such report, shall direct the Deputy
Superintendent of Police incharge of the concerned sub-division to cause to register an F.I.R.
against the persons threatening the couple(s) and, if necessary, invoke Section 151 of Cr.P.C.
Additionally, the Deputy Superintendent of Police shall personally supervise the progress of
investigation and ensure that the same is completed and taken to its logical end with promptitude.
In the course of investigation, the concerned persons shall be booked without any exception
including the members who have participated in the assembly. If the involvement of the members of
Khap Panchayat comes to the fore, they shall also be charged for the offence of conspiracy or
abetment, as the case may be.
III. Punitive Measures:-
(a) Any failure by either the police or district officer/officials to comply with the
aforesaid directions shall be considered as an act of deliberate negligence and/or
misconduct for which departmental action must be taken under the service rules. The
departmental action shall be initiated and taken to its logical end, preferably not
exceeding six months, by the authority of the first instance.
(b) In terms of the ruling of this Court in Arumugam Servai (supra), the States are
directed to take disciplinary action against the concerned officials if it is found that
(I) such official(s) did not prevent the incident, despite having prior knowledge of it,
or (ii) where the incident had already occurred, such official(s) did not promptly
apprehend and institute criminal proceedings against the culprits.
(c) The State Governments shall create Special Cells in every District comprising of
the Superintendent of Police, the District Social Welfare Officer and District
Adi-Dravidar Welfare Officer to receive petitions/complaints of harassment of and
threat to couples of inter-caste marriage.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4164885/ 4
Mustaq Khan vs The State Of Madhya Pradesh on 13 March, 2019
(d) These Special Cells shall create a 24 hour helpline to receive and register such
complaints and to provide necessary assistance/advice and protection to the couple.
(e) The criminal cases pertaining to honour killing or violence to the couple(s) shall
be tried before the designated Court/Fast Track Court earmarked for that purpose.
The trial must proceed on day to day basis to be concluded preferably within six months from the
date of taking cognizance of the offence. We may hasten to add that this direction shall apply even to
pending cases. The concerned District Judge shall assign those cases, as far as possible, to one
jurisdictional court so as to ensure expeditious disposal thereof."
In view of the above, the petitioners are directed to approach the Superintendent of Police, Shajapur
alongwith their documents relating to age proof and marriage and record their statement and also
inform the name of the person who is threatening them. If the petitioners cannot approach to the
superintendent of Police due to some reason and in case of emergency then they are permitted to
approach the nearest police station to record their statements. If the superintendent of police / SHO
finds that there is threat to the life of the petitioners then he shall immediately take action in
accordance with the direction given by the Apex Court in the case of Shakti Vahini (Supra).
With the aforesaid, present writ petition stands disposed of.
It is directed that a copy of this order be supplied to the office of Advocate General and he is directed
to communicate the order to Superintendent of Police, Shajapur for prompt compliance of the order.
C.C. as per rules.
(VIVEK RUSIA) Judge jasleen Digitally signed by Jasleen Singh Saluja Date: 2019.03.13 14:23:28
+05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/4164885/ 5
