Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June, 2022
Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June,
2022
Author: M. Nagaprasanna
Bench: M. Nagaprasanna
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS THE 06TH DAY OF JUNE, 2022
BEFORE
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE M. NAGAPRASANNA
WRIT PETITION No.19012 OF 2021 (GM-RES)
BETWEEN:
MUZAMMIL PASHA
S/O. SYED MUMTAZ
AGED ABOUT 37 YEARS
R/AT NO.1727
1ST STAGE, 2ND BLOCK
YASIN NAGAR
BENGALURU - 560043.
... PETITIONER
(BY SRI MOHAMMED TAHIR, ADVOCATE)
AND:
NATIONAL INVESTIGATING AGENCY
MINISTRY OF HOME AFFAIRS (GOI)
BRANCH OFFICE HYDERABAD
REP. BY THEIR STANDING COUNSEL
OFFICE AT HIGH COURT COMPLEX
OPP. TO VIDHAN SOUDHA
BENGALURU - 560001.
... RESPONDENT
(BY SRI P. PRASANNA KUMAR, SPL. P.P.)
THIS WRIT PETITION IS FILED UNDER ARTICLES 226 AND
227 OF THE CONSTITUTION OF INDIA PRAYING TO SET ASIDE THE
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116948997/ 1
Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June, 2022
IMPUGNED ORDER DTD 27.09.2021 PASSED IN THE
2
SPL.C.C.NO.152/2021, WHICH IS PENDING ON THE FILE OF XLIX
ADDL. CITY CIVIL AND SESSION JUDGE, (SPECIAL COURT FOR NIA
CASES) AT BANGALORE FOR THE ALLEGED OFFENCES UNDER
SECTIONS 143, 147, 307, 436, 353, 332, 333, 427, 504, 506 R/W.
SECTIONS 34 AND 149 OF IPC, SECTION 4 OF PREVENTION OF
DAMAGE TO PUBLIC PROPERTY ACT, 1984, SECTION 2 OF
KARNATAKA PREVENTION OF DESTRUCTION AND LOSS OF
PROPERTY ACT, 1981 AND SECTIONS 15, 16, 18 AND 20 OF UA(P)A
ACT OF 1967, VIDE ANNX-F AND CONSEQUENTLY APPRECIATE
THE APPLICATION FILED UNDER SECTION 207 OF Cr.P.C. SAME AT
ANNX-D, BY THE PETITIONER HEREIN.
THIS WRIT PETITION HAVING BEEN HEARD AND RESERVED
FOR ORDERS ON 12.04.2022, COMING ON FOR PRONOUNCEMENT
THIS DAY, THE COURT MADE THE FOLLOWING:-
ORDER
The petitioner is before this Court calling in question an order dated 27-09-2021 passed by the XLIX
Additional City Civil and Sessions Judge (Special Court for Trial of NIA Cases), Bangalore in Special
C.C.No.152 of 2021, rejecting the application filed by the petitioner under Section 207 of the Cr.P.C.
2. Brief facts leading to the filing of the present petition, as borne out from the pleadings, are as
follows:-
An untoward incident on 11-08-2020, takes place in D.J.Halli Police Station limits,
which was on religious lines. A complaint came to be registered in Crime No.195 of
2020 against accused Nos.1 to 5 along with 300 persons for offences punishable
under Sections 143, 147, 307, 436, 353, 332, 333, 427, 504, 506 r/w. Sections 34 and
149 of the IPC along with Section 4 of the Prevention of Damage to Public Property
Act, 1984 and Section 2 of the Karnataka Prevention of Distribution and Loss of
Property Act, 1981. The police took up investigation on registration of the said
complaint and thereafter, on 17-08-2020, added offences punishable under Sections
15, 16, 18 and 20 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967.
Number of accused were arrested and sent to judicial custody after which Ministry of Home Affairs,
Government of India on 21-09-2020, directs registration of a crime by the National Investigating
Agency ('NIA' for short) at New Delhi Police Station on the same incident against the accused under
the afore- quoted provisions. The NIA further conducted investigation after transfer of the crime
from the State authorities in terms of the direction of Government and then filed a charge sheet. In
the proceedings i.e., Special C.C.No.152 of 2021 after filing the charge sheet by the NIA, the
petitioner/accused No.1 in the said case files an application under Section 207 of the Cr.P.C. for
direction to the NIA to produce and furnish statement of charge sheeted witnesses as mentioned in a
column therein. This was opposed by the NIA by filing its objections and considering the application
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116948997/ 2
Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June, 2022
and objections, the learned Sessions Judge dismissed the application filed by accused No.1 for
furnishing of documents i.e., statements of charge sheeted witnesses recorded by the Police. It is the
rejection of the application that drives the petitioner to this Court in the subject petition.
3. Heard Mr. Mohammed Tahir, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner and Mr. P. Prasanna
Kumar, learned Special Public Prosecutor for the respondent.
4. The learned counsel Mr. Mohammed Tahir, appearing for the petitioner would vehemently argue
and contend that before the investigation was directed to be transferred to NIA, the Police had
recorded several statements of witnesses. Those statements of witnesses do not form part of the
charge sheet filed by the NIA. But, those statements are required for the defense of the accused in
the trial as those statements would reveal innocence of accused No.1 or any other person alleged to
be involved in the crime for the aforesaid offences on 11-08-2020. He would further contend that a
fair trial requires that all documents necessary for the defense, unless they are barred by law, should
be furnished to the accused.
5. On the other hand, the learned Special Public Prosecutor Mr. P.Prasanna Kumar, representing
NIA would vehemently refute the submissions to contend that whatever document that formed part
of the charge sheet, is given to the petitioner. Statements that are recorded by the Police prior to the
investigation taken up by NIA are not relied on by NIA, they do not form part of the charge sheet
and therefore, they cannot be furnished to the petitioner and would submit that it is a matter of trial
and when the trial commences, the documents that are needed can be secured in a manner known to
law. It is his further submission that there can be no fault found with the order passed by the
learned Sessions Judge rejecting the application filed by the petitioner under Section 207 of the
Cr.P.C.
6. I have given my anxious consideration to the submissions made by the respective learned counsel
and perused the material on record. In furtherance whereof, the only issue that calls for my
consideration at this juncture is, whether the petitioner/accused No.1 is entitled to the statements
recorded by the Police prior to the investigation being transferred to NIA?
7. Since the application is filed before the Sessions Judge under Section 207 of the Cr.P.C., it is
germane to notice Section 207 of the Cr.P.C. Section 207 of the Cr.P.C., which reads as follows:
"207. Supply to the accused of copy of police report and other documents.--In any
case where the proceeding has been instituted on a police report, the Magistrate shall
without delay furnish to the accused, free of cost, a copy of each of the following:--
(i) the police report;
(ii) the first information report recorded under section 154;
(iii) the statements recorded under sub-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116948997/ 3
Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June, 2022
section (3) of section 161 of all persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine as its witnesses,
excluding therefrom any part in regard to which a request for such exclusion has been made by the
police officer under sub-
section (6) of section 173;
(iv) the confessions and statements, if any, recorded under section 164;
(v) any other document or relevant extract thereof forwarded to the Magistrate with the police
report under sub-section (5) of section 173:
Provided that the Magistrate may, after perusing any such part of a statement as is
referred to in clause
(iii) and considering the reasons given by the police officer for the request, direct that
a copy of that part of the statement or of such portion thereof as the Magistrate
thinks proper, shall be furnished to the accused:
Provided further that if the Magistrate is satisfied that any document referred to in
clause (v) is voluminous, he shall, instead of furnishing the accused with a copy
thereof, direct that he will only be allowed to inspect it either personally or through
pleader in Court."
(Emphasis supplied) Section 207 of Cr.P.C. deals with supply of copies of police
report and other documents to the accused. The Section contains 5 postulates of what
should be furnished. The Apex Court in CRIMINAL TRIALS GUIDELINES
REGARDING INADEQUACIES AND DEFICIENCIES, IN RE v. STATE OF ANDHRA
PRADESH - (2021) 10 SCC 598, interpreting the aforesaid provision of law has in a
suo motu proceedings under Article 32 of the Constitution of India noticed common
deficiencies which occur in the course of criminal trial and certain practices adopted
by trial Courts in criminal proceedings. Therein, what was the cause for such anomaly
was considered and a direction was issued to adopt uniform practice.
Paragraph 11 of the said judgment reads as follows:
"11. The Amici Curiae pointed out that at the commencement of trial, accused are
only furnished with list of documents and statements which the prosecution relies on
and are kept in the dark about other material, which the police or the prosecution
may have in their possession, which may be exculpatory in nature, or absolve or help
the accused. This Court is of the opinion that while furnishing the list of statements,
documents and material objects under Sections 207/208 CrPC, the Magistrate
should also ensure that a list of other materials, (such as statements, or
objects/documents seized, but not relied on) should be furnished to the accused. This
is to ensure that in case the accused is of the view that such materials are necessary to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116948997/ 4
Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June, 2022
be produced for a proper and just trial, she or he may seek appropriate orders, under
CrPC ["91. Summons to produce document or other thing.--(1) Whenever any court
or any officer in charge of a police station considers that the production of any
document or other thing is necessary or desirable for the purposes of any
investigation, inquiry, trial or other proceeding under this Code by or before such
Court or officer, such Court may issue a summons, or such officer a written order, to
the person in whose possession or power such document or thing is believed to be,
requiring him to attend and produce it, or to produce it, at the time and place stated
in the summons or order.(2) Any person required under this section merely to
produce a document or other thing shall be deemed to have complied with the
requisition if he causes such document or thing to be produced instead of attending
personally to produce the same.(3) Nothing in this section shall be deemed--(a) to
affect Sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act, 1872 (1 of 1872), or the
Bankers' Books Evidence Act, 1891 (13 of 1891) or (b) to apply to a letter, postcard,
telegram or other document or any parcel or thing in the custody of the postal or
telegraph authority."] for their production during the trial, in the interests of justice.
It is directed accordingly;
the Draft Rules have been accordingly modified. [Rule 4(i)]."
(Emphasis supplied) The Apex Court accepts the contention of Amici Curiae therein, that in a trial
the accused are only to be furnished with list of documents and statements which the prosecution
relies on and cannot be kept in dark about other materials which the Police or the prosecution may
have in their possession. These documents may help the accused in getting themselves absolved of
the crime. The Apex Court opined that while furnishing list of statements, documents and material
objects under Sections 207 and 208 of Cr.P.C., the Magistrate should ensure that a list of other
materials, even though not relied on, should be furnished to the accused as they would be imperative
for a fair trial.
8. On a conjoint reading of Section 207 of the Cr.P.C. and the aforesaid opinion of the three Judge
Bench of the Apex Court in a suo motu proceedings, what would unmistakably emerge is, the
statements recorded by the Police under Section 161 or 164 of the Cr.P.C., after registration of the
crime should be furnished to the accused. Sub-section (5) of Section 173 of the Cr.P.C. imposes a
duty on the Police to submit a charge sheet against the accused persons along with all material
documents or relevant extracts on which they propose to rely on. On the bedrock of the statute and
the opinion of the Apex Court, the case at hand requires to be considered. As noticed hereinabove,
the crime was registered on 12-08-2020, for the afore-quoted offences against the petitioner and
several others, at which point in time the Police recorded statements of several witnesses under
Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. Long after investigation had progressed, the Government of India on
21.09.2020 transferred the investigation to NIA. By then, as stated hereinabove, the Police
conducting investigation had recorded several statements. The entire material was lock stock and
barrel transferred to the NIA pursuant to the order of the Government of India. The
respondent/NIA subsequently filed a charge sheet claiming to have conducted investigation into the
matter.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116948997/ 5
Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June, 2022
9. The statements under Section 161 of Cr.P.C. recorded by the Police which were transferred to NIA
did not become a part of the charge sheet. NIA is in custody of those statements and it being the
prosecution, ought to have furnished all those documents to the accused. The arrangement of
witnesses was in the form of tables. Table-I reflects public witnesses who are 21 in number; Table-2
reflects police witnesses who are 94 in number and Table-3 depicts 26 in number. Statements of
witnesses mentioned in Table-3 were not furnished to the accused though they formed part of the
charge sheet. Statements of witnesses mentioned at Tables 1 and 2 did not form part of the charge
sheet and as such they are also not furnished. Out of the witnesses in Tables 1 and 2, there are 21
public witnesses and 94 police witnesses. Section 173(5) of the Cr.P.C. mandates when a report in
respect of a case of which Section 170 of the Cr.P.C. applies, the Police officer shall forward to the
Magistrate along with the report of statements recorded under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C., all of the
persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine as witnesses.
10. The contention of the learned counsel appearing for the respondent is that, those statements do
not form part of the charge sheet and what does not form part of the charge sheet need not be
furnished to the accused. It is accepted by the respondent that though the statements recorded by
the jurisdictional police while conducting investigation under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C. admits that
they are not furnished to the accused. It is in that light the application under Section 207 of the
Cr.P.C. was preferred by the petitioner before the learned Sessions Judge which came to be rejected
on the ground that only the statements recorded by the prosecution have to be produced and the
prosecution in this case being the NIA it has to produce the documents or statements of witnesses,
which it recorded and not the statements of witnesses recorded by the earlier Investigating Officer.
When the prosecution itself is not relying upon the statements recorded by the earlier Investigating
Officer, there was no reason to compel the prosecution to produce statements of those witnesses.
The Court further observed that the accused have every liberty to elicit the said statements during
the course of recording of evidence of the IO.
11. The aforesaid reasons rendered by the learned Sessions Judge to reject the application, in my
considered view, is fundamentally flawed as the accused in the opinion of the Apex Court in the
afore-quoted judgment would become entitled to even those statements or objects not relied on by
the prosecution. It is also germane to notice the judgment of the Apex Court in the case of NITHYA
DHARMANANDHA @ LENIN AND ANOTHER v. GOPAL SHEELUM REDDY1, wherein the Apex
Court holds that ordinarily the Court has to proceed on the basis of the material produced along
with the charge sheet for dealing with the issue. But if the Court is satisfied that there is material of
sterling quality which has been withheld by the Investigator or the Prosecutor, the Court is not
debarred from summoning or relying upon the same even when such document is not a part of the
charge sheet. Sub-section 6 of Section 173 of the Cr.P.C. permits investigating agency to withhold
that portion of the statements recorded by them under Section 161 of the Cr.P.C., which is not
relevant to the subject matter or the disclosure of which to the accused is not essential in the interest
of justice and is inexpedient in public interest. This power to withhold statements or documents
cannot be unbridled or (2018) 2 SCC 93 uncanalised. It can only be used under the circumstances
narrated in sub-section (6) of Section 173 of the Cr.P.C. Therefore, the investigating agency is not
entitled to use the power according to its whim to deny the document that would be necessary for
the defense of the accused.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116948997/ 6
Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June, 2022
12. The contention of the learned counsel appearing for the respondent, which has been accepted by
the learned Sessions Judge, is unacceptable. It can be no argument that the accused can seek for
documents withheld by the prosecution at the time of entering his or her defense. The defense has to
be built up from the commencement of trial and not on ad hoc basis. Unless all the evidence
collected during the course of investigation is furnished to the accused, it cripples construction of
proper defense. Right to defend cannot be rendered illusory by tying the hands of the accused,
depriving him of necessary evidence to defend himself and still claim a fair trial is being conducted.
13. In the light of what is observed hereinabove, it is germane to notice the objections filed by the
NIA to the application of the petitioner filed under Section 207 of the Cr.P.C. Paragraphs 5 and 6 of
the objections, read as follows:
"5. With regard to the allegation in para No.2 of the application, the respondent/NIA
denies all such allegations by the accused applicant and submits that the NIA has
filed the charge sheet based on the facts emerged during the extensive investigation
conducted by the investigating officers. There is no classification of accused into any
categories as alleged by the applicant. The charge sheet contains details of offences
committed by each person. The crime in the instant case was committed by a lot of
people led by a few miscreants, who had conspired in advance to commit the crime.
Therefore, it is absolutely legal on the part of the respondent to prosecute the accused
persons based on offences committed by them, as revealed during the investigation
based on the evidence collected.
6. With regard to the contents in para No.3 of the application wherein it was
discussed about document No.145 in Annexure-B, it is submitted that the said
document No. refers to the handing over of the case documents and material objects
by the City Crime Branch (CCB) and taking over of the same by NIA. The said
document was submitted to the Hon'ble Court along with the charge sheet, to show
the transfer of the case from CCB to NIA. While handing over the documents and
material objects, the CCB has handed over all the documents and material objects
collected in the case by them and all the statements recorded by them during the
course of investigation. The NIA conducted the subsequent investigation and
collected further documents and recorded statements of witnesses. After analyzing all
the evidence collected, including oral and documentary, the documents and
statements which are relevant to the case are identified and submitted before the
Hon'ble Court. It is further submitted that "the statements recoded under 161 of all
the persons whom the prosecution proposes to examine as witnesses" have been
submitted before this Hon'ble Court along with the charge sheet, in accordance with
Section 173 (5)(b) of Cr.P.C. It is also submitted that a copy of the charge sheet, along
with copies of all the relied upon documents and statements have also been supplied
to the accused person herein."
The NIA at paragraph 6 accepts that document No.145 refers to handing over of case documents and
material objects from the CCB to NIA. The document would show handing over of all documents
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116948997/ 7
Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June, 2022
and material objects collected in the case by them and of the statements recorded by them during
the course of investigation. Learned counsel for the respondent - NIA admits that it was not a case of
fresh investigation conducted by it but a subsequent investigation, collection of further documents
and recording of further statements of witnesses. Therefore, it is a case where the
documents/statements of witnesses recorded by the CCB earlier, prior to transfer have been relied
on for analysis of evidence collected and preparation of the charge sheet but the NIA denies that
those documents should be supplied to the accused. According to it, a copy of the charge sheet along
with copies of all documents that would be relied upon and statements have been supplied to the
accused. Therefore, it is a clear case where the statements of charge sheeted witnesses are also
denied to the accused by the NIA which was highlighted by the petitioner in the application filed
under Section 207 of the Cr.P.C. Reference being made to a recently rendered three judge bench
judgment of the Apex Court in the case of MANJOJ AND OTHERS V. STATE OF MADHYA
PRADESH2, wherein it is held as follows:
"184. In Manu Sharma, in the context of policy diaries, this court noted that "the
purpose and the object seems to be quite clear that there should be fairness in
investigation, transparency and a record should be maintained to ensure a proper
investigation". This object is rendered entirely meaningless if the police fail to
maintain the police diary accurately. Failure to meticulously note down the steps
taken during investigation, 2022 SCC OnLine SC 677 and the resulting lack of
transparency, undermines the accused's right to fair investigation; it is up to the trial
court that must take an active role in scrutinizing the record extensively, rather than
accept the prosecution side willingly, so as to bare such hidden or concealed actions
taken during the course of investigation.
185. In the present case, the trial court ought to have inquired more deeply into the
role of DW-1, given that by her own deposition she had admitted to analyzing call
detail records and involvement in Neha's arrest - all of which had been suppressed by
the prosecution side, for reasons best known to them. In this context, a reading of
Section 91 and 243 CrPC as done in Manu Sharma, is important to refer to:
"217. ..Section 91 empowers the court to summon production of any document or
thing which the court considers necessary or desirable for the purposes of any
investigation, inquiry, trial or another proceeding under the provisions of the Code.
Where Section 91 read with Section 243 says that if the accused is called upon to
enter his defence and produce his evidence there he has also been given the right to
apply to the court for issuance of process for compelling the attendance of any
witness for the purpose of examination, cross- examination or the production of any
document or other thing for which the court has to pass a reasoned order."
186. The court went on to elaborate on the due process protection afforded to the accused, and its
effect on fair disclosure responsibilities of the public prosecutor, as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116948997/ 8
Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June, 2022
"218. The liberty of an accused cannot be interfered with except under due process of
law. The expression "due process of law" shall deem to include fairness in trial. The
court (sic Code) gives a right to the accused to receive all documents and statements
as well as to move an application for production of any record or witness in support
of his case. This constitutional mandate and statutory rights given to the accused
place an implied obligation upon the prosecution (prosecution and the Prosecutor) to
make fair disclosure. The concept of fair disclosure would take in its ambit furnishing
of a document which the prosecution relies upon whether filed in court or not. That
document should essentially be furnished to the accused and even in the cases where
during investigation a document is bona fide obtained by the investigating agency
and in the opinion of the Prosecutor is relevant and would help in arriving at the
truth, that document should also be disclosed to the accused.
219. The role and obligation of the Prosecutor particularly in relation to disclosure
cannot be equated under our law to that prevalent under the English system as
aforereferred to. But at the same time, the demand for a fair trial cannot be ignored.
It may be of different consequences where a document which has been obtained
suspiciously, fraudulently or by causing undue advantage to the accused during
investigation such document could be denied in the discretion of the Prosecutor to
the accused whether the prosecution relies or not upon such documents, however in
other cases the obligation to disclose would be more certain. As already noticed the
provisions of Section 207 have a material bearing on this subject and make an
interesting reading.
This provision not only require or mandate that the court without delay and free of cost should
furnish to the accused copies of the police report, first information report, statements, confessional
statements of the persons recorded under Section 161 whom the prosecution wishes to examine as
witnesses, of course, excluding any part of a statement or document as contemplated under Section
173(6) of the Code, any other document or relevant extract thereof which has been submitted to the
Magistrate by the police under sub-section (5) of Section 173. In contradistinction to the provisions
of Section 173, where the legislature has used the expression "documents on which the prosecution
relies" are not used under Section 207 of the Code. Therefore, the provisions of Section 207 of the
Code will have to be given liberal and relevant meaning so as to achieve its object. Not only this, the
documents submitted to the Magistrate along with the report under Section 173(5) would deem to
include the documents which have to be sent to the Magistrate during the course of investigation as
per the requirement of Section 170(2) of the Code.
220. The right of the accused with regard to disclosure of documents is a limited right but is codified
and is the very foundation of a fair investigation and trial. On such matters, the accused cannot
claim an indefeasible legal right to claim every document of the police file or even the portions
which are permitted to be excluded from the documents annexed to the report under Section 173(2)
as per orders of the court. But certain rights of the accused flow both from the codified law as well as
from equitable concepts of the constitutional jurisdiction, as substantial variation to such procedure
would frustrate the very basis of a fair trial. To claim documents within the purview of scope of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116948997/ 9
Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June, 2022
Sections 207, 243 read with the provisions of Section 173 in its entirety and power of the court under
Section 91 of the Code to summon documents signifies and provides precepts which will govern the
right of the accused to claim copies of the statement and documents which the prosecution has
collected during investigation and upon which they rely.
221. It will be difficult for the Court to say that the accused has no right to claim copies of the
documents or request the Court for production of a document which is part of the general diary
subject to satisfying the basic ingredients of law stated therein. A document which has been
obtained bona fide and has bearing on the case of the prosecution and in the opinion of the Public
Prosecutor, the same should be disclosed to the accused in the interest of justice and fair
investigation and trial should be furnished to the accused. Then that document should be disclosed
to the accused giving him chance of fair defence, particularly when non-production or disclosure of
such a document would affect administration of criminal justice and the defence of the accused
prejudicially.
222. The concept of disclosure and duties of the Prosecutor under the English system cannot, in our
opinion, be made applicable to the Indian criminal jurisprudence stricto sensu at this stage.
However, we are of the considered view that the doctrine of disclosure would have to be given
somewhat expanded application. As far as the present case is concerned, we have already noticed
that no prejudice had been caused to the right of the accused to fair trial and non-furnishing of the
copy of one of the ballistic reports had not hampered the ends of justice. Some shadow of doubt
upon veracity of the document had also been created by the prosecution and the prosecution opted
not to rely upon this document. In these circumstances, the right of the accused to disclosure has
not received any setback in the facts and circumstances of the case. The accused even did not raise
this issue seriously before the trial court.
(emphasis supplied)
187. In this manner, the public prosecutor, and then the trial court's scrutiny, both play an essential
role in safeguarding the accused's right to fair investigation, when faced with the might of the state's
police machinery.
188. This view was endorsed in a recent three judge decision of this court in Criminal trials
guidelines regarding Inadequacies and Deficiencies, in re v. State of Andhra Pradesh. This court has
highlighted the inadequacy mentioned above, which would impede a fair trial, and inter alia,
required the framing of rules by all states and High Courts, in this regard, compelling disclosure of a
list containing mention of all materials seized and taken in, during investigation-to the accused. The
relevant draft guideline, approved by this court, for adoption by all states is as follows:
"4. SUPPLY OF DOCUMENTS UNDER SECTIONS 173, 207 AND 208 CR.PC Every
Accused shall be supplied with statements of witness recorded under Sections 161
and 164 Cr.PC and a list of documents, material objects and exhibits seized during
investigation and relied upon by the Investigating Officer (I.O) in accordance with
Sections 207 and 208, Cr. PC.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116948997/ 10
Muzammil Pasha vs National Investigating Agency on 6 June, 2022
Explanation : The list of statements, documents, material objects and exhibits shall
specify statements, documents, material objects and exhibits that are not relied upon
by the Investigating Officer."
189. In view of the above discussion, this court holds that the prosecution, in the interests of
fairness, should as a matter of rule, in all criminal trials, comply with the above rule, and furnish the
list of statements, documents, material objects and exhibits which are not relied upon by the
investigating officer. The presiding officers of courts in criminal trials shall ensure compliance with
such rules."
(Emphasis supplied) If the case at hand is considered on the bedrock of the aforesaid enunciation of
law in the aforesaid judgments of the Apex Court, it cannot but be held to be an unfair act on the
part of the respondent which would lead to an unfair trial. The accused is entitled to a fair trial as
the result of trial on rejecting the application could be taking away the personal liberty of the
accused and therefore, affording of all opportunity to defend must be the very soul of a fair trial to
be conducted against the accused.
14. For the aforesaid reasons, I pass the following:
ORDER
(i) The writ petition is allowed.
(ii) The order dated 27th September, 2021 passed by the XLIX Additional City Civil
and Sessions Judge (Special Court for Trial of NIA Cases), Bangalore in Special C.C.
No.152 of 2021 stands quashed.
(iii) The application filed by the petitioner under Section 207 of the Cr.P.C. in Special
C.C.No.152 of 2021 is allowed and the documents as sought in the application are
directed to be furnished by the respondent to the accused/petitioner within a period
of two weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
Sd/-
JUDGE nvj CT:MJ
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116948997/ 11
