N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
Author: Aravind Kumar
Bench: Aravind Kumar
IN THE HIGH COURT OF KARNATAKA AT BENGALURU
DATED THIS 05th DAY OF MAY, 2020
PRESENT
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ARAVIND KUMAR
AND
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE E.S. INDIRESH
REGULAR FIRST APPEAL NO.1627 OF 2014
Between:
N.G. Vijaya Kumar
S/o late N. Gangappa
Aged about 58 years
R/o No.43, Jaya Vilas
Venkatappa Street
Chikkamavalli
Bangalore - 560 004
...Appellant
(by Shri Shanmukhappa, Advocate)
And:
1. Smt. Y.N. Leelavathi
Aged about 49 years
W/o late L.R. Sri Rangappa
2. Smt. L.S. Hemalatha
aged about 36 years
D/o late L.R. Srirangappa
Both are residents of
No.3, 4th Cross, L.G. Ramanna Layout
Laggere, Peenya Post
2
Bangalore - 560058
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 1
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
...Respondents
(by Shri G.L. Vishwanath, Advocate)
This Regular First Appeal is filed under Section 96 of the
Code of Civil Procedure against the judgment and decree dated
13.08.2014 passed in OS No.4422 of 2006 on the file of the V
Additional City Civil Judge, Bengaluru, dismissing the suit for the
specific performance and possession.
In this Appeal arguments being heard, judgment reserved,
coming on for pronouncement of judgment this day, INDIRESH
J, delivered the following:
JUDGMENT
This Regular First Appeal is preferred by the plaintiff challenging the judgment and decree dated
13th August, 2014 passed in Original Suit No.4422 of 2006 on the file of the V Additional City Civil
Judge at Bangalore, whereby trial court has dismissed the suit for specific performance with costs.
2. For the sake of convenience, parties in this appeal shall be referred to in terms of their status
before the trial Court.
3. The plaintiff has filed the suit against the defendants for specific performance of the contract and
possession, directing the defendants to execute and register the sale deed in respect of the suit
schedule property in his favour by receiving the balance sale consideration from the plaintiff in
terms of the agreement of sale dated 24th February, 2004 and also sought for a direction that in the
event defendants failing to execute and register the sale deed in favour of the plaintiff, same may be
got executed and registered in his favour. Plaintiff also sought for a direction against the defendants
to deliver vacant possession of the suit schedule property, inter alia, sought for grant of permanent
injunction restraining the defendants from alienating, encumbering or disposing off the suit
schedule property in any manner whatsoever in favour of anyone other than the plaintiff.
4. Brief facts of the case according to the plaintiff are:
that defendant No.1 is the wife of late L.R. Srirangappa and defendant No.2 is their
daughter; defendants are the owners of immoveable property bearing survey
No.115/1 measuring three acres of land situated in Laggere, Yeshwanthpur Hobli,
Bangalore North Taluk (hereinafter referred to as 'the suit schedule property'),
having acquired the same, under a family partition;
defendants have executed a written agreement of sale dated 24th February, 2004
agreeing to sell the suit schedule property in favour of the plaintiff for a total sale
consideration of Rs.50,00,000/-. Pursuant to the execution of the agreement of sale,
plaintiff has paid sum of Rs.15,00,000/- to the defendants as advance and part of
sale consideration; plaintiff further averred that he paid Rs.10,00,000/- by way of
cash in the presence of witnesses to the defendants and the remaining Rs.5,00,000/-
through Cheque bearing No.189533 dated 24th February, 2004 drawn on Central
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 2
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
Bank of India, Brigade Road Branch, Bangalore and the said amount of
Rs.5,00,000/- has been realised by the defendants; receipt of the said advance
amount of Rs.15,00,000/- has been acknowledged by the defendants in the
agreement of sale dated 24th February, 2004;
it is further averred that agreement of sale dated 24th February, 2004 stipulates that
the sale transaction was to be completed within a period of two years from the date of
the agreement within said period defendants have to obtain necessary permission
from the competent authorities and thereafter execute and register the sale deed in
favour of the plaintiff by receiving the balance sale consideration of Rs.35,00,000/-
at the time of execution of registration of sale deed; plaintiff was always ready and
willing to perform his part of contract by paying the balance sale consideration and to
get the sale deed executed and registered in his name from the defendants, however,
defendants are avoiding and evading to perform their part of the contract. In view of
the same, plaintiff got issued legal notice dated 23rd February, 2006 to the
defendants, and despite having received the legal notice, defendants have neither
made efforts to execute the registration of Sale Deed nor reply to the same. It is
further averred that defendants who are liable to execute and register the sale deed in
respect of the suit schedule property, are making hasty attempts to alienate the same
in favour of others. Hence, plaintiff filed OS No.4422 of 2006 seeking specific
performance of the agreement of sale dated 24th February, 2004 and for
consequential reliefs as stated in the plaint.
5. In response to the suit summons, defendants appeared through their advocate and filed their
written statement contending that the averments made in the plaint are false and frivolous and
sought for dismissal of the suit. It was contended that plaintiff is a stranger and there is no privity of
contract between them; the defendants have denied the execution of agreement of sale dated 24th
February, 2004; it was further stated in the written statement that acceptance of Rs.5,00,000/-
from the plaintiff was towards meeting the marriage expenses of second defendant which had been
fixed on 28th February, 2004 and it was contended that husband of the first defendant had died on
25th March, 1993 and in view of the same, one Sri L.R. Nagarajappa, being the elder brother of the
husband of the first defendant was to perform the marriage of the second defendant and as such the
said Sri L.R. Nagarajappa had requested the first defendant to avail loan from the third parties for
the purpose of meeting marriage expenses. Under these circumstances, the said L.R. Nagarajappa
prevailed upon the defendants to sign certain documents, which were typed on the stamp paper for
which defendants have objected to affix their signature on the documents; however, said Sri L.R.
Nagarajappa had informed the defendants that he had arranged for some funds to meet the
marriage expenses and in that connection, a cheque for Rs.5,00,000/- was handed over to the first
defendant and stated that these loan documents were required to be signed by them for the amount
paid and as such, the defendants had no idea as to the nature of the documents or in whose name it
was executed; and believing the version of the said Sri L.R. Nagarajappa, defendants had affixed
their signature to the agreement of sale dated 24th February, 2004 without knowing that they were
entering into an agreement of sale of suit schedule property. The defendants further stated that on
23rd February, 2006 the said Sri L.R. Nagarajappa had brought a document styled as Release Deed
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 3
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
to be executed by the first defendant and others in favour of Sri L.R. Munigangappa being another
brother-in-law of the first defendant; under the said Release Deed totally five releasers stated
therein, including the first defendant, were to release their one sixth undivided share each in the suit
schedule property; the defendants further contend that with a view to build confidence so as to
persuade the first defendant to sign the release deed, the said Sri L.R. Nagarajappa has represented
to the first defendant that he was also arrayed as one of the releasers in the said release deed.
Further, the first defendant has requested Sri L.R. Nagarajappa to handover the copies of the
documents to which their signatures were obtained on 24th February, 2004, for which the said Sri
L.R. Nagarajappa did not oblige. In this connection, on 01st March, 2006, the other releasers appear
to have released their 4/6th share of the undivided share in the suit schedule property in favour of
L.R. Munigangappa. The defendants further stated that the market value of the suit schedule
property is more than Rs.3.00 crore, suffice to say, that even during the year 2004, the value of the
suit schedule property was more than Rs.2.00 crore and in view of the same, entering into an
agreement of sale dated 24th February, 2004 in favour of the plaintiff does not arise at all since the
consideration amount agreed upon by the parties in the agreement of sale dated 24th February,
2004 was only Rs.50,00,000/-. Hence the defendants sought for dismissal of the suit.
6. On the basis of the aforesaid pleadings, trial court had framed the following issues:
(1) Does the plaintiff prove that the defendants executed an agreement of sale on
24.2.2004 in his favour, agreeing to sell the suit schedule property to him for a sale
consideration of Rs.50,00,000/-?
(2) Does the plaintiff prove that he paid an amount of Rs.15,00,000/- to defendants
by advance?
(3) Does the plaintiff prove that throughout, he has been ready and willing to perform
his part of the contract?
(4) Do defendants prove that they received Rs.5,00,000/- from the plaintiff, yielding
to the threat and pressure put by Sri L.R.Nagarajappa and signed on several papers
as contended in para 12 of the written statement?
(5) Do defendants prove that in the circumstances narrated in para 14 and 15 of their
written statement, they would not have executed an agreement?
(6) Is the plaintiff entitled for a decree of suit property and possession of suit
property? If so, what order or decree?
7. In order to substantiate his case, plaintiff got himself examined as PW1 and also examined two
more witnesses as PWs.2 and 3 and got marked documents as Exhibits P1 to P9. Defendant No.2
was examined as DW1 and defendant No.1 was examined as DW2 and defendants have marked
Exhibits D1 to D6.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 4
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
8. On the basis of the pleadings and on evaluating the evidence recorded, the trial court has
answered issues No.1 and 2 in the affirmative; however, has answered issues No.3 to 5 in the
negative and accordingly, dismissed the suit of the plaintiff. Being aggrieved by the judgment and
decree dated 13th August, 2014 passed by the trial court, plaintiff has preferred this appeal.
9. We have heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties and perused the materials on record
as well as the original records secured. Shri Shanmukhappa, the learned counsel appearing for the
plaintiff contends that judgment and decree dated 13th August, 2014 passed by the trial Court is
illegal, arbitrary and contrary to the material placed on record. He further contends that though trial
Court having arrived at a conclusion that plaintiff had proved the execution of agreement of sale
dated 24th February, 2004, yet did not decree the suit of the plaintiff. He has further contended
though plaintiff has produced sufficient documents to establish show that he had sufficient funds to
purchase the suit schedule property as on the date of filing of the suit, trial court, without
considering said documents available on record as well as oral evidence in right perspective, has
dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff by observing that plaintiff has failed to prove his readiness
and willingness to perform his part of contract. He further contends that Court below has erred in
recording a finding that land in question is a granted land and therefore, there cannot be any sale
agreement in respect of the suit schedule property. It is his further contention that trial court has
failed to take note of the fact that there is a specific stipulation in the agreement of sale as to
obtaining permission from the competent authorities by respondents and in this regard he submits
that respondents had failed to adhere to the terms and conditions stated in the agreement of sale.
He further submits that trial court has committed a grave error in dismissing the suit in totality even
without ordering refund of the amount paid under the agreement of sale, and thereby, judgment and
decree passed by the trial Court suffers from non-consideration of materials placed on record.
Hence, he prays for allowing the appeal by decreeing the suit.
10. Per contra, Shri G.L. Vishwanath, learned counsel appearing for the respondents contends that
judgment and decree passed by the trial Court is in accordance with law and the trial Court has
considered the entire materials placed on record and on appreciating the evidence on record, has
rightly dismissed the suit filed by the plaintiff and the same does not call for any interference, and as
such, he has sought for dismissal of the appeal.
11. Having heard the learned counsel appearing for the parties, and on perusal of entire material on
record, we are of the view that following point would arise for our consideration:
Whether finding recorded by the trial court to dismiss the suit filed by the plaintiff for
specific performance requires interference or not?
12. The undisputed facts of the case is that marriage of the 2nd defendant was fixed on 29th
February, 2004. Exhibit D4 is the marriage invitation and Exhibit D3 is the marriage photograph.
Originally, Sri L.G. Ramanna the father-in-law of the defendant No.1 was the owner of the property
and pursuant to his death, Land Tribunal granted occupancy rights in favour of the joint family of
the legal heirs of late L.G. Ramanna viz. the husband of the Defendant No.1-late L.R. Srirangappa
who is the brother of L.R. Nagarajappa and others vide proceedings No.599:74-75, 2857:76-77 and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 5
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
259:79-80 as per Exhibit D1. It is not in dispute that the defendants herein are the absolute owners
of the suit schedule property. That as contended by the plaintiff, agreement of sale dated 24th
February, 2004 stipulates that the defendants/vendors shall obtain required permission from the
competent authorities for the sale of the suit schedule property in favour of the appellant/purchaser
within two years from the date of execution of agreement of sale. The parties have further agreed
that the time for compliance of the contract shall be two years from the execution of the agreement
of sale dated 24th February, 2004. It is not in dispute that the defendants acknowledged the receipt
of Rs.15,00,000/-, i.e. Rs.10,00,000/- by way of cash and Rs.5,00,000/- through cheque, which
they have encashed. Perusal of entire records would clearly indicate that the marriage of the
defendant No.2 had been fixed on 28th February, 2004 with one N.V. Swamy at Gangamma
Thimmaiah Convention Hall, Bengaluru and in this connection the finding recorded by the trial
court probabalises that defendant No.1 has received the amount of Rs.5,00,000/- by way of cheque
and Rs.10,00,000/- by way of cash from the plaintiff to meet the marriage expenses. This would
also clearly establish the fact that respondents have put their signature at the instance of Sri L.R.
Nagarajappa who is none other than the elder brother of Late Srirangappa-the husband of
Defendant No.1 who had performed the marriage of 2nd defendant. Though the trial Court has
answered issues No.1 and 2 in favour of the plaintiff with regard to execution of agreement of sale
dated 24th February, 2004 inter alia accepting an advance of Rs.15,00,000/- by the defendants,
however, has held issues No.3 to 5 in favour of the defendants. Having gone through the entire
documents on record and the materials available, we are of the opinion that trial court was justified
in dismissing the suit by considering the factual aspects of the case; and the circumstances therein
would probabalise that the respondents have signed Exhibit P1-agreement of sale dated 24th
February, 2004 to avail consideration of Rs.15,00,000/- from the plaintiff for the purpose of
meeting marriage expenses of defendant No.2 as a loan document and have no idea or intention that
they were selling the suit schedule property as contemplated by the plaintiff under an agreement of
sale .
13. Section 16 of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 (for short hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') provides
for personal bar to relief. Section 16 of the Act, reads:
"16. Personal bars to relief.--Specific performance of a contract cannot be enforced in
favour of a person--
(a) who has obtained substituted performance of contract under Section 20; or
(b) who has become incapable of performing, or violates any essential term of, the
contract that on his part remains to be performed, or acts in fraud of the contract, or
wilfully acts at variance with, or in subversion of, the relation intended to be
established by the contract; or
(c) who fails to prove that he has performed or has always been ready and willing to
perform the essential terms of the contract which are to be performed by him, other
than terms the performance of which has been prevented or waived by the defendant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 6
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
Explanation.--For the purposes of clause (c),--
(i) where a contract involves the payment of money, it is not essential for the plaintiff
to actually tender to the defendant or to deposit in court any money except when so
directed by the court;
(ii) the plaintiff must prove performance of, or readiness and willingness to perform,
the contract according to its true construction."
Sub-clause (ii) to the explanation found under Clause (c) of Section 16 stipulates that plaintiff has to
aver performance of, or readiness and willingness to perform the contract.
14. As regards readiness and willingness is concerned, this Court, in the case of SMT.
CHANDRAKANTHAMMA & OTHERS vs. B.RAMAKRISHNAIAH reported in (2016)I AIR KANT.R
273, following the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of COROMANDEL INDAG
PRODUCTS PRIVATE LIMITED v. GARUDA CHIT AND TRADING COMPANY PRIVATE
LIMITED AND ANOTHER reported in (2011) 8 SCC 601, at paragraph 20 of the judgment has held
thus:
"20. It is also relevant to point out the stand of the parties as reflected in their
pleadings and evidence. In terms of Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963, it is
incumbent on the party, who wants to enforce the specific performance of a contract,
to aver and prove that he has performed or has always been ready and willing to
perform the essential terms of the contract. The Explanation appended to clause (c)
makes it clear that if a contract involves the payment of money, it is not essential for
the plaintiff to actually tender to the defendant or to deposit in court any money
except when so directed by the court. However, the plaintiff must aver performance
of or readiness and willingness to perform the contract according to its true
construction."
In the same paragraph, it is further held as follows:
"Therefore, not only the plaintiff has to aver his readiness and willingness, he must
prove his readiness and willingness by such acceptable evidence on record. The
Explanation makes it clear, in proving his readiness and willingness, it is not
essential for the plaintiff to actually tender to the defendant or to deposit in Court any
money. But nonetheless, when he is called upon to prove in a Court of law his
readiness and willingness, he must prove by acceptable evidence that on the day he
was expected to pay the balance sale consideration agreed upon, either he had ready
funds or from where he would have raised the funds as on that day. Raising of the
funds or source of funds subsequent to the date of the suit would not prove the
plaintiff's readiness and willingness to perform his part of the contract in terms of the
contract agreed upon. In this connection, this Court had an occasion to review the
entire case law on the point and in the case of SMT. PADMINI RAGHAVAN v. MR.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 7
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
H.A. SONNAPPA, SINCE DEAD BY HIS L.Rs AND OTHERS reported in ILR 2014
KAR 233 held as under:
"51. Thus, Section 16(c) of Act envisages that plaintiff must plead and prove that he
had performed or has always been ready and willing to perform the essential terms of
the contract which are to be performed by him, other than those terms the
performance of which has been prevented or waived by the defendant. The
continuous readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff is a condition
precedent to grant the relief of specific performance. This circumstance is material
and relevant and is required to be considered by the Court while granting or refusing
to grant the relief. If the plaintiff fails to either aver or prove the same, he must fail.
The basic principle behind Section 16(c) read with Explanation (ii) is that any person
seeking benefit of the specific performance of contract must manifest that his
conduct has been blemishless throughout entitling him to the specific relief. The
provision imposes a personal bar. The Court is to grant relief on the basis of the
conduct of the person seeking relief.
52. Thus in a suit for specific performance, the plaintiff should not only plead and
prove the terms of the agreement, but should also plead and prove his readiness and
willingness to perform his obligations under the contract in terms of the contract.
The continuous readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff is a condition
precedent to grant the relief of specific performance. This circumstance is material
and relevant and is required to be considered by the Court while granting or refusing
to grant the relief. If the plaintiff fails to either aver or prove the same, he must fail. It
is indisputable that in a suit for specific performance of contract, the plaintiff must
establish his readiness and willingness to perform his part of the contract. The
readiness and willingness on the part of the plaintiff to perform his part of contract
would also depend upon the question as to whether the defendant did everything
which was required of him to be done in terms of the agreement for sale. The
question as to whether the onus was discharged by the plaintiff or not will depend
upon the facts and circumstances of each case. No straitjacket formula can be laid
down in this behalf. To adjudge whether the plaintiff is ready and willing to perform
his part of the contract, the Court must take into consideration the conduct of the
plaintiff prior and subsequent to the filing of the suit along with other attending
circumstances. The amount of consideration which he has to pay to the defendant
must of necessity be proved to be available. Right from the date of the execution till
the date of the decree, he must prove that he is ready and has always been willing to
perform his part of the contract. AS stated, the factum of his readiness and
willingness to perform his part of the contract is to be adjudged with reference to the
conduct of the party and the attending circumstances. The Court may infer from the
facts and circumstances whether the plaintiff was ready and was always ready and
willing to perform his part of contract.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 8
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
53. Readiness and willingness refer to the state of mind and conduct of the purchaser,
as also his capacity and preparedness on the other. One without the other is not
sufficient. There is a distinction between readiness to perform the contract and
willingness to perform the contract. By readiness may be meant the capacity of the
plaintiff to perform the contract which includes his financial position to pay the
purchase price. In so far as willingness is concerned, it reflects the mental attitude of
the plaintiff to part with or pay the balance sale consideration agreed to be paid. If
there are any reservations without any justification, or it is made conditional on the
happening of any event which is not agreed upon, it shows his unwillingness to
perform his part of the contract. The obligation imposed by Section 16 is upon the
Court not to grant specific performance to a plaintiff who has not met the
requirements of Clauses (a), (b) and (c) thereof. A Court may not, therefore, grant to
a plaintiff who has failed to aver and to prove that he has performed or has always
been ready and willing to perform his part of the agreement the specific performance
whereof he seeks. There is therefore, no question of the plea being available to one
defendant and not to another. It is open to any defendant to contend and establish
that the mandatory requirement of Section 16(c) has not been complied with and it is
for the Court to determine whether it has or has not been complied with."
21. Therefore, it is clear, in order to prove his readiness and willingness, the amount of
consideration which the plaintiff has to pay to the defendants, must of necessity be proved to be
available right from the date of the execution of the agreement till the date of the decree. He must
prove that, he is ready and has always been willing to perform his part of the contract. The factum of
his readiness and willingness to perform his part of the contract has to be adjudged with reference to
the conduct of the parties and the attendant circumstances."
15. Therefore, it is clear that readiness and willingness cannot be considered in a straitjacket
formula, and it has to be determined on the facts and circumstances of each case; the intention and
conduct of the parties concerned and all other attendant considerations. Readiness and willingness
are different and distinct and even if a party to the contract is ready and has the requisite funds, he
must be willing to perform his part of contract and vice-versa. Thus, both readiness as well as
willingness have to be established by plaintiff on whom the burden is cast in a suit for specific
performance of the agreement.
16. After the amendment of Section 16(c) of Specific Relief Act, 1963 the Hon'ble Supreme Court, in
the case of MEHBOOB-UR-REHMAN (DEAD) THROUGH LRS. Vs. AHSANUL GHANI (Civil
Appeal No.8199/2009 disposed of on 15th February 2019) has held that averments made in the
plaint must disclose that all the requirements of Section 16(c) read with requirement contained in
Form 47 and 48 of Appendix 'A' of Code of Civil Procedure is found. It has been further held:
"13. It remains trite that the relief of specific performance is not that of common law
remedy but is essentially an exercise in equity. Therefore, in the Specific Relief Act,
1963, even while providing for various factors and parameters for specific
performance of contract, the provisions are made regarding the contracts which are
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 9
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
not specifically enforceable as also the persons for or against whom the contract may
be specifically enforced. In this scheme of the Act, Section 16 thereof provides for
personal bars to the relief of specific performance. Clause (c) of Section 16 with the
explanation thereto, as applicable to the suit in question, had been as follows:-
"16. Personal bars to relief.- Specific performance of a contract cannot be enforced in
favour of a person-
(a) xxx xxx xxx
(b) xxx xxx xxx
(c) who fails to aver and prove that he has performed or has always been ready and
willing to perform the essential terms of the contract which are to be performed by
him, other than terms the performance of which has been prevented or waived by the
defendant.
Explanation:--For the purpose of clause (c),-
(i) where a contract involves the payment of money, it is not essential for the plaintiff to actually
tender to the defendant or to deposit in court any money except when so directed by the court;
(ii) the plaintiff must aver performance of, or readiness and willingness to perform, the contract
according to its true construction."
14. Though, with the amendment of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 by Act No. 18 of 2018, the
expression "who fails to aver and prove" is substituted by Act No. 18 of 2018, the expression "who
fails to aver and prove" is substituted by the expression "who fails to prove". By the same Act No. 18
of 2018, the expression " must aver" is substituted by the expression "must prove" expression "who
fails to prove" and the expression "must aver" stands substituted by the expression "must prove" but
then, the position on all the material aspects remains the same that, specific performance of a
contract cannot be enforced in favour to the person who fails to prove that he has already performed
or has always been ready and willing to perform the essential terms of the contract which are to be
performed by him, other than the terms of which, the performance has been prevented or waived by
the other party. As per the law applicable at the relevant time, it was incumbent for the plaintiff to
take the specific averment to that effect in the plaint. Of course, it was made clear by this Court in
several decisions, that such requirement of taking the necessary averment was not a matter of form
and no specific phraseology or language was required to take such a plea. However, and even when
mechanical reproduction of the words of statue was not insisted upon, the requirement of such
pleading being available in the plaint was neither waived nor even whittled down. In the case of A.
Kanthamani v. Nasreen Ahmed: (2017) 4 SCC 654, even while approving the decree for specific
performance of the agreement on facts, this Court pointed out that the requirement analogous to
that contained in Section 16(c) of the Specific Relief Act, 1963 was read in its forerunner i.e., the
Specific Relief Act, 1877 even without specific provision to that effect. Having examined the scheme
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 10
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
of the Act and the requirements of CPC, this Court said,- vide Syed Dastagir v.
T.R.Gopalakrishna Setty: (1999) 6 SCC 337; and Aniglase Yohannan v. Ramlatha and Ors.: (2005) 7
SCC 534, "Therefore, the plaint which seeks the relief of specific performance of the
agreement/contract must contain all requirements of Section 16 (c) read with requirements
contained in Forms 47 and 48 of Appendix 'A' CPC."
17. A plain reading of Section 16(c) of the Act makes it absolute that plaintiff has to plead readiness
and willingness to pay balance sale consideration amount and has also to tender in proof off its
evidence. In this background efforts made by plaintiff to pay balance sale consideration within a
period of two years, i.e. from the date of execution of sale agreement dated 24th February, 2004 will
have to be looked into and evidence will have to be evaluated. Perusal of the entire records would
indicate that plaintiff has not made any efforts with regard to execution of sale deed in pursuance of
the agreement of sale dated 24th February, 2004. Plaintiff ought to have taken steps in this regard
to prove his readiness and willingness.
18. It is the specific case of the plaintiff that suit schedule property is the absolute property of the
defendants and they had agreed to sell the same under Exhibit P1 whereunder time for execution of
the sale has been stipulated as two years from the date of agreement. Since Clause 6 and 7 of the
agreement has bearing on the point of readiness and willingness, same is extracted hereinbelow:
"6. The Parties hereto agree that the VENDORS shall obtain the required permission
from the competent authorities for the sale of the Schedule Property in favour of the
PURCHASER within two years from the date of these articles.
7. It is hereby agreed between the parties hereto that the time for compliance of the
contract shall be two years from the date of this document and the time shall form
the essence of the contract."
19. Plaintiff has contended in the plaint that he has been always ready and willing to perform his
part of the contract. According to plaintiff, defendants had to obtain permission from competent
authority to sell suit schedule property. Neither in the plaint or in the legal notice (Exhibit P2),
plaintiff has specified as to what permission defendants had to obtain. For the first time in his
deposition, he contended there was a prohibition clause for sale of suit schedule property, within
fifteen years from the date of grant. It is also deposed that under the said circumstances, two years
time had been fixed for the purposes of completion of the sale transaction.
20. Undisputedly, plaintiff is a practicing advocate and as such he was conversant with the nuances
of difference between grant and conferring title by way of grant of occupancy rights. In fact, in his
cross-examination dated 12th September, 2012, the order passed by the Land Tribunal dated 31st
January 1999 was produced and marked as Exhibit D1. Plaintiff also knew that the revenue records
of the suit schedule property stood in the name of Sri L.R. Nagarajappa for the year 2005-06 i.e. as
on the date of agreement, yet he did not call upon the defendants to get the revenue records
mutated. In his cross-examination, dated 12th September, 2012, he admits that he has not asked the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 11
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
defendant whether any permission to sell the land has been applied or obtained. He also admits that
there is no written correspondence with the defendants in this regard. He claims to have made
demand orally. However, the two independent witnesses PW2 and PW3 have not whispered a word
in this regard. Thus, the self-serving testimony of the plaintiff would not come to his rescue to
buttress his plea of being ready and willing to perform his part of contract. Though in the normal
circumstances, the principle of oath against oath could have been applied, in the light of defendants
having stoutly denying the plaintiff's statement. However, we desist from doing so, for the simple
reason that plaintiff being a practicing advocate and well conversant with the legal consequences,
could have kept quiet for two long years without raising his little finger. This conduct on the part of
the plaintiff would drive us to arrive at a conclusion that the plaintiff was not serious in enforcing
the agreement or in other words, not ready and willing to perform his part of the contract. Thus, we
are of the considered view that the trial court was justified in arriving at a conclusion that the
plaintiff was not ready and willing to perform his part of the contract, by answering issue No.3 in the
negative.
21. We have perused the judgment of the trial court. The trial court has dismissed the Suit in totality
without ordering refund of the amount paid under agreement of sale dated 24th February 2004. The
relief of specific performance is a discretionary one. Merely because it is lawful, in all cases such
relief need not be granted automatically. A perusal of pleadings of the parties, evidence on record,
and findings recorded by the trial Court would clearly establish the fact that though trial court, while
answering issues No.1 and 2, has arrived at a conclusion that parties have entered into an agreement
of sale on 24th February, 2004, however, the relief of specific performance was not ordered under
the circumstances of the case. In this regard, it is necessary for us to notice the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of KAMAL KUMAR v. PREMLATA JOSHI AND OTHERS
reported in (2019)3 SCC 704, while dealing with the pre-requisites to be examined by the Courts in
the case of specific performance of contract, has held that grant of relief of specific performance is a
discretionary and equitable relief. It has been observed thus:
"10. It is a settled principle of law that the grant of relief of specific performance is a
discretionary and equitable relief. The material questions, which are required to be
gone into for grant of the relief of specific performance, are First, whether there exists
a valid and concluded contract between the parties for sale/purchase of the suit
property; Second, whether the plaintiff has been ready and willing to perform his part
of contract and whether he is still ready and willing to perform his part as mentioned
in the contract; Third, whether the plaintiff has, in fact, performed his part of the
contract and, if so, how and to what extent and in what manner he has performed
and whether such performance was in conformity with the terms of the contract;
Fourth, whether it will be equitable to grant the relief of specific performance to the
plaintiff against the defendant in relation to suit property or it will cause any kind of
hardship to the defendant and, if so, how and in what manner and the extent if such
relief is eventually granted to the plaintiff; and lastly, whether the plaintiff is entitled
for grant of any other alternative relief, namely, refund of earnest money etc. and, if
so, on what grounds."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 12
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
22. In the light of authoritative principle laid down by the Apex Curt above referred to, when facts
and circumstances of the present case is examined, it is noticed that the plaintiff was held not
entitled for the relief of specific performance by the trial court. However, the fact remains plaintiff
had paid advance money to the defendant-vendors, though specifically alternative relief of refund of
amount had not been prayed for in the plaint. Section 22(1)(b) of the Act mandates that plaintiff has
to seek alternative relief of refund of deposit 'in case his claim for specific performance is refused'
and according to sub-section (2) of Section 22 of the Act, relief of refund would not be granted
unless it is or it was specifically claimed. It would appear that plaintiff does not place the two reliefs
at par, rather he gives his order of preference. The said aspect of the matter was considered by the
Division Bench of Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of MANAGER PUSHPAGIRI MUTT v. C.
INIDRAMMA reported in AIR 2003 AP 379 wherein it is held that since the relief of specific
performance is a discretionary relief, though specifically the alternative relief of refund of the
amount had not been prayed for, in the circumstances of the case and in the interest of justice, the
Court could deem fit and necessary to grant just and equitable decree for refund of advance money
with interest.
23. In the case of MST. SAHIDA BIBI v. S.K. GOLAM MUHAMMAD reported in AIR 1983
CALCUTTA 216, the Division Bench of Calcutta High Court has held that relief of specific
performance was not granted because of facts showing that the plaintiff did not aver and prove that
he was ready and willing to perform his part of contract to sale. However, it was found that earnest
money paid should be refunded. Neither the plaintiff had appealed before the trial Court for grant of
said prayer nor was there any such prayer made before the appellate Court. Thus bar under
Sub-section (2) of Section 22 of the Act would clearly apply. But on consideration of proviso thereto,
the Division Bench gave an opportunity to the plaintiff therein to amend the plaint and further
observed that where such other relief was not claimed in the plaint originally filed, the plaintiff has
right to amend the relief at any stage of the proceedings. The words "at any stage of the proceedings"
connotes not only before the Court of first instance i.e. in the original jurisdictional court, but also
before the Appellate Court, as it would serve the purpose of the proviso to the main provision as
contemplated under Section 22 of the Act.
24. The Hon'ble Supreme Court while interpreting the words "at any stage of the proceedings" in the
case of BABU LAL v. HAZARI LAL KISHORI LAL AND OTHERS reported in AIR 1982 SC 818 has
held that the expression "at any stage of the proceedings" would include execution proceedings as
well as the Appellate Court.
25. Whereas it settled principle of law that proviso follows the enacting part of Section and is in a
way independent of it. It does not enlarge the scope of the Section, and in most cases it cuts down or
makes an exception from the ambit of the main provision. The proper intention of a provision is to
accept and deal with the cases which would otherwise fall within the general language of the main
enactment and its effect is confined to that case. The proper way to regard a proviso is as a
limitation upon the effect of the principal enactment. The duty of the Court also must be to give to
the proviso as far as possible a meaning so restricted as to bring it within the ambit and purview of
the section itself. Bindra's Interpretation of Statutes in Sixth Edition points out that "Ordinarily, a
proviso is no doubt designed to restrict rather than to enlarge the provision to which it is appended
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 13
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
but this is not an inflexible rule and there are cases in which the language might well lead to the
conclusion that the Legislature intended to exercise its enacting power. If after a careful
examination of the proviso, the provision to which it is attached and the Act as a whole, the court
comes to the conclusion that the Legislature intended to create a liability, it is the duty of the court
to give effect to the intention even though it is embodied in a proviso. Having considered the
interpretation made therein with regard to proviso and on application of the same to Section 22(2)
of the Act, it would serve the intention of the Legislature if the purchaser is allowed to entitle for
refund of the earnest advance amount provided that the finding of the trial Court is in favour of the
plaintiff with regard to execution of sale of agreement is concerned.
26. As contemplated in proviso to clause (2) of Section 22 of the Act while invoking the Code of Civil
Procedure, the Court has discretion to allow amendment. But in this appeal it overrides the Code of
Civil Procedure. The Court has no option but to allow such amendment which is a discretion being
only in respect of the terms on which the amendment is to be allowed.
27. The High Court of Madhya Pradesh in the case of SUSHILA DEVI AND OTHERS v.
KACHRABAI AND OTHERS reported in 1994 MPLJ 362 has held that where in a suit of specific
performance a decree is refused, the Court can order refund of amount paid in pursuance of contract
to the defendant, if the plaintiff is not prayed so in the suit.
28. In the instant case though the plaintiff-appellant has not sought for refund of earnest money as
an alternative prayer in the plaint, however, the plaintiff-appellant has filed an application under
Order VI Rule 17 read with Section 151 of the Code of Civil Procedure and requested this Court for
refund of advance amount of Rs.15,00,000/- from the defendant- respondents which is an alternate
prayer. On considering the law declared by various High Courts as stated supra and by applying the
principle of justness in the instant case, we are of the opinion that the appellant-plaintiff is entitled
for refund of amount of Rs.15,00,000/- from the defendant-respondents with interest at the rate of
6% per annum from the date of entering into agreement of sale till the date of realisation of the
same by allowing the application.
In view of the same, we pass the following:
ORDER Appeal filed by the appellant-plaintiff is allowed in part. Judgment and
decree dated 13th August, 2014 passed in OS No.4422 of 2006 by the V Additional
City Civil Judge dismissing the suit for specific performance is affirmed and prayer
for refund of advance amount of Rs.15,00,000/- with interest at 6% per annum from
24th February, 2004 till deposit or payment of said amount is decreed.
Respondent-defendants are directed to pay or refund a sum of Rs.15,00,000/- with
interest at 6 percent per annum from the date of entering into agreement of sale till
the date of payment or deposit to the appellant-plaintiff within a period of three
months from the date of receipt of copy of this Judgment.
Sd/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 14
N G Vijaya Kumar vs Smt Y N Leelavathi on 5 May, 2020
JUDGE Sd/-
JUDGE lnn
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127299263/ 15
