Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite
... on 29 September, 2021
Author: B.P.Routray
Bench: B.P.Routray
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P. (C) No.10726 of 2021 and batch of Writ Petitions
Nabin Kumar Singh .... Petitioners
(In W.P.(C) No.10726 of 2021)
Kamalini Kushal
(In W.P.(C) No.10743 of 2021)
Mr. P. K. Rath, Advocate
Paramananda Singh Petitioner
(In W.P.(C) No.10471 of 2021)
Mr. Huzefa Ahmedi, Senior Advocate
along with Mr. S. C. Tripathy and Mr. R. Roy, Advocates
Bidulata Behera Petitioner
(In W.P.(C) No.19982 of 2021)
Mr. Asok Mohanty, Senior Advocate assisted by
Mr. G.M. Rath, Advocate
Debasis Behera Petitioners
(In W.P. (C) No.10908 of 2021)
Ajay Kumar Mohanty
(In W.P.(C) No.11157 of 2021)
Kabir Das
(In W.P.(C) No.11159 of 2021)
Arvind Kumar Sahu
(In W.P.(C) No.11164 of 2021)
Rajesh Senapati
(In W.P.(C) No.11165 of 2021)
Deepak Kumar
(In W.P.(C) No.11166 of 2021)
Aruna Kumar Sahoo
(In W.P.(C) No.11171 of 2021)
Sukanti Hota
(In W.P.(C) No.12646 of 2021)
Mr. A. K. Patra, Advocate
W.P.(C) No.10726 of 2021 Page 1 of 53
Manish Sahu Petitioners
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 1
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
(In W.P.(C) No.11099 of 2021)
Basanta Kumar Behura
(In W.P.(C) No.11102 of 2021)
Prafulla Kumar Pradhan
(In W.P.(C) No.11103 of 2021)
Jaya Prakash Gupta @ Jayaprakash
Gupta
(In W.P.(C) No.11104 of 2021)
Manoj Kumar Sahoo
(In W.P.(C) No.11106 of 2021)
Jagadish Sahoo
(In W.P.(C) No.11107 of 2021)
Parbatibala Das
(In W.P.(C) No.11109 of 2021)
Harish Chandra Mohanty
(In W.P.(C) No.11110 of 2021)
Ashok Kumar Behera
(In W.P.(C) No.11786 of 2021)
Prajnya Priyadarshini Gharai
(In W.P.(C) No.11979 of 2021)
Dinesh Kumar Nayak
(In W.P.(C) No.12165 of 2021)
Mr. B. P. Das, Advocate
Shantanu Kumar Dash Petitioner
(In W.P.(C) Nos.11311 and 12452 of
2021 )
Mr. Achyuta Nanda Routray, Advocate
Ranjan Kumar Padhi Petitioner
(In W.P.(C) No.11345 of 2021)
Mr. Ajaya Kumar Jena, Advocate
Sanjeeb Kumar Barik Petitioner
(In W.P.(C) No.11427 of 2021)
Mr. Sidhartha Das, Advocate
W.P.(C) No.10726 of 2021 Page 2 of 53
Gouranga Charan Tripathy Petitioner
(In W.P.(C) No.11431 of 2021)
Mr. Umesh Chandra Patnaik, Senior Advocate
Pranati Das Mohapatra Petitioner
(In W.P.(C) No.11625 of 2021)
Mr. R. N. Mishra, Advocate
Bipin Bihari Nayak Petitioner
(In W.P.(C) No.19644 of 2021)
Mr. J. K. Khandayatray, Advocate
Hemanta Kumar Sahu and Others
(In W.P.(C) No.11252 of 2021)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 2
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
Biraja Prasad Premananda Nayak and
Others Petitioners
(In W.P.(C) No.11367 of 2021)
Mr. P.K. Rath, Advocate
-versus-
State of Odisha and others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. A. K. Parija, Advocate General
assisted by Mr. M. S. Sahoo, Mr. D. K. Mohanty and
Mrs. S. Patnaik, Additional Government Advocates
CORAM:
THE CHIEF JUSTICE
JUSTICE B.P.ROUTRAY
JUDGMENT
29.09.2021 Dr. S. Muralidhar, CJ.
1. The policy decision of the Government of Odisha to part with the exclusive privileges of retail sale
through IMFL Off Shops by charging a fixed license fee and selecting the applicants through a
lottery/ draw of lots is the subject matter of the challenge in this batch of writ petitions.
2. The amendment introduced to Rule 34 (1) of the Orissa Excise Rules ('OE Rules') by the Odisha
Excise (Amendment) Rules to replace the words "or otherwise" with the words "lottery or e- lottery"
with effect from 7th January, 2021 is also under challenge. The consequential notification issued by
the Excise Department, Government of Odisha on 26th February, 2021 laying down the criteria and
guidelines for organizing the lottery for grant of exclusive privilege in the trade of intoxicating
liquors through IMFL OFF Shops and the sale notice dated 14th March, 2021 issued by the
Collectors and District Magistrates inviting the applications for settlement of IMFL OFF Shops in
different localities are also challenged in these writ petitions.
3. For convenience, W.P.(C) No.10726 of 2021 (Nabin Kumar Singh vs. State of Odisha and others)
is treated as the lead petition in this batch, and will be discussed in some detail hereafter.
4. The lead petition was first listed on 19th March, 2021. This Court while issuing notice in the writ
petition dismissed the Interlocutory Application (IA No.4749 of 2021) by a detailed order which was
challenged by the said Petitioner and other Petitioners by way of SLP (C) Nos.5051 and 7073 of
2021. The Supreme Court on 1st July, 2021 while adjourning the SLPs clarified that the writ
petitions pending in this Court are to proceed on merits "uninfluenced by the pendency of the
special leave petitions". It was also clarified that "all contentions available to both sides can be
agitated before the High Court."
5. This Court has heard the submissions of Mr. Asok Mohanty, Mr. Huzefa Ahmedi, Mr. U.C.
Pattnaik, learned Senior Advocates and Mr. P.K. Rath, Mr. S.C. Tripathy, Mr. G.M. Rath, Mr. A.K.
Patra, Mr. B.P. Das, Mr. A.N. Routray, Mr. A.K. Jena, Mr. Sidhartha Das, Mr. R.N. Mishra and Mr.
J.K. Khandayatray, learned counsel appearing for the Petitioners. The submissions of and Mr. A.K.
Parija, learned Advocate General along with Mr. M.S. Sahoo, Mr. D.K. Mohanty and Mrs. S. Patnaik,
learned Additional Government Advocates have been heard on behalf of the Opposite Parties
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 3
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
(State).
Background
6. Prior to the enactment of Orissa Excise Act, 2008 (OE Act), the grant of exclusive privilege of
trade and manufacturing of intoxicating liquor was governed by the Bihar and Orissa Excise Act,
1915 (BOE Act). Section 29 of the BOE Act empowers the State Government to accept payment of a
sum in consideration of the grant of any exclusive privilege under Sec. 22 of the BOE Act. Section
29(2) of the BOE Act further provided the mode by which such sum shall be determined. It could be
by auction or by calling tenders as the State Government may in the interest of the excise revenue,
by general or special order, direct. The corresponding rules concerning IMFL were the Orissa Excise
(Exclusive Privilege) Foreign Liquor Rules, 1989 ('1989 Rules'). Rule 6 of the 1989 Rules laid down
the manner in which the 'consideration money' for grant of the exclusive privilege would be paid.
7. Section 22 of the BOE Act dealt with "Grant of exclusive privilege of manufacture and sale of
country liquor or intoxicating drugs". Section 22(1-a) of the BOE Act dealt with the grant of
exclusive privilege for retail sale of foreign liquor "within any specified place". The proviso thereto
mandated the giving a public notice of the intention to grant an exclusive privilege and for
considering the objections of any person residing within the area affected, before an exclusive
privilege is granted.
8. In the year 2005, the State Government decided to change the system of parting with the
exclusive privilege of retail sale of intoxicating liquors through IMFL OFF Shops by charging a
license fee. All new IMFL Off Shops were to be settled by lottery. This was brought about by an
Order dated 28th April, 2005 issued by the Excise Department. Amendments were made to the BOE
Act in exercise of power conferred under Section 29(2) of the BOE Act by an Order dated 23rd April,
1990 of the Government of Odisha. Section 29 (2) of BOE Act expressly provided that the sum
payable for the exclusive privilege was to be determined by auction or by calling tenders 'or
otherwise'. The amended Section 29 read as under:
"29. Payment for grant of exclusive privilege- (1) Instead of or in addition to, any duty
leviable under this Act, the State Government may accept payment of a sum in
consideration of the grant of any exclusive privilege under Section 22.
(2) The sum payable under Sub-section (1) shall be determined as follows:
(a) by auction or by calling tenders or otherwise as the State Government may, in the
interest of excise revenue, by general or special order, direct; and
(b) by such authority and subject to such control as may be specified in such order.
(3) The sum determined under Sub-section (2) shall be final and shall be binding on
the party making the offer by way of tender, bid or otherwise once such offer is
accepted by the authority referred to in Clause (b) of that sub-section."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 4
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
9. It was decided that under the new policy licences for all new IMFL OFF Shops were to be allotted
through a process of lottery while licences in respect of existing shops were to be renewed annually.
It is pointed out by the State Government in its counter affidavit filed in the lead petition that lottery
has been successfully conducted in 503 new IMFL Off Shops spread over the whole State since
2005. On the other hand, in respect of the existing IMFL Off Shops where licences were granted or
renewed in 2001-02, it has lead to cartelization among a few license holders leading to monopolistic
trade practices. It is further pointed out by the State Government that the Comptroller and Auditor
General of India (CAG) in a report No.9 (Revenue Sector) in the year 2016 recommended as under:
"Government may consider evolving a mechanism to ensure settlement of foreign
liquor 'Off' shops and Country Spirit shops every year by calling for applications on a
fixed consideration money and through draw of lottery instead of renewal of the
existing licences to ensure transparency in issue of licenses."
10. With effect from 1st April, 2017, the OE Act 2008 was brought into effect by repealing the BOE
Act. The OE Rules were also brought into force simultaneously. Section 20 of the OE Act provided
"for grant of exclusive privilege of manufacture and sale of foreign liquor, India made foreign liquor
and country liquor or other intoxicants etc." Section 22 deals with the "Transfer of exclusive
privilege". Section 35 provides for "Payment for grant of privilege". Section 90 of the OE Act deals
with "the power to make rules". Section 109 deals with "Repeal and savings".
11. As far as the OE Rules is concerned, Rule 31 deals with "Notice of the proposals for grant of
licenses or exclusive privilege to be given to certain authorities". Rule 34 deals with "Payment of fee
in consideration of grant of exclusive privilege". Rule 34(1) expressly states that the fee in
consideration of grant of exclusive privileges would be determined by the State Government
"whether by auction, e-auction, tender, e-tender or otherwise". The State Government felt that
"lottery" should be expressly included as a method of parting with the privilege rather that resorting
to the words or "otherwise". Rule 34 (1) was accordingly amended by the 2021 Rules. Corresponding
changes were made in Rules 48 and 150 (which speaks manner of fixation and realization of fees)
and Rule 222 which speaks of "license and settlement".
12. Rule 34 of the OE Rules borrowed its language from Section 29 of the erstwhile BOE Act. The
State Government issued a notification on 26th February, 2021 laying down the criteria and
guidelines for organizing lottery for grant of exclusive privileges in the trade of intoxicating liquor in
IMFL OFF Shops. This was made in exercise of the power conferred under Section 20 of the OE Act
read with Rule 34 of the OE Rules and in supersession of the earlier notification dated 20th April,
2005 of the Excise Department. It was notified that the grant of exclusive privilege for retail sale
through IMFL OFF and Country Liquor Shops will be decided by "draw of lottery inviting
applications on fixed monthly consideration money". The detailed procedure was set out. One of the
conditions was that the holder of the licence "shall open the shop in the stipulated locality within 15
days of the issue of licence".
13. On 14th March, 2021 the Collectors and District Magistrate of the several districts of the State of
Odisha issued similar notices in Form-A inviting applications for settlement of exclusive privilege
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 5
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
IMFL OFF Shops through lottery for the year 2021-22. As far as the lead case i.e. W.P.(C) No.10726
of 2021 is concerned, the relevant notice is dated 14th March, 2021 issued by the Collector and
District Magistrate, Deogarh which stated that the lottery was to be held on 16th April, 2021 at 11 am
in Deogarh Collectorate. In a table appended to the sale notice in a tabular form, the name of the
existing IMFL OFF Shop, locality of the shop, exclusive privilege (EP) area, monthly consideration
money fixed for the year 2021-22, the monthly minimum guarantee (MMG) quantity for the year
2021-22 (both for IMFL and Beer) were set out. The conditionalities were also specified in the
notice. Clause 7 stated that the State Government would not be responsible for providing the place
for location of the shops and that it should be the responsibility of the privilege holder "to arrange
suitable place and carry on the privilege granted to him and the place shall be free from objections
from public". Under Clause 8, the EP once granted was to continue for a period of five years. The EP
holder shall renew his licence on the terms and conditions generally prescribed by the State
Government from year to year till completion of five years. Form-B appended to the notice set out
the application for grant of EP of the IMFL OFF Shops through the lottery system.
Submissions of the Petitioners
14. The principal contentions on the side of the Petitioners, as advanced by learned Senior Counsel
as well as other learned counsel appearing on their behalf, can be summarized as under:
(i) There is no provision in the OE Act for introducing lottery as one of the modes of
settlements of exclusive privilege, the collection fees and duty. In other words, there
is no provision in the OE Act, 2008 corresponding to Section 22 read with Section 29
of the BOE Act. Even in Rule 34 of the OE Rules there is no such power of holding
lottery as the procedure for fixation of sum for grant of exclusive privilege.
(ii) The legislative power to make a law with respect to Entry-8 and Entry-51 of the list of the
Constitution of India has been delegated to the State Government. This amounts to delegating
essential legislative function which is not permissible in the eye of law. Unless a law is passed on the
floor of the Assembly, Section 90(2)(ix) and (xv) cannot be resorted to hold a lottery for grant of the
exclusive privilege. Reliance is placed on the decisions in Delhi Race Club Ltd. v. Union of India
(2012) 8 SCC 680 and Pandit Banarsi Das Bhanot v. State of M.P. AIR 1958 SC 909. Reliance is also
placed on the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Odisha v. Harinarayan Jaiswal (1972) 2 SCC
36 in support of the submission that the grant of exclusive privilege can be only under an express
provision of the statute.
(iii) Lottery is one of the species in gambling under Entry-40 of List-I of the Constitution of India.
Therefore, there could be no law of the State to regulate the lottery of any kind. This being the
exclusive domain of the Union of India under Article 246 (1) of the Constitution of India and
without any law passed in this regard by the Parliament, it cannot be done under the OE Rules.
Reliance is placed on the decision in All Kerala Online Lottery Dealers Association v. State of Kerala
(2016) 2 SCC 161.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 6
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
(iv) The State Government ought to have obtained the Presidential sanction under Article 258(1) of
the Constitution of India before it could make a law in relation to lottery. Whereas Section
89(2)(i)(1) and (2) of the BOE Act delegated the rule-making power to the State Government
regarding procedure to be followed for grant of license for the exclusive privilege of trading in
liquor, there is no corresponding provision under the OE Act or in the OE Rules. The legislature
never intended to give authority to the State Government to make 2021 Amendment Rules to
provide for lottery or e-lottery in Rule 34 of the OE Rules and this is without legislative backing.
Reliance is placed on the decision of this Court in Ajit Kumar Routray v. State of Odisha (decision
dated 24th July, 2013 in W.P.(C) No.8084 of 2013) which held that the grant of license to trade in
intoxicating liquor through auction each year instead of renewal was more appropriate and in
consequence to the objects sought to be achieved by the BOE Act.
(v) On the procedural aspect it is submitted that with that no location or locality of the prospective
lottery winner having been fixed in the sale notice dated 14th March, 2021 it is violative of Section
20 of the OE Act which obliges the State to invite objections from public and consider the same
before grant of licence within any specified local area.
(vi) Reliance is placed on the proviso to Rule 31 of the OEA Rules which according to the Petitioners,
specifically prescribes that "local area of the shop shall be the same as the locations of the shop". In
other words, "the local area and the location of the shop will be the shop premises itself". It is
pointed that there has been no communication of any of the particulars provided in Form 8 notice.
The requirement that 'locality' and the 'location' of the shop should be the same as that of the 'local
area' has not been indicated in the advertisements for the year 2021-22. Reliance is placed on the
decision in Sarat Kumar Sahoo v. Collector, Cuttack (1992) 73 CLT 834.
(vii) It is further pointed out that the format of the Notice is not the same as Form-8 format. The
format prescribed in the OE Rules specifically mentions the exclusive privilege area which is not
available in Form-8 notice as filed by the State.
(viii) Relying on the decision in Ramana Dayaram Shetty v. International Airport Authority of India
(1979) 3 SCC 489, M/s. Nova Ads v. Metropolitan Transport Corporation (2015) 13 SCC 257, Ram
and Shyam Company v. State of Haryana (1985) 3 SCC 267 and In Re: Natural Resources Allocation
(2012) 10 SCC 1, it is submitted that when it comes to parting with the State largesse, auction is one
of the preferable modes. It is submitted that there is no rational basis for the State to switch to the
procedure of lottery which is based on chance and on a fixed reserved price. According to the
Petitioners, auction will encourage fair competition among the bidders leading to maximization of
the revenue which would be five to seven times of the reserve price. According to the Petitioners, the
lottery is nothing but a "thumb rule" and is inconsistent with the need in a democracy governed by
the rule of law which is to promote transparency in all processes of parting with State largesse.
(ix) The Petitioners distinguish the decisions in Harinarayan Jaiswal (supra) and State of M.P. v.
Nandalal Jaiswal (1986) 4 SCC 566 on the ground that the concept of public trust doctrine and
maximization of States revenue was not the point of determination in those decisions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 7
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
(x) It is also pointed out that the State is taking a stand contradictory to the one it took in the Ajit
Kumar Routray cases. where it argued that the auction is the preferred method for grant of the
exclusive privilege of trading in liquor. It is contended that the grant of the exclusive privilege for
retail sale of IMFL is different from a housing scheme or the grant of spectrum license which are for
the overall development of the nation. In matters of grant of the exclusive privilege for trading in
IMFL, revenue augmentation or revenue maximization of the State largesse "should be the only
consideration."
Submissions on behalf of the Opposite Parties
15. In reply to the above arguments, it is submitted by Mr. Ashok Parija, learned Advocate General
and Mr. M.S. Sahoo, learned Additional Government Advocate as under:
(i) There are different modes of parting with the exclusive privilege of the State for
trading in IMFL. These include tender, auction, fixed license fees and so on. The
method of draw of lots is based on a fixed license fees and is neither arbitrary nor
irrational. The word 'fee' used in the OE Act or the OE Rules is not to be understood
in the technical sense. It is actually meant to be the "price or consideration" which
the Government charges from the licensees for parting with its privilege. Reliance in
this regard is placed on the decision in Har Shankar v. Deputy Excise & Taxation
Commissioner (1975) 1 SCC 737.
(ii) The grant of license for sale of IMFL would essentially be a matter of policy. The
Court should not strike down a policy unless it is arbitrary, irrational or mala fide. In
this regard reliance is placed on the decision in Nandalal Jaiswal (supra). The
rationale behind the State Government deciding to move to the system of lottery was
to end monopolistic practices and reviving a healthy competition. The
recommendations in report No.9 of CAG were also taken note of. It was noticed that
shops would be run by the same persons for decades. Some of the Petitioners were
license holders for the longest periods. They themselves were selected initially
through auctions and continued on the basis of renewal annually by 10 to 15%
increase of the license fees. They cannot be heard to complain about the shift to the
system of lottery.
(iii) Lottery as mode of disposal of the State largesse has been accepted as a fair
method. In this regard, reliance is placed on the decisions Bhubaneswar
Development Authority v. Adikanda Biswal (2012) 11 SCC 731 and Lt. Col. Surinder
Kumar Dutt v.
Shakti Cooperative House Building Ltd. (1994) (Supp) 1 SCC
80. The system of lottery for settlement of IMFL OFF Shops has been followed in certain other
States like Uttar Pradesh, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Telengana. The learned Advocate General
has also presented before the Court in a tabular form the comparison between systems of auction
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 8
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
and lottery and the requirements thereunder. He points out in both reasons, the criteria for
participation financial credibility which has, obvious, become more and more stringent. It is
contended that family maximization is now the sole criteria it must be considered by the State
Government while parting with its exclusive privileges in the retail of sale of intoxicating liquor. The
State Government has also to account for public health, welfare and safety.
(iv) Reference is made to the Section 5(2) of the OE Act which speaks of the powers and functions of
the Excise Commissioner. Reliance is placed on the decisions in Ashok Lanka v. Rishi Dixit (2005) 5
SCC 598 and In Re Natural Resources Allocation (supra). According to the learned Advocate
General, auction as a mode of settlement of exclusive privileges has not been resorted to in the State
since 2005. The excise revenue has seen a steady increase over the years. According to the
Government, the fixed license fee system is better suited for determining the right value of
commodity/service/license etc. whereas in an auction process the Government is unsure about true
potential of the commodity or service.
(v) The State Government exercises control over the maximum retail price (MRP) of the alcoholic
beverages shown being sold in State through the regulation of supply at Ex-Distillery Price, Excise
Duty and Taxes and the wholesale and retail margin. This results in little opportunity for the
retailers to earn beyond certain limits. Therefore, a fixed prices system is more sensible method for
fixation of consideration for the parting with the exclusive privilege. According to the State, the fixed
price lottery system is a "scientific and rationale method for settlement of alcohol vends, as the
revenue generation is through actual consumption.
(vi) On the contrary, according to the Government, if the IMFL Off Shops are settled through the
lottery process there is a possibility that the licensee with a view to recouping the costs resorts to
mal practices such as overcharging the consumers or going selling through informal outlets for
maximization of the revenue. There could also be sales of sale of non-duty paid liquor or spurious
liquor. In this regard, reliance is placed on the observations of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in P.
Subhash v. The State of A.P. (Manu/AP/0843/2012). There are also instances of unrealistic auction
bids in certain other States resulting in the blacklisting/debarring of the bidders as set out in the
written submissions.
(vii) States such as Uttar Pradesh, Telengana and Odisha that have resorted to grant of exclusive
privilege on the basis of a fixed license fee have witnessed a better Compounded Annual Growth
Rate (CAGR) of Revenue than other States which fix the license fees on the basis of auction. Extracts
the report of the Consultants i.e. E & Y have also been set out in this regard.
(viii) As regards the contention of the Petitioners that the switching over to the lottery method is
without legislative sanction, it is pointed out that Entry-8 (List-II) of the Constitution of India
permits the State Government to deal with intoxicating liquors. It is submitted that the State
Government has the exclusive privilege to deal with manufacture and sale of intoxicating liquors
and no person can claim a fundamental right to that trade. Reliance is placed on the observations of
the Supreme Court in Government of Maharashtra v. Deokar's Distillery (2003) 5 SCC 669.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 9
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
(ix) Reliance is also placed under Sections 20, 28, 35, 45 and 90 (2)(xv) of the OE Act in support of
the contention that there are sufficient provisions in the OE Act as presently enacted that recognise
the power of the State Government to determine and levy the license fee in return for grant of
exclusive privilege.
(x) The grant of exclusive privilege by the State Government to persons is in the nature of the
contract. Reliance is placed on the observations in Har Shankar (supra). Article 298 of the
Constitution is said to empower the State Government to part with the exclusive privilege in
exchange for a consideration in the form of a license fee.
(xi) On the procedural aspect, the State has presented a tabular chart showing the compliance of the
requirements of inviting objections from the public in respect of a local area within which the
exclusive privilege (EP) shops are to be established. Although the proviso to Rule 31(A) of the OE
Rules may not be appropriately worded, it has to be read in its entirety and not just two lines in
isolation. When so read, it is consistent with the Rule 30 and 31 of the OE Rules. It is pointed out
that in Ramesh Chandra Rout v. State of Odisha 97 (2004) CLT 39, the ratio of the earlier judgment
in Sarat Kumar Sahoo (supra) has been clarified and it has been held that whereas "local area" refers
to a larger area and "locality" refers to a smaller area, it nevertheless, does not refer to the exact
location of the shop premises.
(xii) As regards to the Kandhal IMFL OFF Shop, it is stated that the State Government issued
notices inviting objections under Form VIII in November-December, 2020, i.e. before expiry of the
erstwhile licenses on 31st March, 2021. The notice in Form VIII for the Petitioner's Kandhal IMFL
OFF Shop was published on 18th November, 2020. The Kandhal IMFL OFF Shop shall be
established within the locality, i.e. Kandhal Gram Panchayat. The State Government has
substantially complied with the requirements of Rules 31 to 33 of the OE Rules read with Sections
37 to 42 of the OE Act.
(xiii) It is further pointed out that after finalizing a list of objection-free localities, sale notices
inviting applications for establishing IMFL OFF Shops within the localities are issued by the State
Government. Then after identification of new licenses through lottery, the designated licensees are
directed to identify the exaction location of the shop within the objection-free 'locality'. The final
location of the shop is subject to the approval of the Collector under Rule 53(4). Even after grant of
license, if any objection is received in respect of the said shop, the Collector may direct shifting of
the said shop premises with the prior approval of the Excise Commissioner under Rule 53(5).
Indeed, Rule 53(5) has been invoked in a few cases during the present settlement process also.
Moreover, from time to time, this Hon'ble Court has also directed the public-spirited objectors to
approach the Excise Commissioner for addressing their grievances. The entire process of inviting
objections under Rules 30 to 33 are performed annually.
Issues for determination
16. Having considered the above submissions, the issues arise for determination are as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 10
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
(i) Whether the power to impose a license fee for grant of exclusive privilege under
Rule 34 of the OE Rules does not have any legislative sanction and whether Rule 34
suffers from the vice of excessive delegation?
(ii) Whether the policy decision of the State Government to part with the exclusive
privilege of retail sale in intoxicating liquors through IMFL OFF Shops by charging a
fixed license fee and selecting the Applicants through lottery/draw of lots is arbitrary,
discriminatory and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution?
(iii) Whether the policy decision of the State Government to part with the exclusive
privilege of retail sale in intoxicating liquors through IMFL OFF Shops by charging a
fixed license fee as opposed to auction, leads to loss of revenue for the State
Government and is therefore, not in public interest?
(iv) Whether the State Government has complied with the requirement of inviting
objections from the public under proviso to Section 20 of the OE Act read with Rule
31 of the OE Rules?
Issue (i)
17. The first issue to be considered is whether in the absence of an express provision in the OE Act
introducing lottery as one of the modes for settlement of exclusive privilege for collection of fees for
retail sale of IMFL in OFF shops, there has been a delegation of the State's essential legislative
function which is impermissible in law? In other words, one of the principal contentions on the side
of the Petitioners is that the switchover by the State Government to the lottery system is without
legislative backing and therefore unconstitutional and illegal.
18. It is therefore argued that it was only the Parliament which can make a law in relation to lotteries
and insofar as the consent of the President as envisaged in Article 258 (1) of the Constitution of
India has not been obtained, there can be no valid legislation by the State at all.
19. First, the above submission appears to proceed on the misconception. It is undeniable that
'lottery' is a topic which is in Entry-40 of List-I in Schedule-VII to the Constitution i.e. the Union
List. It reads as under:
"Lottery organized by the Government of India or the Government of a State."
20. However, here the State Government is not conducting any 'lottery' as understood in the real
sense of that term and particularly in the sense in which it is found in Entry-40 of List-I of the
Schedule-VII. The method of determining the amount of licence fee and the persons found eligible
for grant of the exclusive privilege is very different from the holding of lotteries as understood in
Entry-40 of List-I. Nor is the system of 'lottery' in the context of the OE Act, 'betting' and 'gambling'
as understood in the sense in which appear in Entry-34 of List-II i.e. the State List.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 11
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
21. To understand this issue better, it would be useful to refer to Section 2 (b) of the Lotteries
(Regulation) Act, 1998 ('1998 Act') which defines 'lottery' to be "a scheme, in whatever form and by
whatever name called, for distribution of prizes by lot or chance to those persons participating in the
chances of a prize by purchasing tickets." This type of lottery where the successful winner gets a
'prize' is very different from a scheme that forms the subject matter of these writ petitions. Further
the statement of objects and reasons of the 1998 Act reveals that the said legislation was in response
to the problems of poor daily wagers and families belonging to low income groups suffering from the
temptation offered by "single digit and instant lotteries". The kinds of lotteries that the 1998 Act
seeks to regulate are those that offer "prize money" purely out of chance. No doubt, every participant
in this 'lottery' has to pay a sum of Rs.1,00,000/- as an application fee, and winning the lottery is a
matter of chance. However, there are other conditionalities to be fulfilled by every participant. In
particular, the solvency of the person participating requires to be ensured even before such person is
granted the exclusive privilege for retail sale of IMFL in OFF shops. Further the fixed licence fee is
determined in a scientific method. Every participant has to make payment of the advance
consideration of money. This can by no means be compared with 'lottery' as popularly understood
and for regulating which there is a legislation by the Parliament in the form of 1998 Act.
22. In All Kerala Online Lottery Dealers Association (supra), the Supreme Court was dealing with
the validity of a notification issued by the Government of Kerala prohibiting online lotteries which
had become popular and prevalent. In paragraph 37 of the said judgment, the Supreme Court
observed that "lottery is a species of gambling". The Supreme Court upheld the delegation of the
power under Section 5 of the Central enactment to the State to decide on prohibiting the sale of
lotteries. There too it was contended by the Petitioners that this amounted to the delegation of an
essential legislative function. This was negatived by the Supreme Court by referring to its earlier
decision in B.R. Enterprises v. State of U.P. (1999) 9 SCC 700. It was reiterated that under Section
12 of the Lotteries Act, the Centre had delegated its power to legislate with regard to lotteries to
States and further there was specific delegation with regard to ban of lotteries of other States under
Section 5 of the said Act. The Supreme Court observed: "this delegation of the legislative power by
the principal to the delegate would not amount to abdication of the legislative power of the Centre
and it would not be without any guidelines and would be sustainable in law if the State concern
would ban lotteries of its own State and other States as well."
23. The context in which the above observations were made pertains to the sale of lotteries and not
the kind of mode of fixation of any licence fee as in the present case. The OE Act has been validly
made with reference to Entry-8 in List-II of Schedule-VII of the Constitution of India which
expressly authorizes the State Government to deal with intoxicated liquors and which reads as
under:
"8. Intoxicating liquors, that is to say, the production, manufacture, possession,
transport, purchase and sale of intoxicating liquors."
24. That the State has the exclusive right to make a law to regulate the activity of trade in liquor is
well recognized for several decades now. In Cooverjee B. Bharucha v. Excise Commissioner and the
Chief Commissioner, Ajmer, AIR 1954 SC 220, a Constitution Bench of Supreme Court held as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 12
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
under:
"It can also not be denied that the State has the power to prohibit trades which are
illegal or immoral or injurious to the health and welfare of the public. Laws
prohibiting trades in noxious or dangerous goods or trafficking in women cannot be
held to be illegal as enacting a prohibition and not a mere regulation."
25. This was reiterated in State of Assam v. A.N. Kidwai, Commissioner of Hills Division AIR 1957
SC 414 wherein it was held as under:
"no person has any absolute right to sell liquor and that the purpose of the Act and
the rules is to control and restrict the consumption of intoxicating liquors, such
control and restriction being obviously necessary for the preservation of public health
and morals, and to raise revenue."
26. Again in Amar Chandra Chakraborty v. Collector of Excise, Government of Tripura, (1972) 2 SCC
442, the Supreme Court while upholding the validity of Section 43 of the Bengal Excise Act,1909
observed as under:
"Trade or business in country liquor has from its inherent nature been treated by the
State and the society as a special category requiring legislative control which has been
in force in the whole of India since several decades. In view of the injurious effect of
excessive consumption of liquor on health this trade or business must be treated as a
class by itself and it cannot be treated on the same basis as other trades while
considering Article 14."
27. In State of Orissa v. Harinarayan Jaiswal (supra), one of the contentions raised was that the
power of the State Government to accept or reject any bid for grant of exclusive privilege for selling
country liquor without assigning any reasons was arbitrary and violative of Article 14 and 19 (1) (g)
of the Constitution.
Recognizing the power of the State Government to part with the exclusive privilege, the Supreme
Court observed as under:
"The fact that the Government was the seller does not change the legal position once
its exclusive right to deal with those privileges is conceded. If the Government is the
exclusive owner of those privileges, reliance on Article 19(1)(g) or Article 14 becomes
irrelevant. Citizens cannot have any fundamental right to trade or carry on business
in the properties or rights belonging to the Government nor can there be any
infringement of Article 14, if the Government tries to get the best available price for
its valuable rights."
28. In Government of Maharashtra v. Deokar's Distillery (supra), it was explained as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 13
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
"The legal (sic liquor) licensee does not have a fundamental right to deal in liquor.
Under Entry 8 List II in the Seventh Schedule to the Constitution of India and
thereby under Sections 49 and 143(2)(u) of the Prohibition Act, the State has the
exclusive right/privilege in respect of potable liquor and the State, in our opinion, can
charge any reasonable expenses or even consideration for permitting such activity by
grant of licence and that the respondents ought to comply with all reasonable orders,
as undertaken by them while obtaining the licence. This factor, the High Court, has
not appreciated. Once the liquor licensee has undertaken to abide by all reasonable
orders under the Prohibition Act while obtaining the licence, they cannot wriggle out
of the contractual liability voluntarily incurred by them."
29. If one carefully examines the scheme of the OE Act and the OE Rules, it is plain that there is no
delegation of the essential legislative function in favour of the State Government. Section 5 of the OE
Act imposes an obligation on the State Government to regulate and control the sale and
consumption of liquor. This is sought to be achieved under Section 18 of the OE Act by mandating
that the manufacturing and sale of intoxicating liquor shall be only through grant of licences.
Section 20 of the Act deals with the grant of exclusive privilege of retail sale of intoxicating liquor
through IMFL OFF shops which reads as under:
"20.Grant of exclusive privilege of manufacture and sale of foreign liquor, India made
foreign liquor and country liquor or other intoxicants etc.-
(1) The State Government may grant to any person on such conditions and for such
period as it may think fit, the exclusive privilege-
(i) of manufacturing, or supply by wholesale, or of both; or
(ii) of selling by wholesale or by retail; or
(iii) of manufacturing or of supplying by wholesale, or of both, and of selling by retail,
any liquor or other intoxicant within any specified local area:
Provided that public notice shall be given of the intention to grant any such exclusive
privilege under the preceding sub-section and that any objections made by any
person residing within that area shall be considered before an exclusive privilege is
granted.
(2) The State Government may, by notification, confer on any officer the power
mentioned in Sub-section (1).
(3) No grantee of any privilege under Sub-section (1) shall exercise the same unless or
until he has received a licence in that behalf from the Collector or the Excise
Commissioner."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 14
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
30. Section 28 of the OE Act recognizes licence fee as one of the components of excise revenue. It
reads as under:
"28. Nature and components of excise revenue:
Excise duty and fees shall be levied and recovered under the following heads, namely,
(a) excise duty, (b) countervailing duty, (c) license fee, (d) VAT, (e) brand registration
fee, (f) import duty
(g) export duty and (h) other fees as may be prescribed." (emphasis supplied)
31. This has to be read with Section 35 of the OE Act which is in pari materia with Section 29 (1) of
the erstwhile BOE Act. It provides that the State Government may, in addition to duty levied under
the OE Act, accept payment of any sum or fees in consideration of any privilege granted or
minimum guaranteed quantity (MGQ) determined under the OE Act.
32. Section 45 (1) of the OE Act also provides that every licence, permit or pass under the OE Act
shall be granted on payment of such fees, if any, and subject to such restrictions as may be imposed
and shall be in such form and contain such particulars, as the Commissioner may direct, from time
to time.
33. Section 90 of the OE Act also governs the procedure for grant of exclusive privilege. Relevant
portion of Section 90 of the CPC Act reads as under:
"90. Power to make rules: (1) The State Government may make rules to carry out the
objects of this Act.
(2) In particular, and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing provisions,
the State Government may make rules for-
xxx xxx xxx
(ix) regulating the procedure to be followed and prescribing the matters to be
ascertained before any licence for the wholesale or retail sale of any intoxicant is
granted for any locality;
xxx xxx xxx
(xv) prescribing the manner of fixation of fee payable in respect of any licence, permit
or pass granted under this Act and the manner of storing of any intoxicant;
xxx xxx xxx"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 15
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
34. The Court is unable to accept the plea of the Petitioners that it is no guidance to
the State in the OE Act in formulating rules and therefore in the absence of the
provisions similar to Section 29 (2) of the BOE Act, the amendment to Rule 34 of the
Rules to provide for lottery, must be held to be ultra vires the BOE Act.
There is sufficient guidance in Section 5 (2) of the Act which provides that the objectives for which
the OE Act has been made and this includes revenue maximization, social regulation and public
health. A conjoint reading of Section 25 and Section 90(2)(ix)(xv) with Section 35 makes it clear that
there is no lack of legislative power in the State Government to determine and levy licence fee for
grant of exclusive privilege for trade in intoxicating liquor. The Court is, therefore, unable to
countenance the submission that there is any excessive delegation of essential legislative function in
favour of the State Government.
35. As explained in Khoday Distilleries Ltd. v. State of Karnataka (1995) 1 SCC 574 "the State can
adopt any mode of selling the licences for trade or business with a view to maximize its revenue so
long as the method adopted is not discriminatory." It was further explained in the said decision as
under:
"(j) The mere fact that the State levies taxes or fees on the production, sale and
income derived from potable liquor whether the production, sale or income is
legitimate or illegitimate, does not make the State a party to the said activities. The
power of the State to raise revenue by levying taxes and fees should not be confused
with the power of the State to prohibit or regulate the trade or business in question.
The State exercises its two different powers on such occasions. Hence the mere fact
that the State levies taxes and fees on trade or business in liquor or income derived
from it, does not make the right to carry on trade or business in liquor a fundamental
right, or even a legal right when such trade or business is completely prohibited."
36. The contention on the side of the Petitioners that the collection of licence fee is in the nature of a
tax which again would require legislation also appears to be misconceived in the context of the right
of the State Government to part with the exclusive privilege for sale of intoxicating liquor. It was
explained in Har Shankar v. Deputy Excise & Taxation Commissioner (supra) as under:
"16. Those interested in running the country liquor vends offered their bids
voluntarily in the auctions held for granting licences for the sale of country liquor.
The terms and conditions of auctions were announced before the auctions were held
and the bidders participated in the auctions without a demur and with full knowledge
of the commitments which the bids involved. The announcement of conditions
governing the auctions were in the nature of an invitation to an offer to those who
were interested in the sale of country liquor. The bids given in the auctions were
offers made by prospective vendors to the Government. The Government's
acceptance of those bids was the acceptance of willing offers made to it. On such
acceptance, the contract between the bidders and the Government became concluded
and a binding agreement came into existence between them. The successful bidders
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 16
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
were then granted licences evidencing the terms of contract between them and the
Government, under which they became entitled to sell liquor. The licensees exploited
the respective licences for a portion of the period of their currency, presumably in
expectation of a profit. Commercial considerations may have revealed an error of
judgment in the initial assessment of profitability of the adventure but that is a
normal incident of all trading transactions. Those who contract with open eyes must
accept the burdens of the contract along with its benefits. The powers of the Financial
Commissioner to grant liquor licences by auction and to collect licence fees through
the medium of auctions cannot by writ petitions be questioned by those who, had
their venture succeeded, would have relied upon those very powers to found a legal
claim. Reciprocal rights and obligations arising out of contract do not depend for
their enforceability upon whether a contracting party finds it prudent to abide by the
terms of the contract. By such a test no contract could ever have a binding force.
xxx xxx xxx
55. Since rights in regard to intoxicants belong to the State, it is open to the
Government to part with those rights for a consideration. By Article 298 of the
Constitution, the executive power of the State extends to the carrying on of any trade
or business and to the making of contracts for any purpose. As observed in
Harinarayan Jaiswal case [(1972) 2 SCC 36] (SCC p. 44, para 13) "if the Government
is the exclusive owner of those privileges, reliance on Article 19(1)(g) or Article 14
becomes irrelevant. Citizens cannot have any fundamental right to trade or carry on
business in the properties or rights belonging to the Government, nor can there be
any infringement of Article 14, if the Government tries to get the best available price
for its valuable rights."
37. In the same decision, the Supreme Court also explained that the word 'fee' is not used in the
same sense as it is in the technical sense of expression. It was held as under:
"56. The distinction which the Constitution makes for legislative purposes between a
"tax" and a "fee" and the characteristics of these two as also of "excise duty" are
well-known. "A tax is a compulsory exaction of money by public authority for public
purposes enforceable by law and is not a payment for services rendered" [ Per
Latham C.J. in Mathews v. Chickory Marketing Board, 60 CLR 263, 276]. A fee is a
charge for special services rendered to individuals by some governmental agency and
such a charge has an element in it of a quid pro quo [Commissioner, Hindu Religious
Endowments, Madras v. Sri LakshmindraThirthaSwamiar of Sri Shirur Mutt, AIR
1954 SC 282. Excise duty is primarily a duty on the production or manufacture of
goods produced or manufactured within the country [Guruswamy & Co. v. State of
Mysore, AIR 1967 SC 1512]. The amounts charged to the licensees in the instant case
are, evidently, neither in the nature of a tax nor of excise duty. But then, the "licence
fee" which the State Government charged to the licensees through the medium of
auctions or the "fixed fee" which it charged to the vendors of foreign liquor holding
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 17
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
licences in Forms L-3, L-4 and L-5 need bear no quid pro quo to the services
rendered to the licensees. The word "fee" is not used in the Act or the Rules in the
technical sense of the expression. By "licence fee" or "fixed fee" is meant the price or
consideration which the Government charges to the licensees for parting with its
privileges and granting them to the licensees. As the State can carry on a trade or
business, such a charge is the normal incident of a trading or business transaction."
xxx xxx xxx "58. In the view we have taken, the argument that the Government
cannot by contract do what it cannot do under a statute must fail. No statute forbids
the Government from trading in its own rights or privileges and the statute under
consideration, far from doing so, expressly empowers it by Sections 27 and 34 to
grant leases of its rights and to issue the requisite licences, permits or passes on
payment of such fees as may be prescribed by the Financial Commissioner."
38. Article 298 of the Constitution provides that the executive power of the Union and of each State
shall extend to the carrying on of any trade or business and the making of contracts for any purpose.
This too, therefore, enables the State Government to part with the exclusive privilege for trade in
liquor in exchange for consideration in the form of a licence fee. The OE Act enables the exercise of
this power.
39. For all of the aforementioned reasons, the Court rejects the contention of the Petitioners that in
terms of the amendment to the OE Rules the system of lottery as a mode of determining the fee
payable for parting with the exclusive privilege for trade in liquor is ultra vires the OE Act and is
otherwise unconstitutional. The contention that it amounts to the delegation of the essential
legislative function to the State and, therefore, impermissible in law is also hereby rejected. It is also
held that 'lottery', in the sense in which it has been inserted in Rule 34 of the OE Rules, is not the
same as the 'lottery' found in Entry 40 of List-I of the Constitution of India. The contention that
there could be no law by the State to determine lottery as one of the modes of determining the fee
for parting with the exclusive privilege for retail trade in liquor is, therefore, expressly rejected by
this Court.
Issue (ii) and (iii)
40. The next major contention concerns the irrationality of the policy to allot IMFL OFF shops on
the basis of a fixed licence fee through draw of lots or lottery.
41. The contention that earlier the State Government had defended the auction system and therefore
it could not now turn around and contend that the lottery system is a better one, deserves to be only
noticed to be rejected. It is essentially for the State Government to determine whether at any point
in time a certain mode of disposal or parting with the exclusive privilege is preferable to other
modes. This was recognized in Nandalal Jaiswal (supra) in the context of a similar legislation in the
State of Madhya Pradesh. There the Supreme Court observed as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 18
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
"4. It is clear on a plain reading of Rule 22 that a licence for manufacture or sale of
country liquor may be disposed of in any one of four different modes, viz., tender,
auction, fixed licence fee or such other manner as the State Government may by
general or special order direct. These four different modes are alternative to one
another and any one of them may be resorted to for the purpose of disposing of a
licence. It is not necessary that the mode of disposal by tender must first be resorted
to and if that cannot be acted upon, then only the mode of disposal by auction and
failing that and not otherwise, the third mode of disposal by fixed licence fee and only
in the event of it not being possible to adopt the first three modes of disposal, the last
mode, namely, "such other manner as the State Government may by general or
special order direct". This would seem to be plain and incontrovertible but Mr Justice
B.M. Lal has rather curiously in his judgment held that these four modes of disposal
are interrelated and "failing in one of the clauses, the next is to be acted upon and for
applying the fourth clause, it is incumbent for the State to specify the manner by
general or special order and this also includes "specifying how and why the other
three clauses are not possible to be acted upon which compels to take resort to the
fourth clause". This view taken by Mr Justice B.M. Lal in regard to the interpretation
of Rule 22 is obviously unsustainable. It is indeed surprising how such a view could
possibly be taken. On a plain grammatical construction of Rule 22 it is obvious that
the Collector or an officer authorised by him in that behalf can choose any one of the
four modes set out in that rule. There is nothing in the language of Rule 22 to justify
the interpretation that an earlier mode of disposal set out in the rule excludes a latter
mode or that reasons must be specified where a latter mode is adopted in preference
to an earlier one. The language of Rule 22 in fact militates against such construction.
It is impossible to subscribe to the proposition that it is only when an earlier mode is
not possible to be adopted for reasons to be specified, that a latter one can be
followed. The Collector or an officer authorised by him can adopt any one of the four
modes of disposal of licence set out in Rule 22, but, of course, whichever mode be
adopted, the equality clause of the Constitution should not be violated in its
application."
42. Again, it was pointed out in the same decision that there had to be sufficient leeway granted to
the State Government to decide even on a "trial and error" method which was the preferable mode
of parting with the exclusive privilege. It was held as under:
"34. But, while considering the applicability of Article 14 in such a case, we must bear
in mind that, having regard to the nature of the trade or business, the Court would be
slow to interfere with the policy laid down by the State Government for grant of
licences for manufacture and sale of liquor. The Court would, in view of the
inherently pernicious nature of the commodity allow a large measure of latitude to
the State Government in determining its policy of regulating, manufacture and trade
in liquor. Moreover, the grant of licences for manufacture and sale of liquor would
essentially be a matter of economic policy where the Court would hesitate to
intervene and strike down what the State Government has done, unless it appears to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 19
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
be plainly arbitrary, irrational or mala fide. We had occasion to consider the scope of
interference by the Court under Article 14 while dealing with laws relating to
economic activities in R.K. Garg v. Union of India [(1981) 4 SCC 675]. We pointed out
in that case that laws relating to economic activities should be viewed with greater
latitude than laws touching civil rights such as freedom of speech, religion, etc. We
observed that the legislature should be allowed some play in the joints because it has
to deal with complex problems which do not admit of solution through any
doctrinaire or strait jacket formula and this is particularly true in case of legislation
dealing with economic matters, where, having regard to the nature of the problems
required to be dealt with, greater play in the joints has to be allowed to the
legislature. We quoted with approval the following admonition given by Frankfurter,
J. in Morey v. Dond [354 US 457]:
"In the utilities, tax and economic regulation cases, there are good reasons for judicial
self-restraint if not judicial deference to legislative judgment. The legislature after all
has the affirmative responsibility. The courts have only the power to destroy, not to
reconstruct. When these are added to the complexity of economic regulation, the
uncertainty, the liability to error, the bewildering conflict of the experts, and the
number of times the Judges have been overruled by events -- self-limitation can be
seen to be the path to judicial wisdom and institutional prestige and stability."
What we said in that case in regard to legislation relating to economic matters must apply equally in
regard to executive action in the field of economic activities, though the executive decision may not
be placed on as high a pedestal as legislative judgment insofar as judicial deference is concerned. We
must not forget that in complex economic matters every decision is necessarily empiric and it is
based on experimentation or what one may call "trial and error method" and, therefore, its validity
cannot be tested on any rigid a priori considerations or on the application of any strait jacket
formula. The Court must while adjudging the constitutional validity of an executive decision relating
to economic matters grant a certain measure of freedom or "play in the joints" to the executive. "The
problem of Government" as pointed out by the Supreme Court of the United States in Metropolis
Theatre Co. v. State of Chicago [57 L Ed 730] "are practical ones and may justify, if they do not
require, rough accommodations, illogical, it may be, and unscientific. But even such criticism should
not be hastily expressed. What is best is not discernible, the wisdom of any choice may be disputed
or condemned. Mere errors of Government are not subject to our judicial review. It is only its
palpably arbitrary exercises which can be declared void."
The Government, as was said in Permian Basin Area Rate cases [20 L Ed (2d) 312] is entitled to
make pragmatic adjustments which may be called for by particular circumstances. The Court cannot
strike down a policy decision taken by the State Government merely because it feels that another
policy decision would have been fairer or wiser or more scientific or logical. The Court can interfere
only if the policy decision is patently arbitrary, discriminatory or mala fide. It is against the
background of these observations and keeping them in mind that we must now proceed to deal with
the contention of the petitioners based on Article 14 of the Constitution."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 20
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
43. The Court is also unable to accept the plea that revenue maximization has to be only
consideration for the State. In fact, lotteries as a mode of disposal was accepted in Bhubaneswar
Development Authority v. Adikanda Biswal (supra) where in the context of allotment of plots it was
held as under:
"25. We are of the view that BDA can adopt several methods for allotment of plots
like, by way of lots, "First Come First Served", auction etc., but the process should be
transparent. We, are, however, of the view that so far as the instant case is concerned,
the decision taken by the authority to cancel the process of allotment by way of
"first-come-first-served" basis cannot be said to be illegal, arbitrary or vitiated by
extraneous reasons warranting interference under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India."
44. Again in the context of allotment of plots in Lt. Col. Surinder Kumar Dutt v. Shakti Cooperative
House Building Ltd (1994) Supp (1) SCC 80, the Supreme Court permitted adoption of any
appropriate method "i.e. by draw of lots or by some other fair method."
45. While auction could be one of the modes for determining the consideration for parting with the
exclusive privilege for sale of liquor, it is not invariably the only method to be adopted. The States of
Uttarakhand, Jharkhand, West Bengal and Telengana, are some of those who have switched over to
the process of lottery for settlement of IMFL shops. In Ashok Lanka (supra), it was noted that
revenue maximization need not be the only criterion and it could include public health, welfare and
safety. In the said decision, it was held as under:
"87.There cannot, however, be any doubt or dispute that having regard to the several
decisions of this Court e.g. State of Bombay v. R.M.D. Chamarbaugwala [AIR 1957 SC
69], Fatehchand Himmatlal v. State of Maharashtra (1977) 2 SCC 670, Khoday
Distilleries Ltd. v. State of Karnataka (1995) 1 SCC 574, B.R. Enterprises v. State of
U.P. [(1999) 9 SCC 700], State of A.P. v. McDowell & Co. [(1996) 3 SCC 709], State of
Punjab v. Devans Modern Breweries Ltd. [(2004) 11 SCC 26] trade in liquor is
considered to be res extra commercium although tobacco produce has not been
declared so. (See Godawat Pan Masala Products I.P. Ltd. v. Union of India [(2004) 7
SCC 68]). The State while exercising its power of parting with its exclusive privilege
to deal in liquor has a positive obligation that any activity therein strictly conforms to
the public interest and ensures public health, welfare and safety. Strict adherence to
the requirement to comply with the statutory provisions must be considered from
that angle."
46. Again in the context of spectrum, it was held in In Re:
Natural Resources Allocation (supra) as under:
"119. The norm of "common good" has to be understood and appreciated in a holistic
manner. It is obvious that the manner in which the common good is best subserved is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 21
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
not a matter that can be measured by any constitutional yardstick--it would depend
on the economic and political philosophy of the Government. Revenue maximisation
is not the only way in which the common good can be subserved. Where revenue
maximisation is the object of a policy, being considered qua that resource at that
point of time to be the best way to subserve the common good, auction would be one
of the preferable methods, though not the only method. Where revenue maximisation
is not the object of a policy of distribution, the question of auction would not arise.
Revenue considerations may assume secondary consideration to developmental
considerations."
47. In the present case, there is empirical data available to the State Government, which has been set
out in the replies filed, to show that the system of auction that had been earlier adopted had given
rise to its own set of problems. Further, auction as a mode had been discontinued since 2005. The
State Government had been renewing the licences earlier settled through lottery annually by fixing
the percentage of increase. The figures of collection of revenue have shown a steady increase since
2005-06. This appears to support the contention of the Government that the fixed licence fee is a
better suited method.
48. The pluses and minuses of auction method have also been discussed in P. Subhash v. The State
of A.P. (supra). A Division Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the said decision noted the
distinction of two methods as under:
"31. It is the case of the State that in the system of auction, the retailers were selling
the liquor more than the maximum retail price putting the consumers at loss and,
therefore, the Government constituted a Cabinet sub-committee to look into the
excise policy, and the sub-committee recommended the present policy after making
deliberations with all stake holders. Further, the auctioneers were selling the licence
to other persons at a higher price. Therefore, the Government have chosen to
discontinue the system of auction in the new excise policy.
32. In the system of lottery, as rightly contended by the State, the licensee will be able
to do his business without resorting to malpractices, as he pays the fixed licence fee.
Drawal of lots gives an opportunity to all the prospective licensees and the same
cannot be equated with gambling. Lots are drawn by the District Collector in the
presence of all the applicants in a transparent manner."
49. There cannot be, in the very nature of things, one right fix in matters of this kind. In other
words, it is not possible to accept the contention of the Petitioners that auction is the only and the
best method for parting with the exclusive privilege for sale of liquor.
50. The argument on the side of the Petitioners that the high bids in the auction held for liquor
vends in the State of Rajasthan supports the retention of the auction method is well-countered by
the State Government by pointing out that at least in four instances in Saipur Pakhar, Khuiyan,
Minakdesar, Sikar and Alwar in Rajasthan the bidders who offered unusually high bids have been
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 22
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
blacklisted or debarred since they failed to make the requisite deposits. Therefore, the ideal method
of determining the fee to be paid is best left to the State Government. Further there is no material
placed on record to enable the Court to doubt the contention of the State Government that resort to
the grant of exclusive privilege on the basis of fixed licence fee has witnessed better compounded
annual growth rate (CAGR) of revenue. Further, the empirical data in the form of the report of E& Y
consultants appears to support the case of the State.
51. Consequently, the Court is unable to agree with the contention of the Petitioners that the policy
of the State to switch over to lottery as a mode of determination of fees for parting with the EP of
trade in IMFL through OFF Shops is irrational and arbitrary.
Issue (iv)
52. Lastly, the contention of the Petitioners concerning non- compliance of the procedural
requirement of the proviso to Section 20 of the OE Act read with Rule 31 of the OE Rules requires to
be considered.
53. Under Rule 30 of the OE Rules, before the 20th October of every year, the Collector has to
prepare a list in Form-VI in which the locality for which the licence is to be granted is required to be
mentioned as accurately as possible. Such of those objections which are serious in nature are to be
taken into account while settling the licence in that location.
54. Under Rule 31 (a) of the OE Rules the proposal in Form-VI shall be published as a public notice
both in Odia and in English in Form No. VIII inviting objections before 1st November. As explained
by the State Government the exact location of the future shops is yet unknown since the future
licencees are yet to be identified at this stage.
55. Rule 33 (1) of the OE Rules envisages that the objections received will be sent to the Collector.
Under Rule 33 (3) of the OE Rules, the list prepared and recommended by the Collector, and
submitted to the Excise Commissioner in accordance with Section 41(2) of the OE Act shall be
submitted by the State Government for approval under Section 42 of the OE Act. Thus, through the
above exercise, the Government ascertains the locality within which an IMFL OFF shop shall be
established.
56. Under the amendment to Rule 34, for the settlement of new IMFL OFF shops through lottery, it
is seen that after settlement of such licence, the licencees are to identify the exact location of the
shop within the 'locality'. In this context, the Court would like to delve on the language of Rule 31 (a)
of the OE Rules which reads as under:
"31. Notice of the proposals for grant of licences or exclusive privilege to be given to
certain authorities.--
Before the 1st November or such other date as the State Government may decide, the
Collector shall,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 23
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
(a) affix the public notice both in Odia and English in Form No. VIII as required
under sub-
section (1) of section 20 and clause (a) of section 38 giving fifteen days time therein for receiving
objections, if any, and proclaim the same in the locality by beat of drums as required under clause
(b) thereof or by mike announcement in the locality, or by hosting of notice in the concerned district
Website:
Provided that the Collector shall indicate the local area of the shop for retail sale
which shall be same as the location of the shop containing a list of Police Station
limits, Grama Panchayats, Wards of Municipal Corporation, Municipality or Wards
of Notified Area Council or village(s), as the case may be, convenient in each case so
as to indicate the local area within which the exclusive privilege is proposed to be
granted:
Provided further that in the Scheduled Areas, no such licence or exclusive privilege
shall be granted without giving thirty days time as required under Section 27."
57. The expression "the local area of the shop for retail sale which shall be the same
as the location of the shop containing a list of police station limit..." has to be
interpreted to mean that the shop would be located in that very local area as
mentioned in the notice. The purpose is indicated in the proviso viz., "so as to
indicate the local area within which the exclusive privilege is proposed to be granted".
The emphasis is therefore on the "local area" and not so much on the 'location' which
in any event has to be within the local area. The State is certainly obliged to indicate
the local area and not the exact location of the shop.
58. The earlier decisions of this Court in Sarat Kumar Sahoo (supra) and Ramesh
Chandra Rout (supra) dealt with the expression "local area" but not in the context in
which it occurs in either Section 20 or Rule 34 of OE Rules. In Ramesh Chandra Rout
(supra) after considering the earlier decision in Sarat Kumar Sahoo (supra), this
Court held that the expression 'local area' refers to a larger area and 'locality' refers to
a smaller area.
However, this did not refer to the exact location of the shop premises. The relevant passages read as
under:
"5. We have perused the judgment of this Court in Sarat Kumar Sahoo and Anr. v.
Collector, Cuttack and Anr. (supra) and we find on a reading of the said judgment
that at the time of issuing public notice inviting objections in accordance with the
proviso to Sub-section (1) of Section 22 of the Act and Rule 3 of the Orissa Exclusive
Privilege Rules, 1970 the local areas and localities in the local area in which the
exclusive privilege is to operate are to be mentioned. Paragraphs 5 and 6 of the said
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 24
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
judgment of this Court in Sarat Kumar Sahoo and Anr. v. Collector, Cuttack and
Anr.(supra) are quoted herein below :
"5. 'Locality' and 'local area' are essentially relative terms distinguishing places from
other places but when they are both used in the same context, 'locality' would
implicitly mean a smaller identified place other than the 'local area' which would
include within itself the locality and embrace more areas and would be identified as
the local area in distinction from still bigger area. The concept of 'local area' being
clarified, as seen earlier, in the Form itself as to mean the limits of the police station
or the grama panchayat, etc., the locality in respect of which the public notice is given
in the Form is necessarily to be specific place where the exclusive privilege is to be
exercised. One meaning of ' locality' in the Oxford English Dictionary is "the fact of
being local, in the sense of belonging to a particular spot". It is for such reason clear
that when public notice is issued in Form 'A' inviting objections, it is to specify both
the local area, such as the grama panchayat, municipal wards, etc., as also specify the
particular spot at which the exclusive privilege of sale is to be carried on. The public
notice is required, in Sub-rule (3) of Rule 3, to be specifically affixed to the locality in
which the privilege is proposed to be granted. The other sub-rules of rules of Rule 3
require the public notice to be proclaimed by beat of drums or such other forms as
are found convenient and an extract of it is to be sent to the Chairman of each
Municipality, Chairman of each Notified Area Council or Chairman of each
Panchayat Samiti reproducing so much of the aforesaid list as relates to their
jurisdiction and an extract of the notice is also to be sent to the Commanding Officer
of each of the Cantonments reproducing so much of the aforesaid list as relates to
manufacture and/or retail sale of country liquor in the area within the limits of the
Cantonment. The variable purpose for such wide circulation of the notice is
apparently to being it to the notice of as much public as possible and their
representatives so that objections can be made protesting the grant of privilege in the
locality as well as in the local area.
6 . This being the purpose and requirement of the public notice, it goes without
showing that at the very notice stage itself the locality for operation of the exclusive
privilege has to be specified. Unless the locality is so made known in the notice itself,
no notice can be given since otherwise the requirement of inviting public objections
becomes an useless formality. It hence is not the responsibility of the grantee of the
privilege to select the locality at which the shop shall be opened and rather the
privilege is to be granted only in respect of the predetermined local area and local
place so that it is operated from no other place".
In the aforesaid judgment, the word 'locality' has been described to be a smaller identified place
than local area and not as the exact place or premises, in which the exclusive privilege proposed to
be granted is to operate, and it has been held in the judgment that both the local area and locality
have to be mentioned in the public notice in Form A so that objections can be made protesting the
grant of privilege in the locality as well as the local area. The judgment of this Court in Sarat Kumar
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 25
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
Sahoo and Anr. v. Collector, Cuttack and Anr. (supra) has been followed in the Liberation Education
and Action for Development (LEAD), through its Secretary and Ors. v. State of Orissa and Ors.
(supra) and it has been held therein that not only the local area but also the locality in which the
exclusive privilege is to operate is to be mentioned in the public notice inviting objections.
7. Coming to the contention of Mr. Mohanty, learned counsel for the petitioner, that unless the exact
place or premises in which the exclusive privilege is to operate has to be mentioned in the public
notice inviting objections the members of the public will not be able to know as to whether the place
in which exclusive privilege will operate is a prohibited place under Sub-rule (1) of Rule 34 of the
Orissa Excise Rules, 1965, at the stage of issuing public notice inviting objections, it is not possible
to know as to who will be granted exclusive privilege in the proposed safe and the exact place or
premises in which the exclusive privilege will operate, though at this stage the local areas and
localities in which the exclusive privilege will operate can be identified by the authorities. Moreover,
on a plain reading of Sub- section (2) of Section 22 of the Act we find that no grantee of any privilege
under Sub-section (1) can operate the exclusive privilege unless and until he has received a licence in
that behalf from the Collector or the Excise Commissioner. Hence, even where a person is granted
exclusive privilege under Sub-section (1) of Section 22 of the Act, unless the premises in which he
intends to operate the exclusive privilege is beyond the places mentioned in Sub-rule (1) of Rule 34
of the Orissa Excise Rules, 1965, licence cannot be granted to such grantee of exclusive privilege in
view of the provisions of Rule 34 of the Orissa Excise Rules, 1965 that licences for shops for
consumption of liquor shall not be granted at the places mentioned therein. This position has also
been considered by this Court in the case of Sarat Kumar Sahoo and Anr. v. Collector, Cuttack and
Anr. (supra) in paragraph-8 which is quoted herein below:
"8. As the foregoing discussions would show it is primarily the duty of the licensing authority and
the authorities who grant the exclusive privilege to know about the premises where the shop is to be
located.
Public objection is to be invited before grant of exclusive privilege with relation to the shop. For the
purpose, the objections made are to be considered and decision taken.
Besides whether objections are made or not, the authorities are themselves to consider and decide
as to whether the premises is one where the shop can be allowed to operate keeping in view the
guidelines of Rules 34 and 35 of the Orissa Excise Rules".
Thus, in our considered opinion, while at the stage of inviting objections from the public by a public
notice it is only necessary to indicate the local areas and the localities in which the exclusive
privilege is to operate as provided in Rule 3 of the Orissa Exclusive Privilege Rules, 1970 and Form-
A appended thereto, at such stage of inviting objection, it is not necessary to indicate the exact place
or premises in which such exclusive privilege will operate but before granting licence to the grantee
of exclusive privilege, the authorities will have to ensure that the exact place or premises in which
the exclusive privilege is to operate does not fall in the places mentioned in Rule 34 of the Orissa
Excise Rules, 1965."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 26
Nabin Kumar Singh vs State Of Odisha And Others .... Opposite ... on 29 September, 2021
59. In any event, the impugned notices do not militate against the proviso to Rule 31 (a) OE Rules.
Having examined some of these sample notices, the Court is not satisfied that there has been a
violation of procedure in indicating the locality of the shop. In any event, on a case-by-case basis it
would still be open for such of those residents of these localities who may be affected to come
forward with their grievances. In fact, it must be noted here that writ petitions are being filed even
after new policy of parting with the exclusive privilege for retail sale of IMFL by lottery mode, by
residents of particular localities complaining of the location of the OFF shops on the ground that it
was fixed without considering their objections. Those cases are being examined individually either
by the Court or by the authorities. Consequently, the Court would not like to comment more on
these aspects since it is always open under the scheme of the OE Act and OE Rules for the affected
parties to ventilate their grievances in appropriate proceedings. Suffice it to hold that the policy shift
to a lottery mode cannot be invalidated on this count.
60. For all of the aforementioned reasons, this Court finds no merits in any of these writ petitions.
Accordingly, the writ petitions are dismissed, but in the circumstances no order as to costs.
61. An urgent certified copy of this judgment be issued as per the rules.
(S. Muralidhar) Chief Justice (B.P. Routray) Judge S.K.Jena/PA S.K. Guin/Sr. Stenographer
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/59061111/ 27
