Nadeem And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
Nadeem And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May,
2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:68778
Court No. - 75
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 528 BNSS No. - 15103 of 2025
Applicant :- Nadeem And Another
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Sandeep Kumar Srivastava
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Arun Kumar Singh Deshwal,J.
1. Heard Sri Sandeep Kr. Srivastava, learned counsel for the applicants, Brijesh Kr. Pandey, learned
counsel for opposite party No.2 and Sri Rajeev Kr. Singh, learned A.G.A. for the State.
2. The instant application has been filed to quash the the charge sheet dated 13.11.2022 of Criminal
Case No. 10806 of 2024, arising out of case crime No. 576 of 2022, under Sections 498A, 323 IPC,
P.S. Amroha Nagar, District J.P. Nagar (Amroha).
3. Facts giving rise to the present controversy is that the matrimonial discord between applicant
No.1 and opposite party No.2 has culminated into the impugned proceeding.
4. Learned counsel for the applicants submits that now the parties have settled their dispute
amicably which is reduced into a written compromise and the parties have decided to live together.
It is further submitted that this Court by order dated 28.3.2025 in Application u/s 528 No. 10299 of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190177128/ 1
Nadeem And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
2025, directed the court below to verify the aforesaid compromise, in pursuance of which the court
below has verified the compromise between the parties by order dated 7.4.2025. A copy of the same
is annexed at page No. 44 of the affidavit.
5. This fact is not disputed by the counsel for opposite party No.2 as well as learned A.G.A.
6. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Gian Singh Vs. State of Punjab & Another; (2012) 10 SCC 303,
in paragraph No. 61 of the judgement, observed as under:-
"The position that emerges from the above discussion can be summarised thus: the
power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint in
exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to a
criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code. Inherent
power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be exercised in
accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz. : (i) to secure the ends of
justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases power to
quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised where the
offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts and
circumstances of each case and no category can be prescribed. However, before
exercise of such power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences
like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not
private in nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise
between the victim and offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like
the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while
working in that capacity etc.; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the purposes of
quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category
of cases, High Court may quash the criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and the victim, the possibility of conviction is
remote and bleak and continuation of the criminal case would put the accused to
great oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not
quashing the criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise
with the victim. In other words, the High Court must consider whether it would be
unfair or contrary to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal proceeding
or continuation of the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of
law despite settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and
whether to secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an
end and if the answer to the above question(s) is in the affirmative, the High Court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190177128/ 2
Nadeem And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
shall be well within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding."
7. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of State of M.P. vs. Laxmi Narayan; (2019) 5 SCC 688, observed as
under:-
"15.1. the power conferred under Section 482 of the Code to quash the criminal
proceedings for the non-compoundable offences under Section 320 of the Code can
be exercised having overwhelmingly and predominantly the civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of
matrimonial relationship or family disputes and when the parties have resolved the
entire dispute amongst themselves;
15.2. such power is not to be exercised in those prosecutions which involved heinous
and serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc.
Such offences are not private in nature and have a serious impact on society;
15.3 similarly, such power is not to be exercised for the offences under the special
statutes like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public
servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender.
15.4. Offences under Section 307 IPC and the Arms Act, etc. would fall in the category
of heinous and serious offences and therefore are to be treated as crime against the
society and not against the individual alone, and therefore, the criminal proceedings
for the offence under Section 307 IPC and/or the Arms Act, etc. which have a serious
impact on the society cannot be quashed in exercise of powers under Section 482 of
the Code, on the ground that the parties have resolved their entire dispute amongst
themselves. However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely because
there is a mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this
provision. It would be open to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation
of Section 307 IPC is there for the sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient
evidence, which if proved, would lead to framing the charge under Section 307 IPC.
For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the nature of injury
sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delicate parts of the body,
nature of weapons used, etc. However, such an exercise by the High Court would be
permissible only after the evidence is collected after investigation and the
charge-sheet is filed/charge is framed and/or during the trial. Such exercise is not
permissible when the matter is still under investigation. Therefore, the ultimate
conclusion in paras 29.6 and 29.7 of the decision of this Court in Narinder Singh
[Narinder Singh v. State of Punjab, (2014) 6 SCC 466 : (2014) 3 SCC (Cri) 54] should
be read harmoniously and to be read as a whole and in the circumstances stated
hereinabove;"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190177128/ 3
Nadeem And Another vs State Of U.P. And Another on 1 May, 2025
8. From above noted judgements, it is clear that merely mentioning the section of serious offences
will not refrain the court from quashing the proceeding, if on considering the material on record,
offences under that section is not made out.
9. Considering the fact as well as on perusal of record, it appears that no heinous and serious
offences of mental depravity or other offences, which may affect the society in general, are made out.
Now both the parties have amicably settled their dispute through compromise which has been duly
verified by the court below. Therefore, continuation of impugned proceeding will amount to travesty
of justice.
10. In view of the above as well as in view of the law laid down by the Apex Court in Gian Singh Vs.
State of Punjab & Another ; (2012) 10 SCC 303, Narinder Singh & Others vs. State of Punjab &
Another (2014) 6 SCC 477, State of M.P. Vs. Laxmi Narayan, (2019) 5 SCC 688 and State of M.P. vs.
Dhruv Gurjar, AIR 2017 SC 1106, the proceeding of proceedings of Criminal Case No. 10806 of
2024, arising out of case crime No. 576 of 2022, under Sections 498A, 323 IPC, P.S. Amroha Nagar,
District J.P. Nagar (Amroha) is hereby quashed.
11. With the aforesaid direction, the present application is allowed.
Order Date :- 1.5.2025 Vandana
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/190177128/ 4
