Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
Author: B.Pugalendhi
Bench: B.Pugalendhi
Crl.A.(MD)No.137 of 2015
and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED : 29.11.2021
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE B.PUGALENDHI
Crl.A.(MD)No.137 of 2015
and
Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
Crl.A.(MD)No.137 of 2015
Nagarajan ... Appellant/Sole accused
versus
State
Rep. by the Inspector of Police,
Kannivadi Police Station,
Dindigul District.
(Cr.No.239 of 2003) ... Respondent
Criminal Appeal filed under Section 374 (2) Cr.P.C. against the
Judgment of conviction and sentence passed by the learned Magalir
Neethimandram (Fast Track Mahila Court), Dindigul, in S.C.No.54 of 2007 on
29.05.2015.
For Appellant : Mr.G.Karuppasamy Pandian
For Respondent : Mr.M.Chandrasekaran,
Additional Public Prosecutor
Mr.A.Thiruvadikumar
Amicus Curiae
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
1/29
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 1
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
(cid:12) Crl.A.(MD)No.137 of 2015
and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
The State
Rep. by the Inspector of Police,
Kannivadi Police Station,
Dindigul District.
(Cr.No.239 of 2003) ... Revision Petitioner
versus
Nagarajan ... Respondent
/ Sole accused
Suo motu Criminal case filed under Section 397 r/w. 401 Cr.P.C.
seeking to set aside the Judgment of acquittal passed by the learned Magalir
Neethimandram (Fast Track Mahila Court), Dindigul, in S.C.No.54 of 2007 on
29.05.2015, acquitting the accused from the charge punishable under Section
306 IPC.
For Revision
Petitioner : Mr.M.Chandrasekaran
Additional Public Prosecutor
For Respondent : Mr.G.Karuppasamy Pandian
COMMON JUDGMENT
The appellant is the sole accused in S.C.No.54 of 2007 on the file of the Mahalir Neethimandram
(Fast Track Mahila Court), Dindigul. He was charged for the offence under Section 306 IPC.
2. The trial Court, in conclusion of trial, by its Judgment dated 29.05.2015, found him not guilty for
the offence under Section 306, however, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248
of 2015 found him guilty for the offences under Sections 354 and 448 of IPC, convicted and
sentenced him as follows:
(i) for the offence under Section 354 IPC, to undergo simple imprisonment for three
years and one month and to pay a fine of Rs.25,000/- and in default, to undergo
simple imprisonment for three months.
(ii) for the offence under Section 448 IPC, to undergo simple imprisonment for three
months.
As against the conviction and sentence imposed by the trial Court, the appellant preferred this
Criminal Appeal in Crl.A.(MD)No.137 of 2015 along with an application to suspend the sentence
pending the appeal. This Court, while admitting this appeal and also considering the petition for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 2
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
suspension of sentence, found that the trial Court is erred by acquitting the accused for the offence
under Section 306 IPC. Further, this Court has felt that the evidence with regard to the offence
under Section 306 IPC was not properly appreciated by the trial Court and therefore, it requires
further examination and since the State has not preferred any appeal as against the Judgment of
acquittal for the offence under Section 306 IPC, this Court directed the Registry to take suo motu
revision, accordingly, the Registry filed a Criminal Revision Case in Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
3. Mr.A.K.Alagarsamy, learned counsel, took notice on behalf of the appellant and also entered
appearance in the suo motu Criminal Revision Case.
4. Since the accused in both the Criminal Appeal and the Criminal Revision Case is one and the
same, both the Criminal Appeal and the Criminal Revision Case are taken up together.
5. Mr.G.Karuppasamy Pandian, learned counsel, representing Mr.A.K.Azagarsami, learned counsel
for the appellant, at the outset, submitted that the suo motu revision is an abuse of process of court
and the appellate Court, while exercising its power under Section 374 Cr.P.C., is not entitled to take
up a case on revisional jurisdiction, which is not vested with the Court at the relevant point of time.
6. Considering the issue raised by the learned counsel for the appellant, this Court appointed
Mr.A.Thiruvadikumar as an Amicus Curiae to assist this Court in the Criminal Revision Case.
7. The brief facts of the case, which are relevant for considering the case, are set out as hereunder:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
(i) The deceased Mariammal is the daughter-in-law of P.W.2-
Sarasawathi. She had two children, viz., Kavitha and Vanitha. She married the only son of P.W.2,
one Ganesan, as a second marriage. On 11.07.2003, at late hours, when the deceased Mariammal
was rocking the cradle of her 1 ½ year child, the accused, a neighbour, trespassed into the house of
the deceased, hugged her and attempted to rape her. On hearing the noise of the deceased, P.W.2,
mother-in-law of the deceased, woke up and scolded the accused and therefore, the accused run
away from the house of the deceased. P.W.3- Kalarani, a neighbour, also witnessed the accused
coming out of the deceased's house and scolding of P.W.2 on the accused. Ashamed of this incident,
the deceased was crying and P.W.2 pacified her. But, in the morning, around 5 O' clock, the
deceased and the child were not available in the house. Therefore, P.W.2 searched for her and
enquired with her father as to whether she came to their house.
(ii) The deceased Mariammal went to a School, where, her elder daughter Vanitha [P.W.5] was
studying in 3rd standard and attempted to take P.W.5 along with her. But, in the absence of
Warden, the Teachers did not allow P.W.5 to leave the School. Therefore, the deceased along with
her 1 ½ year child went to a nearby place and consumed oleander seeds and also administered
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 3
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
poison to her child. P.W.4, while grassing his cattle in the nearby https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 field at Kuivannayakkanpatti, found the deceased and her child
lying in the field and informed the same to P.W.1 – a watchman of Kuivannayakkanpatti Panchayat.
P.W.4 along with P.W.1 went to rescue them, where, they found that the child was alive and took the
child in a bi-cycle to Kannivadi Government Hospital, where, the child was declared dead.
Thereafter, P.W.1 lodged a complaint [Ex.P1] before the Kannivadi Police Station and the same was
registered in Cr.No.239 of 2003 on the file of the Kannivadi Police Station on 12.07.2003 at about
3.00 p.m.
(iii) P.W.11-Palaniappan, the Inspector of Police, on receipt of information, proceeded to the place of
occurrence, prepared a mahazar (Ex.P4) and rough sketch (Ex.P6) in the presence of P.W.7-Raman
and another and also conducted inquest on the deceased Mariammal and after completing the
inquest, he made a request for postmortem through P.W.9-Head Constable. He also conducted
inquest on the child [Kavitha] and the inquest report of the deceased is marked as Ex.P8 and he
made a request for postmortem on child [Kavitha] also. P.W.6-Dr.Ashok Babu conducted the
postmortem on the deceased Mariammal and preserved viscera and sent the same for analysis and
reserved his opinion vide Exs.P2 and P3. He also examined P.W.6-Dr.Ashok Babu. Thereafter, the
further investigation was carried out by P.W.12. P.W.12 examined the Doctor and other witnesses
and after completing the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
investigation, he filed a final report as against the appellant for the offence under Section 306 IPC
on 30.10.2003. The same was taken on file in PRC No. 13/2005 by the learned Judicial Magistrate
No.2, Dindigul and committed to the Court of Sessions. The learned Sessions Judge, Mahalir
Neethimandram, Fast Track Court, Dindigul, framed charges against the accused and examined the
witnesses in S.C.No.54 of 2007.
(iv) During the trial, 12 witnesses were examined and nine documents were marked. P.W.1 is the
Watchman of Kuivannayakkanpatti Panchayat, who along with P.W.4, found the deceased and her
child Kavitha lying in the field, attempted to rescue the child Kavitha, who was alive and also lodged
a complaint in Ex.P1 before the Kannivadi Police Station. P.W.2 is the mother-in-law of the
deceased, who is the witness to the previous day occurrence, when the accused attempted to outrage
the modesty of the deceased and P.W.3, a neighbour, is the witness to the quarrel between P.W.2
and the accused. P.W.5-Vanitha is the another daughter of the deceased, who was studying in 3rd
standard at the time of occurrence. P.W.6-Dr.Ashok Babu conducted the postmortem on the
deceased Mariammal and her child Kavitha. P.W.7 is the witness for the observation mahazar and
P.W.8 is the brother-in- law of the deceased Mariammal. P.W.9 is the Head Constable, who has
taken the viscera to the Forensic Department. P.W.10 is a hostile witness. P.W.11 is
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 the Investigating Officer, who
conducted the preliminary investigation and P.W.12 is the Inspector of Police, who conducted
further investigation and file the final report.
(v) The incriminating materials were put to the accused under Section 313 Cr.P.C., but the accused
denied the same. In conclusion of trial, the trial Court found him guilty under Sections 448 and 354
IPC instead of 306 IPC and convicted and sentenced as stated supra. Aggrieved over the same, the
present Criminal Appeal has been filed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 4
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
8. Heard Mr.G.Karuppasamy Pandian, learned counsel representing Mr.A.K.Alagusamy, learned
counsel for the appellant and Mr.M.Chandrasekaran, learned Additional Public Prosecutor
appearing for the State.
9. Mr.G.Karuppasamy Pandian, learned counsel for the appellant submitted that the prosecution
has not established its case beyond any reasonable doubt. The case of death has also not been
established in this case and final opinion of the Doctor is not marked. In the absence of viscera
report and final opinion of the Doctor, it cannot be concluded that the deceased died by consuming
poison.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis He further submitted that the entire case of the and
Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 prosecution rests upon the evidence of P.W.2 and P.W.3 and the fact
remains that the deceased was not having a good relationship with her husband and the
non-examination of the deceased's husband is a material defect in this case. According to P.W.3, on
the previous day, both the deceased Mariammal and the accused came out of her house and the
same was witnessed by P.W.2- Saraswathi and when P.W.2 questioned the accused, he replied that
he came for the purpose of getting a match box and therefore, it is the P.W.2, who scolded the
deceased, on account of which, the deceased committed suicide. However, the trial Court, without
having any materials, found this appellant guilty and convicted him for the offence under Section
354 IPC.
10. It is further stated by the learned counsel for the appellant that the evidence of P.W.5-Vanitha
would disclose that the deceased was not having a good relationship with her husband and
therefore, P.W.5 was admitted in the hostel. It is further stated that since P.W.2 scolded the
deceased, she had taken the extreme step, for which, the respondent Police, without ascertaining the
case files, filed the final report in a mechanical manner. He further submitted that the direction of
this Court to take up suo motu Criminal Revision case for the offence under Section 306 IPC is not
proper. Further, the conviction under Sections 354 and 448 of IPC without a specific charge is liable
to be set aside. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
11. Per contra, the learned Additional Public Prosecutor appearing for the State submitted that the
evidence of P.W.2 and P.W.3 would disclose that the accused, a neighbour, trespassed into the
house of P.W.2 and attempted to outrage the modesty of the deceased Mariammal. Since the
deceased Mariammal protested and cried, P.W.2-Saraswathi, the mother-in-law of the deceased,
witnessed the occurrence, scolded the accused and the same was witnessed by P.W.3 also. The
evidence of P.W.2 and P.W.3 had made out a specific case as against the accused that the accused
entered into the house of the deceased in the mid night and intercepted the deceased.
P.W.5-daughter of the deceased, who was studying in 3rd standard, has also stated in her evidence
that around 9.00 a.m. on 12.07.2013, her mother [deceased Mariammal] along with her sister
Kavitha came to her school and requested to come with her, but, since the School Authorities
refused to send her out, her mother [deceased Mariammal] went alone and took out the extreme
step. The accused, on the previous day night, entered into the house of the deceased and attempted
to rape her, which was witnessed by P.W.3. and on the next day, the deceased had committed
suicide. According to the learned Additional Public Prosecutor, the prosecution has established its
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 5
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
case sufficiently as against the accused for the offence under Section 306 IPC.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
12. This court paid its anxious consideration on the rival submissions made.
13. The deceased Mariammal was having two daughters. Her husband, Mr.Ganesan, is a Drama
Artist and he was not present at the time of occurrence. The deceased Mariammal was living with
her mother-in-law [P.W.2]. On 12.07.2003, in the early morning hours at 01.00 a.m., the accused, a
neighbour, entered into the house of the deceased, hugged her and also attempted to outrage her
modesty and on the protest made by the deceased, P.W.2 woke up and questioned the accused. The
quarrel between P.W.2 and the accused at odd hours was also witnessed by P.W.3, a neighbour and
consequent to that, the deceased went to a nearby field, consumed oleander seeds and also
administered poison to her child.
14. The respondent Police filed the final report for the offence under Section 306 IPC and the trial
court has also framed charges for the offence under Section 306 IPC. But, the trial Court found this
accused/appellant not guilty for the offence under Section 306, however, found him guilty for the
offence under Sections 354 and 448 of IPC, convicted and sentenced him as stated supra. Aggrieved
over the same, the present Criminal Appeal has been filed by the accused.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
15. This Court, while considering the matter at the time of suspending the sentence, directed the
Registry to take up suo motu revision case and accordingly, Criminal Revision Case in
Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 has been filed.
16. While at the time of arguments, Mr.G.Karuppasamy Pandian had taken a stand that this Court
does not have the power to initiate suo motu revision. Therefore, this Court appointed
Mr.A.Thiruvadikumar, learned counsel, as Amicus Curiae in order to assist the Court with regard to
the powers of the High Court to exercise suo motu revision and the conviction of the accused under
Section 354 IPC in the absence of the said charge.
17. With regard to the powers of the High Court to exercise suo motu revision, the learned Amicus
Curiae, by relying upon the Judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Nadir Khan vs. the
State (Delhi Administration) reported in 1976 AIR 2205, (ii) Eknath Shankarrao Mukkawar vs. State
of Maharashtra, reported in 1977 AIR 1177, submitted that the High Court, while exercising its
power under Section 374 Cr.P.C., can also exercise the revisional powers under Section 401 Cr.P.C
and that apart, under Section 399(i) Cr.P.C. can exercise the power of revision on its own.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
18. The learned Amicus Curiae further submitted that as per the provisions of Section 401(1) Cr.P.C.,
the High Court can exercise the power of the suo motu revision [on its own motion].
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 6
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
19. At this juncture, it is necessary to extract the provisions of Section 401(1) Cr.P.C.
“401-High Court's powers of Revision – (1) In the case of any proceeding the record of which had
been called for by itself or which otherwise comes to its knowledge, the High Court may, in its
discretion, exercise any of the powers conferred on a Court of Appeal by Sections 386, 389, 390 and
391 or on a Court of Session by Section 307 and, when the Judges composing the Court of Revision
are equally divided in opinion, the case shall be disposed of in the manner provided by Section 392.”
20. In view of the above provisions and the ratio laid down by the Hon'ble Apex Court [as cited
supra], the contention of the learned counsel for the accused, that the suo motu revision taken by
this Court is erroneous, is unsustainable in law.
21. Admittedly, the accused had been charged under Section 306 IPC, but, the trial Court had
chosen to convict the accused under Section 354 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and
Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 IPC in the absence of said charge. With regard to the same, the learned
Amicus Curiae submitted that the legal plea as to the sustainability of the conviction for a minor
charge in the absence of the said charge revolves around the provisions of Sections 215, 221, 222 and
464 of Cr.P.C. The purpose of framing of charge against the accused is to have proper acquaintance
of the allegation for which prosecution is initiated. As per Section 211 of Cr.P.C., there is an
obligation on the part of the Court at the time of framing charge to incorporate the relevant
requirements, but, as per Section 215 of Cr.P.C., some sort of error visualizing in the format of
charge would not make the trial redundant. Further, under Section 222 of Cr.P.C. the conviction
under the minor offence than that of the accused had been charged, is found permissible and while
in terms of Section 221 of Cr.P.C. even if there happens to be absence of charge against the accused,
even then, he could be convicted and the aforesaid is duly cared under Section 464 of Cr.P.C.
19. The learned Amicus Curaie further submitted that the foundational facts as projected by the
prosecution would certainly sustain the charge under Section 306 IPC, but, subject to the court
accepting the evidence of P.W.2. Admittedly, it was the act of the accused which had induced/driven
the deceased to commit suicide. The instigation/intentional aid on the part of the appellant/accused
forcing her to commit the drastic act is the act of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and
Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 outraging the modesty. There is a certain live-link between the act of
the accused and the suicide. The ingredients of Section 306 IPC are clearly made out on the factual
background of the prosecution case. P.W.2-Saraswathi would inform that the
deceased/Mariyammal had made oral dying declarations, expressing her intention to commit
suicide, pursuant to the incident/act of the accused in outraging the modesty of the victim. Further,
P.W.3-Kalarani and P.W.8-Ganesh had also spoken about the presence of the accused at the odd
hours and P.W.8 was also cross examined on the said lines.
20. It is further submitted that in the present case, the accused had played an active role in
tarnishing the self esteem of the victim, by outraging her modesty, which had eventually drawn the
victim to commit suicide. Therefore, there is a direct act for the incitement to the commission of
suicide. Further, the fact that the accused had trespassed at the odd hours, is proved by the evidence
of P.W.2 and P.W.3. The accused had in fact suggested to P.W.2 as to she had misunderstood the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 7
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
incident during the cross examination. Therefore, the sustainability of the charge under Section 306
IPC would also depend upon these factors. In support of the same, the learned Amicus Curiae relied
on the Judgments of the Hon'ble Apex Court, in Praveen Pradhan vs. State of Uttranchal and
another reported in 2013 (1) SCC (Crl.) 146 and Ude Singh and others vs. State of Haryana.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
21. Heard the submissions of the learned Amicus Curiae.
22. The deceased Mariammal killed one of her daughters and committed suicide, by consuming
certain poisonous substance. P.W.6- Dr.Ashok Babu, who conducted the post mortem of the
deceased Mariammal and the child Kavitha, in his evidence, has stated that the deceased died by
consuming oleander seeds. Though the viscera and his final opinion were not marked by the
prosecution, P.W.6-Dr.Ashok Babu in his evidence has stated that based on the viscera, he gave his
final opinion and as per his final opinion, the deceased died by consuming oleander seeds. However,
the Doctor [P.W.6] was not cross examined by the accused.
23. P.W.1 and P.W.4 have identified the dead body on 12.07.2003 at about 10.00 a.m. and also duly
informed the Police. On the same day, in small hours around 1.00 a.m., this appellant/accused
entered into the house of the deceased, hugged her and attempted to rape her and on the protest
made by the deceased, P.W.2, her mother-in-law, woke up, shouted at him and thereafter, the
accused left the house. P.W.2, in her evidence, has also stated that the victim has stated her that she
would not survive any more due to this incidence and she also consoled her, but, even then, she has
committed suicide. In the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 cross
examination, a suggestion has been made on behalf of the accused that the accused misbehaved with
her daughter-in-law and P.W.2 misinterpreted the same and lodged a complaint and thereby, the
accused admitted the said incidence projected by the prosecution.
24. As rightly contended by the learned Amicus Curaie, the accused had played an active role in
tarnishing the self esteem of the victim, by outraging her modesty, which had eventually drawn the
victim to commit suicide and by the act of the accused, he had instigated the victim to commit
suicide and further, there is a direct act for the incitement to the commission of offence.
25. At this juncture, it is necessary to note that if any person commits suicide and the person who
abets the commission of such suicide is liable to be prosecuted and punished under Section 306 of
Indian Panel Code. The abetment may be by instigation, conspiracy or intentional aid as defined
under Section 107 of Indian Panel Code. The word “instigation” has been discussed elaborately by
the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Chitresh Kumar Chopra vs. State (Government of NCT of Delhi),
reported in AIR 2010 SCC 1446, which reads as follows:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis “Instigation is to goad, urge forward, provoke,
incite and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 or encourage to do an act. To satisfy the
requirement of instigation, though it is not necessary that actual words must be used
to that effect or what constitutes instigation must necessarily and specifically be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 8
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
suggestive of the consequence. Yet a reasonable certainty to incite the consequence
must be capable of being spelt out. Where the accused had, by his acts or omission or
by a continued course of conduct, created such circumstances that the deceased was
left with no other option except to commit suicide, in which case, an instigation may
have to be inferred. A word uttered in a fit of anger or emotion without intending the
consequences to actually follow, cannot be said to be instigation.
Thus, to constitute instigation, a person who instigates another has to provoke, incite,
urge or encourage the doing of an act by the other by goading or urging forward. The
dictionary meaning of the word goad is a thing that stimulates someone into action;
provoke to action or reaction to keep irritating or annoying somebody until he
reacts.” Instigation has to be gathered from the circumstances of the case and an
inference can also be drawn from the circumstances, which in fact have created a
situation leading the person to commit suicide.
26. In a similar circumstances, in dealing with an offence under Section 306 IPC, the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Ude Singh vs. State of Haryana, in Crl.A.No.233 of 2010, dated 25.07.2019, has
held as follows:
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 “14.6. In Chitresh
Kumar Chopra v. State (Govt. of NCT of Delhi): (2009) 16 SCC 605, this Court
referred to the decision in Ramesh Kumar (supra) and, while pointing out the
complexities related with the determination of the question as to the cause of suicide,
expounded on the relevant principles in the following:-
"19. As observed in Ramesh Kumar (supra), where the accused by his acts or by a
continued course of conduct creates such circumstances that the deceased was left
with no other option except to commit suicide, an "instigation" may be inferred. In
other words, in order to prove that the accused abetted commission of suicide by a
person, it has to be established that:
(i) the accused kept on irritating or annoying the deceased by words, deeds or wilful
omission or conduct which may even be a wilful silence until the deceased reacted or
pushed or forced the deceased by his deeds, words or wilful omission or conduct to
make the deceased move forward more quickly in a forward direction; and
(ii) that the accused had the intention to provoke, urge or encourage the deceased to
commit suicide while acting in the manner noted above. Undoubtedly, presence of
mens rea is the necessary concomitant of instigation.
20. ………….The question as to what is the cause of a suicide has no easy answers
because suicidal ideation and behaviours in human beings are complex and
multifaceted. Different individuals in the same situation react and behave differently
because of the personal meaning they add to each event, thus
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 9
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 accounting for
individual vulnerability to suicide. Each individual's suicidability pattern depends on
his inner subjective experience of mental pain, fear and loss or self-respect. Each of
these factors are crucial and exacerbating contributor to an individual's vulnerability
to end his own life, which may either be an attempt for self-protection or an escapism
from intolerable self."
(Underling supplied for emphasis) 14.7. In the case Amalendu Pal v. State of W.B.:
(2010) 1 SCC 707, this Court, after reference to several past decisions, held as
follows:-
"12. Thus, this Court has consistently taken the view that before holding an accused
guilty of an offence under Section 306 IPC, the court must scrupulously examine the
facts and circumstances of the case and also assess the evidence adduced before it in
order to find out whether the cruelty and harassment meted out to the victim had left
the victim with no other alternative but to put an end to her life. It is also to be borne
in mind that in cases of alleged abetment of suicide there must be proof of direct or
indirect acts of incitement to the commission of suicide. Merely on the allegation of
harassment without there being any positive action proximate to the time of
occurrence on the part of the accused which led or compelled the person to commit
suicide, conviction in terms of Section 306 IPC is not sustainable."
(Underling supplied for emphasis)
15. Thus, “abetment” involves a mental process https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis of instigating a
person in doing something. A person abets and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 the doing of a thing
when: (i) he instigates any person to do that thing; or (ii) he engages with one or more persons in
any conspiracy for the doing of that thing; or (iii) he intentionally aids, by acts or illegal omission,
the doing of that thing. These are essential to complete the abetment as a crime. The word
"instigate" literally means to provoke, incite, urge on or bring about by persuasion to do anything.
16. In cases of alleged abetment of suicide, there must be a proof of direct or indirect act/s of
incitement to the commission of suicide. It could hardly be disputed that the question of cause of a
suicide, particularly in the context of an offence of abetment of suicide, remains a vexed one,
involving multifaceted and complex attributes of human behaviour and responses/reactions. In the
case of accusation for abetment of suicide, the Court would be looking for cogent and convincing
proof of the act/s of incitement to the commission of suicide. In the case of suicide, mere allegation
of harassment of the deceased by another person would not suffice unless there be such action on
the part of the accused which compels the person to commit suicide; and such an offending action
ought to be proximate to the time of occurrence. Whether a person has abetted in the commission of
suicide by another or not, could only be gathered from the facts and circumstances of each case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 10
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
16.1 For the purpose of finding out if a person has abetted commission of suicide by another, the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 consideration would be if the
accused is guilty of the act of instigation of the act of suicide. As explained and reiterated by this
Court in the decisions above-referred, instigation means to goad, urge forward, provoke, incite or
encourage to do an act. If the persons who committed suicide had been hypersensitive and the
action of accused is otherwise not ordinarily expected to induce a similarly circumstanced person to
commit suicide, it may not be safe to hold the accused guilty of abetment of suicide. But, on the
other hand, if the accused by his acts and by his continuous course of conduct creates a situation
which leads the deceased perceiving no other option except to commit suicide, the case may fall
within the four-corners of Section 306 IPC. If the accused plays an active role in tarnishing the
self-esteem and self-respect of the victim, which eventually draws the victim to commit suicide, the
accused may be held guilty of abetment of suicide. The question of mens rea on the part of the
accused in such cases would be examined with reference to the actual acts and deeds of the accused
and if the acts and deeds are only of such nature where the accused intended nothing more than
harassment or snap show of anger, a particular case may fall short of the offence of abetment of
suicide. However, if the accused kept on irritating or annoying the deceased by words or deeds until
the deceased reacted or was provoked, a particular case may be that of abetment of suicide. Such
being the matter of delicate analysis of human behaviour, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis each
case is required to be examined on its own facts, while and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 taking note
of all the surrounding factors having bearing on the actions and psyche of the accused and the
deceased.
16.2. We may also observe that human mind could be affected and could react in myriad ways; and
impact of one's action on the mind of another carries several imponderables. Similar actions are
dealt with differently by different persons; and so far a particular person’s reaction to any other
human’s action is concerned, there is no specific theorem or yardstick to estimate or assess the
same. Even in regard to the factors related with the question of harassment of a girl, many factors
are to be considered like age, personality, upbringing, rural or urban set ups, education etc. Even the
response to the ill-action of eve-teasing and its impact on a young girl could also vary for a variety of
factors, including those of background, self- confidence and upbringing. Hence, each case is
required to be dealt with on its own facts and circumstances.
17. ............
18. ............
19. ............
20. ............
21. In the given set up and the respective position of the parties, if the accused No. 1 continuously
addressed or called the deceased girl as his “wife”, in our view, the utterance was not merely of
teasing but of demeaning and destroying the self-esteem of the young girl whose engagement had
broken and whose uncle was mocking her https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis to join him in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 11
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
matrimony. It was the act of humiliation of and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 highest order for the
girl, who had personally suffered the set-back of broken engagement, apart that she was unable to
clear even 10th standard examination. Obviously, she was being ridiculed and taunted for her
broken engagement. The other accused persons chose to join the accused No. 1 and aggravated the
humiliation of the girl by addressing her as younger brother's wife or aunt. There remains nothing to
doubt that the accused persons were working with the common intention to harass and humiliate
the girl with reference to her broken engagement. The significant part of the matter is that such
taunting and humiliation of the deceased at the hands of the accused persons had not been a
singular event or one-off affair but had been a continuous feature, as amply established by the
prosecution witnesses. The incident of 05.05.1996 drew the final straw when the hapless girl
received the same taunts from the accused persons and she even rebuked them. We find no reason
to disbelieve the statement of PW-2 Jai Narain as regards the incident of 05.05.1996. Equally, there
is no reason to disbelieve the statement of PW-11 Smt. Krishna that her daughter wept the whole
night after the said incident; and on being frustrated and exasperated with such humiliations,
expressed her intention to end her life. The fact of the matter remains that the victim girl ended her
life in the early morning very next day.
22. Taking an overall view of the matter, we are satisfied that the present one had not been a case of
a mere https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis eve-teasing, insult or intimidation but the continuous and
and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 repeated acts and utterances of the accused persons were
calculated to bring disgrace to the village girl and to destroy her self-esteem; rather the acts and
utterances were aimed at taking her to the brink of helplessness and to the vanishing point of
tolerance. It had not been a case of mere intimidation or insult. The incessant intimidation and
insult of the innocent girl had been of instigation; and such instigation clearly answers to the
description of abetment of suicide. Therefore, in our view, the accused Nos. 1 and 3 have rightly
been held guilty of offence of abetment of suicide.
23. The contention of the appellants that their intention had never been to make her commit suicide
is required to be rejected because, as noticed above, the hapless girl was intentionally chosen for
humiliation by the accused, who were otherwise involved in several litigations with her parents. The
accused persons also knew it that the father of the girl was posted in his duty outside the village. As
noticed, the intention of the accused had only been to drive the deceased to the brink of helplessness
and intolerance; they in fact succeeded in doing so on 05.05.1996, when the girl rebuked them for
their utterances. However, the victim girl found no way out because the humiliation at the hands of
accused had been everyday affair; and, in the given set up of the society she belonged to, any action
against the accused by her family was being avoided for the sake of her honour.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
24. The present case indeed represents a sordid state of affairs in relation to the young girl in the
rural setting, whose honour and self-esteem got brutally violated by none other but her own
relatives, who found her to be the soft- target to settle their scores with her parents. The accused
rather exhibited their denigrating mentality while targeting the young girl, who was otherwise
required to be treated by them with affection and respect, for being their niece and their cousin. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 12
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
facts of this case lead only to the conclusion that the accused persons had intentionally, with their
incessant acts and utterances, goaded the victim girl to commit suicide. She indeed committed
suicide within few hours of her last and unbearable encounter with the accused. The acts and deeds
of the accused in the evening of 05.05.1996 had been too proximate to the event of suicide by 9 a.m.
in the morning of 06.05.1996. As testified by PW-11 Smt. Krishna, her daughter cried the whole
night for being unable to bear the daily humiliation at the hands of the accused; and ended her life
in the morning.
25. For what has been discussed hereinabove and having examined the matter in its totality, we find
no reason to consider any interference in the impugned judgment and order dated 05.05.2008 in
relation to the appellant Nos. 1 and 3.” https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248
of 2015
27. From the above, it is clear that the accused had instigated the deceased to commit suicide and
therefore, the charge framed against him under Section 306 IPC is sustainable.
28. Further, it is the duty of every Court to award proper sentence having regard to the nature of the
offence and the manner in which, it was executed or committed. The trial Court is expected to
consider all relevant facts and circumstances with the gravity of offence. The nature of crime, the
conduct of the accused and other attending circumstances, are also relevant in deciding the case.
The High Court, under Section 401 Cr.P.C., is having the power to call for the records without the
intervention of another agency. The High Court as an effective instrument in the administrative of
criminal justice is duty bound to suo motu act where there is flagrant abuse of law. The nature of
offence and the manner of disposal by the trial Court has prompted the Court to take up the suo
motu Criminal revision petition for the ultimate social good of the community. The High Court is
not required to act any revision merely through a conduit application at the instance of an aggrieved
party.
29. In the facts and circumstances of the case and applying the ratio laid down by the Hon'ble Apex
Court, the appellant is liable to be convicted for the offence under Section 306 IPC. Accordingly, the
accused is found https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 guilty for the
offence under Section 306 IPC and 448 IPC and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
five years and to pay a fine of Rs.5,000/-, in default, to undergo simple imprisonment for three
months for the offence under Section 306 IPC and sentenced to undergo simple imprisonment for
three months for the offence committed under Section 448 IPC. The period of imprisonment already
undergone by the accused is ordered to be set off under Section 428 of Cr.P.C. The sentences shall
run concurrently.
30. This Court places its appreciation to Mr.A.Thiruvadikumar, learned counsel, who was appointed
as Amicus Curiae, for his sincere efforts in representing the case.
31. In the result, Crl.A.(MD)No.137 of 2015 filed by the appellant/accused is dismissed and suo motu
revision in Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015 is allowed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 13
Nagarajan vs State on 29 November, 2021
29.11.2021 Index : Yes / No Internet : Yes / No ogy Note : In view of the present lock down owing to
COVID-19 pandemic, a web copy of the order may be utilized for official purposes, but, ensuring that
the copy of the order that is presented is the correct copy, shall be the responsibility of the
advocate/litigant concerned. https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and Crl.R.C.(MD)No.248 of 2015
B.PUGALENDHI, J.
ogy Pre-delivery Judgment in and 29.11.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/166509399/ 14
