Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44192
Court No. - 49 Reserved
A.F.R.
Case :- WRIT - A No. - 12070 of 2024
Petitioner :- Nagendra Kumar
Respondent :- State of U.P. and others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Abhinav Tripathi,Prashant Shukla
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Siddharth Singhal
Hon'ble J.J. Munir,J.
1. This writ petition is directed against an order of the Director, Internal Account and Audit,
Directorate, U.P. dated 22.12.2023, cancelling the petitioner's appointment as an Assistant
Accountant. Also under challenge is an order dated 20.10.2023 passed by the Director aforesaid,
where pending proceedings, to determine the validity of the petitioner's 'O' level computer
certificate secured from the Calcutta University, disbursement of the petitioner's salary was stayed
until further orders.
2. An advertisement, bearing No.12 of 2016, was issued by the Uttar Pradesh Subordinate Services
Selection Commission, Lucknow (for short, 'the Commission'), advertising 2874 posts of Assistant
Accountants, Auditors and Assistant Treasury Accountants to be filled up by direct recruitment. The
selections were to be made by the Commission on the basis of a written test followed by interview.
One of the essential qualifications was the possession of an 'O' level diploma certificate from a
Government of India recognized institute.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 1
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
3. It is the petitioner's case that, being eligible and qualified to be selected and appointed against
one of these posts, the petitioner applied in response to the advertisement of 2016 issued by the
Commission. He was issued an admit-card, permitting him to participate in the written
examination. The petitioner appeared in the written examination, which he successfully passed. The
petitioner says that he was directed by the Commission to produce his certificates of educational
qualifications at the time of interview for document verification. The petitioner was successful in the
interview and declared selected for appointment to the post of Assistant Accountant and Auditor on
16.10.2019. The result was declared by the Commission on the last mentioned date. The result dated
16.10.2019 mentioned that a few candidates have been conditionally selected as their 'O' level
computer certificate was yet to be verified. The Commission, vide their letter dated 31.10.2019,
directed the employers, that is to say, the Director, Internal Account and Audit, Directorate, U.P. to
verify the educational qualifications and certificates of candidates before issue of appointment
letters. In response to the aforesaid advice from the Secretary of the Commission, the selected
candidates were directed to produce certificates of their educational qualifications in the prescribed
proforma, which was done by the petitioner filling up the proforma on 17.12.2019. After verification
of the petitioner's qualifications by the office of the Director, Internal Account and Audit,
Directorate, U.P., the petitioner was issued a letter of appointment, signed by the Director, dated
16.06.2020. The petitioner was posted as an Assistant Accountant in the office of the Block
Development Officer, Suriyawan, Bhadohi. The petitioner's name finds place at serial No.14 of the
appointment-cum-posting letter dated 16.06.2020 issued by the Director. The petitioner joined
service of the respondents as an Assistant Accountant on 24.06.2020.
4. According to the petitioner's case, he has been working continuously ever since in the office of the
Block Development Officer, Suriyawan, Bhadohi to the satisfaction of his superiors and with no
complaint against him. The petitioner was all of a sudden served with a show cause notice dated
07.06.2023 issued by the respondents, calling upon him to submit documents, that would verify his
'O' level computer diploma certificate. In reply to the said show cause notice dated 07.06.2023, the
petitioner submitted documents, that would establish his case. The petitioner submitted his reply on
26.06.2023 as aforesaid. Once again a show cause notice dated 12.10.2023 was issued to the
petitioner by the Director, calling upon the petitioner to submit his explanation with regard to the
validity of his 'O' level computer certificate. Along side the said show cause, by an order of the
selfsame date, the petitioner's salary was stopped pending inquiry into the validity of the petitioner's
certificate last mentioned. This was followed by the order dated 22.12.2023, cancelling the
petitioner's appointment on ground that his 'O' level computer certificate was forged and not issued
by the Calcutta University.
5. Aggrieved by the orders dated 22.12.2023 and 12.10.2023, both passed by the Director, Internal
Account and Audit, Directorate, U.P., this petition has been instituted under Article 226 of the
Constitution.
6. A notice of motion by a reasoned order dated 12.08.2024 was issued and an ad interim stay of
operation of both the impugned orders granted with a direction to permit the petitioner to discharge
his duties regularly and pay him salary. In answer to the notice of motion, respondent Nos.2 and 3
filed a counter affidavit dated 31.08.2024, to which the petitioner filed a rejoinder dated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 2
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
02.10.2024. Apart from the notice of motion, upon a complaint by the petitioner that the interim
order is being observed in breach, this Court on 25.09.2024 ordered the Director to permit the
petitioner to join and comply with the interim orders of this Court dated 12.08.2024 in letter and
spirit. The Director was also asked to show cause why other measures be not adopted to enforce this
Court's order, if the breach continued. The Director filed her reply to the show cause along with an
application, bringing on record certain documents, which too add to the pleadings in this case. In
order to enable the petitioner to plead to the facts brought on record through the Director's affidavit
filed in reply to the show cause, the petitioner was given opportunity to file a counter affidavit,
which he did on 02.10.2024. This too forms part of the pleadings.
7. On 03.10.2024, when this petition came up, the parties having exchanged affidavits, it was
admitted to hearing, which proceeded forthwith. Judgment was reserved.
8. Heard Mr. Prashant Shukla, learned Counsel for the petitioner, Mr. Manish Goyal, learned
Additional Advocate General assisted by Ms. Akansha Sharma, learned Standing Counsel appearing
on behalf of respondent Nos.1, 2, 3, 5, 6 and 7, and Mr. Siddharth Singhal, learned Counsel
appearing on behalf of respondent No.4. Service upon respondent No.8 is confirmed as per office
report dated 30.08.2024, but no one has put in appearance.
9. It is argued by Mr. Prashant Shukla, learned Counsel for the petitioner that the respondents had
already verified the 'O' level computer certificate relied upon by the petitioner, as evident from the
result, that was declared by the Commission on 16.10.2019. It is pointed out that the Commission
has specifically advised the respondent Department, vide letter dated 31.10.2019, to verify the
educational qualifications and certificates before proceeding to issue appointment letters. Pursuant
to the aforesaid advice, candidates were directed to produce their testimonials relating to their
educational qualifications, submitting them in the prescribed proforma. The petitioner filled up the
prescribed proforma, producing the requisite certificates on 17.12.2019. It was after verification of
all documents relating to his educational qualifications that the petitioner was issued with the letter
of appointment-cum-posting dated 16.06.2020 by the Director. The submission, therefore, is that
the respondents are now estopped from cancelling the petitioner's appointment by relying upon the
report allegedly received from the Calcutta University, saying that the petitioner's certificate has not
been issued by them. After all, the respondents had verified the genuineness of the petitioner's
certificate relating to the 'O' level computer course.
10. It is next urged that the petitioner's appointment has been cancelled after a period as long as
three years, which is arbitrary and impermissible in law. The advertisement was issued in the year
2016 and the petitioner appointed on 16.06.2020, after clearing the written examination and
interview. Ever since, he has been diligently working to the satisfaction of his superiors. Lapse, as it
is, of a period of almost three years, the petitioner's appointment cannot be cancelled by the
impugned order. It is next urged that after expiry of the period of probation and the petitioner
becoming a regular employee of the Department, his appointment could not have been cancelled
without holding a regular departmental inquiry. An inquiry in this case has to be held in accordance
with the procedure prescribed under the Uttar Pradesh Government Servants (Discipline and
Appeal) Rules, 1999 (for short, 'the Rules of 1999'), which apply to the petitioner by virtue of Rule 26
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 3
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
of the Uttar Pradesh Government Department Subordinate Accounts Cadre (Non-Gazetted) Service
Rules, 2014 (for short, 'the Rules of 2014').
11. The learned Counsel for the petitioner points out that the petitioner earned his 'O' level computer
certificate, pursuing his studies with the Indian Technical Institute, Adarsh Bazar, Ghazipur (for
short, 'the Technical Institute'), from 10.07.2012 to 05.08.2013. It is next submitted by the learned
Counsel for the petitioner that after issue of the show cause notice dated 07.07.2023, the petitioner
ex abundanti cautela passed his 'O' level computer certificate course again from the National
Institute of Electronics & Information Technology (NIELIT), that was granted to him on
30.05.2024. It is then submitted that if any fraud had been committed by the Technical Institute,
the petitioner, who was a bona fide student at the said institute, cannot be made to suffer on account
of the fraud played upon him by the Technical Institute. The petitioner did not have knowledge
about the 'O' level computer certificate, issued by the Technical Institute, being forged and
fabricated. So far as he is concerned, he did not conceal any material facts, either before the
Commission or the respondents, who have appointed him in their establishment. It is emphasized
by Mr. Shukla that in the garb of passing the impugned orders, styled as orders of cancellation of
appointment, the petitioner's services have been terminated, who is otherwise a regular and
confirmed employee, appointed in accordance with Rules. He was selected after following the
prescribed procedure by the Commission and then appointed by the Director vide order dated
16.06.2020. He was appointed to a cadre post. The impugned order dated 22.12.2023 is not an
order of discharge of a probationer from service. If at all the petitioner's services had to be
terminated, it could be done only after holding a departmental inquiry, as part of regular
disciplinary proceedings, envisaged under the Rules of 1999 read with the Rule of 2014.
12. In support of his submissions, Mr. Shukla has relied upon the authority of the Supreme Court in
Avtar Singh v. Union of India and others, (2016) 8 SCC 471, a decision of Padia, J. in Abhiram v.
State of U.P. and others, 2020 SCC OnLine All 2248, and a Bench decision of this Court in Smt.
Parmi Maurya v. State of U.P. and others, 2014 (2) ADJ 633 (DB).
13. Mr. Manish Goyal, learned Additional Advocate General assisted by Ms. Akansha Sharma,
learned Standing Counsel, has primarily answered the petitioner on behalf of respondent Nos.1, 2, 3,
5, 6 and 7. It is argued by Mr. Goyal that the 'O' level computer certificate, that the petitioner claims
to have earned from the University of Kolkatta, is forged to its face and has drawn the attention of
the Court to a xerox copy of the certificate, annexed to the affidavit filed by the Director, Internal
Account and Audit, Directorate, U.P. in reply to the show cause notice issued by this Court on
25.09.2024. He points out that a perusal of the certificate shows that it has been issued by the
'University of Kolkatta'. He says that there is no such university as the 'University of Kolkatta'. The
'University of Calcutta' does not write or describe itself as 'University of Kolkatta', but as the
'University of Calcutta'. He has further drawn attention of the Court to the same affidavit filed in
support of the reply to the show cause last mentioned, where annexed as Annexure No.2 is a memo,
bearing reference No. CE/Dip/Veri/11348/2023 dated 26.09.2023, addressed to the Director,
Internal Account and Audit, Directorate, U.P., Lucknow by the Deputy Controller of Examinations,
University of Calcutta. The memorandum aforesaid says in answer to a query by the Director,
Internal Account and Audit, Directorate, U.P. that the document submitted has not been issued by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 4
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
the Calcutta University. There is, thus, according to Mr. Goyal, a clear denial by the University of
Calcutta having ever issued the 'O' level computer certificate, upon which the petitioner relies to
support his candidature. He submits that possession of an 'O' level computer certificate is an
essential qualification for appointment as an Assistant Accountant. The petitioner was given due
opportunity, including a show cause notice and personal hearing, before the order for cancellation of
appointment was passed by the Director. The petitioner neither disputed the certificate, upon which
he relied to support his candidature, nor the verification report received from the University of
Calcutta. He has invited the attention of the Court to what the petitioner said in his reply to the
respondents' letter dated 07.06.2023, asking him to verify his 'O' level computer certificate. It
figures at page No.76 of the writ petition paper book and reads:
"(cid:128)(cid:129)(cid:130)(cid:131)(cid:132) (cid:128)(cid:133)(cid:134)(cid:133) (cid:131)(cid:135)(cid:136)(cid:137)(cid:134)(cid:137) '(cid:138)' (cid:139)(cid:133)(cid:136)(cid:139) (cid:136)(cid:134)(cid:135)(cid:140) 2013 (cid:128)(cid:133)(cid:141) (cid:142)(cid:143)(cid:132)(cid:137) (cid:144)(cid:132)(cid:137) (cid:129)(cid:145)(cid:146) (cid:147)(cid:130) (cid:142)(cid:143) (cid:148)(cid:149)(cid:142)(cid:133)
(cid:142)(cid:137)(cid:134)(cid:135)(cid:132)(cid:137)(cid:139)(cid:132) (cid:128)(cid:133)(cid:141) (cid:147)(cid:128)(cid:137) (cid:142)(cid:134) (cid:131)(cid:143)(cid:132)(cid:137) (cid:144)(cid:132)(cid:137) (cid:129)(cid:145)(cid:146) (cid:147)(cid:130) (cid:150)(cid:151)(cid:135)(cid:132) (cid:129)(cid:145) (cid:146) (cid:152)(cid:143)(cid:128)(cid:135)(cid:152) document (cid:128)(cid:145)(cid:152)(cid:133) (cid:147)(cid:143)(cid:152)
(cid:151)(cid:153)(cid:135)(cid:132)(cid:130) (cid:150)(cid:133) (cid:154)(cid:136)(cid:144)(cid:151) (cid:142)(cid:134)(cid:137)(cid:132)(cid:137) (cid:129)(cid:145)(cid:146) (cid:132)(cid:137) (cid:147)(cid:130) (cid:154)(cid:155)(cid:143)(cid:139)(cid:133)(cid:156) (cid:149)(cid:135)(cid:134)(cid:150)(cid:135)(cid:151)(cid:157)(cid:151) (cid:142)(cid:143)(cid:132)(cid:133) (cid:129)(cid:145) (cid:158)(cid:150)(cid:142)(cid:133) (cid:154)(cid:151)(cid:143)(cid:134)(cid:143)(cid:142)(cid:135)(cid:151) (cid:159)(cid:134)
(cid:142)(cid:157)(cid:160) (cid:152)(cid:129)ยก (cid:142)(cid:129)(cid:152)(cid:137) (cid:129)(cid:145)(cid:146)"
14. The learned Additional Advocate General submits that adherence to principles of natural justice
in this case would not require the holding of regular disciplinary proceedings as the very
appointment of the petitioner is based on a forged document, which the petitioner does not deny, is
the one he relies upon to support his candidature. Therefore, by not holding a regular departmental
inquiry or disciplinary proceedings, in accordance with Rule 7 of the Rules of 1999, no prejudice
would be caused to the petitioner. So far as the 'O' level computer certificate dated 31.05.2024,
earned by the petitioner from the NIELIT is concerned, the same would be of no help as it has been
earned after the petitioner's appointment. Mr. Goyal emphasizes that in fact the petitioner's
endeavour to secure an 'O' level certificate in computers, all over again, constitutes an admission on
his part that the certificate, upon which he relied to support his candidature, was forged.
15. Mr. Manish Goyal has relied upon the authority of the Supreme Court in A.P. Public Service
Commission v. Koneti Venkateswarulu and others, (2005) 7 SCC 177; Devendra Kumar v. State of
Uttaranchal and others, (2013) 9 SCC 363; Manjul Kumar v. State of U.P., 2021 SCC OnLine All
2161; Reena Devi v. State of U.P., 2019 SCC OnLine All 4783; and, Union of India and others v.
Bipad Bhanjan Gayen, (2008) 11 SCC 314.
16. We have carefully considered the rival submissions advanced by learned Counsel for both parties
and perused the record.
17. The moot question is, if as a thumb rule in all cases where an employee, who is appointed to a
service in accordance with Rules after selection and confirmed in service, is it imperative to hold a
full-fledged disciplinary proceedings before his service can be terminated, if the case is that he
secured the appointment by practice of fraud, relying on forged documents of eligibility? The
corollary of the question is, if an appointment is secured through practice of utter fraud, based on
forged testimonials, can the appointment be cancelled without obliging the employer to hold a
regular disciplinary proceedings against the employee, even if he is confirmed in service, by giving
him a show cause notice and hearing him on the validity of the document.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 5
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
18. To hold in his favour, during the course of submissions, learned Counsel for the petitioner has
very forcefully relied upon Avtar Singh (supra), which is a three Judge Bench decision of the
Supreme Court. The principles in Avtar Singh and the remarks that are relevant, to which our
attention was invited, appear in paragraph Nos.33 to 38.11 of the report. These read:
"33. The fraud and misrepresentation vitiates a transaction and in case employment
has been obtained on the basis of forged documents, as observed in M. Bhaskaran
case [Union of India v. M. Bhaskaran, 1995 Supp (4) SCC 100 : 1996 SCC (L&S) 162 :
(1996) 32 ATC 94] , it has also been observed in the reference order that if an
appointment was procured fraudulently, the incumbent may be terminated without
holding any inquiry, however, we add a rider that in case employee is confirmed,
holding a civil post and has protection of Article 311(2), due inquiry has to be held
before terminating the services. The case of obtaining appointment on the basis of
forged documents has the effect on very eligibility of incumbent for the job in
question, however, verification of antecedents is different aspect as to his fitness
otherwise for the post in question. The fraudulently obtained appointment orders are
voidable at the option of employer, however, question has to be determined in the
light of the discussion made in this order on impact of suppression or submission of
false information.
34. No doubt about it that verification of character and antecedents is one of the
important criteria to assess suitability and it is open to employer to adjudge
antecedents of the incumbent, but ultimate action should be based upon objective
criteria on due consideration of all relevant aspects.
35. Suppression of "material" information presupposes that what is suppressed that
"matters" not every technical or trivial matter. The employer has to act on due
consideration of rules/instructions, if any, in exercise of powers in order to cancel
candidature or for terminating the services of employee. Though a person who has
suppressed the material information cannot claim unfettered right for appointment
or continuity in service but he has a right not to be dealt with arbitrarily and exercise
of power has to be in reasonable manner with objectivity having due regard to facts of
cases.
36. What yardstick is to be applied has to depend upon the nature of post, higher post
would involve more rigorous criteria for all services, not only to uniformed service.
For lower posts which are not sensitive, nature of duties, impact of suppression on
suitability has to be considered by authorities concerned considering post/nature of
duties/services and power has to be exercised on due consideration of various
aspects.
37. The "McCarthyism" is antithesis to constitutional goal, chance of reformation has
to be afforded to young offenders in suitable cases, interplay of reformative theory
cannot be ruled out in toto nor can be generally applied but is one of the factors to be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 6
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
taken into consideration while exercising the power for cancelling candidature or
discharging an employee from service.
38. We have noticed various decisions and tried to explain and reconcile them as far
as possible. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we summarise our conclusion thus:
38.1. Information given to the employer by a candidate as to conviction, acquittal or
arrest, or pendency of a criminal case, whether before or after entering into service
must be true and there should be no suppression or false mention of required
information.
38.2. While passing order of termination of services or cancellation of candidature for
giving false information, the employer may take notice of special circumstances of the
case, if any, while giving such information.
38.3. The employer shall take into consideration the government
orders/instructions/rules, applicable to the employee, at the time of taking the
decision.
38.4. In case there is suppression or false information of involvement in a criminal
case where conviction or acquittal had already been recorded before filling of the
application/verification form and such fact later comes to knowledge of employer,
any of the following recourses appropriate to the case may be adopted:
38.4.1. In a case trivial in nature in which conviction had been recorded, such as
shouting slogans at young age or for a petty offence which if disclosed would not have
rendered an incumbent unfit for post in question, the employer may, in its discretion,
ignore such suppression of fact or false information by condoning the lapse.
38.4.2. Where conviction has been recorded in case which is not trivial in nature,
employer may cancel candidature or terminate services of the employee.
38.4.3. If acquittal had already been recorded in a case involving moral turpitude or
offence of heinous/serious nature, on technical ground and it is not a case of clean
acquittal, or benefit of reasonable doubt has been given, the employer may consider
all relevant facts available as to antecedents, and may take appropriate decision as to
the continuance of the employee.
38.5. In a case where the employee has made declaration truthfully of a concluded
criminal case, the employer still has the right to consider antecedents, and cannot be
compelled to appoint the candidate.
38.6. In case when fact has been truthfully declared in character verification form
regarding pendency of a criminal case of trivial nature, employer, in facts and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 7
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
circumstances of the case, in its discretion, may appoint the candidate subject to
decision of such case.
38.7. In a case of deliberate suppression of fact with respect to multiple pending cases
such false information by itself will assume significance and an employer may pass
appropriate order cancelling candidature or terminating services as appointment of a
person against whom multiple criminal cases were pending may not be proper.
38.8. If criminal case was pending but not known to the candidate at the time of
filling the form, still it may have adverse impact and the appointing authority would
take decision after considering the seriousness of the crime.
38.9. In case the employee is confirmed in service, holding departmental enquiry
would be necessary before passing order of termination/removal or dismissal on the
ground of suppression or submitting false information in verification form.
38.10. For determining suppression or false information attestation/verification form
has to be specific, not vague. Only such information which was required to be
specifically mentioned has to be disclosed. If information not asked for but is relevant
comes to knowledge of the employer the same can be considered in an objective
manner while addressing the question of fitness. However, in such cases action
cannot be taken on basis of suppression or submitting false information as to a fact
which was not even asked for.
38.11. Before a person is held guilty of suppressio veri or suggestio falsi, knowledge of
the fact must be attributable to him."
19. No doubt, upon a reading of what has been remarked in paragraph No.33 and sub-para (9) of
paragraph No.38 of Avtar Singh, it would seem that holding a departmental inquiry is imperative
before an order of termination, removal or dismissal is passed against a public servant on the
ground of suppression or submitting false information in the verification form, if the employee has
been confirmed in service. But, the holding in Avtar Singh has to be understood in the context of
facts and the issue, in regard to which principles there were laid down. It is a principle too well
settled to brook doubt that a judgment is a precedent for what it actually decides. A fortiori, the
principles laid down in a judgment have to be understood in the context of facts and the controversy
involved, giving rise to the lis.
20. The three Judge Bench of their Lordships in Avtar Singh had before them a conflicting opinion
of two Judge Division Benches, that were referred for authoritative pronouncement by the Division
Bench in Jainendra Singh v. State of U.P., (2012) 8 SCC 748. The Division Bench in Jainendra Singh
(supra) had noted divided opinion amongst various Division Benches, comprising two Judges of the
Supreme Court on the question, if 'suppression of information or submitting false information in the
verification form as to the question of having been criminally prosecuted, arrested or as to pendency
of a criminal case', would have on the rights of an employee appointed to government service. It was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 8
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
in the context of the said question and conflicting opinion that the three Judge Bench of their
Lordships in Avtar Singh laid down the principles noted above. It is, therefore, evident that the
principles in Avtar Singh have been culled out in the context of suppression or the furnishing of false
information at the time of recruitment by a government servant upon his right to continue in
service, once facts are discovered. These have no application to a case, that is founded purely on a
charge of securing employment fraudulently by a candidate on the basis of forged educational
qualifications, governing eligibility, or so to speak, essential qualifications. In our opinion, therefore,
reliance placed by the petitioner on the principles in Avtar Singh would not be of much help to him.
21. The learned Counsel for the petitioner has reposed faith in the Bench decision of this Court in
Parmi Maurya (supra). He has drawn the Court's attention to paragraphs Nos.7, 9 and 10 of the
report in Parmi Maurya. These read:
"7. On these facts, the learned Single Judge, in our view, was clearly in error in
arrogating to the Court the task of determining whether the certificate and mark
sheets submitted by the appellant were genuine or otherwise. This, with respect, was
no part of the jurisdiction of the writ Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
When a substantive charge of misconduct is levied against an employee of the State,
the misconduct has to be proved in the course of a disciplinary inquiry. This is not
one of those cases where a departmental inquiry was dispensed with or that the
ground for dispensing with such an inquiry was made out. The U.P. Government
Servants (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, 1999 lays down a detailed procedure in Rule
7 for imposing a major penalty. Admittedly, no procedure of that kind was followed
since no disciplinary inquiry was convened or held.
9. The facts of the present case are, therefore, clearly distinguishable. The charge of
misconduct has to be duly established. Since no disciplinary inquiry was held, the
charge was never proved.
10. In this view of the matter, we are of the view that the judgement and order of the
learned Single Judge is unsustainable and the special appeal would have to be
allowed. We, accordingly, allow the special appeal in terms of the following
directions:
(i) The judgement of the learned Single Judge dated 24 September 2013 is quashed
and set aside;
(ii) In consequence, the order of termination dated 30 November 2010 shall stand
quashed and;
(iii) The respondents shall be at liberty to hold a departmental inquiry in respect of
the allegation of misconduct and take necessary action thereafter as may be
warranted in accordance with law."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 9
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
22. It is no doubt true that upon reading the facts in Parmi Maurya, it does seem that the principle
there comes close to the point that arises here, but Parmi Maurya was a case after which the
principle has received attention of the Supreme Court, that may not at all endorse Parmi Maurya.
The issue was examined by this Court in Narendra Kumar Tripathi v. State of U.P. and others, 2021
(1) ADJ 654, and after an elaborate reference to Punjab Urban Planning & Development Authority v.
Karamjit Singh, (2019) 16 SCC 782, this Court held:
"13. It is thus manifest that it has been the consistent view of our Courts that where
the appointment is alleged to have been secured by fraud or misrepresentation, the
normal rules governing the conduct of disciplinary proceedings were not liable to be
followed. This since the termination in such a situation is not on account of a
misconduct committed during the course of employment. All that is required in such
a situation is to place the employee on notice and comply with the fundamental
principles of natural justice.
14. Parmi Maurya was a case where the charge of fabrication was seriously disputed
and challenged by the employee who had also not been provided access to the
material on the basis of which that charge was sought to be established. It becomes
pertinent to recollect that contrary to the above, the petitioner here does not dispute
the charge of fabrication. The decision is thus clearly distinguishable and does not
come to the aid of the petitioner. The decision in Abhiram merely follows the
aforesaid decision without noticing the other decisions of this Court as well as the
Supreme Court which have consistently held to the contrary and in unequivocal
terms laid down the law to be that a regular departmental enquiry is not liable to be
drawn where the initial appointment has been obtained by practise of fraud and is
thus void and non-est. This of course subject to the caveat and as held herein above,
that the rudimentary principles of natural justice must necessarily be adhere to and
followed."
23. We must remark that Parmi Maurya was a case, where the charge of fabrication was seriously
disputed and challenged by the employee, whereas in Narendra Kumar Tripathi (supra), the charge
of fabrication was described by the Court as not disputed. It was one of the parameters on which
Parmi Maurya was held not to apply in the case of Narendra Kumar Tripathi. Of course, it was held
also not applicable when followed in Abhiram (supra) for reason that Abhiram had followed Parmi
Maurya without noticing other decisions of this Court and the Supreme Court, where a contrary
view was taken. It must also be remarked here that though the petitioner in this case, unlike
Narendra Kumar Tripathi, disputes the charge of his 'O' level computer certificate being forged, but
the denial is one that is there for a formality.
24. We say so because the petitioner does not dispute the document, which he says is a certificate of
an 'O' level in computers, earned from the University of Kolkatta, as he says, and also does not
dispute the genuineness of the verification report dated 26.09.2023, secured by the respondents
from the University of Calcutta, disowning the petitioner's 'O' level certificate in computers. The
petitioner, if he wanted, could have disputed the verification report by producing a report to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 10
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
contrary from the University of Calcutta, affirming the certificate of 'O' level in computers, on which
he relies to support his candidature. If this were the case, the matter might have then been one
involving sufficient dispute on facts about the charge as would oblige the respondents in case of a
confirmed employee, like the petitioner, to hold disciplinary proceedings. This is a case where the
fraud and forgery are hardly denied and both are apparent to the face.
25. We have perused the photostat copy of the 'O' level computer certificate, on which the petitioner
relies and annexed as Annexure No.1 to the affidavit filed by the Director, Internal Account and
Audit, Directorate, U.P., Lucknow, in reply to the show cause. The certificate is mentioned in
paragraph No.8 of the affidavit aforesaid by the Director. The petitioner has filed a counter affidavit
to this affidavit filed by the Director. In paragraph No.7 of the counter affidavit filed by the
petitioner, the contents of paragraph Nos.7 to 11 of the Director's affidavit (in reply to the show
cause) have been answered. It is said that all these paragraphs are wrong, incorrect and denied, but
the averments there do not at all say that the document annexed as Annexure No.1 to the Director's
affidavit is not the 'O' level computer certificate, upon which the petitioner relies to found his
candidature. All that is said is that the petitioner did his 'O' level computer course from the
Technical Institute after studying at the said institute from 10.07.2012 to 05.08.2013. He has
annexed, along with his counter affidavit, a true copy of the identity card issued by the Technical
Institute and a copy of the certificate also granted by the same Institute. Thus, for a fact, the
document annexed as Annexure No.1, being the certificate relating to 'O' level in computers dated
22.08.2013, upon which the petitioner relied before the respondents to support his candidature, is
not denied.
26. We have also looked into the certificate issued by the Technical Institute, where the petitioner
says, he read for a year to earn the aforesaid certificate from the University of Kolkatta. It is a
photostat copy of the certificate dated 15.03.2022. The letterhead of the Technical Institute on its
face does not show it to be affiliated to the University of Calcutta and the contents thereof saying
that the petitioner studied at the Institute are written by hand. Not to say that a hand written
certificate cannot be issued by an authorized and authentic educational institute, but ex facie a look
at the certificate does not inspire confidence at all that the Technical Institute has anything to do
with the University of Calcutta. The certificate of 'O' level in computers, upon which the petitioner
has relied, reads at the top of it "UNIVERSITY of Kolkatta WITH INDIAN TECHNICAL INSTITUTE
(An Autonomous Scientific Society of Department of Information Technology Ministry of
Communication and Information Technology, Government of India for Accreditation of Computer
Courses under the (AICTE-DIT Scheme). On the left side at the top of this certificate is the
University's monogram, describing it as 'University of Calcutta' and the monogram by the rest of its
content and design is the same as that used by the University of Calcutta. But, at the top, the
University is described as the 'University of Kolkatta'. The University of Calcutta in none of its
papers or websites describes itself as the University of Kolkatta. These are stark facts, which show ex
facie the certificate to be the product of forgery. In addition, the way the certificate describes it to
have been issued by the University of Kolkatta with the Technical Institute, which does not mention
where this Technical Institute is located, makes the inference of forgery inescapable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 11
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
27. Then there are other irresponsible things written on the head of the certificate, reproduced
hereinabove. It describes the Technical Institute as an Autonomous Scientific Society of Department
of Information Technology, Ministry of Communication and Information Technology, Government
of India for Accreditation of Computer Courses under the (AICTE-DIT Scheme). There is nothing to
show that this Institute is anyway an Autonomous Scientific Society of the Department of
Information Technology etc. of the Government of India. Nothing has been shown to the Court that
the Government of India would have anything to do with an Autonomous Scientific Society, like the
one, called the Technical Institute. The letterhead, on which the certificate dated 15.03.2022 has
been issued to the petitioner, does not show anything about the nature of the organization that the
Technical Institute is. It is not said there that it is affiliated to the University of Calcutta or that it is
an Autonomous Scientific Society under the Department of Information Technology.
28. Coming back to the 'O' level certificate in computers, relied upon by the petitioner dated
22.08.2013, issued by the University of Kolkatta, it is shown to be signed by the 'Controller of
Examination, Kolkatta'. It does not even say that it is signed by the Controller of Examination,
University of Calcutta. It is signed together by the Executive Director of the Technical Institute.
These are telltale matters, which ex facie show the 'O' level certificate in computers, relied upon by
the petitioner, a product of forgery. We say that the document is forged, because it is purported to
have been issued by the University of Calcutta, signed by the Controller of Examination of the said
University, when in fact it is not. This is what precisely makes the document forged. The clincher
comes when we look at memo No. CE/Dip/Veri/11348/2023 dated 26.09.2023 issued by the Deputy
Controller of Examinations, University of Calcutta. This is a memo that was issued by the University
of Calcutta in answer to a query by the Director, Internal Account and Audit, Directorate, U.P., if the
petitioner's 'O' level certificate in computers was granted by the University. The unequivocal answer,
albeit in a prescribed proforma is that the document submitted was not issued by the University of
Calcutta. There is, therefore, hardly any kind of doubt that the petitioner's candidature is based on
an utterly forged document, relating to an essential qualification for appointment. The petitioner's
appointment is, therefore, beset by fraud.
29. Now, the question, if an employee, who has been confirmed in service, but found to have secured
his appointment by practice of fraud, relying on forged eligibility certificates, can suffer a
cancellation of appointment without disciplinary proceedings, we think, is sufficiently answered
against the petitioner by this Court in Narendra Kumar Tripathi and the Supreme Court in Karamjit
Singh (supra). An appointment secured by utter fraud, even if the employee has proceeded to
confirmation in service, would not entitle him to the holding of disciplinary proceedings, where the
fraud is apparent and requires no consideration of evidence on both sides to reach a definitive
conclusion. Of course, the employee would be entitled to opportunity to show cause, which in this
case has been given in ample measure. The petitioner was given a show cause notice dated
07.06.2023, to which he submitted his reply on 26.06.2023. A second show cause notice dated
12.10.2023 was issued to the petitioner by the Director, calling upon him to submit his explanation
with regard to the validity of his 'O' level certificate in computers. Therefore, it is not a case where
the petitioner was not given any opportunity to have his say about the case of fraud, vitiating his
appointment, based on the forged eligibility testimonial. In a case of this kind, where the fraud is
apparent, the law would not require regular disciplinary proceedings to be held. After all, in a case
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 12
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
like the present one, the fraud goes to the root of the matter, vitiating the petitioner's very
appointment and his right to hold the post at the inception of service. It is not a case of misconduct
done along the course of his employment. It is nothing to do with service misconduct per se. It is
about the validity of his candidature at the threshold.
30. We are of opinion that in a case like this, even a confirmed employee would not be entitled to
disciplinary proceedings being held against him under the Rules of 1999 that apply here. But, he
would be entitled to show cause and a reasonable opportunity, which has been afforded to the
petitioner in this case. Reference in this connection may be made to Manjul Kumar (supra), which
was a case of an Assistant Teacher, securing employment with the Pt. Dindayal Purva Madhyamik
Vidyalaya, Bitia, Belhar, District Sant Kabir Nagar on the basis of a forged Intermediate Mark-sheet,
a forged B.Sc. Degree and a forged Teachers Eligibility Test certificate. In the context of these facts,
Suneet Kumar, J. remarked:
"11. It follows that when a candidate is found to have put forth a false claim on the
strength of forged and manufactured documents and obtained appointment, it would
be a negation of the rule of law to exercise jurisdiction under Article 226 to protect
that individual. Societal good lies in ensuring probity. That is the only manner in
which the sanctity of the system ran be preserved. The legal system cannot be seen as
an avenue to support those who make untrue claims based on forged educational
documents.
12. The nation cannot live on a lie. Courts play a vital institutional role in preserving
the rule of law. The judicial process should not be allowed to be utilized to protect the
unscrupulous and to preserve the benefits which have accrued to an imposter on the
specious plea of equity. (Refer: Nidhi Kaim v. State of M.P.).1 It is not disputed by the
petitioner that the documents were duly verified by the competent authorities and
the authorities conferring the certificates have certified that the documents relied
upon by the petitioner are forged and manufactured documents. Petitioner in the
circumstances would have no right to continue on the post and receive salary. The
very foundation on which the appointment rests is non-est -- void abinitio. Nothing
further has to be done by the authorities but to discontinue the appointment. In
permitting the petitioner to continue in service and pay salary would perpetuate
fraud and misrepresentation that would be negation of rule of law. Petitioner, his
father (clerk) and the then Basic Education Officer were throughout aware that
petitioner had obtained the appointment by fraud."
31. The same issue arose in the context of an appointment secured through an illegal and void
adoption of the employee in Raj Kumar Saxena v. Basic Shiksha Parishad U.P. and others, 2019 SCC
OnLine All 4256. In the said case, after a survey of much relevant authority on the point, it was held:
"35. On specific query, as to how, the names of biological parents came to be recorded
in the high school and intermediate certificates despite the petitioner having been
adopted at the age of 7 years. Learned counsel for the petitioner placed reliance on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 13
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
the decision rendered by the Single Judge of this Court in Ravindra Kumar v. State of
U.P., to contend that the Board of High School and Intermediate Examination
records the names of the biological parents instead of the adoptive parent in the high
school/and intermediate certificates, therefore, the names of the biological parents
and not the adoptive mother came to be recorded in the certificates. The facts
obtaining in Ravindra Kumar (supra) is distinguishable. The deed of adoption was a
registered deed and a valid deed; the petitioner, therein, had approached the Board
for correction of the certificate which was declined by the Board in absence of rules
permitting such correction. This is not the case in the instant case. The deed of
adoption is invalid and unenforceable in law.
36. The plea on the face of it is untenable for the reason that the petitioner as per his
own case was adopted at the age of 7 years and in view of the Section 12 of the Act,
1956, the adopted child for all purposes shall be deemed to be the child of his
adoptive parent. However, the name of the adoptive mother does not find recorded in
either of the certificates (class 10 and 12). Nor does such a reference finds in the
Parivar Register prepared under U.P. Panchayat Raj (Maintenance of Family
Register) Rule, 1970. It therefore, follows that until taking the examination of class
12, the alleged adoption deed had not seen the light of day. It was an after thought to
get an unregistered adoption deed executed for the purposes of obtaining
compassionate appointment. The State Amendments came to be inserted in Act, 1956
and Act, 1908 to avoid such fraud and misrepresentation on the basis of such
document.
37. It follows from the position in law that where an appointment has been obtained
on fraud and misrepresentation on the strength of a manufactured document which
is the basis of the appointment, such an appointment is void and nonest since
inception. The consequence upon recording a finding that the document is nonest is
discontinuance of such appointment. It is not a case of commission of misconduct
during the course of appointment inviting imposition of major penalty under the
Service Rules."
(emphasis by Court)
32. To like effect is the holding of this Court in Narendra Kumar Gond v. State of U.P. through
Secretary (Basic Education) and others, 2018 SCC OnLine All 5716, where it was held:
"10. The contention of the petitioner that disciplinary proceedings should have been
held in th matter and as this has not been done the impugned order is vitiated, is not
tenable in law for the reason the factum of employment of petitioner's mother at the
time of his father's death and the petitioner's compassionate appointment is
undisputed and secondly, in view of the provisions contained in the appointment
letter itself and even otherwise in the facts of the case it is the appointment which has
been cancelled for the reasons disclosed hereinabove, rightly so, after giving due
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 14
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
opportunity of hearing to the petitioner which cannot be faulted and also as it is not a
case of misconduct having been committed during the course of service but it is a
case of cancellation of his appointment on the ground that the same was obtained by
misrepresentation/concealment and incorrect facts. In the case of R. Vishwanatha
Pillai (supra) also the Supreme court itself was in agreement that a full-fledged
inquiry in view of provisions of Article 311 of the Constitution was not required in
such matters by holding as under:--
"Para-15. This apart, the appellant obtained the appointment in the service on the
basis that he belonged to a Scheduled Caste community. When it was found by the
Scrutiny Committee that he did not belong to the Scheduled Caste community, then
the very basis of his appointment was taken away. His appointment was no
appointment in the eyes of law. He cannot claim a right to the post as he had usurped
the post meant for a reserved candidate by playing a fraud and producing a false caste
certificate. Unless the appellant can lay a claim to the post on the basis of his
appointment he cannot claim the constitutional guarantee given under the Article 311
of the Constitution. As he had obtained the appointment on the basis of a false caste
certificate he cannot be considered to be a person who holds a post within the
meaning of Article 311 of the Constitution of India. Finding recorded by the Scrutiny
Committee that the appellant got the appointment on the basis of false caste
certificate has become final. The position, therefore, is that the appellant has usurped
the post which should have gone to a member of the Scheduled Caste. In view of the
finding recorded by the Scrutiny Committee and upheld upto this Court he has
disqualified himself to hold the post. Appointment was void from its inception. It
cannot be said that the said void appointment would enable the appellant to claim
that he was holding a civil post within the meaning of Article 311 of the Constitution
of India. As appellant had obtained the appointment by playing a fraud he cannot be
allowed to take advantage of his own fraud in entering the service and claim that he
was holder of the post entitled to be dealt with in terms of Article 311 of the
Constitution of India or the Rules framed thereunder. Where an appointment in a
service has been acquired by practising fraud or deceit such an appointment is no
appointment in law, in service and in such a situation Article 311 of the Constitution
is not attracted at all.
Para-16. In Ishwar Dayal Sah v. State of Bihar, 1987 Lab.I.C. 390, the Division Bench
of the Patna High Court examined the point as to whether a person who obtained the
appointment on the basis of a false caste certificate was entitled to the protection of
Article 311 of the Constitution. In the said case the employee had obtained
appointment by producing a caste certificate that he belonged to a Scheduled Caste
community which later on was found to be false. His appointment was cancelled. It
was contended by the employee that the cancellation of his appointment amounted to
removal from service within the meaning of Article 311 of the Constitution and
therefore void. It was contended that he could not be terminated from service without
holding departmental inquiry as provided under the Rules. Dealing with the above
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 15
Nagendra Kumar vs State Of Up And 7 Others on 1 April, 2025
contention, the High Court held that if the very appointment to the civil post is
vitiated by fraud, forgery or crime or illegality, it would necessarily follow that no
constitutional rights under Article 311 of the Constitution can possibly flow. It was
held:
"If the very appointment to civil post is vitiated by fraud, forgery or crime or
illegality, it would necessarily follow that no constitutional rights under Article 311
can possible flow from such a tainted force. In such a situation, the question is
whether the person concerned is at all a civil servant of the Union or the State and if
he is not validly so, then the issue remains outside the purview of Art. 311. If the very
entry or the crossing of the threshold into the arena of the civil service of the State or
the Union is put in issue and door is barred against him, the cloak of protection
under Art. 311 is not attracted.""
33. In view of all that has been said, no case for interference with the impugned orders is made out.
34. In the result, this writ petition fails and is dismissed.
35. The interim order dated 12.08.2024 is hereby vacated.
Order Date :- 01.04.2025 Anoop (J.J. Munir) Judge
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5900068/ 16
