Nainsi Singh And 3 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 30 April, 2025
Nainsi Singh And 3 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 30
April, 2025
Author: Mahesh Chandra Tripathi
Bench: Mahesh Chandra Tripathi
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:67195-DB
Court No. - 42
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. WRIT PETITION No. - 7918 of 2025
Petitioner :- Nainsi Singh And 3 Others
Respondent :- State Of Up And 2 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Sarvesh
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Hon'ble Mahesh Chandra Tripathi,J.
Hon'ble Anil Kumar-X,J.
1. Heard Sri Sarvesh, learned counsel for the petitioners and learned Additional Government
Advocate representing the State-respondents.
2. The present writ petition has been filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India, wherein
the petitioners have challenged the legality, propriety, and validity of the impugned First
Information Report dated 02.1.2025, registered as Case Crime No.01 of 2025, under Sections 85, 115
(2), 352, 351 (2) of B.N.S., 2023 and Section 3/4 of D.P. Act, P.S. Shivrajpur, District Kanpur Nagar.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/33293128/ 1
Nainsi Singh And 3 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 30 April, 2025
The petitioners have further prayed for issuance of a direction restraining the police authorities
from effecting their arrest pursuant to the aforesaid impugned F.I.R.
3. Learned counsel for the petitioners has submitted that the F.I.R. in question is founded upon false
and frivolous allegations, and even if the entire contents of the F.I.R. are taken on their face value,
no offence is made out against the petitioners. He further contends that the alleged offence under
said Sections, is punishable with imprisonment for a term of seven years or less, and as such, the
procedural safeguards enshrined under Section 41-A of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973 (now
replaced by Sections 35 and 35(3) of the B.N.S.S., 2023) are squarely attracted. It is, therefore,
incumbent upon the police authorities to act in strict compliance with the said statutory provisions
before taking any coercive action against the petitioners.
4. In this context, it is pertinent to refer to the landmark judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Arnesh Kumar vs. State of Bihar, reported in (2014) 8 SCC 273, wherein the Apex Court, while
expressing concern over routine and mechanical arrests in offences punishable with imprisonment
up to seven years, laid down binding directions to safeguard the rights of the accused and to ensure
that the liberty of citizens is not curtailed without due cause. The Hon'ble Supreme Court observed
as under:
"Our endeavour in this judgment is to ensure that police officers do not arrest
accused unnecessarily and Magistrate do not authorize detention casually and
mechanically. In order to ensure what we have observed above, we give the following
direction:
All the State Governments to instruct its police officers not to automatically arrest
when a case under Section 498-A of the IPC is registered but to satisfy themselves
about the necessity for arrest under the parameters laid down above flowing from
Section 41 Cr.P.C.;
All police officers be provided with a check list containing specified sub- clauses
under Section 41(1)(b)(ii);
The police officer shall forward the check list duly filed and furnish the reasons and
materials which necessitated the arrest, while forwarding/producing the accused
before the Magistrate for further detention;
The Magistrate while authorizing detention of the accused shall peruse the report
furnished by the police officer in terms aforesaid and only after recording its
satisfaction, the Magistrate will authorize detention;
The decision not to arrest an accused, be forwarded to the Magistrate within two
weeks from the date of the institution of the case with a copy to the Magistrate which
may be extended by the Superintendent of police of the district for the reasons to be
recorded in writing;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/33293128/ 2
Nainsi Singh And 3 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 30 April, 2025
Notice of appearance in terms of Section 41A of Cr.PC be served on the accused
within two weeks from the date of institution of the case, which may be extended by
the Superintendent of Police of the District for the reasons to be recorded in writing;
Failure to comply with the directions aforesaid shall apart from rendering the police
officers concerned liable for departmental action, he shall also be liable to be
punished for contempt of court to be instituted before High Court having territorial
jurisdiction.
Authorizing detention without recording reasons as aforesaid by the judicial
Magistrate concerned shall be liable for departmental action by the appropriate High
Court.
We hasten to add that the directions aforesaid shall not only apply to the cases under
Section 498-A of the I.P.C. or Section 4 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, the case in
hand, but also such cases where offence is punishable with imprisonment for a term
which may be less than seven years or which may extend to seven years; whether with
or without fine."
5. The said principles and directions have been recently reaffirmed and reiterated by the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in Md. Asfak Alam vs. State of Jharkhand & another, Criminal Appeal No. 2207 of
2023, decided on 31.07.2023, wherein the Court reiterated the binding nature of the guidelines laid
down in Arnesh Kumar (supra), emphasizing their continued applicability in similarly situated
cases.
6. This Court has carefully perused the contents of the impugned F.I.R. and is of the considered
opinion that, at this stage, it does disclose commission of a cognizable offence. Hence, in light of the
authoritative pronouncements of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in State of Haryana & Others vs.
Bhajan Lal & Others, 1992 Supp. (1) SCC 335; Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of
Maharashtra, AIR 2021 SC 1918; and Leelavati Devi @ Leelawati & Another vs. State of U.P., Special
Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No. 3262/2021 decided on 07.10.2021, the prayer of the petitioners seeking
quashing of the F.I.R. at the threshold stage cannot be acceded to.
7. Nonetheless, considering the nature of the allegations, the punishment prescribed, and the law
laid down in the decisions of Arnesh Kumar and Md. Asfak Alam (supra), this Court deems it
appropriate to direct that the Investigating Officer shall proceed strictly in accordance with law. In
particular, before taking any coercive action such as arrest, the Investigating Officer shall
mandatorily issue a notice under Sections 35 and 35(3) of the B.N.S.S., 2023 (which correspond to
the erstwhile Section 41-A Cr.P.C.) and afford an opportunity to the petitioners to participate in the
investigation. The petitioners, on their part, shall extend full cooperation in the ongoing
investigation and shall appear before the Investigating Officer as and when required.
8. It is further clarified that in the event the Investigating Officer, during the course of investigation,
collects credible evidence and materials necessitating arrest, then he shall be at liberty to take
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/33293128/ 3
Nainsi Singh And 3 Others vs State Of Up And 2 Others on 30 April, 2025
appropriate steps, including arrest of the petitioners, after recording cogent reasons for the same in
writing. However, such action must be taken strictly in adherence to the procedural safeguards and
guidelines laid down by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Arnesh Kumar and Md. Asfak Alam (supra).
Furthermore, it is expected of the Investigating Officer that the investigation in the present case
shall be concluded expeditiously, preferably within a period of 60 days from today, and a police
report under Section 193(3) of the B.N.S.S., 2023 (corresponding to Section 173(2) Cr.P.C.) shall be
submitted before the jurisdictional Magistrate within the said timeframe.
9. With the aforesaid directions and observations, the instant writ petition is disposed of.
(Anil Kumar-X, J.) (Mahesh Chandra Tripathi, J.) Order Date :- 30.4.2025 RKP
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/33293128/ 4
