Nandini Nagar Post Graduate College, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Higher ... on 1 May, 2025
Nandini Nagar Post Graduate College, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru.
Prin. Secy. Higher ... on 1 May, 2025
Author: Rajan Roy
Bench: Rajan Roy
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
High Court of Judicature at Allahabad
(Lucknow)
**********
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:24959-DB
Reserved on: 15.04.2025
Delivered on: 01.05.2025
Court No. - 2
Case :- WRIT - C No. - 3205 of 2025
Petitioner :- Nandini Nagar Post Graduate College, Gonda Thru. Authorized Representative, Manager
Respondent :- State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Higher Education, Lko. And 3 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Mohd Tanveer Raza
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.,Akhilesh Kumar Srivastava,Sanjeev Kumar Srivastava
Hon'ble Rajan Roy,J.
Hon'ble Om Prakash Shukla,J.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80711758/ 1
Nandini Nagar Post Graduate College, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Higher ... on 1 May, 2025
(Per: Rajan Roy, J.) (1) Heard.
(2) By means of this petition, the petitioner has challenged vires of U.P. State Universities
(Amendment) Act, 2023 as notified on 08.12.2023.
(3) During hearing learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that challenge was confined to
Section 5 of the amending Act by which amendments have been made to the Schedule of the U.P.
State Universities Act, 1973 (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act, 1973') specifically at Sl. No.6 by
which certain districts have been added in the territorial jurisdiction of the newly established Maa
Pateshwari Devi State University, Balrampur such as Ambedkar Nagar, Ayodhya, Barabanki and
Sultanpur.
(4) Petitioner is a post-graduate non-aided college situated in District-Gonda. It was affiliated to Dr.
Ram Monohar Lohia Avadh University, Ayodhya but by means of the aforesaid amendment in the
Schedule of the Act, 1973, now, the college falls within the territorial jurisdiction of Maa Pateshwari
Devi State University, Balrampur and the grievance is that it does not want to be de-affiliated from
Dr. Ram Monohar Lohia Avadh University, Ayodhya and affiliated with the newly established
university.
(5) The submission of learned counsel for the petitioner was that there is no provision for
de-affiliation. Secondly, the amendment violates rights of the petitioner under Article 19(1)(g) of the
Constitution of India. Thirdly, Section 7 of the Act, 1973 does not contain any power of de-affiliation
nor does Section 37(8) and (9). No opportunity of hearing or notice was given prior to the
amendment. Therefore, the amendment violates rights of the petitioner to continue to be affiliated
with Dr. Ram Monohar Lohia Avadh University, Ayodhya.
(6) Learned Standing Counsel has invited our attention to para no.21 of the writ petition wherein it
has been stated, inter alia, that the petitioner does not wish to seek quashment of notification dated
08.12.2023 for creation of new university i.e. opposite party no.3 but the petitioner has serious
greivance so far as de-affiliation of the petitioner's college from opposite party no.2-University is
concerned without the consent of petitioner-college and without following any provisions
established by law and rules framed in this regard. The contention is that in the pleadings it is said
that it does not want quashment of the notification whereas in the relief clause, as amended,
petitioner-college has prayed for mandamus declaring the said notification to be ultra vires the
Constitution. Therefore, the pleading is incongruous with the relief claimed.
(7) On being confronted, learned counsel for the petitioner submitted that he does not wish to
challenge the entire notification but only that part is sought to be assailed by which the Schedule to
the Act, 1973 referable to Section 3 thereof has been amended.
(8) We do not wish to enter into this controversy for the reason that none of the grounds raised in
the writ petition and argued before us by learned counsel for the petitioner pursuade us to declare
the impugned amendment as ultra vires.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80711758/ 2
Nandini Nagar Post Graduate College, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Higher ... on 1 May, 2025
(9) Article 19(1)(g) of the Constitution of India confers a right upon citizens to practise any
profession, or to carry on any occupation, trade or business. Sub-Section(6) of Article 19 provides
that nothing in sub-clause (g) of the said clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far
as it imposes, or prevent the State from making any law imposing, in the interests of the general
public, reasonable restrictions on the exercise of the right conferred by the said sub-clause, and, in
particular, nothing in the said sub-clause shall affect the operation of any existing law in so far as it
relates to, or prevent the State from making any law relating to the professional or technical
qualifications necessary for practising any profession or carrying on any occupation, trade or
business; or the carrying on by the State, or by a corporation owned or controlled by the State, of
any trade, business, industry or service, whether to the exclusion, complete or partial, of citizens or
otherwise.
(10) Now, the Act, 1973 is a State enactment which the State Legislature is competent to enact and it
is not the case of the petitioner that the legal position is otherwise. The said Act was promulgated to
amend and consolidate the law relating to certain universities. Section 5 relates to territorial
exercise of powers by the universities etc and sub-Section (1) thereof provides that Save as otherwise
provided by or under this Act, the powers conferred on each University (other than the
Sampurnanand Sanskrit Vishvavidyalaya) shall be exercisable in respect of the area for the time
being specified against it in the Schedule. Section 7 of the Act, 1973 deals with powers and duties of
the University. Sub-Section (2) thereof empowers a university under the Act, 1973 to admit any
college to the privileges of affiliation or re-cognition or, to enlarge the privileges of any college
already affiliated or recognized, as the case may be, or to withdraw or curtail any such privilege and
to guide and control the work of affiliated and associated colleges. Section 37 of the said Act relates
to affiliated colleges. Sub-Section (8) thereof empowers the university to withdraw or curtail
affiliation granted to any college for the reasons and terms mentioned therein. Likewise, the
Vice-Chancellor has been conferred such powers under sub-Section (9).
(11) The Schedule to the Act, 1973 read conjointly with Section (5) defines the territorial jurisdiction
of the university within the bounds of which it exercises its powers under Section 7 and 37 etc of the
Act, 1973.
(12) The power to affiliate also includes power to curtail or withdraw the affiliation and in fact, a
specific provision is contained in this regard in sub-Sections (8) and (9) of Section 37 of the Act,
1973.
(13) The amendment in the Schedule does not vest the university with the power of withdrawal or
curtailment but that is vested in it under sub-Sections (8) and (9) of Section 37 as already discussed,
therefore, there is a misconception in the mind of the petitioner that the amendment makes a
provision for de-affiliation, which is not the case. All that the amendment does is, it redistributes the
territorial jurisdiction of the universities under Section 5 of the Act, 1973 by taking out certain
districts from the territorial jurisdiction of Dr. Ram Monohar Lohia Avadh University, Ayodhya and
including it in the jurisdiction of newly established Maa Pateshwari Devi State University,
Balrampur. As a consequence of the aforesaid amendment, the petitioner which was earlier
affiliated with Dr. Ram Monohar Lohia Avadh University, Ayodhya will now be treated as affiliated
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80711758/ 3
Nandini Nagar Post Graduate College, ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Prin. Secy. Higher ... on 1 May, 2025
with opposite party no.3-Maa Pateshwari Devi State University, Balrampur. The petitioner does not
have any constitutional or legal right to continue to be affiliated with Dr. Ram Monohar Lohia
Avadh University, Ayodhya. In fact, matters of affiliation are governed purely by the statute i.e the
Act, 1973. It is trite that no pre-legislation hearing is required in law unless the Act itself envisages
such a hearing which the Act, 1973 does not. Therefore, all the contention raised by learned counsel
for the petitioner are untenable and cannot form the basis for issuance of any mandamus declaring
the impugned amendment as ultra vires.
(14) The statement of object and reasons for the impugned amendment as contained in Section 5 of
the amending Act, 1973 mentions the vision of Government of Uttar Pradesh of establishing one
state university in each division to provide quality higher education. In pursuance to the aforesaid
goal, opposite party no.3 has been established in Devi Patan division and accordingly, the territorial
jurisdiction has been assigned to the newly constituted Universities including opposite party no.3 by
the impugned amendment.
(15) For all these reasons, the writ petition is misconceived and the same is dismissed.
(Om Prakash Shukla,J.) (Rajan Roy,J.) Order Date :- 01.05.2025 Shanu/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/80711758/ 4
