Nanda Kishore Sahoo vs State Of Odisha And Others ... Opp. ... on 8 January, 2021
Nanda Kishore Sahoo vs State Of Odisha And Others ... Opp. ...
on 8 January, 2021
Author: S.Pujahari
Bench: S.Pujahari
CORAM : HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE S.PUJAHARI
W.P.(C) No.34017 of 2020
Nanda Kishore Sahoo ... Petitioner
- Versus -
State of Odisha and others ... Opp. Parties
ORDER
04. 08.01.2021 In the wake of the pandemic Covid-19, the case is taken up through V.C.
2. Heard, the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the State.
3. The grievance of the petitioner in this case is that the opposite party no.2-Collector, Jajpur
pursuant to an order to have been passed in W.P.(C) No.25640 of 2020 has now taken step for
demolition of his crusher unit though the aforesaid was not ordered in said writ petition and the
order of the writ petition was only to look into the grievance of the petitioner by making an inquiry
on the same and to pass necessary orders in accordance with law. Therefore, the petitioner has come
to this Court seeking protection from demolition of his crusher unit.
4. It is the case of the petitioner that he established a crusher unit in his stitiban land appertaining
to Plot Nos.6436, 6438 and 6439, Khata No.1728 of Mouza- Anjira, Tahasil-Dharmasala,
Dist.-Jajpur, but as in the Hal settlement, the land was wrongly recorded in the name of
Government as forest in Kisam, the petitioner has approached the Board of Revenue to exercise
revisional jurisdiction to correct the record of right, which is still pending. However, in the
meanwhile, a P.I.L., i.e., W.P.(C) No.25640 of 2020 was filed by a person indicating that there is
rampant illegal quarry of stones causing serious impact to environment, damage to the environment
and their property and, as such, the opposite parties therein be directed to stop the same and
compensate the villagers, who have sustained loss in such activities. As such, the order was passed
as aforesaid. Thereafter, the opposite party no.2-the Collector, Jajpur, without giving any due notice
to the petitioner, has taken steps to demolish the crusher units in the locality including that of the
petitioner, which is located in his own land, but wrongly recorded in the name of the Government.
Hence, he filed the writ petition seeking relief as stated earlier.
5. On consent of the learned counsel for the petitioner and the learned counsel for the State, the writ
petition is disposed of at the stage of admission.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169943331/ 1
Nanda Kishore Sahoo vs State Of Odisha And Others ... Opp. ... on 8 January, 2021
6. During the course of hearing, learned counsel for the petitioner submits that though the direction
in the P.I.L. was to the opposite party no.2-Collector, Jajpur and the State Pollution Control Board
to look into the grievance of the petitioner therein regarding illegal operation of the stone quarries
and consequential illegal running of 275 illegal crusher units, but the opposite party no.2-Collector,
Jajpur, without giving a chance of hearing to the petitioner, taking steps to evict him and demolish
his crusher unit. The opposite party no.2- Collector, Jajpur is not authorized to evict much less
demolition the structure, as the same is exclusively within the domain of the Tahasildar under the
O.P.L.E. Act and, as such, without a proceeding under the O.P.L.E. Act, the petitioner is not liable
for eviction from the land in question recorded in the name of the Government, especially when
such recording is disputed and the dispute is subjudice. Therefore, the opposite party
no.2-Collector, Jajpur be prevented not to demolish the crusher unit, particularly when the
petitioner is not running his crusher unit since long, as he has no authority to run the same
presently.
7. In response, learned counsel for the State submits that the opposite party no.2-Collector, Jajpur
has never passed an order for eviction or demolition, but has directed the authority subordinate to
him, i.e., Tahasildar and others to see that the crusher units do not run, as those are responsible for
illegal mining of stones causing environmental hazard. The same was passed pursuant to an order of
this Court in the aforesaid P.I.L. In such premises, the prayer of the petitioner is without any
substance and, as such, the writ petition is liable to be dismissed.
8. To address the contention of the parties, it would be apposite to have a look to the order passed in
the P.I.L. vide W.P.(C) No.25640 of 2020, which reads as thus:-
"Heard learned counsel for the parties by Video Conferencing mode.
The petitioner has filed this writ petition alleging inaction of the State authorities in
not taking cognizance of the complaint with regard to illegal stone quarry (Gangei
Duburi quarry) in Mouza-Lunibara under Tahasil- Dharmasala which is running over
there in violation of law and further seeks for a direction for payment of
compensation to the petitioner for damage caused to the house and in alternative
seeks for a direction to the Tahasildar, Dharmasala, Collector Jajpur and State
Pollution Control Board to cause an enquiry and pass needful order on the
complaint/grievances vide Annexures-3, 4 and 5 respectively within a stipulated
time.
For removal of road metal, which is a minor mineral, the Tahasildar has leased out
Gangei Duburi quarry in Mouza-Lunibara in favour of opposite parties no. 6 and 7,
but the opposite parties no. 6 and 7 by causing illegal stone quarry polluting the
environment in the locality, which causes health hazardous to the local people. The
petitioner, so also the people of the village, submitted their complaint before the
Tahasildar, Dharmasala on 13.08.2020, Collector, Jajpur on 13.08.2020 and State
Pollution Control Board on 27.08.2020 alleging arbitrary and illegal action of the
opposite parties no. 6 and 7, who are operating the quarry. Against inaction of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169943331/ 2
Nanda Kishore Sahoo vs State Of Odisha And Others ... Opp. ... on 8 January, 2021
authority concerned, the petitioner approached this Court by filing this application.
Mr. S.P. Das, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that due to the illegal
mining of the stone quarry, it causes damages to the village and as such, he has relied
upon the photographs, where cracks have been shown in the walls of the houses,
which is severely damaged because of the illegal blasting of the mines. He contended
that though the petitioner moved the Collector, Jajpur, but no action has been taken.
Therefore, the petitioner has approached this Court by filing this application.
Mr. P.K. Parhi, learned Asst. Solicitor General for Union of India-opposite party no.1
contended that the grievance has not been made before the opposite party no.1,
rather the grievance has been made to the State authorities including the State
Pollution Control Board, who are the competent authority to take care of the issue in
question.
Mr. P.P. Mohanty, learned Addl. Government Advocate appearing for State opposite
parties submits that if the grievance has already been made before the authorities
concerned, then the same may be disposed of by the authorities concerned in
accordance with law.
Having heard Mr. S.P. Das, learned counsel for the petitioner, Mr. P.K. Parhi, learned
Asst. Solicitor General for Union of India and Mr. P.P. Mohanty, learned Addl.
Government Advocate appearing for the State opposite parties and after going
through the records it appears that against illegal mining, the petitioner has moved
the Tahasildar, Dharmasala, Collector, Jajpur and State Pollution Control Board by
filing Annexures 3, 4 and 5, but no action has been taken till date. Reliance has
already been placed on the newspaper cutting and also certain photographs, which
have been annexed to the writ petition, which clearly indicates that due to illegal
blasting in the mining there are cracks in the house, causing damages to the locality
and as such, allegation has been made that due to such illegal blasting there is
environment pollution, causing health hazardous to the local people.
In that view of the matter, this Court disposes of this writ petition directing the
Collector-cum-District Magistrate, Jajpur- opposite party no.3 and State Pollution
Control Board- opposite party no.8 to look into the grievance of the petitioner and
after causing an enquiry pass appropriate order in accordance with law.
Mr. S.P. Das, learned counsel for the petitioner contended that he may be granted
liberty to file a fresh representation before the authorities concerned within a period
of fifteen days, which may be considered in accordance with law. If such a
representation is filed, the same shall be considered in accordance with law by the
Collector-cum-District Magistrate, Jajpur- opposite party no.3 and State Pollution
Control Board- opposite party no.8 as expeditiously as possible, preferably within a
period of six weeks.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169943331/ 3
Nanda Kishore Sahoo vs State Of Odisha And Others ... Opp. ... on 8 January, 2021
With the liberty aforesaid, the writ petition stands disposed of."
9. Thereafter, the Collector, Jajpur has also passed the order as follows:-
"24.11.2020 - Whereas, this Misc. Case no.39/2020 has been filed in response to the
order of Hon'ble High Court of Odisha passed in W.P.(C) No.25640 of the year 2020.
Where as, it is been reported that there have been instances of theft of minor mineral
reported in the area of Dharmasala. The process involves illegal mining of the minor
mineral primarily black stone, breaking of big boulders into small chips at crushers
and illegal transportation of both big boulders and small chips.
Where as, based on inputs received from field, the enforcement of various authorities
has been ramped up, but the same is limited, as compared to alleged quantum of
illegal mining.
Where as, it is reported from the field that during enforcement drives the illegal
mining is stopped and resumed at odd hours.
Where as, these minerals are transported through various road networks, with on
field intelligence network keeping an eye on the movement of officials.
Where as, it is found that more than 200 illegal crushers are operating in the area.
Therefore, it is here by ordered that a special team consisting of Tahasildar,
Dharmasala, IIC, Dharmasala, an Officer from Divisional Forest Office, Regional
Officer, State Pollution Control Board and one MVI nominated by RTO will be
formed. This team along with sufficient Police Force to be provided by S.P., Jajpur
will move and close the 275 nos. of illegal crushers operating in Dharmasala (List
enclosed) within 15 days of issue of this order, so as to break the sequence and bring
the process of illegal mining to a halt.
The special team so formed will also keep a vigil on resurfacing of new illegal
crushers and to cover other illegal crushers existing outside the list attached.
Further, the existing practice of enforcement should continue with same vigour
against illegal excavation and illegal transportation."
10. From the order of the opposite party no.2- Collector, Jajpur, it does not transpire that any
eviction or demolition order has been passed, but direction has been given to close the crusher units
running illegally to curb the illegal quarrying of stones in the locality.
Learned counsel for the State has also submitted that since the opposite party no.2- Collector,
Jajpur is not going to demolish the crusher unit or evict the petitioner. The same shall be done by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169943331/ 4
Nanda Kishore Sahoo vs State Of Odisha And Others ... Opp. ... on 8 January, 2021
the Tahasildar in accordance with law. Learned counsel for the petitioner also submits that since the
petitioner is not running the crusher unit, as he has no necessary papers, as such, he be protected.
But, illegally quarrying of stone is attributable to illegal run of crusher unit in the nearby locality and
such stone crusher unit is on impetus for running the same illegal quarrying of stones. However, the
same does not authorize the opposite party no.2- Collector, Jajpur for demolition/eviction of person
having such crusher unit in any Government/private land. Eviction and demolition is within the
domain of the Tahasildar under the O.P.L.E. Act in respect of unauthorized construction/occupation
of Government land. The opposite party no.2-Collector, Jajpur, however, is authorized to take steps
to close the crusher units running illegally is not in dispute.
11. Considering the aforesaid facts and submissions made, this Court dispose of this writ petition
with a direction that no eviction or demolition of the petitioner and his crusher unit shall be made
from the land in question without adhering to the due process of law. But, the same shall not
preclude the opposite party no.2- Collector, Jajpur to take such steps as required to close the crusher
unit running illegally within its jurisdiction, by sealing the same or making the same dysfunctional
by adopting any other suitable method without causing any damage to the crusher unit therein.
Petitioner, however, at liberty to ventilate his grievance, if any, for closure of the crusher unit, if he is
entitled to run the same legally before the opposite party no.2-Collector, Jajpur. If the petitioner
produced necessary documents before the opposite party no.2-Collector, Jajpur that he has
authority to run the crusher unit, then the same shall be taken into consideration and the petitioner
be allowed to run the unit, even if the same is located in a land belonging to Government ownership
of which is in dispute. However, even if such licence/permission is obtained to run the unit, the
same shall not preclude the authority under the O.P.L.E. Act to take steps for eviction and
demolition in the manner known to law.
The parties may utilize the copy of this order as per the High Court's Notice No.4587 dated
25.03.2020.
.......................
S.Pujahari, J.
DA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/169943331/ 5
