Nandini Devi vs The Secretary To Government on 7 December, 2020
Nandini Devi vs The Secretary To Government on 7 December,
2020
Author: S.M.Subramaniam
Bench: S.M.Subramaniam
W.P.(MD)No.7016 of 2011
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED: 07.12.2020
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM
W.P.(MD)No.7016 of 2011
and
M.P(MD)No.1 of 2011
Nandini Devi ... Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Secretary to Government,
Health and Family Welfare Department,
Secretariat,
Chennai.
2.The Deputy Director of Medical
and Rural health Services (Leprosy),
Dindigul District. ... Respondents
PRAYER: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, to issue a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, to call for the
records on the file of the 1st respondent pertaining to its order in
letter No.53994/AD2/2006-2, dated 03.03.2008 and quash the same
and consequently direct the respondents to provide appointment on
compassionate ground.
For Petitioner : Mr.S.C.Herold Singh
For Respondents : Mr.P.Mahendran
Addl.Govt.Pleader
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5138403/ 1
Nandini Devi vs The Secretary To Government on 7 December, 2020
1
http://www.judis.nic.in
(cid:12) W.P.(MD)No.7016 of 2011
ORDER
The Government Order, dated 03.03.2008, is under challenge in the present Writ Petition.
2. The order of rejection of the claim of the writ petitioner for compassionate appointment is issued
on the ground that the application itself is filed after a lapse of about 17 years and therefore, there is
no provision under the scheme of compassionate appointment to extend the benefit of appointment.
3. The father of the writ petitioner Late Murugesan was working in the Department of Rural Health
Services and died on 12.09.1990, while in service. The petitioner states that he was aged about 10
years old at the time of death of her father and therefore, he could not able to approach the
respondents seeking appointment. The family was in penurious circumstances, on account of the
sudden death of the deceased employee. However, the petitioner submitted an application seeking
appointment belatedly on 09.06.1999. Though the petitioner in her affidavit has stated that the
application was submitted in the year 1998, the said http://www.judis.nic.in application submitted
in the proper format has not been enclosed in the typed set of papers filed along with the Writ
Petition. In the absence of any such proper application, the date cannot be trusted upon merely on
the statement. However, even as per the petitioner, she submitted an application after a lapse of 9
years from the date of death of her father. The impugned order has been passed after a lapse of
about 9 years on 03.03.2008.
4. The learned counsel for the petitioner states that there was a ban for appointment and therefore,
the case of the petitioner was not considered and accordingly, the application is to be treated as if
submitted within the time limit and the Writ Petition is to be ordered.
5. The learned Additional Government Pleader appearing on behalf of the respondents opposed the
contention by stating that even as per the petitioner, the first application was submitted after a lapse
of 9 years. Therefore, there was an enormous delay even in filing the application. As per the
Government scheme, the application has to be submitted within a period of three years.
Admittedly, it was not submitted within a period of three years and therefore, the Writ Petition is to
be dismissed.
http://www.judis.nic.in
6. Compassionate appointment is an exception and cannot be claimed as a matter of right.
Enormous delay in submitting an application or the appointment was not considered for a longer
period, then, a factual inference to be drawn by the Courts that the penurious circumstances arose
on account of the sudden demise of the Government employee became vanished. Thus, the very
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5138403/ 2
Nandini Devi vs The Secretary To Government on 7 December, 2020
purpose and object of the scheme of compassionate appointment to mitigate the circumstances is to
be met with. In the absence, it is to be presumed that the family is no more require an appointment.
It is not as if one appointment is to be provided to one legal heir of the deceased employee. The
scheme is otherwise in violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India. Thus, the purpose
of objects as well as the terms and conditions of the scheme are to be scrupulously followed by the
competent Authorities.
7. This Court elaborately considered the principles in the matter of grant of compassionate
appointment in W.P.(MD)No. 20900 of 2015, dated 19.06.2019 and the relevant paragraphs are
extracted hereunder :-
http://www.judis.nic.in “5.This Court is of the considered opinion that the indigent
circumstances of the family must be properly ascertained by the competent
authorities by conducting a detailed enquiry. The very purpose and object of the
scheme of compassionate appointment is to mitigate the circumstances arising on
account of the sudden demise of the deceased Government employee. Thus, the very
scheme is to save the family and not to provide one appointment to one legal heir of
the deceased employee. Therefore, the indigent circumstances, the life style, other
source of income including the quantum of family pension, terminal benefits and
retirement benefits received are all to be thoroughly ascertained by the competent
authorities for the purpose of evaluating the indigent circumstances of the family of
the deceased employee for the purpose of providing appointment on compassionate
ground.
6.On account of increase in the strength of Government employees, there may be
several deaths in various departments. It may not be possible for the Government to
provide large scale appointments through the compassionate appointment schemes.
In the event of expanding the scope of such special http://www.judis.nic.in schemes,
the equality clause is violated and further, the same will result in infringement of
Constitutional rights of other citizen. Thus, the State must be cautious in
implementing such special schemes, which is otherwise in violation of the
recruitment rules in force as well as the Constitutional principles and perspective. It
is brought to the notice of this Court that large number of applications are received by
the Government for the purpose of providing appointment on compassionate ground.
Thus, eligibility criteria, indigent circumstances and the terms and conditions of the
scheme are to be strictly and scrupulously followed by the competent authorities
concerned and there cannot be any compromise in the matter of verifying the facts
and details of the family concerned, so as to arrive a conclusion in respect of the
indigent circumstances and other relevant criteria. In the event of any lapse,
negligence or dereliction of duty in this regard, the same would affect the very
scheme of public appointment under the Constitutional Schemes. Thus, the
authorities must be cautious and the enquiry to be conducted must be transparent
and the appointments are to be made strictly in accordance with the terms and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5138403/ 3
Nandini Devi vs The Secretary To Government on 7 December, 2020
conditions.
http://www.judis.nic.in
7.The Hon'ble Supreme Court also held that the amount of family pension, terminal benefits and
other benefits paid to the spouse of the employee are also to be taken in to account for the purpose
of ascertaining indigent circumstances of the family of the deceased employee. At the outset, the
genuinity of the claim of the legal heirs of the deceased employee is to be ascertained. The very
object of the special scheme is to be protected by defeating the wrongful claims and by not allowing
the legal heirs of the deceased employee to take any undue advantage of such exceptional schemes.
For all these reasons, the overnment must provide compassionate appointment only to the genuine
cases where the family of the deceased employee is badly in need of employment and in distress.
8. This being the consideration to be shown by the competent authorities of the Government, the
circumstances warrants the Government has to mould the policy in such a manner in respect of the
family in distress and not to provide one employment to one family of the deceased employee. In the
event of enlarging the scope, even the opportunity http://www.judis.nic.in for the genuine families
may be denied and there is a possibility that a family genuinely in distress may not get an
opportunity to get the appointment on account of the wrongful appointments, if any to be made
under the scheme of compassionate appointment. Thus, the genuinity and indigent circumstances
are all paramount importance and the same is to be ascertained at the first instance by conducting a
detailed and transparent enquiries. In the event of any lapse, negligence or dereliction of duty on the
part of the authorities competent then the higher officials as well as the Government should take
stringent actions against all those authorities under the Discipline and Appeal Rules.
9.The welfare schemes are to be implemented without infringing the rights of all other citizen under
the constitution. Any welfare scheme affecting or infringing the rights of other citizen are not only
unconstitutional, it infringes the fundamental rights of all other citizen. Any such welfare schemes
cannot provide any undue advantage to any person or to clause of persons, thus the Government is
bound to issue consolidated and comprehensive Instructions / Guidelines / http://www.judis.nic.in
Circular to all the competent authorities of various departments of Government of Tamil Nadu for
the purpose of providing the benefit of the scheme of the compassionate appointment to the legal
heirs of the deceased employee.
10.For the purpose of issuing such consolidated Instructions / Guidelines / Circulars, it is necessary
that this Court should implead the Chief Secretary to the Government only for that limited purpose.
This Court is inclined to suo-moto implead the Chief Secretary to the Government of Tamil Nadu,
Secretariat, Chennai-9 and accordingly, the Registry is directed to implead the Chief Secretary as
fourth respondent in the present writ petition.
11.Compassionate Appointment is an exception. The same cannot be claimed as a matter of legal
right. Equal opportunity in public employment is the Constitutional mandates. Equality clause
enunciated in the Constitutional must be scrupulously followed while undertaking the process of
selection and appointment to all the public force. Lakh and Lakh of young people of this great nation
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5138403/ 4
Nandini Devi vs The Secretary To Government on 7 December, 2020
are burning their midnight lambs for securing http://www.judis.nic.in their public employment. In
the event of expanding the scheme of scope of compassionate appointment, the constitutional rights
of all those common people are not only deprived, they are losing an opportunity for which
otherwise they are entitled under Constitution of India.
12. There are many number of poor families in our great nation wherein not even a single person is
in Government service/ public service. There are many number of families where the fathers are
leading wayward life and not taking care of the family and mothers are struggling to save the
children and the family. Such mothers are in distress even to provide education to her children.
They are struggling and going for job in private houses, companies etc. Under these circumstances,
the Government is obligated to provide equal opportunity to those families, where not even single
person is in Government service. Only in the event of making appointments under the constitutional
schemes, those meritorious candidates from the poor families will get an opportunity to enter into
the Government service. Contrarily, many number of posts if filled up through such special schemes
the opportunities to http://www.judis.nic.in these weaker sector are taken away. Such a situation
should never arises and in that event the State Government is violating the concept of social justice
ensured under the Constitution of India.
13. In the event of expanding the special schemes, the State failed to be a model employer and
further such special employment and schemes are provided in favour of few families by neglecting
the larger sector of the families who are also struggling in our great nation. State being a model
employer, must be cautious in implementing such schemes and provided public employments
strictly under the constitutional schemes and by providing equal opportunity to all the candidates,
who are all aspiring to secure public employment through open competitive process and by rule of
reservation.
14.Compassionate appointment being a special scheme, no selection process is conducted. The rule
of reservation has not been followed. No interview is conducted. No merit assessments are made. If
the public appointments are made in this manner in large scale any prudent man will understand
http://www.judis.nic.in that the efficiency in public administration will undoubtedly come down.
The efficiency in public administration is not only compromised, but it will lead to favouritism and
nepotism.
15. The legal principles in this regard are repeatedly settled by this Court in many number of
judgments, inspite of that, the Government has so far not issued consolidated instructions enabling
the subordinate authorities to follow the rules constitutionally and uniformly, so as to avoid
discriminating, if the persons who are submitting application on compassionate appointment.
16. This Court is of the opinion that consideration for appointment on compassionate ground is to
be construed as violation of Articles 14 and 16 of the Constitution of India and is only in the nature
of concession and therefore does not create a vested right in favour of the claimant. A compassionate
appointment scheme is a non- statutory scheme and is in the form of a concession and it cannot be
claimed as a matter of right by the claimant to be enforced through a writ proceeding. A
compassionate http://www.judis.nic.in appointment is justified when it is granted to provide
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5138403/ 5
Nandini Devi vs The Secretary To Government on 7 December, 2020
immediate succor to the deceased employee. Mere death of a Government employee in his harness,
it does not entitle the family to claim compassionate employment. The competent authority has to
examine the financial condition of the family of the deceased employee and only if it is satisfied that
without providing employment, the family will not be able to meet the crisis, that a job is to be
offered to the eligible member of the family of the deceased employee.”
8. In view of the principles laid down in the Judgment cited supra, the reasons stated in the
impugned order is in consonance with the principles and there is no infirmity as such. Accordingly,
the Writ Petition stands dismissed. No costs. Consequently, the connected miscellaneous petition is
also dismissed.
07.12.2020
Index :Yes / No
Internet :Yes / No
MPK
http://www.judis.nic.in
To
1.The Secretary to Government,
Health and Family Welfare Department, Secretariat, Chennai.
2.The Deputy Director of Medical and Rural health Services (Leprosy), Dindigul District.
http://www.judis.nic.in S.M.SUBRAMANIAM, J.
MPK 07.12.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/5138403/ 6
