Nareshpal vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Nareshpal vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:75
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 36178 of 2023
Applicant :- Nareshpal
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Abhilasha Singh,Ashutosh Yadav,Lal Prabhakar Singh,Mahendra Singh,Shyam Lal
Counsel for Opposite Party :- Arun Kumar,G.A.,Satendra Singh
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Ms. Abhilasha Singh and Sri Mahendra Singh, learned counsels for the applicant and Sri
Satendra Singh, learned counsel for the informant as well as Ms. Ifrah Islam, learned State Law
Officer and perused the record.
3. First and second supplementary affidavits filed by the learned counsel for the applicant today is
taken on record.
4. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 243 of 2023, under Sections 302 I.P.C. and Section 3/25 of
the Arms Act, Police Station Junawai, District Sambhal, during the pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135054307/ 1
Nareshpal vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
5. The FIR was instituted by the informant stating that his father had gone to take care of the corn
crop at his field on 09.07.2023 and has been shot dead by some unknown person in the night at
about 9 p.m. ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT :
6. The applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case and he has nothing to do with the
said offence.
7. The applicant is not named in the FIR. The son of the informant is the scribe of the FIR and the
name of the applicant has subsequently come up stating that he was present at the time of offence at
the place of occurrence.
8. The said allegations are vague as it was pitch dark at the place of occurrence.
9. The applicant has been made an accused on the basis of suspicion only in the statement of other
witnesses who have been roped in later on during the investigation the same day after institution of
the FIR.
10. No person has seen the applicant committing the said crime.
11. False recovery of country made pistol and an empty cartridge has been foisted on the applicant.
12. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity
of the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
13. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since
11.07.2023. The applicant is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail,
he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF INFORMANT :
14. The bail application has been opposed on the ground that it was the applicant only who was at
the place of occurrence at the time of offence, as such it was the duty of the applicant to explain the
circumstances of the murder of the deceased person and the burden of proof lies on him in the light
of Section 106 of the Indian Evidence Act. The recovery of country made pistol along with an empty
cartridge has been made at the pointing out of the applicant, as such he is not entitled for bail.
CONCLUSION:
15. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
16. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135054307/ 2
Nareshpal vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
17. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
18. Learned State Law Officer could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would
warrant denial of bail to the applicant.
19. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned State Law Officer.
20. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
21. Let the applicant- Nareshpal involved in aforementioned case crime number be released on bail
on furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the
court concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance
with law.
22. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
23. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135054307/ 3
Nareshpal vs State Of U.P. on 2 January, 2025
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 Sumit S (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/135054307/ 4
