National Insurance Company Limited vs Naseema Begum And Others on 21 August, 2025
National Insurance Company Limited vs Naseema Begum And
Others on 21 August, 2025
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
...
RP no.42/2021
Pronounced on: 21.08.2025
National Insurance Company Limited
.......Appellant(s)
Through: Mr Aatir Kawoosa, Advocate
Versus
Naseema Begum and others
......Respondent(s)
Through: Mr G. N. Shaheen, Advocate for
respondents 4&5/review petitioners
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. Review of judgement dated 16th March 2021, passed by this Court in an appeal, being MA
no.33/2018 titled National Insurance Company Limited v. Naseema Begum and others, is sought by
respondents 4&5 in the said appeal, who are being hereinafter referred to as "review petitioners".
2. I have heard Mr G. N. Shaheen, learned counsel for review petitioners, and considered the matter.
I have gone through judgement dated 16th March 2021.
3. It is contention of review petitioners, which has also been reiterated by their counsel, that this
Court has not appreciated arguments and judgements produced by their counsel in the appeal,
which led to legal error in judgement. Five judgements are stated to have been submitted Page 1
when arguments were made by counsel for review petitioners during hearing the appeal and even
mention about those judgements have not been made in judgement dated 16th March 2021. It is
being also stated that even arguments made by counsel representing review petitioners are not
reflected in the judgement. Reiterating submissions made in the appeal, it is being vehemently
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45019511/ 1
National Insurance Company Limited vs Naseema Begum And Others on 21 August, 2025
stated that the Tribunal had framed four issues, which included about validity of driving licence and
route permit of offending vehicle, viz. whether owner of offending vehicle, i.e., respondent no.2 had
permitted respondent no.3 to ply offending vehicle without valid and effective driving licence and
route permit of vehicle and thereby committed breach of condition of policy, if so, what would be its
effect on the claim petition. According to learned counsel for review petitioners, driving licence was
valid and effective at the time of accident. Offending vehicle had route permit. Insurance Company
failed before Tribunal to prove violation of any terms and conditions of contract of insurance. It is
stated by counsel for review petitioners that this court wrongly upset findings of the Tribunal.
4. It is also strenuously stated by learned counsel for review petitioners that judgement of the
Supreme Court in National Insurance Company Limited v. Chella Bharathamma and others, (2004)
8 SCC 517 , has wrongly been applied by this Court because the said judgement relates to a vehicle
which did not have route permit whereas in the case in hand there was a route permit. There is a
sharp distinction propounded by courts with regard to application of offending vehicle being
without route permit and offending vehicle having valid permit but having violated route permit. It
is also being averred that there are catena of Page 2 judgements and violation of route permit is one
thing which will not absolute insurance company from indemnifying insured.
5. Learned counsel for review petitioner has placed reliance on a judgment passed by the Punjab and
Haryana High Court in a case titled as Mani Ram Aggarwal (deceased) through his LRs v. United
India Insurance Company Limited reported in (2017) ACJ 1082 and stated that the said
case/judgement is identical to the instant case. According to him, in the aforesaid judgement it has
been observed that breach of route permit will not be a defence which will be available to Insurance
Company. Mere fact that truck was being operated in State of Haryana, though it has route permit
only for State of Rajasthan will not constitute violation of terms and conditions of insurance policy
and it will not be available as defence to insurance company and that insurance company was bound
to indemnify insured.
6. Learned counsel for review petitioner would also rely on a judgement passed by the Punjab and
Haryana High Court in case titled as National Insurance Company Limited v. Paramjit Kaur and
others reported in (2017) 3 ACC 502, in which distinction between a vehicle without route permit
and violation of plying vehicle beyond route permit areas.
7. According to learned counsel for review petitioners, appellant/ Insurance Company has not
proved before the Tribunal that offending vehicle was carrying passengers but offending vehicle was
on personal reason not carrying passengers. He has again placed reliance on a judgement passed by
the High Court of Rajasthan in United India Insurance Company Limited v. Sharda Devi and others
reported in (2012) 4 WLN 125, in which it has been held that route permit Page 3 authorizing to ply
within local limits of municipality does not mean that the said vehicle cannot go outside the local
limits of municipality at all and that failure of insurance company to show that offending vehicle was
at that time carrying passengers on said route in violation of route permit makes insurance company
liable to indemnify on behalf of owner.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45019511/ 2
National Insurance Company Limited vs Naseema Begum And Others on 21 August, 2025
8. Learned counsel for review petitioner has also relied upon a judgement of the Supreme Court in
New India Insurance Company v. Shri Satpal Singh and others reported as (2000) AIR SC 235 has
laid down that gratuitous passengers in a vehicle covering third party risk cannot be excluded and
insurance company cannot be absolved to indemnify on behalf of owner. According to him,
judgement under review is in violation to law laid down by the High Court of Himachal Pradesh in
Oriental Insurance Company Limited v. Lekh Raj reported as (2014) 3 SimLC 1353, in which same
views were made as were made by the Punjab and Haryana High Court in Shri Ram General
Insurance Company Limited v. Aarti and others reported as (2014) Law Herald
613.
9. It is being stated that judgement under review has been passed contrary to position of law as
contained in Motor Vehicles Act as well as law laid down by the High Courts. This Court is stated to
have committed error of law and illegality in setting aside judgement of the Tribunal.
10. Before proceeding further, it would be appropriate to reproduce judgement under review
hereunder:
1. Impugned in this Appeal is Award dated 11.04.2018 passed by Motor Accident
Claims Tribunal, Srinagar (for short "Tribunal") on a Claim petition bearing File no
29 of 2014 titled Naseema Begum and others Page 4 v. National Insurance Company
Ltd and others, directing appellant Insurance Company to pay compensation in the
amount of Rs 5,55,000/- along with 6.5% interest per annum from the date of
institution of claim till realization, on the grounds made mention of therein.
2. A claim petition, as is discernible from perusal of the file, was filed by respondents
1 to 3 before the Tribunal on 03.03.2014 averring therein that deceased namely Hilal
Ahmad Lone S/O Mohammad Maqbool Lone R/O Naribal Tehsil and District
Baramulla aged 21 years, died in an accident, which took place on 21.02.2009 at
Dagar Mohalla, Chandoosa, due to rash and negligent driving of driver of offending
vehicle, (Tata Mini Bus) bearing Registration no. JK01B / 2920, which was insured
with appellant Insurance Company. Before the Tribunal, claimants/respondents
sought compensation in the amount of Rs.56,00,000/-
3. Appellant Insurance Company resisted the claim before the Tribunal on the
ground that driver of offending vehicle was not holding the valid driving license
4. The Tribunal, in view of pleadings of parties, framed Issues for determination,
which are:
1) Whether on 21.09.2009 deceased namely Hilal Ahmad Lone while travelling in a
Mini Bus bearing regd No. JK01B/2920 from Rajpora towards Babreshi met with an
accident at Dagar Mohalla Chandoosa due to rash and negligent driving of the
offending vehicle by its driver i.e. respondent no. 3, as a result of which deceased got
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45019511/ 3
National Insurance Company Limited vs Naseema Begum And Others on 21 August, 2025
seriously injured and succumbed to his injuries on spot.? (OPP)
2) Whether on the date of accident offending vehicle was under insurance cover of
respondent no. 1? (OPP)
3) Whether the owner of the offending vehicle i.e. respondent no. 2 had permitted the
respondent no. 3 to ply the offending vehicle without valid and effective D/L and R/P
of vehicle and thereby committed breach of conditions of the policy, if so, what would
be its effect on the claim petition? (OPP-1)
4) In case issue No. 1 is decided in affirmative, then whether petitioners are entitled
to compensation, if so, to what extent and from whom. ? (OPP)
5) Relief. OP Parties.
5. Claimants produced and examined five witnesses before the Tribunal; besides
claimants/respondent no 1. Appellant Insurance Company also produced three witnesses.
6. By impugned Award, the Tribunal found claimants/respondents entitled to receive compensation
of Rs.5,55,000/ along with 6.5% interest per annum.
7. Heard and considered.
8. Learned senior counsel appearing for appellant Insurance Company has stated that the claim
petition was contested among other grounds, on the ground that the insured vehicle was being plied
without valid Route Permit at Chandoosa in District Baramulla. In this regard issue No.3 was also
framed by the Tribunal. Appellant produced officer of the Company as a witness, who deposed that
the Route Permit of the offending vehicle was valid for Eastern area Srinagar city while as the Page 5
accident took place at Dagar Mohalla Chandsoosa, as such, owner committed breach of Policy
conditions. He has further deposed that the eastern area falls within jurisdiction of District Srinagar.
Appellant also produced Iqbal Ahmad Bhat, Senior Assistant RTO Kashmir, Srinagar, who has
deposed that offending vehicle was authorized to ply on eastern area and the place of accident, i.e.,
Chandoosa, does not come within the jurisdiction of eastern area. The Tribunal has wrongly decided
the issue against Appellant on the ground that Appellant has not clarified that the place of
occurrence namely Dagar Mohalla Chandoosa does not fall in the eastern area of Srinagar City. It is
submitted by learned senior counsel that the witnesses have categorically stated that Route Permit
was valid for the eastern area Srinagar City and the place of accident namely Chandoosa does not
come within jurisdiction of eastern area. It has been also proved that the owner has committed
breach of Policy conditions. Thus, the Tribunal has wrongly decided the issue with regard to the
Route Permit against the appellant.
9. Learned senior counsel for appellant has also contended that the Tribunal has failed to appreciate
that the owner has committed breach of the Policy conditions as the offending vehicle as being
driven without Route Permit. Thus, the finding recorded by the Ld. Tribunal is misplaced. Since
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45019511/ 4
National Insurance Company Limited vs Naseema Begum And Others on 21 August, 2025
there is apparent breach of terms and conditions of the Policy of Insurance committed by the
Insured wilfully and consciously and also the subject matter was not plied in accordance with its
"limitation as to use" detailed in the Policy Schedule itself. Therefore, the impugned Award is bad in
law and liable to be set aside.
10. According to learned senior counsel for appellant it is settled position of law as has been held by
Supreme Court in the case of National Insurance Company Ltd v. Chella Bharathamma and others,
(2004) 8 SCC 517, that the vehicle, which does not have valid Route Permit on the date of accident
amounts to fundamental breach. Not only that plying of the vehicle without a valid a route permit is
not only breach of the Policy conditions but also breach of law, as such, the Appellant could not be
held liable to indemnify the owner, therefore, the impugned award is bad in law.
11. It may be mentioned here that the Tribunal while deciding Issue no.3, (viz. whether the owner of
the offending vehicle had permitted driver to ply offending vehicle without valid and effective
driving licence and route permit, thereby committing breach of conditions of the policy; if so, what
would be its effect on the claim petition), has taken into account statement of witnesses produced by
appellant Insurance Company as burden to prove Issue no.3 was upon appellant Insurance
Company. Appellant Insurance Company produced three witnesses before the Tribunal.
12. There is substance in submission of learned senior counsel for appellant Insurance Company.
The reference made by him to National Insurance Company Limited v. Challa Bharathamma and
others, (2004) 8 SCC 517, has direct bearing on the present case. In the said cited judgement the
Supreme Court has said that if offending vehicle is plied without valid route permit on the date of
accident, it amounts to fundamental breach of insurance contract and that plying of vehicle without
valid route permit is not only breach of policy conditions but also breach of law. In that view of
matter, the impugned Award is Page 6 liable to be set-aside and modified to the extent that recovery
rights are given to insurance company.
13. For the reasons discussed above, the impugned Award dated 11.04.2018 passed by Motor
Accident Claims Tribunal, Srinagar on a Claim petition bearing File no 29 of 2014 titled Naseema
Begum and others v. National Insurance Company Ltd and others, is set-aside and modified to the
extent that appellant Insurance Company shall pay compensation in the amount of Rs 5,55,000/-
along with 6.5% interest per annum from the date of institution of claim till realization and then
recover the same from the owner of the offending vehicle.
14. Disposed of in terms of above.
15. Record of the Tribunal, if summoned/received, be send down along with copy of this judgement.
16. It is pertinent to mention here that while considering abovementioned contentions, the scope
and ambit of Section 114 read with Order XLVII Rule 1 of the Code of Civil Procedure is to be taken
into consideration.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45019511/ 5
National Insurance Company Limited vs Naseema Begum And Others on 21 August, 2025
17. The grounds on which review can be sought are enumerated in Order XLVII Rule 1 CPC, which
reads as under:
"1. Application for review of judgment. - (1) Any person considering himself
aggrieved-
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed, but from which no appeal
has been preferred,
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed, or
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small Causes, and who, from the
discovery of new and important matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due
diligence, was not within his knowledge or could not be produced by him at the time
when the decree was passed or order made, or on account of some mistake or error
apparent on the face of the record, or for any other sufficient reason, desires to obtain
a review of the decree passed or order made against him, may apply for a review of
judgment of the court which passed the decree or made the order."
18. An application for review would lie, among others, when an order suffers from an error apparent
on the face of record and permitting the same to continue would lead to failure of justice.
Limitations on exercise of power of review are well settled. The first and foremost requirement of
entertaining a review petition is that the order, review of which is sought, suffers from any error
apparent on the face of the Page 7 order and permitting the order to stand will lead to failure of
justice. In absence of any such error, finality attached to the judgment/order cannot be disturbed.
19. The power of review can also be exercised by the court in the event discovery of new and
important matter or evidence takes place which despite exercise of due diligence was not within the
knowledge of the applicant or could not be produced by him at the time when the order was made.
An application for review would also lie if the order has been passed on account of some mistake.
20. It is beyond any doubt or dispute that the review court does not sit in appeal over its own order.
A rehearing of the matter is impermissible in law. It constitutes an exception to the general rule that
once a judgment is signed or pronounced, it should not be altered. It is also trite that exercise of
inherent jurisdiction is not invoked for reviewing any order.
21. The Supreme Court in Haridas Das v. Usha Rani Banik (Smt.) and Others, (2006) 4 SCC 78,
while considering the scope and ambit of Section 114 CPC read with Order 47 Rule 1 CPC observed
and held as under:
"14. In Meera Bhanja v. Nirmala Kumari Choudhury, (1995) 1 SCC 170 it was held
that:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45019511/ 6
National Insurance Company Limited vs Naseema Begum And Others on 21 August, 2025
"8. It is well settled that the review proceedings are not by way of an appeal and have
to be strictly confined to the scope and ambit of Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. In connection
with the limitation of the powers of the court under Order 47 Rule 1, while dealing
with similar jurisdiction available to the High Court while seeking to review the
orders under Article 226 of the Constitution, this Court, in AribamTuleshwar Sharma
v. Aribam Pishak Sharma, (1979) 4 SCC 389 speaking through Chinnappa Reddy, J.
has made the following pertinent observations:
'It is true there is nothing in Article 226 of the Constitution to preclude the High
Court from exercising the power of review which inheres in every court of plenary
jurisdiction to prevent Page 8 miscarriage of justice or to correct grave and palpable
errors committed by it. But, there are definitive limits to the exercise of the power of
review. The power of review may be exercised on the discovery of new and important
matter or evidence which, after the exercise of due diligence was not within the
knowledge of the person seeking the review or could not be produced by him at the
time when the order was made; it may be exercised where some mistake or error
apparent on the face of the record is found, it may also be exercised on any analogous
ground. But, it may not be exercised on the ground that the decision was erroneous
on merits. That would be the province of a court of appeal. A power of review is not to
be confused with appellate power which may enable an appellate court to correct all
manner of errors committed by the subordinate court.'
15. A perusal of Order 47 Rule 1 shows that review of a judgment or an order could be
sought: (a) from the discovery of new and important matters or evidence which after
the exercise of due diligence was not within the knowledge of the applicant; (b) such
important matter or evidence could not be produced by the applicant at the time
when the decree was passed or order made;
and (c) on account of some mistake or error apparent on the face of the record or any other
sufficient reason."
22. An error which has to be established by a long-drawn process of reasoning on points where there
may conceivably be two opinions, can hardly be said to be an error apparent on the face of the
record. An error that is not self-evident and has to be detected by a process of reasoning, can hardly
be said to be an error apparent on the face of record justifying the court to exercise its power of
review under Order XLVII Rule 1 CPC. In exercise of jurisdiction under Order XLVII Rule 1 CPC, it
is not permissible for an erroneous decision to be 'reheard and corrected'. A review petition, it must
be remembered, has a limited purpose and cannot be allowed to be 'an appeal in disguise'. [Vide:
Aribam Tuleshwar Sharma v. Aribam Pishak Sharma, AIR 1979 SC 1047;
Satyanarayan Laxminarayan Hegde v. Millikarjun Bhavanappa Tirumale, AIR 1960
SC 137, and Parsion Devi v. Sumitri Devi, (1997) 8 SCC 715].
Page 9
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45019511/ 7
National Insurance Company Limited vs Naseema Begum And Others on 21 August, 2025
23. Again, the Supreme Court in Lily Thomas v. Union of India, (2000) 6 SC 224, held that power of
review could be exercised to correct a mistake but not to substitute a view. Such powers could be
exercised within limits of statute dealing with exercise of power. It was further observed that the
words "any other sufficient reason" appearing in Order XLVII Rule 1 CPC must mean "a reason
sufficient on grounds at least analogous to those specified in the rule" as was held in Chhajju Ram v.
Neki, AIR 1922 PC 112 and Moran Mar Basselios Catholicos v. Most Rev. Mar Poulose Athanasius,
AIR 1954 SC 526.
24. Section 114, CPC, provides for a substantive power of review by a civil court and consequently by
appellate courts. Section 114 envisions:
"114. Review. --Subject as aforesaid, any person considering himself aggrieved, --
(a) by a decree or order from which an appeal is allowed by this Code, but from which
no appeal has been preferred,
(b) by a decree or order from which no appeal is allowed by this Code,
(c) by a decision on a reference from a Court of Small cause, may apply for a review of
judgment to the Court which passed the decree or made the order, and the Court may
make such order thereon as it thinks fit."
25. The words "subject as aforesaid" occurring in Section 114 of the Code mean subject to such
conditions and limitations as may be prescribed as appearing in Section 113 thereof and for the said
purpose, the procedural conditions contained in Order XLVII of the Code must be taken into
consideration. Section 114 of the Code although does not prescribe any limitation on the power of
the court but such limitations have been provided for in Order XLVII Rule 1 CPC.
26. Power of review can be exercised for correction of a mistake but not to substitute a view. Such
powers can be exercised within the limits of statute dealing with the exercise of power. The review
cannot be treated Page 10 like an appeal in disguise. It cannot be denied that the review is the
creation of a statute. In the case of Patel Narshi Thakershi v. Pradyumansinghji Arjunsinghji, (1971)
3 SCC 844, the Supreme Court has held that power of review is not an inherent power. It must be
conferred by law either specifically or by necessary implication. The review is also not an appeal in
disguise. It is essential that it should be something more than a mere error; it must be one which
must be manifest on the face of the record. The real difficulty with reference to this matter, however,
is not so much in the statement of the principle as in its application to the facts of a particular case.
When does an error cease to be mere error, and become an error apparent on the face of the record?
Learned counsel for review petitioner was unable to suggest any clear-cut rule by which the
boundary between the two classes of errors could be demarcated. The term "mistake or error
apparent" by its very connotation signifies an error which is evident per se from the record of the
case and does not require detailed examination, scrutiny and elucidation either of facts or legal
position. If an error is not obvious and detection thereof requires long debate and process of
reasoning, it cannot be treated as an error apparent on the face of the record for the purpose of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45019511/ 8
National Insurance Company Limited vs Naseema Begum And Others on 21 August, 2025
Order 47 Rule 1 CPC. To put it differently, an order or decision or judgment cannot be corrected
merely because it is erroneous in law or on the ground that a different view could have been taken by
the court on a point of fact or law. In any case, while exercising the power of review, the court cannot
sit in appeal over its judgment/decision.
Page 11
27. The Supreme Court in Ram Sahu (Dead) through LRs and others v. Vinod Kumar Rawat and
others, 2020 SCC OnLine SC 896, after discussing a number of judgements on the subject of review,
has held that an application for review is more restricted than that of an appeal and the Court of
review has limited jurisdiction as to the definite limit mentioned in Order XLVII Rule 1 CPC itself.
The powers of review cannot be exercised as an inherent power nor can an appellate power be
exercised in the guise of power of review. After holding this, the Supreme court found that High
Court overstepped jurisdiction vested in the Court under Order XLVII Rule 1 CPC.
28. In the backdrop of above well-settled legal position, all that has been argued by learned counsel
for review petitioners and/or mentioned in the instant review petition, is that this Court should
reopen the findings recorded in the judgement, review of which is sought. It is made clear here that
review jurisdiction cannot be used for that purpose. This is not the scope of Section 114 read with
Order XLVII Rule 1 CPC. After having an overall view of the grounds taken in the application and
submissions made by learned counsel for review petitioner, there is no error apparent on the face of
record warranting review of the judgement dated 16th December 2020. In such circumstances, the
instant review petition is liable to be dismissed. The judgements relied upon by learned counsel for
review petitioners, given above discourse, does not given any help to the averments made by review
petitioners in the instant petition.
29. Notwithstanding the legal position and well settled law qua review of judgement/order and
having regard to contentions of learned counsel Page 12 for review petitioners, more particularly
with reference to judgements cited by him, which according to him have not been made mention of
by this Court while rendering judgement under review, it would be appropriate to say here that the
Supreme Court in Gohar Mohammed v. Uttar Pradesh State Road Transport Corporation and
Others, (2023) 4 SCC 381, has held that even assuming that there was a valid and effective Permit to
ply offending vehicle, the same was not valid for the place where accident took place, therefore,
liability to pay compensation is to be that of owner of offending vehicle. Relevant portion thereof is
quoted as under:
"8. Having heard the learned counsel for the parties and on perusal of the material
available on record, it clearly reveals that on the date of accident, the appellant did
not have a valid and effective permit to ply the offending vehicle on the route where
accident took place. Having extensively gone through the fact-finding exercise, it is
categorically recorded by MACT that the appellant was neither able to produce/
prove the original permit nor was able to prove the information received under the
RTI Act. Even if RTI information is considered by which it is not clear as to when the
disputed permit was issued and by whom. The alleged permit was issued on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45019511/ 9
National Insurance Company Limited vs Naseema Begum And Others on 21 August, 2025
28.7.2012 i.e. on Saturday and no explanation is on record as to why deposit of fee
was asked on the next day i.e. Sunday. Moreover, assuming that permit was valid as
per letter of the Transport Authority, but it is not of any help to the appellant since
the vehicle was being plied on a route different than specified in permit. The
appellant has failed to give any explanation to refute the observations made by MACT
to ply the vehicle on Roorkee bypass to Haridwar via Meerut which did not fall within
the route of permit issued by the Transport Authority. The said findings of fact have
been affirmed by the High Court by the impugned order."
30. In Rani and others v. National Insurance Company Limited and others, (2018) 8 SCC 492, the
Supreme Court was considering an appeal against the judgment passed by the High Court of
Karnataka against the Award of the Motor Accidents Claims Tribunal, which had, while awarding
compensation in favour of claimants therein, made Insurance Company jointly and severely liable to
pay compensation to claimants.
Page 13 The Award had been challenged by Insurance Company contending that liability to pay
compensation could not have been fastened on it as offending vehicle did not possess a valid Permit
to operate in State of Karnataka and that Permit was granted for State of Maharashtra alone. The
High Court of Karnataka held that liability to pay compensation was only that of the owner of
offending vehicle. The Supreme Court, however, held that Insurance Company should first pay
compensation amount to claimants and shall have liberty to recover the same from owner of
offending vehicle. In such circumstances, the contentions and submissions of learned counsel for
review petitioners are misconceived, unfounded and baseless.
31. For the reasons discussed above, I do not find any merit in this petition seeking review of
judgement dated 16th March 2021, and the same is, accordingly, dismissed.
(Vinod Chatterji Koul) Judge Srinagar 21.08.2025 Ajaz Ahmad, Secretary Whether approved for
reporting? Yes/No. Page 14
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/45019511/ 10
