National Insurance Company Lt vs State Of J&K And Ors on 2 August, 2023
National Insurance Company Lt vs State Of J&K And Ors on 2
August, 2023
Bench: Chief Justice, Wasim Sadiq Nargal
Sr. No.11
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
WP(C) No. 2703/2019
CM No. 5521/2019
National Insurance Company Lt. .....Appellant/Petitioner(s)
Through :- Mr. C.S Gupta, Advocate
v/s
State of J&K and ors. .....Respondent(s)
Through :- Mr. R.K Jain, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Pranav Jain, Advocate
CORAM:
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE WASIM SADIQ NARGAL, JUDGE
ORDER (Oral)
02.08.2023 N. KOTISWAR SINGH-CJ
1. In this petition, the petitioner has questioned the legality of the order dated 16.04.2019 passed by
the Jammu and Kashmir State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Jammu (hereinafter
referred to as the "State Commission") in Appeal No. 3808, by virtue of which the appeal preferred
by the petitioner-Insurance Company was rejected by affirming the decision of the District
Consumer Disputes Redressal, Forum Jammu (hereinafter referred to as the "District Forum")
dated 26.03.2016.
2. Before proceeding further with the mater, we would like to clarify that we are examining the
issues in exercise of power conferred under Article 226 of the Constitution of India and not as an
appellate forum.
3. After the claim of the claimant-respondent No. 4 herein seeking benefit of insurance was settled
in favour of the claimant by the District Forum, the aggrieved party i.e. Insurance Company had
every right to challenge the same before the appellate forum, which the Insurance Company did by
availing the remedy of appeal under Section 13 of the J&K Consumer Protection Act, 1987 (for
brevity "the Act"), which provides that any person aggrieved by an order made by the District Forum
may prefer an appeal against such order to the State Commission. Thereafter, there is no provision
for a second appeal under the Act, though Section 17 of the Act provides for appeal by any person
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92931213/ 1
National Insurance Company Lt vs State Of J&K And Ors on 2 August, 2023
aggrieved by any order by the State Commission to the High Court. The same is in respect of
decision taken by the State Commission in its original jurisdiction, not while exercising the appellate
jurisdiction and as such, Section 17 of the Act would not be applicable.
4. In view of the provisions of Section 18 of the Consumers Act, finality is to be attached to the order
of District Forum or the State Commission, if no appeal has been preferred against such order. In
the present case, since the order of District Forum dated 26.03.2016 was appealed against before the
State Commission i.e. appellate forum and since the appeal has been decisively decided in favour of
the claimant, the order of the State Commission which has affirmed the finding of District Forum
has attained finality.
Thus, keeping in mind the aforesaid legal provisions, we proceed with the petition in the light of the
principles which govern exercise of provision of Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
5. As, we proceed to examine the impugned orders in issue, it may be apposite to refer to the
relevant facts of the case.
6. From the records, it is seen that the respondent No. 4-claimant had obtained a policy from the
National Insurance Company Limited for himself and for his family members under the Medical
Policy known as "Parivar Medi Claim" under which the insured and his family members would be
covered for certain benefits as mentioned in the scheme and policy. The policy was for a sum of Rs. 5
lacs. The said policy was effective from 18.02.2014 to 17.02.2015. According to respondent No. 4,
soon after obtaining of the said policy, it was found that the wife of the complainant/respondent No.
4 had developed some lump in her right breast in the month of March, 2014 and on medical advice,
she was taken to Medanta Medicity Hospital, Gurgaon for treatment, where she was diagnosed to be
suffering from Mammographic abnormality in the upper inner quadrant of the right breast with
mild ductile extending from the mass towards periarolar edge and was, accordingly, advised
immediate surgery whereupon, she was operated upon on 12.03.2014. Thereafter, the
complainant/respondent No. 4 informed the insurance company about the medical treatment,
expenses incurred and for reimbursement of the permissible expenses, which according to the
respondent No. 4 was to the extent of Rs. 3,80,604/-.
7. It is the plea of the respondent No. 4 that he was directed by Insurance Company to approach M/s
Park Medi-Claim Consultants Pvt. Ltd, which was impleaded as a party respondent in the original
claim in the form of Third Party Administrator (for short "TPA"). On the instructions of Insurance
Company, the claimant/respondent No. 4 approached M/s Park Medi-Claim Consultants Pvt. Ltd.,
where he was directed to submit the necessary documents for settlement of the claim, which the
respondent No. 4 duly did. Unfortunately, neither was there any response from the said Third Party
Administrator nor from the company, which compelled the respondent No. 4 to approach the
District Forum, alleging deficiency in service and for claim of the insured amount.
8. The District Forum in Case File No. 358/DFJ after hearing the parties and on consideration of the
evidence adduced by the parties, allowed the claim.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92931213/ 2
National Insurance Company Lt vs State Of J&K And Ors on 2 August, 2023
Before the District Forum, the Insurance Company took two specific pleas. Firstly, it was contended
that there is an exclusion clause in the form of Clause 4.2 in the terms and conditions of Insurance
Policy, which excludes any claim in respect of disease contracted during the first 30 days and since
the wife of the respondent No. 4 had contracted the disease within 30 days, the claim of the
respondent No. 4 could not be entertained.
9. It was also contended that the respondent No. 4 had failed to submit the requisite documents to
the TPA and as such, by virtue of condition No. 5.6.4 of the terms and conditions of the Insurance
Policy, which requires submission of documents in original for necessary verification/investigation,
the claim could not be entertained.
10. As regards the aforesaid pleas taken by the Insurance Company, the respondent No. 4 had
contended that he was not aware of any such exclusion clause as provided under Clause 4.2. The
specific plea of the respondent No. 4 was that at the time of obtaining the policy from the Insurance
Company, the existence of said exclusion clause was not made known to him. In fact, at the time of
making the proposal form, which was accepted by the Insurance Company, it did not contain any
such term. It was merely a Insurance Policy cover note which was given to the respondent No. 4.
11. Further, as regards the other plea taken by the Insurance Company that the documents were not
furnished, it was the specific plea of the respondent No. 4 that the documents were duly submitted
to the TPA, as directed by the company, but TPA did not respond to the same and as such, the
respondent No. 4 could not be faulted with.
12. The District Forum examined the issues on the basis of evidence so led.
As regards the first plea taken, the finding of the District Forum was that when the complainant led
evidence to the effect that while filling up proposal form, the insurer did not refer to any of the terms
of Insurance Policy, nor the terms and conditions of policy, particularly the exclusion clause, made
known to the deponent. In view of the above finding, the District Forum held that the insurance
company was not justified in taking refuge under exclusion clause 4.2 of the policy.
The Forum also noted that after completion of recording of evidence of the complainant/respondent
No. 4, the company was provided opportunity to lead evidence but the company did not lead
evidence in rebuttal to the evidence and deposition of the claimant/respondent No. 4 that the
company did not provide the terms and conditions of Insurance Policy including the exclusion
clause at the time of filling up of proposal form.
The District Forum by relying on the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in the case of
M/s Modern Insulators Ltd. Vs. Oriental Insurance Company Ltd.; AIR 2000 SC 1014 observed that
while the insured has a duty to disclose the relevant facts, similarly, it is also the duty of the
insurance company and its agents to disclose all material facts in their knowledge, since obligation
of good faith applies to both the parties equally.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92931213/ 3
National Insurance Company Lt vs State Of J&K And Ors on 2 August, 2023
The District Forum also observed that the claimant proved the allegation regarding non-supply of
terms and conditions of Insurance Policy at the time of filling up of proposal form by leading cogent
evidence which remained unchallenged from the side of the company.
The District Forum also perused the Insurance Policy produced before it and found that the terms
and conditions of the Insurance Policy were neither part of it, nor the insurance policy referred to
the said exclusion clause and, accordingly, held that it has been proved that the terms and
conditions of the Insurance Policy, containing exclusionary clause, were neither part of the contract
of insurance nor disclosed to insured. The District Forum held that in that event, the insurance
company cannot claim the benefit of the exclusion clause.
Thus, the District Forum came to the conclusion that the failure of the company in settling the claim
of the respondent No. 4/Complainant amounts to deficiency in service.
13. Coming to the second issue about non-furnishing of documents, the District Forum gave a
finding that the claimant/respondent No. 4 had already given "No Objection" to the TPA for
obtaining necessary documents from the concerned hospital for verification of the documents which
were submitted by the complainant/respondent No 4 before the TPA. However, TPA neither
appeared before the Forum nor led any evidence to prove to the contrary.
Under the circumstances, the District Forum allowed the claim vide order dated 26.03.2016, which
was challenged before the State Commission by the Insurance Company by preferring an appeal
bearing Appeal No. 3808, which was dismissed by the State Commission on 16.04.2019 which is
challenged before us.
14. When we examined the impugned order of the State Commission, what we found is that the
Commission agreed with the findings of fact on the aforesaid two issues.
As regards the exclusionary clause, the Commission gave a finding in Para No. 14 of its decision that
it is true that the terms and conditions of the insurance policy were not part of the insurance policy
and the appellant/petitioner herein provided to the respondent No. 4/claimant only a cover note of
the policy.
The Commission also held that the appellant/petitioner herein has nowhere proved by convincing
evidence that the terms and conditions of the policy were communicated to the
complainant/respondent No. 4.
Coming to the second issue, the finding of the Commission was that the complainant/respondent
No. 4 had submitted all the documents to the appellant/petitioner herein and instead of settling the
claim, the appellant/petitioner herein directed the complainant/respondent No. 4 to approach the
TPA for settlement of the claim though there was no privity of contract between
claimant/respondent No. 4 and TPA. However, all the requisite documents relating to expenses
incurred by the insured for treatment of his wife were submitted to the TPA, who was authorized to
collect and settle all the claims on behalf of the company.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92931213/ 4
National Insurance Company Lt vs State Of J&K And Ors on 2 August, 2023
The Commission also considered the evidence adduced about the correspondence between the
claimant/respondent No. 4 and TPA, and after taking into consideration that TPA neither appeared
before the Forum below, nor contested the factual averments made by the complainant/respondent
No. 4, came to the conclusion that the averments made by the claimant/respondent No. 4 herein
remained uncontested and, accordingly, held that the averments would be deemed to be correct and
admitted.
The Commission also came to the conclusion that the claimant/respondent No. 4 had submitted all
the necessary documents and as such, condition Nos. 5.6.4 had been duly complied with.
Thus, there is concurrent finding of facts as regards the two contested issues based on evidence
adduced by the parties.
15. In support of his contentions, Mr. C.S Gupta, learned counsel for the petitioner has relied on the
decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court rendered in "Suraj Mal Ram Niwas Oil Mills (P) Ltd. Vs.
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. & anr.; 2010 (10) SCC 567" as well as "Life Insurance Corporation
of India and anr. Vs. Sunita; 2022 (1) SCC 68." He submits that the terms and conditions of the
policy are to be construed strictly and there cannot be any departure or addition of words to the
same, and as far as the exclusion clause 4.2 is concerned, it is very clear and explicit that any disease
contracted between 30 days would be excluded from the policy and undeniably, the wife of
respondent No. 4 contracted the disease within 30 days and as such, it would stand excluded.
We agree with the aforesaid principle of law and also the submissions advanced by learned counsel
for the petitioner, but the fact remains that the said exclusionary provision was not brought to the
notice of the insured, which is necessary to enable the insurer to evade liability.
16. Learned counsel for the respondents on the other hand has submitted that even if there is an
exclusion clause in the policy, unless the same is brought to the notice of the insured, such an
exclusion clause could not be invoked.
17. It is the a specific plea of the claimant/respondent No. 4 that the such an exclusion clause was
not brought to the notice of the insured when the insurance policy was obtained from the company
and this plea has been accepted by both the Fora i.e District Consumer Disputes Redressal Forum,
Jammu and J&K State Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission, Jammu. In this regard, learned
counsel for the respondents has drawn attention of this Court to decision rendered in "M/s Peacock
Plywood Pvt. Ltd. Vs. The Oriental Insurance Co. Ltd.; 2006 (12) SCC 673", in which the Hon'ble
Supreme Court in para No. 78 held as follows:-
"74. Respondent in its written statement did not raise such a contention. It was
required to be specifically pleaded and proved by Respondent. The burden to prove
the applicability of exclusionary clauses was on Respondent. Neither any issue has
been raised, nor any evidence has been adduced in this behalf. It is also not a case
that the servants of the assured were privy to the unseaworthiness as provided for in
Clause 5.5.1 of the insurance policy. There has been no evidence to that effect. Even
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92931213/ 5
National Insurance Company Lt vs State Of J&K And Ors on 2 August, 2023
the said provision has not been applied by the learned Single Judge."
18. We have also noted the decision relied upon by the District Forum in the case of "M/s Modern
Insulators Ltd. Vs. Oriental Insurance Company Ltd.; AIR 2000 SC 1014", in which the Hon'ble
Supreme Court also made the following observations in para Nos. 7, 8 & 9 which are reproduced as
under:-
"7. The National Commission was of the view that "it is equally responsibility of the
respondent to call for these terms and conditions even if they were not sent by the
appellant as alleged, to understand the extent of risks covered under the policy and
the associated aspects."
8. It is the fundamental principle of insurance law that utmost good faith must be observed by the
contracting parties and good faith forbids either party from non-disclosure of the lads which the
parties known. The insured has a duty to disclose and similarly it is the duty of the insurance
company and its agents to disclose .ill material facts in their knowledge since obligation of good
faith applies to both equally.
9. In view of the above settled position of law we are of the opinion that the view expressed by the
National Commission is not correct. As the above terms and conditions of the standard policy
wherein the exclusion clause was included, were neither a part of the contract of insurance nor
disclosed to the appellant respondent cannot. claim the benefit of the said exclusion clause.
Therefore, the finding of the National Commission is untenable in law."
19. Thus, the fact situation obtaining in the present case appears to be in harmony with the aforesaid
decisions rendered in M/s Modern Insulators Ltd. (supra) and M/s Peacock Plywood Pvt. Ltd.
(supra) and since there is a specific finding by the two Fora that this exclusion clause was not
brought to the notice of the insured, the same cannot be used by the insurer to deny the claim.
20. As noticed above, there is concurrent finding of fact as regards these two crucial facts in regard
to the failure of the insurer to bring to the notice of the insured about such exclusion clause, as well
as the fact of submission of relevant documents to the insurance company by the insured which have
a direct bearing on the present case, for allowing the claim of the claimant/respondent No. 4.
21. As discussed above, since we are exercising writ jurisdiction under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, it is circumscribed by the principles governing it. It has been held by the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of "Shalini Shyam Shetty and anr. Vs. Rajendra Shankar Patil;
2010 (8) SCC 329" that where there is concurrent finding of facts by the Courts below, the writ Court
should not interfere in such matters. Paras 56 (8) and 62 (h) of the said judgment which are relevant
are reproduced as under:-
"56(8) The High Court in exercise of certiorari or supervisory jurisdiction will not
covert itself into a Court of Appeal and indulge in re-appreciation or evaluation of
evidence or correct errors in drawing inferences or correct errors of mere formal or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92931213/ 6
National Insurance Company Lt vs State Of J&K And Ors on 2 August, 2023
technical character.
62(h) In exercise of its power of superintendence High Court cannot interfere to
correct mere errors of law or fact or just because another view than the one taken by
the tribunals or Courts subordinate to it, is a possible view. In other words the
jurisdiction has to be very sparingly exercised. ""
This principle has also been followed by this Court in number of decisions including in "New India
Assurance Co. Ltd. Vs. Mushtaq Ahmad Bhat and ors.; 2003 (Sup.) JKJ 573 and Union of India Vs.
President, Divisional Forum and ors.; 1994 KashLJ 484.
22. In the light of the above decisions and well settled principles, we are of the opinion that it would
not be permissible to exercise the power of the appellate forum to re-appreciate the evidence, which
has already been settled by the two Fora in favour of the claimant/respondent No. 4.
23. In view of the above, we are not inclined to entertain this writ petition and, accordingly, the
same is dismissed.
The respondent No. 4 shall be entitled to get the insured amount as directed by the District Forum
on 26.03.2016, which was upheld by the State Commission.
The aforesaid amount, which is stated to be lying with the District Forum/State
Commission/Registry of this Court shall be, accordingly, released within a period of one month, in
favour of the claimant/respondent No. 4, after proper identification and verification.
(WASIM SADIQ NARGAL) (N. KOTISWAR SINGH)
JUDGE CHIEF JUSTICE
JAMMU
02.08.2023
Tarun
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/92931213/ 7
