Nazir Ahmed & Ors vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 5 June, 2023
Nazir Ahmed & Ors vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 5 June,
2023
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
...
CRM(M) No.299/2021
CrlM no.880/2021
CrlM No.466/2022
c/w
CRM(M) No.311/2021
CrlM Nos.467, 931 & 932/2021
Reserved on: 31.05.2023
Pronounced: 05.06.2023
Nazir Ahmed & Ors. ....... Petitioner(s)/Appellant(s)
Through: Mr. Sarfraz Shah, Advocate.
Mr. Shafiq Chowdhary, Advocate
Versus
Union Territory of J&K & Ors. .........Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy. AG
CORAM: HON'BLE MR JUSTICE M A CHOWDHARY, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The two petitions, invoking inherent jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, have been filed by petitioners/accused in two counter FIRs first filed on the complaint of
one Tariq Iqbal and the second by Razia Begum seeking quashing of both the FIRs.
2. The respondent no.3 in CRM(M) No.299/2021 had got registered a case against the petitioners
Nazir Ahmed and others vide FIR No.130/2021 on 15.05.2021 at Police Station Domana for the
commission of offences punishable under sections 452/323/147/148 IPC, whereas respondent no.2
Razia Begum in CRM(M) No.311/2021 had filed a case which was registered vide FIR No. 141/2021
at the same police station on 25.05.2021 for commission of offences punishable under sections
452/323/504/506/34 IPC against Nazir Hussain and others. The second FIR registered on the
complaint of Razia Begum seems to be counterblast to the earlier FIR registered on the complaint of
Tariq Iqbal, however, both the cases areise out of same incident and cause of action.
3. The official respondents filed the status report in both the cases. However, during pendency of
these petitions, the private parties entered into a compromise which was executed between the
complainants in both the cases i.e. Tariq Iqbal and Razia Begum. Their statements in support of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139542536/ 1
Nazir Ahmed & Ors vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 5 June, 2023
compromise were also recorded by the learned Registrar Judicial as per directions of the Court.
4. The facts which lead to the filing of CRM(M) No.299/2021 are that on 14.05.2021, the respondent
no.3 parked his Scorpio car in front of the house of the petitioners 3 and 6; and when petitioner
no.6, Razia Begum objected to parking of the car in front of her house, respondent no.3 along with
two/three persons hurled filthy abuses and assaulted her. As a result whereof, she sustained
injuries; and that as she was getting her treatment, respondent no.3 in the meantime lodged a false
and frivolous FIR against the petitioners which is impugned in the petition. Whereas, the facts as
stated in CRM(M) No. 311/2021, are that petitioner no.1 is the resident of Mendhar Poonch and
have purchased a plot of land at Gurha Brahman Bantalab, Jammu over which he has constructed a
residential house; that the respondent no.2- Razia Begum lodged the impugned FIR in order to
scuttle the proceedings in the FIR No.130/2021 lodged by the son of the petitioner no.1, who has
been mercilessly beaten by the family members of the respondent no.2.
5. This Court while issuing notice to the respondents on 02.06.2021 in CRM(M) No.299/2021 and
on 04.06.2021 in CRM(M) No. 311/2021 allowed the investigation in the FIR to go ahead, however,
presentation of challan was made subject to the permission of this Court. It is stated that the
complainants in both the cases i.e. Tariq Iqbal and Razia Begum have entered into a compromise,
wherein, inter alia, it has been resolved and agreed by them that after lodging FIRs against each
others, they have executed a compromise deed and have amicably settled their grievance between
them and are not interested in pursuing the impugned FIRs lodged by them against each others. A
copy of the compromise deed dated 29th February, 2022 has also been placed on record.
6. On 09.02.2023, the parties were directed to record their statements in support of their
compromise, in compliance whereof, Tariq Iqbal as well as Razia Begum got their statements
recorded before the learned Registrar Judicial on 23.05.2023. Both the parties were identified by
their respective counsels. In their statements, complainants in both the cases have stated that they
have amicably resolved all disputes and issues with each other. It has also been stated by the
complainants in their statements that they do not want to pursue the impugned FIRs filed by them
against each other.
7. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
8. So far as the facts alleged in petition pertaining to the compromise arrived at between the parties
in terms of compromise deed executed on 29.02.2021, are concerned, the same are not disputed.
However, according to the parties, most of the offences of which accused/petitioners have been
charged are non-compoundable. In the backdrop of this position, the question arises as to whether
this Court has power to quash the proceedings, particularly when some of the offences alleged to
have been committed are non-compoundable in nature. The Supreme Court in the case of Gian
Singh. v. State of Punjab & another, reported in (2012) 10 SCC 303, while considering this aspect,
has observed as under:
"57. The position that emerges from the above discussion can be summarised thus:
the power of the High Court in quashing a criminal proceeding or FIR or complaint
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139542536/ 2
Nazir Ahmed & Ors vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 5 June, 2023
in exercise of its inherent jurisdiction is distinct and different from the power given to
a criminal court for compounding the offences under Section 320 of the Code.
Inherent power is of wide plenitude with no statutory limitation but it has to be
exercised in accord with the guideline engrafted in such power viz; (i) to secure the
ends of justice or (ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court. In what cases
power to quash the criminal proceeding or complaint or F.I.R may be exercised
where the offender and victim have settled their dispute would depend on the facts
and circumstances of each case and no category can be prescribed. However, before
exercise of such power, the High Court must have due regard to the nature and
gravity of the crime. Heinous and serious offences of mental depravity or offences
like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. cannot be fittingly quashed even though the victim or
victim's family and the offender have settled the dispute. Such offences are not
private in nature and have serious impact on society. Similarly, any compromise
between the victim and offender in relation to the offences under special statutes like
Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by public servants while
working in that capacity etc; cannot provide for any basis for quashing criminal
proceedings involving such offences. But the criminal cases having overwhelmingly
and pre-dominatingly civil flavour stand on different footing for the purposes of
quashing, particularly the offences arising from commercial, financial, mercantile,
civil, partnership or such like transactions or the offences arising out of matrimony
relating to dowry, etc. or the family disputes where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute. In this category
of cases, High Court may quash criminal proceedings if in its view, because of the
compromise between the offender and victim, the possibility of conviction is remote
and bleak and continuation of criminal case would put accused to great oppression
and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal case despite full and complete settlement and compromise with the victim.
In other words, the High Court must consider whether it would be unfair or contrary
to the interest of justice to continue with the criminal proceeding or continuation of
the criminal proceeding would tantamount to abuse of process of law despite
settlement and compromise between the victim and wrongdoer and whether to
secure the ends of justice, it is appropriate that criminal case is put to an end and if
the answer to the above question(s) is in affirmative, the High Court shall be well
within its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceeding.."
9. Similarly, the Supreme Court in the case titled Narinder Singh & Ors. Vs. State of Punjab & anr,
reported in (2014) 6 SCC 466, has laid down guidelines for quashing of criminal proceedings. The
guidelines are reproduced as under:
"31. In view of the aforesaid discussion, we sum up and lay down the following
principles by which the High Court would be guided in giving adequate treatment to
the settlement between c/w the parties and exercising its power under Section 482 of
the Code while accepting the settlement and quashing the proceedings or refusing to
accept the settlement with direction to continue with the criminal proceedings:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139542536/ 3
Nazir Ahmed & Ors vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 5 June, 2023
(I) Power conferred under Section 482 of the Code is to be distinguished from the
power which lies in the Court to compound the offences under Section 320 of the
Code. No doubt, under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court has inherent power
to quash the criminal proceedings even in those cases which are not compoundable,
where the parties have settled the matter between themselves. However, this power is
to be exercised sparingly and with caution.
(II) When the parties have reached the settlement and on that basis petition for
quashing the criminal proceedings is filed, the guiding factor in such cases would be
to secure:
(i) ends of justice, or
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of any Court.
While exercising the power the High Court is to form an opinion on either of the aforesaid two
objectives. (III) Such a power is not be exercised in those prosecutions which involve heinous and
serious offences of mental depravity or offences like murder, rape, dacoity, etc. Such offences are not
private in nature and have a serious impact on society. Similarly, for offences alleged to have been
committed under special statute like the Prevention of Corruption Act or the offences committed by
Public Servants while working in that capacity are not to be quashed merely on the basis of
compromise between the victim and the offender.
(IV) On the other, those criminal cases having
overwhelmingly and pre-dominantly civil character,
particularly those arising out of commercial transactions or arising out of matrimonial relationship
or family disputes should be quashed when the parties have resolved their entire disputes among
themselves.
(V) While exercising its powers, the High Court is to examine as to whether the possibility of
conviction is remote and bleak and continuation of criminal cases would put the accused to great
oppression and prejudice and extreme injustice would be caused to him by not quashing the
criminal cases. (VI) Offences under Section 307 IPC would fall in the category of heinous and
serious offences and therefore is to be generally treated as crime against the society and not against
the individual alone. However, the High Court would not rest its decision merely because there is a
mention of Section 307 IPC in the FIR or the charge is framed under this provision. It would be
open to the High Court to examine as to whether incorporation of Section 307 IPC is there for the
sake of it or the prosecution has collected sufficient evidence, which if proved, would lead to proving
the charge under Section 307 IPC. For this purpose, it would be open to the High Court to go by the
nature of injury sustained, whether such injury is inflicted on the vital/delegate parts of the body,
nature of weapons used etc. Medical report in respect of injuries suffered by the victim can generally
be the guiding factor. On the basis of this prima facie analysis, the High Court can examine as to
whether there is a strong possibility of conviction or the chances of conviction are remote and bleak.
In the former case it can refuse to accept the settlement and quash the criminal proceedings whereas
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139542536/ 4
Nazir Ahmed & Ors vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 5 June, 2023
in the later case it would be permissible for the High Court to accept the plea compounding the
offence based on complete settlement between the parties. At this stage, the Court can also be
swayed by the fact that the settlement between the parties is going to result in harmony between
them which may improve their future relationship.
(VII) While deciding whether to exercise its power under Section 482 of the Code or not, timings of
settlement play a crucial role. Those cases where the settlement is arrived at immediately after the
alleged commission of offence and the matter is still under investigation, the High Court may be
liberal in accepting the settlement to quash the criminal proceedings/investigation. It is because of
the reason that at this stage the investigation is still on and even the charge sheet has not been filed.
Likewise, those cases where the charge is framed but the evidence is yet to start or the evidence is
still at infancy stage, the High Court can show benevolence in exercising its powers favourably, but
after prima facie assessment of the circumstances/material mentioned above. On the other hand,
where the prosecution evidence is almost complete or after the conclusion of the evidence the matter
is at the stage of argument, normally the High Court should refrain from exercising its power under
Section 482 of the Code, as in such cases the trial court would be in a position to decide the case
finally on merits and to come a conclusion as to whether the offence under Section 307 IPC is
committed or not. Similarly, in those cases where the conviction is already recorded by the trial
court and the matter is at the appellate stage before the High Court, mere compromise between the
parties would not be a ground to accept the same resulting in acquittal of the offender who has
already been convicted by the trial court. Here charge is proved under Section 307 IPC and
conviction is already recorded of a heinous crime and, therefore, there is no question of sparing a
convict found guilty of such a crime."
10. From a perusal of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court, it is clear that in the cases or
disputes which have predominantly civil flavour and where the wrong is basically private or
personal in nature and the parties have resolved their entire dispute, the High Court is well within
its jurisdiction to quash the criminal proceedings if it is known that because of the compromise
arrived at between the parties, there is remote possibility of securing conviction of the accused. In
fact, in such cases, the Supreme Court has clearly observed that it would amount to extreme
injustice if despite settlement having been arrived at by the parties, the criminal proceedings are
allowed to continue.
11. Adverting to the facts of the instant case, it is clear that the parties to the dispute, Tariq Iqbal and
Razia Begum have entered into a compromise, whereby complainants/victims have decided not to
pursue prosecution in the impugned FIRs against each other. Therefore, once the rival parties have
arrived at a settlement, allowing the prosecutions to continue merely because the offences alleged
against the accused are non-compoundable in nature, would amount to great injustice to both the
parties and, in fact, it will amount to frittering away the fruits of compromise that has been arrived
at between the parties. The continuance of criminal proceedings against the petitioner, in these
circumstances, will be nothing but an abuse of process of law.
12. In view of the aforesaid discussion, both the petitions are allowed. Accordingly, FIR
No.0130/2021 registered at Police Station, Domana for offences punishable under Sections 452,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139542536/ 5
Nazir Ahmed & Ors vs Union Territory Of J&K & Ors on 5 June, 2023
323, 147, 148 IPC and FIR No.0141/2021 registered at the same police station for offences
punishable under Sections 452,323,504,506 and 34 IPC as well as further proceedings taken
thereon are quashed.
13. Both the petitions, alongwith interim application(s) are disposed of.
14. Copy of this Judgment shall be placed on the connected file as well.
(M A Chowdhary) Judge Jammu 05.06.2023 Raj Kumar Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139542536/ 6
