New India Assurance Co. Ltd vs Anita Devi And Others on 10 March, 2023
New India Assurance Co. Ltd vs Anita Devi And Others on 10
March, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on 01.03.2023
Pronounced on 10.03.2023
MA No. 9900008/2013
New India Assurance Co. Ltd. .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Q
Through: Mr. Udhay Bhaskar, Advocate
Vs
Anita Devi and others ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Divyanshu Malhotra, Advocate
for respondent Nos. 1 to 3
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The appellant has preferred the instant appeal against award dated 07.08.2013 passed by the
Commissioner Under Employee(cid:128)s Compensation Act (Assistant Labour Commissioner), Jammu
(hereinafter to be referred as the Commissioner), whereby in a claim petition, filed by the
claimants/respondents No. 1 to 3, have been awarded an amount of Rs. 7,60,651/- as compensation
on account of death of deceased, Pritam Lal.
2. It appears that deceased Pritam Lal had died in an incident while working as a driver with truck
bearing registration No. JK02A 3787. The incident took place on 14.10.2005 when the deceased was
killed by the conductor of the truck Rakesh Kumar. The truck in question bearing registration No.
JK02A 3787 was owned by Sunita Kumari respondent No. 4 herein. It appears that the deceased was
done to death by the conductor as he had denied him the permission to leave the truck midway to
destination because the same was loaded with cement. The dependents of the deceased i.e.
respondent Nos. 1 to 3 filed a claim petition before the Commissioner, wherein it was pleaded that
the deceased was 33 years old at the time of the incident, earning Rs. 6,000/- per month. It was also
claimed that the deceased had died during the course of his employment with respondent No. 4
herein.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48374175/ 1
New India Assurance Co. Ltd vs Anita Devi And Others on 10 March, 2023
3. The claim petition was contested by the appellant/insurance company, with which the truck in
question was insured at the relevant time. The insurance company in its objections to the claim
petition disputed the claim of the claimants. It was submitted that the vehicle in question was
insured with it with effect from 30.01.2005 to 29.01.2006 in the name of Sutanter Singh respondent
No. 5 herein as such, the insurance company had no statutory and legal obligation to indemnify the
respondent-Sunita Kumari, with whom it was claimed that the deceased was having a relationship of
employment. It has been claimed that since the deceased was not in the employment of
insured-Sutanter Singh as such, the insurance company is entitled to be exonerated from its liability
to satisfy the award.
4. Respondent-Sutanter Singh in his reply to the claim petition submitted that he had sold the
vehicle in question to one Khemraj who got the same transferred in the name of his wife-Sunita
Kumari. It was further submitted by the said respondent that the certificate of insurance of the
vehicle has not been transferred from his name.
5. The Commissioner in the face of the pleadings of the parties framed the following issues:
1) "Whether the deceased „Pritam Lal(cid:128) falls under the definition of "employee" as
prescribed under the Employee(cid:128)s Compensation Act 1923. OPP
2) Whether the deceased met with an accident arising out of and in the course of his
employment for respondent no. 1 OPP
3) What was the age and wages of the deceased at the time of accident. OPP
4) Whether the vehicle in question and involved in accident was insured and driven
in violation of the terms and conditions of insurance policy OPR-2
5) Relief"
6. An additional issue came to be framed at the instance of appellant insurance company which
reads as under:
"Whether the respondent no. 2 is liable to indemnify respondent no 1 and 3 as per the
contract of insurance policy."
7. After appreciation of the evidence led by the parties, the Commissioner came to the conclusion
that the deceased had died in an accident arising out of and in the course of his employment with
respondent-Sunita Kumari. It was further concluded by the learned Commissioner that the vehicle
in question was not being driven in violation of the terms and conditions of the policy of the
insurance and that insurance company was liable to satisfy the award. The learned Commissioner by
taking the age of the deceased as 33 years and his wages at Rs. 4000/- per month, assessed the
compensation of Rs. 3,94,120/- in favour of the claimants with an additional interest of Rs. 3,66,531
making the total awarded sum as Rs. 7,60,651/-. The insurer was made liable to pay the awarded
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48374175/ 2
New India Assurance Co. Ltd vs Anita Devi And Others on 10 March, 2023
sum.
8. The appellant insurance company has raised a number of grounds in the appeal challenging the
impugned award but the main emphasis of the counsel appearing for the appellant was on following
points:
I That the policy of insurance was not transferred in the name of respondent-Sunita
Kumari, the employer of the deceased as such, the insurance company had no privity
of contract with the employer, consequently it was not liable to satisfy the amount of
the impugned award.
II That the deceased was not the employee of the insured as such, the insurance
company cannot be held liable to satisfy the award.
9. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case including the
record of the learned Commissioner.
10. The facts that have been proved from the evidence on record led by the parties before the learend
Commissioner and which are not in dispute are that the deceased was an employee of respondent
No. 4 Sunita Kumari. It is established that the policy of insurance in respect of the vehicle in
question had not been transferred from the name of insured Sutanter Singh to the name of Sunita
Kumari. It is also an admitted fact that the deceased was an employee of respondent No. 4-Sunita
Kumari and not the employee of respondent No. 5-Sutanter Singh.
11. In light of aforesaid proved and admitted facts, the question arises as to whether the appellant
insurance company can be held liable to satisfy the award passed by the learned Commissioner. In
order to find an answer to this question, we will have to first ascertain as to what would be the effect
of transfer of a vehicle from the name of the insured to another person without the transfer of
certificate of insurance. In this regard, it would be apt to refer to the provisions contained in section
157 of the Motor Vehicles Act, which reads as under:
"157. Transfer of certificate of insurance.--
(1) Where a person, in whose favour the certificate of insurance has been issued in
accordance with the provisions of this Chapter, transfers to another person the
ownership of the motor vehicle in respect of which such insurance was taken together
with the policy of insurance relating thereto, the certificate of insurance and the
policy described in the certificate shall be deemed to have been transferred in favour
of the person to whom the motor vehicle is transferred with effect from the date of its
transfer.
Explanation.--For the removal of doubts, it is hereby clarified that such deemed transfer shall
include transfer of rights and liabilities of the said certificate of insurance and policy of insurance.
(2) The transferee shall apply within fourteen days from the date of transfer in the prescribed form
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48374175/ 3
New India Assurance Co. Ltd vs Anita Devi And Others on 10 March, 2023
to the insurer for making necessary changes in regard to the fact of transfer in the certificate of
insurance and the policy described in the certificate in his favour, and the insurer shall make the
necessary changes in the certificate and the policy of insurance in regard to the transfer of
insurance."
12. From a perusal of the aforesaid provision, it becomes clear that when a person who is holding a
certificate of insurance in accordance with provisions of Chapter XI of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988,
transfers of the ownership of the said vehicle to another person, the certificate of insurance and the
policy described in the certificate is deemed to have been transferred in favour of the person to
whom the motor vehicle has been transferred with effect from date of its transfer.
13. It is to be noted that it is only the certificate of insurance which has been issued in accordance
with Chapter XI of the Motor Vehicles Act which gets automatically transferred in the name of
transferee of the vehicle, meaning thereby that a certificate of insurance to the extent it covers
compulsory risks as per requirement laid down in section 147 of the Motor Vehicles Act which falls
in Chapter XI of the said Act, would get transferred. In terms of Section 147 of the Motor Vehicles
Act, the compulsory policy requirements include risks (i) against any liability which may be incurred
in respect of death of or bodily injury to any person including owner of the goods or his authorized
representative carried in the motor vehicle or damage to any property of a third party. (ii) death of
or bodily injury to any passenger of a transport vehicle, except gratuitous passengers of goods
vehicle. (iii) a liability arising under the Workmen(cid:128)s Compensation Act in respect of death or bodily
injury to any employee. Therefore, the certificate of insurance to the extent it covers compulsory
risks as contemplated in section 147 of the Motor Vehicles Act would get automatically transferred
to the transferee upon transfer of a vehicle by the original insurer.
14. I am supported in my aforesaid view by the judgment of the Supreme Court in Firdaus v Oriental
Insurance Company Ltd and others, (2017) 15 SCC 674. In the said judgment, the Supreme Court,
while holding that liability of the insurance company continues so far as it relates to payment of
award passed by the Workmen Compensation Commissioner even after the transfer of the vehicle by
the insured to another person, relied upon its following observations made in the case of Rikhi Ram
and another v Sukhrania and others, 2003(3) SCC 97:
(3) This Court in G. Govindan v. New India Assurance Co. Ltd. and Ors. has settled
the controversy as regards liability of insurer to pay compensation to third party in
the absence of any intimation of transfer of the vehicle to the transferee. It was held
therein that since insurance against third party is compulsory, and once the
insurance company had undertaken liability to third party incurred by the persons
specified in the policy, the third party's right to recover any amount is not affected by
virtue of the provisions of the Act or by any condition in the policy. We are of the view
that said decision concludes the controversy in the present appeal. However, we
would like to give further reasons that the liability of an insurer does not come to an
end even if the owner of the vehicle does not give any intimation of transfer to the
insurance company. Chapter VIII of the Act has been enacted following several
English statutes. In England, Prior to 1930, there was no law of compulsory
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48374175/ 4
New India Assurance Co. Ltd vs Anita Devi And Others on 10 March, 2023
insurance in respect of third party rights. Whenever an accident took place the victim
or the injured used to take legal proceedings against an erring motorist for recovery
of damages. But many a times, it was found that the owner of an offending vehicle
was not always in a position to pay compensation or damages to the injured or to the
dependants of the deceased and in that event the claimants could not get the
damages.
To meet such a situation, various legislations were enacted in England. For the first time, Third
Parties (Rights Against Insurers) Act, 1930 was enacted, the provisions of which find place in
Section 97 of the Act which gave to third party right to sue directly against the insurer.
Subsequently, the Road Traffic Act, 1930 was enacted which provided for compulsory insurance of
motor vehicles. The provisions of the said Act was engrafted in Section 95 of the Act. Under Section
38 of English Act, 1930, certain conditions of insurance policy were made ineffective so far as the
third parties were concerned. The object behind the aforesaid legislation was that third party right
should not suffer on account of failure to comply with those terms of the insurance policy. Section
94 of the Act gives protection to third party in respect of death or bodily injury or damage to the
property while using the vehicle in public place and, therefore, the insurance of vehicle had been
made compulsory under Section 94 read with Section 95 of the Act.
4. A perusal of Sections 94 and 95 would further show that the said provisions do not make
compulsory insurance to the vehicle or to the owners. Thus, it is manifest that compulsory insurance
is for the benefit of third parties. The scheme of the Act shows that an insurance policy can cover
three kinds of risk, i.e. owner of the vehicle; property (vehicle) and third party. The liability of the
owner to have compulsory insurance is only in regard to the third party and not to the property.
Section 95(5) of the Act runs as follows:
"95. (5) Notwithstanding anything elsewhere contained in any law, a person issuing a
policy of insurance under this section shall be liable to indemnify the person or
classes of person specified in the policy in respect of any liability which the policy
purports to cover in the case of that person or those classes of person."
5. The aforesaid provision shows that it was intended to cover two legal objectives. Firstly, that no
one who was not a party to a contract would bring an action on a contract; and secondly, that a
person who has no interest in the subject matter of an insurance can claim the benefit of an
insurance. Thus, once the vehicle is insured, the owner as well as any other person can use the
vehicle with the consent of the owner. Section 94 does not provide that any person who will use the
vehicle shall insure the vehicle in respect of his separate use.
6. On an analysis of Section 94 and 95, we further find that there are two third parties when a
vehicle is transferred by the owner to a purchaser. The purchaser is one of the third parties to the
contract and other third party is for whose benefit the vehicle was insured. So far, the transferee
who is the third party in the contract, cannot get any personal benefit under the policy unless there
is a compliance of the provisions of the Act. However, so far as third party injured or victim is
concerned, he can enforce liability undertaken by the insurer.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48374175/ 5
New India Assurance Co. Ltd vs Anita Devi And Others on 10 March, 2023
7. For the aforesaid reasons, we hold that whenever a vehicle which is covered by the insurance
policy is transferred to a transferee, the liability of insurer does not cease so far as the third
party/victim is concerned, even if the owner or purchaser does not give any intimation as required
under the provisions of the Act."
15. From the foregoing analysis of the law on the subject, it is clear that whoever may be the actual
owner of the motor vehicle at the time of the accident, compulsory risks covered under the policy of
insurance get automatically transferred to the transferee of a vehicle even though certificate of
insurance has not been transferred in his favour.
16. In view of the legal position discussed hereinbefore, it is immaterial whether the deceased was an
employee of respondent Sunita Kumari or Sutanter Singh, so far as the liability of the appellant
insurance company to satisfy the impugned award is concerned. Once the vehicle in question was
transferred by Sutanter Singh to respondent-Sunita Kumari, the compulsory risks covered under the
policy of insurance purchased by Sutanter Singh would get automatically transferred to
respondent-Sunita Kumari from the date she became the owner of the vehicle. Since the deceased
was an employee of respondent No. 4 and he died during the course of his employment as such, the
appellant/insurance company cannot escape its liability to indemnify the award.
17. For the foregoing reasons, I do not find any merit in this appeal, the same is accordingly,
dismissed. The deposited amount, if any, is directed to be released in favour of the
claimants/respondent Nos. 1 to 3 in accordance with the terms of the impugned award.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 10.03.2023 Rakesh Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/48374175/ 6
