New India Assurance Company vs Dev Singh S/O Nika Singh on 20 October, 2023
New India Assurance Company vs Dev Singh S/O Nika Singh on
20 October, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on 12.10.2023
Pronounced on 20.10.2023
MA No. 299/2010
New India Assurance Company .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Limited
D. O.-II, Gandhi Nagar, Jammu, th.
its Sr. Divisional Manager, Smt.
Suman Gupta, aged 54 years.
Q
Through: Mr. Udhay Bhaskar, Adv.
vs
1. Dev Singh S/o Nika Singh ..... Respondent(s)
2. Premo Devi W/o. Dev Singh
3. Kashmir Singh S/o. Dev Singh
4. Miss Sushma D/o. Dev Singh
Respondents 1 to 4 all residents of
Dugal Halal, Tehsil Kalakote, District
Rajouri.
5. P Road Lines
Through its owner/proprietor
307, Sharp Bhawan, Azadpur
Commercial Complex, Azadpur
New Delhi-110033
Through: Mr. Diyanshu Malhotra, Adv. for Nos. 1 to 4
Mr. Madan Lal, Advocate for No. 5
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1. The appellant/insurance company has challenged award dated 14.12.2009 passed by the
Commissioner under Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (Assistant Labour Commissioner),
Jammu (hereinafter to be referred as the Commissioner), whereby a sum of Rs. 4,30,560/- along
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129454207/ 1
New India Assurance Company vs Dev Singh S/O Nika Singh on 20 October, 2023
with interest at the rate of 12 per cent has been awarded in favour of the claimants/respondent Nos.
1 to
4. The liability of paying the compensation has been fastened upon the appellant/insurance
company.
2. It appears that on 20.05.2006, Balwan Singh, the predecessor in interest of the claimants, who
was employed with respondent No. 5, owner of the Gas Tanker bearing No. HR-38-J-9707, while
driving the said Gas Tanker suffered an accident on reaching Daha Khani, W. No. 5, Keri Bari,
District Chitwan (Nepal). As a result of the accident, Balwan Singh died. The accident had arisen out
of and in the course of employment of the deceased with respondent No. 5 and at the time of the
accident, the offending vehicle was carrying Liquefied Petroleum Gas(LPG) from Baruni Oil
Refinery. The deceased was 22 years old at the time of the accident.
3. The claim petition was contested by the owner (respondent No. 5) and the insurer, the appellant
herein. Respondent No. 5, the owner of the offending Tanker admitted that the deceased was
employed with it and it was pleaded that the vehicle in question was insured with the
appellant/insurance company at the time of the accident. The appellant/insurance company raised a
number of defences and one of the defences raised by the appellant/insurance company was that the
deceased-Balwan Singh was not holding an effective and valid licence at the time of the accident
inasmuch as he was not authorized to drive a vehicle carrying hazardous goods. On the basis of the
pleadings of the parties, the Commissioner framed the following issues:
1. "Whether the deceased namely Balwan Singh falls under the definition of
Workman as prescribed under the Workmen's Compensation Act, 1923 (OPP)
2. Whether he met with an accident during and in the course of his employment with
Respondent No. 1(OPP)
3. What was age and wages of the deceased at the time of death (OPP)
4. Relief."
4. After recording evidence of the parties, the Commissioner after taking the wages of the deceased
as Rs. 4,000/- per month and his age as 26 years, assessed the compensation in favour of the
claimants as Rs. 4,30,560/-. Although no issue was framed by the Commissioner as regards the
validity of the driving license of the deceased, yet evidence was led by the parties before the
Commissioner on this aspect of the matter and the Commissioner also dealt with this aspect of the
matter in the impugned award by holding that there was no requirement of possession of a valid
driving license in a case where compensation is being sought under the provisions of the Employees
Compensation Act, 1923.
5. The appellant/insurance company has challenged the impugned award passed by the
Commissioner to the extent liability to satisfy the award has been fastened upon it. It has been
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129454207/ 2
New India Assurance Company vs Dev Singh S/O Nika Singh on 20 October, 2023
claimed that the Commissioner was not correct in holding that plea regarding validity of the driving
license cannot be raised in a proceeding under Employees Compensation Act. It has also been
contended that without an endorsement on the driving license, authorising its holder to drive a
vehicle carrying hazardous goods, it cannot be said that a person driving such a vehicle is holding an
effective and valid driving license.
6. The first question of law that arises for determination in this appeal is as to whether an insurer is
entitled to raise the plea of validity of driving license in a proceeding under Employees
Compensation Act. The other question that arises for determination is as to whether a person
driving a vehicle carrying hazardous goods is competent to drive such a vehicle in the absence of an
endorsement on his driving license authorising him to drive such a vehicle.
7. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
8. Learned counsel appearing for the respondents have contended that the aforesaid questions of
law do not constitute substantial questions of law and in fact the Commissioner has not even framed
an issue as regards the validity of the driving license. On this ground it is urged that the appeal
deserves to be dismissed. In support of their contentions, learned counsel for the respondents have
relied upon the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of Fulmati Dhramdev Yadav and
anothers v New India Assurance Company Limited and another, Civil Appeal No. 4713 of 2023
dated 04.09.2023. It has been contended that when no issue was framed by the Commissioner
regarding the validity or invalidity of the driving licence of the deceased, in such a situation, appeal
in terms of Section 30 of the Employees Compensation Act cannot be entertained as the scope of an
appeal under the said Act is limited only to substantial questions of law.
9. As per proviso to Section 30 of the Employees Compensation Act, no appeal lies against an order
passed by the Commissioner, unless a substantial question of law is involved in the appeal. First of
all, it needs to be understood as to what amounts of substantial question of law within the meaning
of proviso to section 30 of the Employees Compensation Act. The Supreme Court in the case of Hero
Vinod (Minor) vs Seshammal (2006) 5 SCC 545 has explained the expression substantial question of
law in the context of Section 100 of the CPC and summarized the principles in the following manner:
"(i) An inference of fact from the recitals or contents of a document is a question of
fact. But the legal effect of the terms of a document is a question of law. Construction
of a document involving the application of any principle of law, is also a question of
law.
Therefore, when there is misconstruction of a document or wrong application of a principle of law in
construing a document, it gives rise to a question of law.
(ii) The High Court should be satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law, and not a
mere question of law. A question of law having a material bearing on the decision of the case (that is,
a question, answer to which affects the rights of parties to the suit) will be a substantial question of
law, if it is not covered by any specific provisions of law or settled legal principle emerging from
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129454207/ 3
New India Assurance Company vs Dev Singh S/O Nika Singh on 20 October, 2023
binding precedents, and, involves a debatable legal issue. A substantial question of law will also arise
in a contrary situation, where the legal position is clear, either on account of express provisions of
law or binding precedents, but the court below has decided the matter, either ignoring or acting
contrary to such legal principle. In the second type of cases, the substantial question of law arises
not because the law is still debatable, but because the decision rendered on a material question,
violates the settled position of law.
(iii) The general rule is that High Court will not interfere with concurrent findings of the Courts
below. But it is not an absolute rule. Some of the well recognized exceptions are where (i) the courts
below have ignored material evidence or acted on no evidence; (ii) the courts have drawn wrong
inferences from proved facts by applying the law erroneously; or (iii) the courts have wrongly cast
the burden of proof. When we refer to 'decision based on no evidence', it not only refers to cases
where there is a total dearth of evidence, but also refers to any case, where the evidence, taken as a
whole, is not reasonably capable of supporting the finding."
10. Thus, a substantial question of law would include not only a question which involves a debatable
legal issue, but it would also arise where inter alia binding precedents relating to a question of law
have been either ignored or a contrary finding has been returned with regard to such legal principle.
The aforesaid principles can be safely applied to the cases under the Employees Compensation Act,
while considering the import of the expression "substantial question of law" appearing in proviso to
section 30 of the said Act.
11. It has been contended by the learned counsel for the appellant/insurance company that in the
instant case, the learned Commissioner has rendered findings on legal issues which are contrary to
the settled proposition of law relating to entitlement of an insurer to raise plea regarding validity of
the license as also relating to competence of a driver to drive a vehicle carrying hazardous goods
without endorsement authorising him to do so upon his driving license.
12. Before testing the merits of the contentions raised by the learned counsel for the
appellant/insurance company, it would be apt to deal with the objection of the learned counsel for
the respondents to the maintainability of the appeal on the ground that an issue regarding validity of
the license was not framed by the Commissioner. It is true that the Commissioner has not framed
the issue as regards the validity of the driving license of the deceased. Had it been a case where the
question regarding validity of the driving license of the deceased was not at all discussed and
considered by the Commissioner then certainly in view of the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court
in Fulmati Dhramdev Yadav's case (supra), no appeal under section 30 of the Act could have been
entertained but in the instant case, not only have the parties led evidence as regards the question of
validity of driving license of the deceased, but the learned Commissioner has elaborately discussed
the said evidence and come to a conclusion that validity of the driving license is an issue, which
cannot be raised in a proceeding under Employees Compensation Act by relying upon the judgment
delivered by this Court in the case, titled, United India Insurance Company Ltd vs. Mst. Noora and
others, 2005(3) 27(HC). Therefore, merely because the Commissioner did not frame an issue
regarding validity of the driving license of the deceased does not mean that the said issue was not
considered by the Commissioner when the impugned award clearly suggests otherwise. Thus the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129454207/ 4
New India Assurance Company vs Dev Singh S/O Nika Singh on 20 October, 2023
ratio laid down in Fulmati Dhramdev Yadav's case (supra), does not apply to the facts of the instant
case.
13. It is true that in a proceeding under Employees Compensation Act, the employer cannot raise the
plea of validity of driving license or absence of a valid driving licence, while question relating to
award of compensation in favour of his employee is to be determined, but it does not mean that even
the insurer is estopped from raising the plea regarding validity of the driving license of the
deceased/injured driver employed by the owner so as to wriggle out of its liability to indemnify the
insured. This is so because the liability of the insurance company to pay compensation to the driver
on account of his death or injury, does not arise out of provisions contained in Employees
Compensation Act, but it arises out of the contract of insurance between the employer and the
insurance company. If the said contract contains a covenant whereby the insurance company is
entitled to be exonerated of its liability to indemnify the insured in case of non validity of the driving
licence of the employee, the insurance company can very well raise this defence in the proceedings
under Employees Compensation's Act.
14. In the above context, I am supported by the judgment of this Court rendered in the case of Zoona
and others vs Ghulam Hassan Khandey and others, 2010(1) JKJ 363. In the said case, this Court,
while dealing with the aforesaid aspect of the matter, has observed as under:
"9.............There can be no denial of the fact that Workman' Compensation Act was
conceived and enacted with laudable aims and objects and that having regard to the
purpose of the Act even stretched view may be taken in interpreting the Act. There
can be also no dispute with the legal proposition that the dependents of the deceased
Workman to hold the employer responsible for payment of compensation have only
to prove that the deceased workman was under employment of the employer; that
death occurred due to an injury/accident arising out of and in the course of
employment. However, the said proposition cannot be extended to include that an
individual/company having an independent contract with the employer whereunder
the individual/company binds down himself/itself to indemnify the employer in the
event of an accident resulting in death/injury, is to be governed by the legal
proposition and not the terms and conditions of the contract governing the
relationship between the indemnifier and indemnified. In other words, the
dependents of a deceased workman on proving that the deceased was a workman and
that his death was caused due to injury/accident arising out of and in the course of
employment may prove their case against the employer but to fasten a third party like
Insurance Company with responsibility to indemnify the employer and pay the
compensation, the dependents have to further prove that the third party or the
Insurance Company in terms of the agreement between such third party/Insurance
Company and the employer is obligated to pay the compensation to the dependents.
The second limb of the duty cast on the dependents does not fall within the realm of
the Workman's Compensation Act and the third party/Insurance Company can prove
and establish that because of defence available to it, it was not under any real
obligation to pay the compensation amount.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129454207/ 5
New India Assurance Company vs Dev Singh S/O Nika Singh on 20 October, 2023
10. Viewed thus, though the validity of driving license may not be a requirement
under Workman's Compensation Act but all the same, it may be a requirement under
the agreement between the insurance company and the employer. The view that
validity of driving license is not a requirement in such matter, therefore, is not a
sound proposition of law. If in a case it is found that the deceased workman had not a
valid driving license the Insurance Company may successfully wriggle-out of its
obligation to pay compensation to the dependents of the deceased workman. In such
a situation the employer nonetheless shall continue to be under legal obligation to
pay compensation to the dependents of the deceased workman."
15. Again the Supreme Court in the case of National Insurance Company Ltd vs Mastan and another,
(2006) 2 SCC 64, has held that an insurer, subject to the terms and conditions of contract of
insurance is bound to indemnify the insured under the 1923 Act, meaning thereby that if there is
any violation of terms and conditions of contract of insurance, the insurer can avoid its liability to
indemnify the insured. In a recent case, titled, Bali Ram vs Rajinder Kumar and another, 2020 SCC
Online SC 769, the Supreme Court has, in a case relating to Employees Compensation Act, 1923 held
that in case of a valid driving license, if the license has expired, the insured is absolved of its liability.
16. From the aforesaid analysis of law on the subject, it is clear that the validity of driving license
may not be an issue to be gone into while considering the liability of employee under the provisions
of the Employees Compensation Act but it would certainly be a consideration while determining the
liability of an insurer under a contract of insurance. Therefore, the insurance company can certainly
raise an issue with regard to the validity of driving licence in the proceedings under Employees
Compensation Act. In Zoona and other's case (supra), this Court has considered the ratio laid down
in the earlier judgment in the case of Mst Noora (supra) on which, the learned Commissioner has
placed reliance and held that the proposition of law laid down in the said case is not legally sound. I
am in respectful agreement with the view taken by this Court in Zoona and other's case, (supra)
because the said view is in consonance with the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in National
Insurance Co. Ltd vs Mastan (supra) and Beli Ram vs Rajinder Kumar and anr (supra).
17. The learned Commissioner has relied upon the view taken by this Court in Noora and others'
case (supra) which has been declared as not a sound law in the later judgment of Zoona and others,
case (supra) and the said view is also contrary the settled position of law laid down by the Supreme
Court. Thus, a substantial question of law has arisen for determination. Therefore, the contention of
the respondents that no substantial question of law arises in the instant case is without any merit.
18. Having held that ratio laid down by this Court in Noora and others' case (supra) is not sound
proposition of law and that later judgment in Zoona and others' case(supra) lays down the correct
position of law which is in consonance with position of law settled by the Supreme Court, the very
basis of the finding of the Commissioner that validity of the driving license of the deceased cannot
be gone into during proceedings under Employees Compensation Act gets knocked down.
Accordingly, it is held that the contention of the appellant/insurance company as regards the
validity of the driving license of the deceased was required to be dealt with and decided by the
Commissioner as the appellant/insurance company was entitled to establish breach of policy
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129454207/ 6
New India Assurance Company vs Dev Singh S/O Nika Singh on 20 October, 2023
conditions so as to seek its exoneration from the liability to indemnify the employer.
19. That takes us to the second question of law which relates to the validity of the driving license of
the deceased. According to the appellant/insurance company without there being an endorsement
on the driving license of the deceased authorising him to drive a vehicle carrying hazardous goods,
he was not competent to drive the offending vehicle. It is not in dispute that the deceased was
driving the offending vehicle that was carrying LPG which is a hazardous substance.
20. Section 3 of the Motor Vehicles Act, 1988 deals with necessity for driving license and it further
provides that a person cannot drive a motor vehicle in any public place unless he holds an effective
driving license issued to him authorizing him to drive a vehicle. Section 10 of the Motor Vehicles Act
provides for forms and contents of the license to drive. Sub section (2) of Section 10 provides that
the driving license shall also be expressed as entitling the holder to drive motor vehicle of one or
more of the classes (a) to (j) mentioned in the said sub section.
21. Thus, provisions of the Motor Vehicles Act provide for the requirement of a driving license for
driving a specific class of vehicle and unless a person has a driving license authorising him to drive a
particular class of vehicle, he is not legally competent to drive such type of vehicle. In the instant
case, admittedly the deceased was driving a vehicle that was carrying hazardous goods at the
relevant time. Admittedly, there was no endorsement authorising the deceased to drive such type
vehicle. However, the claimants had placed on record a copy of the training certificate, according to
which, the deceased had undergone training programme on safe transportation of hazardous goods
(Liquefied Petroleum Gas) and passed the same. The question arises whether mere holding of such a
certificate without there being any endorsement to this effect on the driving license of the deceased
would entitle him to drive such type of vehicle.
22. The answer to aforesaid question can be found in provisions contained in Rule 9 of the Central
Motor Vehicles Rules. Sub Rule (1) of Rule 9 provides that any person driving a goods carriage
carrying goods of dangerous or hazardous nature to human life, should in addition to being a holder
of a driving license to drive a transport vehicle, also possess a certificate of having successfully
passed a course consisting of syllabus prescribed in the said Sub Rule. Sub Rule (2) provides that
holder of a driving license possessing the certificate mentioned in Sub Rule (1) has to apply to the
licensing authority for making necessary entries in his driving license. Sub Rule (3) provides that on
receipt of application, the licensing authority would make an endorsement in the driving license to
the effect that the license holder is authorized to drive a goods carriage carrying goods of dangerous
or hazardous nature to human life.
23. From the above, it is clear that undergoing the requisite course in terms of Sub Rule (1) of Rule 9
of the Rules is only one of the steps in the direction of acquiring a driving license authorising a
person to drive a vehicle carrying hazardous goods. Unless the final step in this regard i.e.
endorsement is made in the driving license of the holder in terms of Sub Rule (3) of Rule 9, such
person cannot claim to be legally competent to drive a vehicle carrying hazardous goods.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129454207/ 7
New India Assurance Company vs Dev Singh S/O Nika Singh on 20 October, 2023
24. The aforesaid issue has also been considered by this Court in the case of United India Insurance
Company Limited vs Pawan Sumbly and others, CIMA No. 42/2012 decided on 19.07.2016. In the
said case, this Court, while dealing with the question whether mere passing of driving test by the
driver relating to the training course for carrying hazardous substances without any endorsement to
this effect on the driving license of the driver would be enough to hold such driver competent to
drive such type of vehicle, has observed that mere possession of certificate having undergone driving
test to drive a vehicle meant for carrying hazardous substances cannot be taken as a substitute for
fulfilment of the requirement of endorsement on the driving license authorizing the driver to drive
such type of vehicle. The Court further observed that bringing out vehicle carrying dangerous and
hazardous goods on public places involves a great element of risk to life and property of public at
large. Therefore, owners of such vehicles must exercise special care to ensure that such vehicles are
entrusted for driving and given incharge of persons who are duly trained and specifically authorised
to take charge of such vehicles. The Court further observed that no lenient view is justified if breach
in this regard is proved by the insurer. A similar view has been taken by this Court in the case of
United India Insurance Co. Ltd. vs Subash Singh and others, 2017 (4) JKJ 570.
25. In view of the aforesaid analysis of the legal position, it is clear that without endorsement
authorising the deceased to drive the offending vehicle that was carrying hazardous goods in the
shape of Liquefied Petroleum Gas, it cannot be stated that he was holding a valid and effective
driving license. Therefore, the appellant/insurance company has been able to establish that there
has been a breach of the policy conditions on the part of the owner, respondent No. 5, which entitles
the appellant/insurance company to avoid its liability to indemnify respondent No. 5. The learned
Commissioner has fallen into a grave error by not considering the binding precedents on this aspect
of the matter and in holding that the appellant/insurance company is liable to pay the awarded sum.
26. For the foregoing reasons, the appeal is allowed and the appellant/insurance company is
exonerated from its liability to indemnify the insured. However, having regard to the fact that the
appellant/insurance company has already deposited the awarded sum with the Commissioner, and a
portion thereof stands released in favour of the claimants, it is directed that the Commissioner shall
release the balance amount of compensation in favour of the claimants and thereafter, recover the
whole of the sum released in favour of the claimants from the owner/respondent No. 5. Upon
receipt of the released compensation from the owner/employer, the same shall be refunded to the
appellant/insurance company, who shall be at liberty to move an appropriate application before the
Commissioner in this regard.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 20.10.2023 Rakesh Whether the order is speaking: Yes Whether
the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129454207/ 8
