Nikhil Sharma vs State Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
Nikhil Sharma vs State Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
Bench: Rajnesh Oswal, Moksha Khajuria Kazmi
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 13.07.2023
Pronounced on: 23.08.2023
CRA No. 20/2014
c/w
Conf No. 9/2014
Nikhil Sharma .....Appellant(s)/Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr. Sunil Sethi, Sr. Advocate with
Q
Mr. Mohsin Bhatt, Advocate
Vs
State of J&K and others ..... Respondent(s)
Through: Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, Dy.AG.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE RAJNESH OSWAL, JUDGE
HON'BLE MS. JUSTICE MOKSHA KHAJURIA KAZMI, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Per-Oswal J.
01. This appeal arises out of the judgment of conviction dated 10.03.2014 and the order of sentence
dated 15.03.2014, whereby the Court of learned 3rd Additional Sessions Judge, (Fast Track Court),
Jammu (hereinafter to be referred as "the trial court") has convicted the appellant for commission of
offences under Sections 363 and 376 RPC and sentenced him to undergo rigorous imprisonment for
life and fine of Rs. 50,000/- under Section 376 RPC. The appellant has been further sentenced to
undergo imprisonment for seven years and fine of Rs. 5,000/- for commission of offence under
Section 363 RPC. In default of payment of fine, the appellant has been directed to undergo simple
imprisonment for six months in case of conviction under Section 376 RPC and in default of payment
of fine in case of conviction under Section 363 RPC, the appellant has been directed to undergo
simple imprisonment for two months.
02. The judgment has been impugned by the appellant on the ground that the prosecutrix was
mentally unsound, which is clearly established from her statement during cross-examination, as
such, her statement could not have relied upon by the learned trial court. It is also stated that the
statements of other witnesses examined by the prosecution clearly establish that the appellant has
been falsely implicated because of the quarrel between the appellant and brother of the prosecutrix.
It is also contended by the appellant that the statement of Dr. Poonam Mahajan has ruled out the
presence of spermatozoa in the vaginal smears, which clearly demonstrates that the appellant has
been falsely implicated. In nutshell, the appellant has assailed the judgment of the trial court on the
ground that the learned trial court has not appreciated the evidence in its right perspective and has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2210883/ 1
Nikhil Sharma vs State Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
ignored the material infirmities in the prosecution case.
03. Mr. Sunil Sethi, learned senior counsel for the appellant vehemently argued that a bare perusal
of the statement of the prosecutrix would reveal that she was of unsound mind and in view of her
incoherent statement, the same could not have been relied upon by the learned trial court for
convicting the appellant. He further submitted that there are material contradictions between the
statement of father of the prosecutrix and statement of PW Nek Ram. It was also argued by Mr.
Sethi that the medical evidence does not establish the commission of offence of rape upon the
prosecutrix by the appellant.
04. Per contra, Mr. Pawan Dev Singh, learned Dy. AG submitted that the prosecutrix had clearly
deposed about the commission of rape by the appellant and other witnesses including the father of
prosecutrix have also supported the version of the prosecutrix. He further submitted that the
prosecutrix was a minor girl and it was not that at all the time she was mentally unstable. The
manner, in which she made her statement in chief-examination clearly establishes the guilt of the
appellant and the learned trial court has rightly relied upon the testimony of the prosecutrix.
05. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record.
06. The prosecution case as projected in the charge sheet is that on 25.05.2008, at around 2200
hours, the father of the prosecutrix submitted a written complaint with the SHO, Police Station,
Akhnoor, wherein he stated that his daughter i.e. the prosecutrix, aged 12 years at around 03.00 pm
had gone towards the house of her maternal grandfather but she did not return back till the evening.
He searched for her and during search when he reached the thoroughfare, he found that the
appellant had taken his daughter below the culvert and was committing rape on her. On seeing him,
he ran away from the spot. The occurrence took place at 07.00 pm. The condition of the prosecutrix
was not good. He initially took her to home and thereafter, he approached the Police Station along
with his daughter. On receipt of this application, FIR bearing No. 120/2008 for commission of
offence under section 376 RPC was registered against the appellant. Thereafter, the investigation
was commenced and after completion of the investigation, charge sheet was laid against the
appellant for commission of offences under Section 363 & 376 RPC before the Court of Judicial
Magistrate 1st Class, Akhnoor and the same was committed to the Court of Sessions Judge, Jammu
vide order dated 17.08.2008. Finally, the case was transferred to the learned trial court. The charges
for commission of offences under Sections 376 & 363 RPC were framed against the appellant vide
order dated 07.10.2008. Out of the 11 witnesses cited by the prosecution, 6 witnesses were
examined. The appellant also examined one witness in his defence. The learned trial court vide
judgment dated 10.03.2014 convicted the appellant for commission of offence under Sections 363 &
376 RPC and vide order dated 15.03.2014 sentenced him to undergo imprisonment along with
payment of fine as mentioned above.
07. The main contention raised by the appellant is that the statement of the prosecutrix
demonstrates that she was of unsound mind and learned trial Court has erred in relying upon her
statement. It was also submitted that there are material contradictions between the statements of
two witnesses and the medical evidence does not establish the commission of offence of rape by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2210883/ 2
Nikhil Sharma vs State Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
appellant.
08. The statement of the prosecutrix depicts that the learned trial court had put her some questions
before declaring her mentally fit. A perusal of the statement of the prosecutrix would reveal that
during initial questions by the learned trial court, she stated that false statement should be made in
the Court and she did not understand the difference between the truth and falsehood. The learned
trial court observed that in view of the reply submitted by the prosecutrix, oath cannot be
administered to the prosecutrix, but nonetheless the statement of the prosecutrix was recorded
without oath after declaring her fit for making statement. During her testimony, she stated that the
appellant had undressed her below the culvert and did wrong act with her. The appellant had laid
her on the ground and caught her tightly after laying over her. He was under the influence of liquor.
She received bruises on her thigh. She was coming all alone from the house of her maternal uncle,
who resided near her house. The appellant also gave her toffees, which were thrown by her. Her
parents also came on spot, the appellant then ran away. The appellant had taken off his pant. Her
father had taken her home and blood oozed out from her private part. She was examined by the
Doctor. Report was registered against the appellant in the Police Station. She was ten years of age at
the time of incident. During cross-examination, she did not disclose the name of her school as well
as the name of her grandfather. She admitted that she was not mentally fit. She also did not know
the name of her maternal uncle. She stated that each toffee given by the appellant weighed one Kg.
The private parts of male and female are similar. The colour of blood is yellow and her father was a
doctor. The clothes were handed over to the Police. She does not know the meaning of sexual
intercourse and the case is false.
09. PW-2 (Father of the prosecutrix) stated that on 25th of May, 2008, the prosecutrix, who was 10
years of age and mentally unsound, had gone to the house of her maternal grand-parents. He
enquired from his in-laws and he was told that she had already left for home. He searched for her
and when he reached near the main road, he heard the cries from below the culvert. He went on spot
and saw the accused was raping the prosecutrix after removing her salwar (trouser). The appellant
had also removed his pant. When the appellant saw him, he fled from the spot after taking pant with
him. He brought his daughter to home and his wife found the blood coming from the private part of
the prosecutrix, who was crying. Thereafter, report was lodged in the Police Station. He was
accompanied by Nek Ram and his daughter. The statement of the prosecutrix was recorded by the
Police. He identified his signatures. He proved the FIR (EXTP-2). The prosecutrix was examined by
the Doctor. The Police had seized the wearing apparel, which included salwar, shirt and one pant,
which was blood stained. He proved the seizure memo EXTP-2/1. The pant of the accused was also
seized. He proved seizure memo EXTP-2/2. He also proved the supurdnama of two rings (EXTP-2/3
and EXTP-2/4). He also proved the written report lodged by him EXTP-2/5. He also proved his
statement recorded before the Magistrate. During cross-examination, he stated that occurrence took
place on 25.05.2008 and not on 26.05.2008. He alone proceeded from home to search for the
prosecutrix. The culvert was at a distance of 600 yards from his house and the house of his in-laws
was also situated at the same distance from the culvert. He went to the house of his in- laws for
searching the prosecutrix and at that time his three brothers-in-law were not at home. He went to
the house of Nek Ram to enquire about the prosecutrix, who told him that she had already left.
Thereafter, he searched her daughter in other houses and then went towards the road. It was about
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2210883/ 3
Nikhil Sharma vs State Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
10.00 p.m. The seized clothes were not shown to him in the Court. They reached the Police Station
at 10.00 p.m. His daughter sometimes talks in a proper manner and sometimes in incoherent
manner, as she is mentally unstable. He has not mentioned in respect of the toffees either in his
complaint or in his statement recorded under Section 161 Cr. P.C. Nek Ram and Raj Kumar
accompanied him to the Police Station. It is not mentioned in his statement recorded under Section
164-A Cr.P.C. that the appellant was raping his daughter after removing his pant and salwar. It is
mentioned in his statement that the accused ran away after lifting his pant. The appellant was
arrested in the intervening night of 25th /26th at about 10.00 to 11.00 p.m. He denied the
suggestion of the learned counsel for the appellant/accused that prior to the incident his son was
beaten up by the appellant while playing cricket.
10. PW-3 Nek Ram (Maternal Uncle of the prosecutrix) stated that the prosecutrix, who is 10 years
of age and mentally unstable is his niece. On 25.05.2008, she had come to his house and went back
to her home in the evening. Bikru Ram came to his house and enquired from him about the
whereabouts of his daughter. He replied that she had already left for home. At 07.00 p.m or 07.15
p.m. Father of the prosecutrix again came to his house and told him about the occurrence
committed by the appellant with the prosecutrix. Thereafter, he along with Bikru Ram and
prosecutrix went to the Police Station. Medical examination of the prosecutrix was conducted on the
same day at about 1.30. a.m on 26.05.2008. The clothes of the prosecutrix were seized by the Police,
which were blood stained. Ring used for sealing the packet was kept on supurdnama of father of
prosecutrix. The Police also seized the pant of the appellant and the ring used for sealing the pant
was kept on supurdanama of father of prosecutrix. During cross-examination, he stated that on
25.05.2008 at about 8.00/9.00 p.m. he was present in his house. The appellant was known to him
prior to occurrence, who resided at distance of two kilometers from his house. The prosecutrix used
to visit his house frequently. Sometimes, she used to come all alone from her home, which is
situated at a distance of 400/500 meters. He has no personal knowledge of the occurrence but came
to know the same from father of prosecutrix. There is no enmity between the appellant and son of
father of prosecutrix. He did not go outside to search for the prosecutrix.
11. PW-4 (mother of the prosecutrix) stated that the age of her daughter was 10 years. The appellant
was known to her. In the year 2008, in the summer season, the prosecutrix had gone to the house of
her maternal grandmother at 3.00 p.m. but she did not return. When she asked her husband to
search for the prosecutrix, he went out and at about 7.30 pm, he came back along with the
prosecutrix in his lap, who was crying with pain due to which she opened the salwar of the
prosecutrix and found that blood was oozing out from her private part. On enquiry, the prosecutrix
told her that the appellant had committed wrong act with her after taking her below the culvert. He
was caught by her husband. Thereafter, they went to the Police Station. Next day, the appellant was
arrested and he confessed his crime. The prosecutrix was examined by the Doctor and the Police
also seized the clothes of the prosecutrix and the appellant. She admitted the contents of seizure
memo EXTP-2/1 and EXTP-2/2 and also of supurdnama EXTP- 2/4. These documents bore her
signatures. During cross-examination, she stated that her husband is suffering from AIDS. Nek Ram
is her real brother and her parental house is situated from a distance of one kilometer from her
house. After seeing the condition of her daughter, she went along with her husband and prosecutrix
to her parental house at 7.30 p.m. where Nek Ram met her. She narrated him about the incident.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2210883/ 4
Nikhil Sharma vs State Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
Her mother and sister-in-law also became aware about the incident. Her husband went in search of
the prosecutrix at 6.00 p.m. Her husband had not given any written report in her presence. The
Police had enquired about the incident from the prosecutrix and thereafter, statement of the
prosecutrix was recorded in the Court in her presence.
12. PW-5 I.A. Malik, Scientific Officer, FSL, Jammu stated that he had received two sealed packets
through SPO Amar Singh forwarded by SDPO, Akhnoor in connection with the case FIR No.
120/2008 under Sections 376/511 RPC of Police Station, Akhnoor. The contents of the packet were
subjected to chemical and microscopic examination for the detection of semen/human spermatozoa.
The opinion was given by him in his report No. 617/FSL dated 30.06.2009. The report bears his seal
and signatures. Its contents are correct and the same is exhibited as EXT-P-I.A. During cross-
examination, he deposed that he had not received the semen sample of the accused for its
comparison with the semen to be detected from the exhibit No. M-46/09 due to which he could not
tell that the semen which were detected from exhibit M-46/09 were of accused or of somebody else.
Before conducting the test, he was not told whether the semen stains were of human or of animal.
No semen found on exhibit No. M-45/09 and M-47/09 after conducting the examination.
13. PW-6 Dr. Poonam Mahajan, Medical Officer, stated that she had examined the prosecutrix. On
examination, prosecutrix was conscious, cooperative but not responding fully to verbal commands.
No marks of violence externally on any part of body, old abrasion marks on the medial side of both
legs were found. No fresh marks of violence were found on her body, however, local examination
shows both labia majora, vulva hypermic, (congested and red) with the evidence of dried blood
stains around are of vaginal opening which was wet. Vagina admits little finger with difficulty and
there was no evidence of fresh bleeding. Two smears taken from posterior fornix and sent for
histopathological examination. The H/P examination report does not show the presence of
spermatozoa in both the smears. In her opinion, there was no definite evidence of sexual intercourse
but marks of violence around vaginal orifice might indicate assault. The medical examination report
bears her signature, contents whereof were correct. In cross-examination, she stated that she has
given her opinion that there was no definite evidence of sexual intercourse. The marks of violence
around vaginal orifice could be possible by cycling or otherwise than sexual intercourse. It is true
that no spermatozoa were present in both smears of the prosecutrix and she had conducted the
examination of the prosecutrix within a period of seven hours of alleged incident. The witness asked
the prosecutrix regarding the incident but she could not reply as she was mentally retarded.
14. PW Ranjeet Singh, Head Constable was the Investigating Officer. He stated that during the
course of the investigation, the victim was taken to hospital in the intervening night of 25th/26th
May 2008, where she was medically examined because her mother told them that blood was oozing
out from the private part of the prosecutrix. He went to the place of occurrence at 4.00 a.m in the
morning. He proved the site plan EXTP-10. The clothes of the prosecutrix were seized from her
house and the same were sealed on spot. The appellant was arrested on 26.05.2008 and his pant
was also seized. Both the seized articles were sent to the FSL, Jammu for examination. After
completion of the investigation, he proved the offences under Sections 363 & 376 RPC against the
appellant. During cross-examination, he stated that the appellant was arrested on 26.05.2008 at
1.00 p.m. He felt stains of semen and blood over pant of prosecutrix, due to that reason he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2210883/ 5
Nikhil Sharma vs State Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
mentioned the same over the seizure memo. The pant was produced by the appellant in the Police
Station on 26.05.2008. The place of occurrence was below culvert. Father of prosecutrix has
wrongly stated in his statement under section 164-A Cr. P.C. that occurrence took place on
26.05.2008.
15. DW Deepak Sharma stated that he knows the appellant, who resides in his vicinity. The appellant
has been falsely implicated in the case because quarrel took place between son of father of
prosecutrix and the appellant while playing cricket.
16. The prosecution in order to bring home the guilt of the appellant has relied upon the statement
of prosecutrix, her parents, maternal uncle and also the medical evidence as well as forensic
evidence. So far as the statement of the prosecutrix is concerned, her statement is required to be
appreciated by taking into consideration that she is of unsound mind. The courts cannot expect a
person of unsound manner to depose in a manner like that of a normal person. Reply submitted by
the prosecutrix that she does not understand difference between truth and falsehood, the colour of
the blood was yellow, that her father was a Doctor reveals that she was not of a sound mind. In
Chaman Lal v. State of H.P1., , the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex Court observed as under:
"18.-------The High Court has also come to the conclusion that the victim was not in a
position to understand the good and bad aspect of the sexual assault. Merely because
the victim was in a position to do some household works cannot discard the medical
evidence that the victim had mild mental retardation and she was not in a position to
understand the good and bad aspect of sexual assault. It appears that the accused had
taken disadvantage of the mental illness of the victim. --
(emphasis added)
17. So far as the present case is concerned, the statement of the prosecutrix is relevant only to the
extent that the appellant laid her on ground (2020) 17 SCC 69 and thereafter himself laid on her and
held her tightly. He did wrong act with her. Though she has not categorically stated that the
appellant raped her but this court does not expect the narration of detailed occurrence from her as
she is of unsound mind. Also this court finds that that the prosecutrix was not tutored particularly in
view of replies made by her during cross-examination. It is settled law that even in absence of the
statement of the prosecutrix, who because of any disability is not in position to depose in proper
manner, the accused still can be convicted for commission of offence of rape. In „State of
Maharashtra v. Bandu'2, the Hon(cid:128)ble Apex court reversed the acquittal of the accused, who had
raped the deaf and dumb girl, but was not examined during trial. The Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme court
observed as under:
"The evidence of the mother of the victim clearly shows that it was the
respondent-accused who took away the victim. The victim and the accused were seen
together by PW-2, Gajanan Marutrao Sonule on the date of commission of offence.
The victim immediately after the occurrence narrated the same to her mother as to
what happened as reflected in the FIR and the version of the PW-1. Rape has been
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2210883/ 6
Nikhil Sharma vs State Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
confirmed by medical evidence. Identity of accused is not in dispute. In these
circumstances the trial court having convicted the respondent, the High Court was
not justified in setting aside the conviction.
(emphasis added)
18. The other evidence on record also points towards the guilt of the appellant. PW-2, who is the
material witness, has stated that when he went in search of her daughter and reached near the
culvert, he heard the cries below the culvert and found that the appellant was raping the prosecutrix.
It is true that he admitted that he did not make statement before the Magistrate in respect of the
accused raping his daughter but the defence has not been able to dispute his presence on place of
occurrence. The perusal of the statement of witness (2018) 11 SCC 163 recorded under section 164-A
Cr. P.C. reveals that he had stated that the appellant did wrong act with his daughter. It was he, who
took the prosecutrix to home and his wife found blood oozing out from the private part of the
prosecutrix. It needs to be noted that it was PW-2 who lodged FIR regarding commission of offence
of rape by the appellant. Not only the victim of the sexual assault but also her family bears the
mental trauma, humiliation for none of their fault. The father is a guardian and protector of his
minor children and he makes every effort to protect his minor children from the vagaries of life. No
father would falsely implicate any innocent person on the allegation that he committed rape upon
his minor daughter, who is mentally unsound, thereby putting the honour and dignity of his
daughter as well as of his family at stake. In "State vs Ramdev Singh"3, the supreme Court observed
as under:
"Sexual violence apart from being a dehumanizing act is unlawful intrusion on the
right of privacy and chastity of a female. It is serious blow to her supreme honour and
offends her self esteem and dignity - it degrades and humiliates the victim and where
the victim is a helpless innocent child or a minor it leaves behind a traumatic
experience, a rapist not only causes physical injuries but more indelibly leaves a scar
on the most cherished possession of a woman i.e. dignity, honour, reputation and not
the least her chastity. ..... The courts are, therefore, expected to deal with cases of
sexual crime against woman with utmost sensitivity. Such case need to be dealt with
sternly and severally. A socially sensitized judge is a better statutory armour in cases
of crime against women than long clauses of penal provisions, containing complex
exceptions and provisos."
(emphasis added)
19. In State of U.P. Vs. Choteylal4, the supreme court observed as under:
"The important thing that the court has to bear in mind is that what is lost by a rape
victim is face. The victim looses value as a person. Ours is a conservative society and,
therefore, a AIR 2004 SC 1290 AIR 2011 SC 697 woman and more so a young
unmarried woman will not put her reputation in peril by alleging falsely about
forcible sexual assault. In examining the evidence of the prosecutrix the courts must
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2210883/ 7
Nikhil Sharma vs State Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
be alive to the condition prevalent in the Indian society and must not be swayed by
beliefs in other countries. The courts must be sensitive and responsive to the plight of
the female victim of sexual assault. Society's belief and value system need to be kept
uppermost in mind as rape is the worst form of women's oppression. A forcible
sexual assault brings in humiliation, feeling of disgust, tremendous embarrassment,
sense of shame, trauma and lifelong emotional scar to a victim and it is, therefore,
most unlikely of a woman, and more so by a young woman, roping in somebody
falsely in the crime of rape. The stigma that attaches to the victim of rape in Indian
society ordinarily rules out the leveling of false accusations. An Indian woman
traditionally will not concoct an untruthful story and bring charges of rape for the
purpose of blackmail, hatred, spite or revenge. This Court has repeatedly laid down
the guidelines as to how the evidence of the prosecutrix in the crime of rape should be
evaluated by the court."
(emphasis added)
20. The cross-examination of the witnesses by the defence depicts that a failed attempt was made by
the defence to establish that because of past enmity, the appellant was falsely implicated in the
commission of offence of rape by the father of the prosecutrix. The motive of false implication,
which has been projected by the appellant that the son of PW-2 was beaten up by the appellant
during cricket match, can hardly be a motive for falsely implicating a person and that too in the
commission of heinous offence of rape. From the evidence on record it transpires that when the
prosecutrix was taken to her home, her mother i.e. PW No. 4 herself saw the blood oozing from the
private part of the prosecutrix. The FSL report establishes the presence of human spermatozoa on
blue coloured shirt of the prosecutrix. Further the statement of Dr. Poonam Mahajan is also
relevant, who though has stated that no fresh marks were found on her body, however, local
examination showed that both labia majora (vulva) hyperaemic, (congested and red) with evidence
of dried blood stains on both labia medially introitus (area around vaginal opening) was wet. No
doubt, the said witness has stated that there is no definite evidence of sexual intercourse but marks
of violence around vaginal orifice (vulva) indicated assault and if her statement is read in
conjunction with the statement of PW-2, PW-4, and PW-5 I. A. Malik, Scientific Officer, FSL,
Jammu, it is clearly established that the appellant raped the prosecutrix. Further, the occurrence
took place at 7.00 pm on 25.05.2008 at 10.00 pm and the FIR was lodged on 25th of May, 2008 and
the promptitude with which the FIR was lodged, the medical evidence and also the report of FSL, it
cannot be said that the appellant has been falsely implicated in the case. In FIR, it was mentioned by
the PW-2 that the prosecutrix was raped by the appellant. The following facts are established by the
prosecution:
(a) That the appellant was seen with the prosecutrix below culvert and he was
without pant and the prosecutrix was also without trouser.
On seeing the PW-2, the appellant ran away.
(b) The appellant had laid the prosecutrix on the ground and he himself laid on her.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2210883/ 8
Nikhil Sharma vs State Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
(c) The prosecutrix was examined by the PW- Dr. Poonam Mahajan just after few hours of rape and
injuries were found on the private part of the prosecutrix.
(d) The semen was found on the blue coloured shirt of the prosecutrix.
21. In Collector of Customs v. D. Bhoormall5, the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme court has remarked as under:
"30.---------------- in all human affairs absolute certainty is a myth, and -- as Prof.
Brett felicitously puts it -- "all exactness is a fake". El Dorado of absolute proof being
unattainable, the law accepts for it probability as a working substitute in this
work-a-day world. The law does not require the prosecution to prove the impossible.
All that it requires is the establishment of such a degree of probability that a prudent
man may, on its basis, believe in the existence of the fact in issue. Thus, legal proof is
not necessarily perfect proof; often it is nothing more than a prudent man's estimate
as to the probabilities of the case."
22. Thus, this Court has no hesitation to hold that it was the appellant who raped the unsound girl
below the culvert, while she was returning from her maternal grandfather(cid:128)s home at 7.00 p.m.
23. The evidence led by the defence is not of such nature and character that raises any doubt about
the truthfulness of the prosecution case. As such, this Court does not find that the evidence has not
been properly appreciated by the learned trial court and the material infirmities in the prosecution
have been ignored by the learned trial court. Rather, we find that the prosecution has proved its case
beyond reasonable doubt. After re-appreciating the evidence, this Court too has reached to the same
conclusion as that of the learned trial court.
24. Now we would examine the propriety of the quantum of the sentence, imposed upon the
appellant. Before we do so, it would be apt to take note of the various pronouncements of the
Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme Court on the issue of quantum of sentence. In Deo Narain Mandal vs. State of UP
6 , the Supreme Court held that sentence should not be either excessively harsh or (1974) 2 SCC 544
( 2004) 7 SCC 257 ridiculously low. While determining the quantum of sentence, the court should
bear in mind the principle of proportionality. Sentence should be based on facts of a given case.
Gravity of offence, manner of commission of crime, age and sex of accused should be taken into
account. Discretion of Court in awarding sentence cannot be exercised arbitrarily or whimsically. In
Anil Vs. State of Maharashtra 7 , the Supreme Court held that the investigating agency and courts
are duty bound to collect additional evidence regarding past criminal history etc. of the convicted
accused before imposing sentence relating to possibility of reformation, rehabilitation and criminal
past of the convict to impose appropriate sentence under Section 354(3) Cr. P.C. The State is obliged
to furnish such material to court.
25. It is established that the appellant raped the prosecutrix, who was of unsound mind but at the
same time, nothing has been brought on record by the prosecution in respect of the past criminal
antecedents of the appellant. The appellant was 21 years of age at the time of occurrence i.e. 2008
and at present he must be of 36 years of age. The nominal roll placed on record by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2210883/ 9
Nikhil Sharma vs State Of J&K And Others on 23 August, 2023
Superintendent of Jail concerned in the month of May, 2023 reveals that the total period of
incarceration of the appellant as on 12.05.2023 was 10 years 3 months and 12 days. It is evident that
the appellant has spent substantial part of his youth in custody. The appellant is first time offender.
Taking into consideration the abovementioned factors, this Court finds that the sentence of rigours
imprisonment for life awarded to the appellant is on higher side. Section 376 (1) RPC, as it existed
on the date of commission of offence, 2014) 4 SCC 69 provides for imprisonment for a term not less
than seven years but may extend to imprisonment for life.
26. Accordingly, while upholding the judgment of conviction dated 10.03.2014, we modify the order
of sentence dated 15.03.2014 and sentence the appellant to imprisonment for a period he has
already remained in custody. However, the fine imposed under sections 363 & 376 RPC shall remain
the same. He is ordered to be released forthwith provided the appellant deposits the fine, failing
which he shall suffer the imprisonment for a period of six months as prescribed by the learned trial
court, for default in payment of fine.
27. Before parting, we find that the prosecutrix is required to be compensated in terms of Victim
Compensation Scheme, 2019 notified by the Government of Jammu & Kashmir vide Notification
dated 11.07.2019 on account of physical and mental trauma she had faced due to the act of the
appellant. Accordingly, copy of this judgment be sent to the Secretary, State Legal Service Authority,
Jammu, who shall pass appropriate orders for grant of compensation to the prosecutrix.
28. Record of the learned trial court be sent back along copy of this judgment.
29. Confirmation is answered accordingly.
(MOKSHA KHAJURIA KAZMI) (RAJNESH OSWAL)
JUDGE JUDGE
Jammu
23.08.2023
Karam Chand/Secy
Whether the order is speaking: Yes
Whether the order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/2210883/ 10
