Nikunj Sharma vs State Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
Nikunj Sharma vs State Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
Author: Sanjay Dhar
Bench: Sanjay Dhar
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Reserved on: 22.02.2023
Pronounced on: 02.03.2023
CRMC No. 181/2018
(O&M)
Nikunj Sharma .....Appellant(s)/ Petitioner(s)
Through: - Mr. Abhinav Sharma, Sr. Advocate with
Mr. Abhirash Sharma, Advocate
Vs.
State of J&K and another ...Respondent(S)
Through: - Mr. Bhanu Jasrogia, GA
Mr. Aseem Sawhney, Advocate &
Mr. Arshad Hussain, Advocate
CORAM: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJAY DHAR, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
1) In the instant petition, the petitioner has called into question FIR No. 152/2018 for offences
under Sections 316/323/109 RPC registered with the Police Station, Rajouri.
2) It appears that respondent No. 2/complainant lodged a written report with the SHO, Police
Station, Rajouri on 29.03.2018. In the said report, it was alleged that the petitioner happens to be
her husband with whom she has entered into wedlock on 05.03.2016. According to the complainant,
after about three months of the marriage, the petitioner and his relatives including his parents,
brother and sister started harassing and beating her. It was further alleged that the complainant
became pregnant and in the month of January 2017, when she was pregnant, the petitioner and his
aforesaid relatives conspired with each other and brother of the petitioner, Anuj Sharma pushed her
down the stairs, as a result of which she fell down and experienced pain in her belly. It is further
alleged that the petitioner, husband of the complainant, arranged her treatment and she was
administered some medicines as a consequence whereof, miscarriage took place. The complainant
has further alleged that she was thrown out of her matrimonial home and she started living with her
parents.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28428272/ 1
Nikunj Sharma vs State Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
3) On the basis of the aforesaid report, the Police registered impugned FIR for offences under
Sections 316/323/109 RPC and started investigation of the case. Vide order dated 17.04.2018 passed
by this Court in the instant petition, investigation to the extent of offence under Section 316 RPC
was stayed, but it appears that the investigation of the case continued in respect of the other
offences.
4) The petitioner has challenged the impugned FIR primarily on the ground that all the offences
alleged in the impugned FIR are non-cognizable in nature, as such, it was not open to the police to
register the FIR and undertake the investigation of the case without permission of the Magistrate. It
has been contended that the investigation of the impugned FIR is without jurisdiction and, as such,
the same deserves to be quashed. The other ground urged by the petitioner is that as per the medical
report, there was no positive evidence with regard to the pregnancy of the complainant, as such,
offences under Sections 313 and 316 of RPC are not otherwise made out against the petitioner. It has
been contended that once the registration of basic FIR in respect of non-cognizable offences is
without jurisdiction, the Investigating Agency cannot add cognizable offences during the
investigation of the case.
5) The respondent-State has filed its objections to the petition and has filed the status report with
regard to the investigation. As per the status reports filed by the Investigating Agency, after
registration of the impugned FIR, the statements of the witnesses under Section 161 Cr. P.C. were
recorded, on the basis of the which, offences under Sections 316 and 498-A RPC were added and
offence under Section 316 RPC was dropped. Status reports further indicate that during the course
of the investigation, the Investigating Officer called the complainant for recording her statement
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. but she has not responded so far.
6) Respondent No. 2/complainant has also filed her response to the petition. In her response, it has
been contended that this Court in exercise of its jurisdiction under Section 482 Cr. P.C. cannot
embark upon an inquiry to ascertain the veracity of the contention of the petitioner that there was
no positive evidence with regard to the pregnancy of the complainant. It has been further submitted
that admittedly, the complainant had lodged two more complaints before the police prior to lodging
of the impugned FIR, in which specific allegations were made by her regarding demand of dowry by
the accused including the petitioner, as also regarding harassment perpetrated upon her by the
accused in connection with demands of dowry. According to respondent No. 2, merely because the
FIR has been registered with regard to non-cognizable offences, the Investigating Agency is not
precluded from undertaking investigation, if it finds that certain cognizable offences are also made
out against the accused.
7) I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case including the case
diary.
8) The main ground urged by the learned Senior Counsel for the petitioner impugning the FIR
lodged by respondent No. 2 is that the Investigating Agency could not have registered an FIR and
undertaken the investigation in respect of non-cognizable offences.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28428272/ 2
Nikunj Sharma vs State Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
9) On the other hand, learned counsel for respondent No. 2 has submitted that technicalities cannot
be allowed to defeat the ends of justice when during the investigation of the case it has come to fore
that the cognizable offences have also been committed by the petitioner and co-accused.
10) Before determining the merits of the rival contentions of the parties, it would be apt to mention
here that although offences under Sections 313 and 316 IPC have been categorized as cognizable
offences under the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, yet corresponding offences under the Ranbir
Penal Code i.e. Section 313 and Section 316 of RPC, as per the Jammu and Kashmir Code of
Criminal Procedure Svt. 1989, are non-cognizable in nature. The offence under Section 323 RPC is
also non-cognizable in nature. Thus, there is no dispute with regard to the legal position that
offences under Sections 316 and 323 RPC as also offence under Section 313 RPC are non- cognizable
in nature.
11) Since the offences alleged to have been committed relate to a period when the Jammu and
Kashmir Code of Criminal Procedure was in force, therefore, in the matter of registration of
information and undertaking of investigation, the instant case is to be governed by the provisions
contained in Chapter XIV of the Jammu and Kashmir Code of Criminal Procedure.
12) Section 154 is the first provision in the aforesaid Chapter, which provides that every information
relating to the cognizable offences has to be reduced to writing by the officer incharge of the Police
Station or under his direction. Section 155 of Cr. P.C. relates to information in non-cognizable cases,
it reads as under:
"155. Information as to non- cognizable cases and investigation of such cases.
(1) When information is given to an officer in charge of a police station of the
commission within the limits of such station of a non- cognizable offence, he shall
enter or cause to be entered the substance of the information in a book to be kept by
such officer in such form as the State Government may prescribe in this behalf, and
refer the informant to the Magistrate. (2) No police officer shall investigate a non-
cognizable case without the order of a Magistrate having power to try such case or
commit the case for trial.
(3) Any police officer receiving such order may exercise the same powers in respect of
the investigation (except the power to arrest without warrant) as an officer in charge
of a police station may exercise in a cognizable case.
(4) Where a case relates to two or more offences of which at least one is cognizable,
the case shall be deemed to be a cognizable case, notwithstanding that the other
offences are non-
cognizable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28428272/ 3
Nikunj Sharma vs State Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
13) From a perusal of the aforesaid provision, it is clear that when information regarding
commission of a non-cognizable offence is given to an officer of the Police Station, he has to enter it
in a book to be maintained for the said purpose and thereafter, refer the informant to the Magistrate
having the jurisdiction. Sub Section (2) quoted above provides that the Police Officer is debarred
from investigating a non-cognizable offence without the order of the Magistrate concerned. Once
such an order is received by the Police Officer, he can exercise the same powers as he may exercise
in a cognizable offence, except that he cannot exercise the power of arrest without warrant.
14) From the above, it becomes clear that an officer of the Police Station has to record the
information with regard to non-cognizable offences in a separate book to be kept for that purpose,
whereas information with regard to cognizable offences has to be recorded in a different book. It is
also clear that investigation into a non-cognizable case cannot be undertaken without order of a
Magistrate, whereas there is no such requirement in case of cognizable offences.
15) In the instant case, Investigating Agency has registered an FIR and undertaken the investigation
in respect of non-cognizable offences. The contents of the impugned FIR also do not disclose
commission of any cognizable offence. It talks about harassment and beating of the complainant by
the accused. It also talks about administration of medicines and treatment to her resulting in
miscarriage. The contents of the FIR do not relate to an act of harassment in connection with
demand of any dowry. There is not even a whisper in the impugned FIR that respondent No. 2 has
been subjected to demands of dowry by the accused. Therefore, the impugned FIR discloses only
commission of non-cognizable offences but still then the SHO concerned registered an FIR and
undertook investigation of the case as if it was a cognizable case.
16) The question arises as to what would be the effect of such an action on the part of the
Investigating Agency. Learned counsel for the respondent No. 2 has vehemently argued that such an
illegality is curable and the same should not be allowed to defeat the ends of justice so as to permit
the petitioner and co-accused escape the clutches of law. In support of his contentions, the learned
counsel has placed heavy reliance on the judgment of the Supreme Court in the case of N. H.
Rishbud and Inder Singh vs. State of Delhi, AIR 1955 SC 196, wherein the Supreme Court ruled that
Section 5A of the Prevention of Corruption Act, 1947 is mandatory and not directory and went on to
hold that the illegality committed in the course of an investigation does not affect the competence
and jurisdiction of the Court for trial. The Court further held that where cognizance of the case has
been taken and the case has proceeded to termination the validity of the preceding investigation
does not vitiate the result unless miscarriage of justice has been caused thereby. The Court while
examining the order of a Magistrate contemplated Section 5A(1) of the Prevention of Corruption
Act, 1947, observed as under:
"When a Magistrate is approached for granting such permission, he is expected to
satisfy himself that there are good and sufficient reason for authorizing an officer of a
lower rank to conduct the investigation. The granting of such permission is not be
treated by a Magistrate as a mere matter of routine but it is an exercise of his judicial
discretion having regard to the policy underlying it. In our opinion, therefore, when
such a breach is brought to the notice of the court at an early stage of the trial the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28428272/ 4
Nikunj Sharma vs State Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
court will have to consider the nature and extent of the violation and pass
appropriate order for such re-investigation as may be called for, wholly or partly...."
17) On the basis of the aforesaid observations of the Supreme Court, Mr. Aseem Sawhney, learned
counsel appearing for respondent No. 2 has submitted that even if, it is assumed that the action of
the Police in registering the impugned FIR was not in accordance with law, the same would not
vitiate the whole investigation, particularly when during investigation of the case, cognizable offence
viz. offence under Section 498-A RPC has been found established against the accused. He has also
placed reliance upon the judgment of Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of Vadlamudi
Kutumba Rao vs. State of Andhra Pradesh, AIR 1961 AP
448.
18) At first blush, the contention raised by Mr. Aseem Sawhney appears to be attractive but when
the same is deeply analyzed in the light of legal position on the subject, the same appears to be
without any merit because the ratio laid down by the Supreme Court in N. H. Rishbud's case, on
which heavy reliance has been placed by the learned counsel Mr. Sawhney, cannot be made
applicable to the instant case for the reason that investigation of the impugned FIR is still at its
inception.
19) The Supreme Court has in the case of State of Harayana and others vs. Bhajan Lal and others,
1992 supp (1) SCC 335 after noticing ratio laid down in N. H. Rishbud and Inder Singh's case
(supra) explained that in the case before it the question relating to legal authority of SHO was raised
at the initial stage, therefore, it would be proper and desirable that the investigation should proceed
only on the basis of the valid order in strict compliance of the mandatory provision of Section 5A(1)
of the Prevention of Corruption Act,1947. The relevant observations of the Supreme Court in this
regard are reproduced as under:
"130. There is also one more legal hurdle which the prosecution has to overcome in
entrusting this investigation with the SHO. As has been repeatedly mentioned the
case under consideration is not only registered under Section 5(2) but also under
Sections 161 and 165 IPC. The Government order authorizes the Inspector of Police of
Haryana State to investigate only the offences falling under Section 5 of the Act.
Therefore, the SHO who has taken up the investigation of the offences inclusive of
those under Sections 161 and 165 IPC is not at all clothed with any authority to
investigate these two offences, registered under the IPC, apart from the offence under
Section 5(2) of the Act. When Mr. Sachar was confronted with this legal issue, he
tried to extricate himself from this situation saying that the prosecution would
approach the Magistrate of the first Class for obtaining an order under section 5A(1)
authorizing SHO to investigate the offences under the provisions of the IPC.
However, as the question relating to the legal authority of the SHO is raised even at
this initial stage, we feel that it would be proper and also desirable that the
investigation, if at all to be proceeded with the opinion of the State Government,
should proceed only on the basis of a valid order in strict compliance with the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28428272/ 5
Nikunj Sharma vs State Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
mandatory provision of Section 5A(1).
131. From the above discussion, we hold that (1) as the salutary legal requirement of
disclosing the reasons for according the permission is not complied with; (2) as the
prosecution is not satisfactorily explaining the circumstances which impelled the S. P.
to pass the order directing the SHO to investigate the case; (3) as the said direction
manifestly seems to have been granted mechanically and in a very casual manner,
regardless of the principles of law enunciated by this Court, probable due blissful
ignorance of the legal mandate, and (4) as, above all, the SHO has got neither any
order from the Magistrate to investigate the offences under Section 161 and 165 IPC
nor any order from the S. P. for investigation of the offence under Section 5(1)(e) of
the Prevention of Corruption Act in the manner known to law, we have no other
option, save to quash that order of direction reading "investigate" which direction
suffers from legal infirmity and also the investigation, if any, so far carried out.
Nevertheless, our order of quashing the direction of the S. P. and the investigation thereupon will
not in any way deter the first appellant, the State of Haryana to pursue the matter and direct an
investigation afresh in pursuance of the FIR, the quashing of which we have set aside, if the State so
desires, through a competent police officer, clothed with the legal authority in strict compliance with
Section 5A(1) of the Act."
20) From the aforesaid enunciation of law on the subject, it is clear that if the illegality in
undertaking the investigation is pointed out at the earliest when the investigation is at its inception,
it cannot be brushed aside as the Investigating Agency as well as the complainant would be free to
take appropriate steps for proceeding in accordance with law. In the case of N. H. Rishbud and
Inder Singh (supra), the investigation had culminated in filing of charge sheet and cognizance had
also been taken by the competent Court. It was in the aforesaid situation that the Supreme Court
held that unless it is found that prejudice would be caused to any party by quashing the
investigation, an order setting aside the investigation would not be desirable.
21) In the instant case, legality and validity of the impugned FIR has been immediately challenged
by the petitioner by filing this petition in the year 2018 itself. In fact, the FIR was registered on
29.03.2018 and the instant petition has been filed on 17.04.2018 i.e. within one month of lodging of
the FIR. In such a situation, the illegality committed by the Investigating Agency in registering and
undertaking the investigation cannot be brushed aside and if the same is quashed, no prejudice
would be caused to respondent No. 2/complainant, who has the option of filing a private complaint
under Section 200 of Cr.P.C. against the petitioner and co-accused. The ratio laid down by the
Supreme Court in N. H. Rishbud and Inder Singh (supra) is, therefore, not applicable to the instant
case.
22) So far as the judgment of Andhra Pradesh High Court in Vadlamudi Kutumba Rao (supra) is
concerned, the same is also not applicable to the facts of the instant case, inasmuch as in the said
case the FIR was registered under Section 409 IPC, which is a cognizable offence and after
investigation, charge sheet was laid in respect of the said offence as well as in respect of certain
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28428272/ 6
Nikunj Sharma vs State Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
other offences which were non-cognizable in nature.
23) It is a settled law that if during the investigation of the cognizable offence, certain
non-cognizable offences are also made out, the Investigating Agency is not required to seek
permission of the Magistrate for undertaking investigation in respect of those offences. In fact, in
the Code of Criminal Procedure,1973 there is specific provision in the shape of Section 155(4) CrPC,
which provides that where a case relates to two or more offences of which, at least one is cognizable,
the case should be deemed a cognizable case notwithstanding that other offences are
non-cognizable. Even in the context of Jammu and Kashmir Cr. P.C. where there is no akin to
Section 155(4) of Central Cr.P.C. the Supreme Court in the case of State of J&K vs. Dr. Saleem ur
Rehman, 2021 SCC Online SC 1014, has made it clear that while investigating cognizable offences,
the investigating agency is well within its jurisdiction to investigate the offences of non-cognizable
nature together with the cognizable offences.
24) In the instant case, the basic FIR has been registered in respect of non- cognizable offences and
as per the Investigation Agency, now cognizable offence under Section 498-A Cr.P.C. has also been
found established against the petitioner. Such a situation is not contemplated by law. The basic
foundation of the investigation which is registration of impugned FIR, is itself without sanction of
law. Therefore, any investigation undertaken on its strength is bound to crumble. The same cannot
be legalized once its very basis is illegal. I am supported in my aforesaid view with the judgment of
High Court of Kerala in Haneefa vs. State of Kerala, 2022 LiveLaw (Ker)
638. In the said case, Kerala High Court while relying upon the judgment of Supreme Court in
Keshav Lal Thakur vs. State of Bihar, (1996) 11 SCC 557 held that when only non-cognizable offences
are alleged initially, investigation cannot be commenced without orders from the Magistrate. It has
been further held that incorporation of a cognizable offence at the time of filing a final report cannot
be utilized as a method or as a device to circumvent the mandate of Section 155(2) Cr.P.C. by the
officer incharge of the police station or any investigating officer.
25) Even otherwise, a perusal of the case diary reveals that statements of the witnesses recorded
under Section 161 Cr.P.C. during the investigation of the case do not disclose commission of offence
under Section 498-A of RPC. The witnesses examined by the Investigating Agency have only
corroborated what has been stated in the impunged FIR which, as already discussed, does not
disclose commission of offence under Section 498-A RPC. So far as the earlier applications of the
complainant/ respondent No. 2 to the Police, wherein she has alleged demands of dowry by the
accused, are concerned, the same are not part of the case diary. Therefore, contention of the learned
counsel for respondent No. 2 that these applications disclose commission of offence under section
498-A RPC, cannot be looked into as the same do not form part of material collected by the
Investigating Agency. In these circumstances, I fail to understand on what basis the Investigating
Agency has in its status report concluded that offence under section 498-A RPC is also made out
against the accused.
26) For all what has been analyzed herein above, the impugned FIR deserves to be quashed as this
case is squarely covered by illustration No. (2), laid down by the Supreme Court in Bajan Lal's case,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28428272/ 7
Nikunj Sharma vs State Of J&K And Another on 2 March, 2023
(supra), which reads as under:
"2. Where the allegations in the First Information Report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under Section 156(1) of the Code except under an
order of a Magistrate with the purview of Section 155(2) of the Code."
27) For the foregoing discussions, the petition is allowed and the impugned FIR is quashed.
However, respondent No. 2 is at liberty to take resort to appropriate remedy as may be available to
her under law.
28) Case diary be returned to the learned counsel appearing for the State.
(SANJAY DHAR) JUDGE Jammu 02.03.2023 Karam Chand/Secy.
Whether the order is speaking: Yes/No
Whether the order is reportable: Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28428272/ 8
