Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February,
2025
Author: S.K. Sahoo
Bench: S.K. Sahoo
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024
An application under Articles 226 and 227 read with Articles 21
and 22(5) of the Constitution of India.
----------------------
Nilakantha Pradhan ....... Petitioner
-Versus-
Government of India
& Others ....... Opp. Parties
For Petitioner: - Mr. Janmejaya Katikia
Advocate
For Opp. Party Nos.
1 to 3: - Mr. P.K. Parhi, DSGI
(for O.Ps. 1 & 2)
Mr.S.S. Kashyap
Sr. Panel Counsel
Govt. of India
(for O.P. No.3)
For Opp. Party Nos.
4 & 5: - Mr. P. S. Nayak
Addl. Govt. Advocate
---------------------
P R E S E N T:
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.K. SAHOO
AND
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.S. MISHRA
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of Hearing: 31.01.2025 Date of Judgment: 19.02.2025
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 1
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 1 of 43
S.K. SAHOO, J. Hon'ble Justice V.R. Krishna Iyer (as he then was)
said in his inimitable style in Maneka Gandhi -Vrs.- Union of
India reported in A.I.R. 1978 S.C. 597 that the spirit of man
is at the root of Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Liberty
makes the worth of a human being. Absent liberty, other
freedoms are frozen. To frustrate Article 21 of the Constitution of
India by relying on any formal adjectival statute, however, flimsy
or fantastic its provisions be, is to rob what the constitution
treasures. Procedure which deals with modalities of regulating,
restricting or even rejecting a fundamental right falling within
Article 21 has to be fair, not foolish, carefully designed to
effectuate, not to subvert, the substantive right itself. Procedure
must rule out anything arbitrary, freakish and bizarre. In the
words of Mahatma Gandhi, Father of the Nation, "To deprive a
man of his natural liberty and to deny to him the ordinary
amenities of life is worse than starving the body; it is starvation
of the soul, the dweller in the body."
Challenging the detention order dated 23.07.2024
under Annexure-1 as well as the consequential confirmation
order dated 18.10.2024 under Annexure-4, being illegal and
arbitrary in the eyes of law, the petitioner Nilakantha Pradhan
has filed this writ petition in the nature of habeas corpus under
Articles 226 of the Constitution of India read with Articles 21 and
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 2 of 43
22(5) of the Constitution of India, with a further prayer for a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 2
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
direction to the opposite parties to set him at liberty.
2. The opposite party no.1 in exercise of the power
conferred under section 3(1) of the Prevention of Illicit Traffic in
Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances Act, 1988
(hereinafter to be called as '1988 Act', for short) passed the
order of detention on dated 23.07.2024 under Annexure-1
detaining the petitioner with a view to prevent him from
engaging in illicit trafficking of narcotic drugs and psychotropic
substances in future and he was directed to be detained and
kept in Circle Jail, Choudwar, Cuttack.
In the grounds of detention under Annexure-2, it
appears that the sponsoring authority submitted proposal before
the opposite party no.2 on 23.07.2024 that the petitioner was
involved in three cases, i.e., (i) NCB Bhubaneswar Crime
No.02/2024 dated 25.01.2024 in a case under N.D.P.S. Act in
which charge sheet has not been submitted; (ii) Odisha Excise
Case PR No. 1022/2022-23 under section 20(b)(ii)(C) of N.D.P.S.
Act dated 12.03.2024 and (iii) F.I.R. No. 108/2017 dated
18.09.2017 in which charge sheet was submitted under sections
20(b)(ii)(C) and 29 of N.D.P.S. Act. It is further stated that the
petitioner was actively involved in trafficking of narcotics drugs
and psychotropic substances and he was a habitual offender. His
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 3 of 43
presence in the society was a threat to the innocent persons of
the locality/State/Nation and his activities was prejudicial to
society. It is further stated that the petitioner was on bail,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 3
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
however, considering his conscious involvement in illegal
trafficking of drugs and psychotropic substances in a repeated
manner to the detriment of the society, he had a high propensity
to be involved in the prejudicial activities in future. It is further
stated that the acts of the petitioner in engaging himself in
prejudicial activities of illicit traffic of narcotics and psychotropic
substances, which posed serious threat to the health and welfare
not only to the citizens of the country but to every citizen in the
world, besides deleterious effect on the national economy. The
offences committed by the petitioner were held to be so
interlinked and continuous in character and were of such nature
that the same affected security and health of the nation. The
grievous nature and gravity of offences committed by the
petitioner in a well-planned manner clearly established his
continued propensity and inclination to engage in such acts of
prejudicial activities. Considering the facts presented, the
opposite party no.2 came to the conclusion that there was ample
opportunity for the petitioner to repeat the serious prejudicial
acts and therefore, the petitioner should be immobilized and
there was a need to prevent him from engaging in such illicit
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 4 of 43
traffic of narcotic drugs and psychotropic substances in future by
detention under section 3(1) of 1988 Act. Since the petitioner
was indulged in organizing the illicit trafficking of narcotic drugs
and psychotropic substances as well as had a high propensity to
engage in illicit activities, it was conclusively felt that if he was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 4
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
not detained under section 3(1) of the 1988 Act, he would
continue to so engage himself in possessing, purchase, sale,
transportation, storage, use of narcotics and psychotropic
substances illegally and handling such activities, organizing
directly in such activities and conspiring in furtherance of such
activities which amounted to illicit trafficking of psychotropic
substances under section 2(e) of the 1988 Act. It is further
stated that considering the magnitude of the operation, the
chronicle sequence of events, the well organised manner in
which such prejudicial activities were carried on, the nature and
gravity of the offence, the consequential extent of investigation
involved including scanning/examination of papers, formation of
grounds, the opposite party no.2 was satisfied that the nexus
between the dates of incident and passing of the detention order
as well as object of the detention of the petitioner is well
maintained. The petitioner was informed in the grounds of
detention that he had the right to represent against his detention
to the Authority, to the Central Government as well as to the
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 5 of 43
Advisory Board. He was also informed that he shall be heard by
the Advisory Board in due course, if the Board considers it
essential to do so or if the petitioner so desired. The grounds
were communicated to the petitioner for the purpose of clause
(5) of Article 22 of the Constitution of India and as required
under section 3(3) of the 1988 Act.
3. The order of detention with grounds of detention was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 5
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
served on the petitioner on 31.07.2024. On receipt of the same,
the petitioner submitted a representation to the Joint Secretary
(PITNDPS), Government of India, Ministry of Finance,
Department of Revenue on 17.09.2024 as per Annexure-3.
Thereafter, the matter was placed before the PITNDPS State
Advisory Board, Odisha which was also of the opinion that
sufficient cause was made out for detention of the petitioner. The
Central Government by virtue of sub-section (f) of section 9 of
the 1988 Act, confirmed the said detention under Annexure-4 on
18.10.2024 thereby directing to detain the petitioner (detenu)
for a period of one year from the date of detention i.e.
31.07.2024.
4. The petitioner has filed the writ petition with the
following grounds:
(i) The Detaining Authority has referred to NCB,
Bhubaneswar Crime No.02/2024 dated 25.1.2024 in
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 6 of 43
which the petitioner is not the principal accused and
basing on the statement of two co-accused, the
petitioner has been entangled in the case and this
Court has already granted bail to the petitioner in the
said case;
(ii) So far as the 2nd case i.e. Odisha Excise Case PR
No. 1022/2022-23 under section 20(b)(ii)(C) of the
1988 Act is concerned, the petitioner has been
released on bail by this Court even more than one
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 6
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
year prior to the issuance of the impugned order of
detention and there lies no proximate link of the said
case with the order of detention and no prima facie
involvement of the detenu is visible;
(iii) So far as the 3rd case i.e. Kantamal P.S. F.I.R.
No. 108 dated 18.9.2017 is concerned, the petitioner
is on bail, charge sheet has already been filed and
the case is under trial in the Court of learned
Additional Sessions Judge, Kandhamal in C.T. Case
No.492 of 2017 and the complicity of the petitioner is
yet to be established. It is further stated that while
filing charge sheet, the name of the petitioner has
been incorporated without any specific material;
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 7 of 43
(iv) It is stated that reference to the Advisory Board
under section 9(b) of the 1988 Act should have been
made within five weeks from the date of detention,
but in the instant case, the date of detention being
23.07.2024, reference to the Advisory Board was
made on 29.08.2024, which was beyond the period
prescribed under the statute;
(v) It is further stated that as per section 9(c) of the
1988 Act, the Advisory Board is required to submit
report within eleven weeks from the date of
detention of the person concerned, but in the instant
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 7
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
case, the Advisory Board should have filed its report
by 08.10.2024, but the order of confirmation dated
18.10.2024 under Annexure-4 is silent regarding the
date of filing of the final report by the PITNDPS State
Advisory Board, Odisha and that apart, a copy of the
report of the Advisory Board has not been supplied to
the petitioner, thereby curtailing the personal liberty
of the petitioner as guaranteed under Article 21 of
the Constitution of India;
(vi) It is stated that there lies no prima facie and
substantial materials in all the three cases, as has
been cited in the grounds of detention under
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 8 of 43
Annexure-2 and cumulatively all the three cases
cannot be said to have proved the propensity of the
detenu to carry on illicit drug trafficking, posing a
serious threat to the people as well as to the society.
None of these cases have even got a proximate link
with the order of detention.
5. The opposite party no.3, Zonal Director, Narcotic
Control Bureau, Bhubanewar Zonal Unit, Bhubaneswar has filed
counter affidavit to the writ petition, stating, inter alia, that the
petitioner has a long-standing history of engaging himself in
drug trafficking, with multiple cases under the N.D.P.S. Act and
Excise Act and therefore, the Detaining Authority has reasonably
believed warranting preventive detention under the 1988 Act to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 8
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
safeguard public health and welfare. It is further stated that the
detention order was executed on 31.07.2024 as per section 4 of
the 1988 Act, following which the petitioner was detained in the
Circle Jail, Choudwar, Cuttack on 01.08.2024 at 12.35 a.m. It is
further stated that grounds of detention, along with the relied-
upon documents, were duly served upon the petitioner on
04.08.2024, at Circle Jail, Choudwar, Cuttack, in compliance with
Section 3(3) of the 1988 Act and the representation dated
17.09.2024, as enclosed under Annexure-3 in the writ petition,
has not been received by any of the concerned authorities, i.e.
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 9 of 43
the jail authorities, the Narcotics Control Bureau, the PITNDPS
Unit, New Delhi or the State Advisory Board as of date. The
representation under Annexure-3 neither bears the signature of
the petitioner nor any acknowledgment from any receiving
authority. It is further stated that the petitioner's allegation that
the Detaining Authority has flagrantly violated or abused the
powers vested under the 1988 Act is wholly misconceived and
baseless. The detention order issued by the Detaining Authority
is not only valid but also imperative to ensure that the petitioner
is restrained from engaging in further acts of illicit drug
trafficking. It is further stated that the petitioner's repeated
transgressions of law manifested through his involvement in the
seizure of 438 kg. of ganja in Kantamal P.S. F.I.R. No. 108 of
2017, 30 kg. of ganja under Odisha Excise PR No.1022 of 2022-
23 and supply of 21.1 kg. of ganja under NCB Bhubaneswar
Crime No. 02 of 2024 highlights his persistent engagement in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 9
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
criminal activity, rendering him ineligible to invoke the protection
under Article 21 of the Constitution of India in shielding his
unlawful actions. It is further stated that the Detaining Authority
carefully evaluating the totality of circumstances, including the
detenu's criminal antecedents, prior engagements in similar
offences and the unrelenting nature of his conduct, in exercise of
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 10 of 43
the powers conferred upon it, issued the order of preventive
detention, which was both warranted and legally sound.
It is further stated in the counter affidavit that as per
Section 9(b) of the 1988 Act, the mandatory period of five weeks
is to be calculated from the date of detention and not from the
date when the detention order was passed. In the present case,
the reference to the State Advisory Board was made on
29.08.2024, which is well within the statutory period of five
weeks from the date of detention i.e. 31.07.2024. It is further
stated that the report containing the opinion of the State
Advisory Board, Odisha, regarding the detention of the petitioner
was submitted well within the statutory period of eleven weeks
from the date of detention. After giving an opportunity of
personal hearing on 03.10.2024 by the State Advisory Board and
after thorough consideration of all the parameters, the State
Advisory Board unanimously opined that there exists sufficient
cause for the detention of the petitioner and accordingly, the
order of detention was confirmed under section 9(f) of the 1988
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 10
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
Act.
It is further stated in the counter affidavit that the
Detaining Authority has found sufficient reasons to believe in the
propensity of the petitioner's criminal activities, which span a
period of nearly two decades, i.e., from 2005 to 2024. During
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 11 of 43
this period, the petitioner has been behind the bar at least eight
times for his involvement in various crimes. It is further stated
that apart from the three N.D.P.S. cases cited in the grounds of
detention, the petitioner is also involved in three cases under the
Excise Act and two additional cases under the Indian Penal Code.
It is further stated that the continued engagement of the
petitioner in such activities, even while being enlarged on bail,
establishes a clear pattern of persistent and organized criminal
conduct. It is further stated that the conscious and repeated
efforts of the petitioner to traffic and supply illicit drugs pose a
serious and imminent threat to the health and welfare of society
at large. His activities had a deleterious effect on the younger
generation, particularly in the States of India, and such actions
cannot be neglected or ignored. It is further stated that the
subjective satisfaction of the Detaining Authority is based on the
cumulative effect of the petitioner's repeated offences, the
organized nature of his activities and the significant potential
harm pose to society. It is further stated that the magnitude of
his crimes cannot be judged in isolation but must be seen as a
clear and continuous effort to disrupt public order and welfare.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 11
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
The detention of the petitioner under the 1988 Act, is not only
reasonable but also imperative to prevent further engagement in
such illicit and dangerous activities.
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 12 of 43
6. The opposite parties nos.1 and 2 have filed counter
affidavit almost in the similar line of the counter affidavit filed by
opposite party no.3. It is stated, inter alia, that the detaining
authority found sufficient reasons with subjective satisfaction
against the petitioner with regards to propensity of his crimes
since the year 2005 until 2024 wherein the detenu has been
behind the bars for at least eight times as he was involved in
various crimes. Apart from three N.D.P.S. Act cases against his
name as mentioned in the detention order, the detenu has also
three cases under Excise Acts and two more cases under the
Indian Penal Code.
7. The Opposite party No.5, Superintendent, Circle Jail,
Choudwar, Cuttack has also filed counter affidavit on behalf of
the State of Odisha (Opposite party nos.4 and 5) reiterating the
stand taken by the opposite party no.3 in its counter affidavit.
8. In reply to the counter affidavits filed by the opposite
parties, rejoinder affidavit has been filed on behalf of the
petitioner, stating, inter alia, that the documents basing on
which the Detaining Authority became satisfied to pass the order
of detention have not been supplied to the petitioner and thereby
the order of detention as well as the confirmation thereof is
actuated with malafide. It is further stated that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 12
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
representation of the petitioner under Annexure-3 has been filed
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 13 of 43
before the opposite party no.5, who denied to give any
acknowledgment in receipt thereof and few days after, the
opposite party no.5 called the petitioner and told that since the
said document has been prepared by someone else, the same is
not permissible and he has to write as per his (opposite party
no.5) dictation and to the utter surprise, the prisoner's petition
under Annexure-B/7 to the counter affidavit has been sent to the
authorities without enclosing the original representation, which
the petitioner came to know after going through the affidavit
filed by the opposite parties nos. 4 and 5. It is further stated that
taking advantage of the same, the opposite parties nos.4 and 5
have taken the stand that no such representation of the
petitioner has been received at the PITNDPS Unit, New Delhi or
by the Jail Authorities or by the State Advisory Board.
9. On the last date of hearing, i.e. on 31.01.2025, an
additional affidavit dated 31.01.2025 has been filed by the
opposite party no.3 in Court enclosing some documents wherein
it is stated that the documents were placed before the Detaining
Authority as well as served on the petitioner. It is further stated
that the petitioner was given sufficient opportunity to be
confronted with those cases and a panchanama was drawn
mentioning the above proceedings in the jail premises, which
was acknowledged by the petitioner after being explained to him
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 13
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 14 of 43
in Odia language by the Investigating Officer as per Annexure-
C/3. It is further stated that the petitioner had submitted a
prisoner's petition on 17.09.2024 addressed to the Secretary to
the Govt. of India, Department of Revenue, Ministry of Finance,
opposite party no.1 through the opposite party no.5 and the said
representation was forwarded to the Detaining Authority on the
same day.
10. Mr. Janmejaya Katikia, learned counsel appearing for
the petitioner strenuously urged that though from the detention
order, it appears that while passing the order of detention, the
Detaining Authority took into account the involvement of the
petitioner in three cases only which were from the year 2017 to
2024, but in the counter affidavit filed by opposite party no.3, it
appears that apart from those three cases, the Detaining
Authority has also taken into account the involvement of the
petitioner in three other cases under the Excise Act and two
additional cases under the Indian Penal Code which are from
2005 onwards, the details of which have neither been supplied to
the petitioner nor the same has been stated in the grounds of
detention under Annexure-2, thereby it violates the principles of
natural justice. Learned counsel further submitted that the
representation filed by the petitioner under Annexure-3 has
neither been forwarded to the PITNDPS Unit, New Delhi nor to
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 15 of 43
the Advisory Board, rather on being dictated by the opposite
party no.5 to the petitioner, the petition has been forwarded to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 14
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
the Advisory Board. Learned counsel for the petitioner referring
to paragraph no.7 of the counter affidavit filed by opposite party
nos.1 and 2 submitted that the counter affidavit has been
prepared in consultation with the Sponsoring Authority, i.e. the
Zonal Director, Narcotics Control, Bureau, Bhubaneswar, Odisha.
Mr. Katikia, further argued that the Detaining
Authority, opposite party no.2, without applying his mind, has
been biased with the report of the Sponsoring Authority so as to
pass the order of detention in the garb of subjective satisfaction,
which fact is revealed from paragraph no.7 of the counter
affidavit filed by opposite parties nos.1 and 2. He further argued
that without applying mind, the opposite party no.1 basing on
the report of the Sponsoring Authority, i.e. opposite party no.3
has passed the impugned order of detention, which is liable to be
quashed. He emphatically contended that the grounds on which
the impugned order of detention has been passed have not been
supplied to the petitioner and thus, the impugned order of
detention is liable to be quashed.
Mr. Katikia, further argued that if as per the
detention order, the petitioner after being released on bail in one
N.D.P.S. Act case of the year 2017, indulged himself in another
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 16 of 43
case of the year 2023 and after being released in the second
case, he indulged himself in third case of the year 2024 and
thereby misutilised his liberty, application for cancellation of bail
could have been moved by the State. When ordinary criminal law
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 15
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
provided sufficient means to address the situation, the Authority
should not have taken recourse to the provisions of the 1988
Act, which is an extraordinary statute, leading to the passing of
impugned detention order.
In support of his contentions, Mr. Katikia has placed
reliance on the decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the
cases of Commr. of Police, Bombay -Vrs.- Gordhandas
Bhanji reported in 1951 Supreme Court Cases 1088,
Sasthi Keot -Vrs.- The State of West Bengal reported in
(1974) 4 Supreme Court Cases 131, Khudiram Das -Vrs.-
State of West Bengal reported in (1975) 2 Supreme Court
Cases 81, Ameena Begum -Vrs.- State of Telengana
reported in (2023) 9 Supreme Court Cases 587 and
Jaseela Shaji -Vrs.- Union of India reported in (2024) 9
Supreme Court Cases 53.
11. Mr. P.K. Parhi, learned Deputy Solicitor General for
the Union of India and Mr. S.S. Kashyap, learned Senior Panel
Counsel for the Government of India, on the other hand, argued
that apart from involvement of the petitioner in the three cases
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 17 of 43
as mentioned in the grounds of detention under Annexure-2, he
is also involved in three cases under the Excise Act and two
additional cases under the Indian Penal Code and the Detaining
Authority taking into account all the aforesaid eight cases, has
passed the impugned order of detention. Learned counsel further
submitted that the detention of the detenu was required to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 16
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
prevent him from anti-social activities as he was indulging in
drug trafficking in various districts of the State of Odisha
including the districts of Boudh, Kandhamal and Cuttack and
contraband ganja of commercial quantity had been recovered
from his possession and he was remanded to judicial custody on
several occasions and that the activities of the detenu were
detrimental to the society. It is argued that the preventive
detention can be ordered by the Detaining Authority against a
person in case a satisfaction is drawn with regard to his activities
prejudicial to the public order as well as to protect society from
anti-social activities. It is further argued that the petitioner had
been provided with entire records which were based to order his
detention and further the petitioner was informed about his legal
right of filing representation against his detention to the
Detaining Authority as well as to the Central Government. It is
further argued that while passing the detention order, the
constitutional and statutory requirements were fulfilled by the
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 18 of 43
Detaining Authority and there is no case for breach of any of
these provisions and therefore, there is no merit in the writ
petition which is liable to be dismissed.
12. Mr. Partha Sarathi Nayak, learned Addl. Government
Advocate for the State appearing for the opposite parties nos.4
and 5 submitted that in compliance of the detention order under
Annexure-1, the petitioner was lodged in Circle Jail, Choudwar,
Cuttack and as per the direction of the Detaining Authority, he
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 17
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
was produced before the Advisory Board on the date fixed.
13. Adverting to the contentions raised by the learned
counsel for the respective parties and on perusal of the material
on record, the following points would emerge for our
consideration:
(i) Whether the Court can look into the records to
satisfy it as to whether the Detaining Authority had
arrived at its subjective satisfaction only on the
grounds communicated to the detenu, or there were
some other relevant materials before the Authority?
(ii) What would happen where there be some
materials before the Detaining Authority which could
have influenced it in arriving at its subjective
satisfaction, but the same were not mentioned in the
grounds of detention?
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 19 of 43
(iii) Whether the Detaining Authority has taken into
account the involvement of the detenu only in three
criminal cases as has been mentioned in the grounds
of detention?
(iv) Whether the Detaining Authority is justified in
taking into account involvement of the petitioner in
other five cases as spelt out in the counter filed by
the opposite party no.3 as well as opposite parties
nos.1 and 2 when the details of such cases have not
been mentioned in the grounds of detention?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 18
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
(v) Whether the Detaining Authority had given
sufficient opportunity to the petitioner to make
effective representation against the order of
detention in compliance to the provisions of Article
22(5) of the Constitution of India read with section 6
of the 1988 Act?
(vi) Whether partial withdrawal of grounds of
detention by not supplying all the basic facts and
materials relied upon by the Detaining Authority to
the petitioner shall entail the very detention a nullity
for being violative of Article 22(5) of the
Constitution?
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 20 of 43
(vii) Whether the petitioner is deprived of sufficient
and reasonable opportunity to make an effective
representation against the detention order in
violation of his fundamental right enshrined under
Article 22(5) of Constitution of India read with
section 8 of 1988 Act?
14. Section 3 of 1988 Act states, inter alia, that a State
Government or any officer of the State Government, not below
the rank of a Secretary to that Government, specially
empowered for the purposes of this section by that Government,
may, if satisfied, with respect to any person that, with a view to
preventing him from engaging in illicit traffic in narcotic drugs
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 19
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
and psychotropic substances, it is necessary so to do, make an
order directing that such person to be detained.
There is no dispute that validity of the satisfaction of
the Detaining Authority will have to be considered on the facts of
each case. Since an order of prevention detention has the effect
of invading one's personal liberty, it would be just and proper to
see that such drastic power is invoked in appropriate cases
responsibly, rationally and reasonably. The detention of a person
without a trial is a very serious encroachment on his personal
freedom and therefore, at every stage, all questions in relation
to the said detention must be carefully and solemnly considered.
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 21 of 43
Preventive detention is a precautionary measure which is taken
to prevent a person from doing something which, if left free and
unfettered, it is reasonably probable that he would do. In other
words, the essential concept of preventive detention is that the
detention of a person is not to punish him for something he has
done, but to prevent him from doing it. If the subjective opinion
is formed by the Detaining Authority as regards the necessity of
detention for a specified purpose, the condition of exercise of
power of detention would be fulfilled and it is not permissible for
a Court, on a review of the grounds, substitute its own opinion
for that of the Authority. Procedural safeguard provided under
1988 Act are sacrosanct and needs to be followed to the hilt,
deviation of which has all potential to threaten the violation of
constitutional right guaranteed to the detenu.
15. At this stage, it would be worthwhile to delve upon
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 20
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
the citations placed by the learned counsel for the petitioner and
other relevant citations which have great bearing in deciding the
points raised herein.
In the case of Khudiram Das (supra), it is held that
the Constitutional imperatives enacted in Article 22 of
Constitution of India are two-fold; (i) the Detaining Authority
must, as soon as may be, that is, as soon as practicable after the
detention, communicate to the detenu the grounds on which the
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 22 of 43
order of detention has been made, and (ii) the Detaining
Authority must afford the detenu the earliest opportunity of
making a representation against the order of detention. These
are the barest minimum safeguards which must be observed
before an executive authority can be permitted to preventively
detain a person and thereby drown his right of personal liberty in
the name of public good and social security. It is further held
that the communication of the grounds of detention is intended
to subserve the purpose of enabling the detenu to make an
effective representation. The 'grounds' mean all the basic facts
and materials which have been taken into account by the
Detaining Authority in making the order of detention and on
which, therefore, the order of detention is based. It is the factual
constituent of the 'grounds' on which the subjective satisfaction
of the authority is based. Therefore, nothing less than all the
basic facts and materials which influenced the Detaining
Authority in making the order of detention must be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 21
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
communicated to the detenu. That is the plain requirement of
the first safeguard in Article 22(5). It is further held that it is not
only the right of the Court, but also its duty as well, to examine
what are the basic facts and materials which actually and in fact
weighed with the Detaining Authority in reaching the requisite
satisfaction. The judicial scrutiny cannot be foreclosed by a mere
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 23 of 43
statement of the Detaining Authority that it has taken into
account only certain basic facts and materials and though other
basic facts and materials were before it, it has not allowed them
to influence its satisfaction. The Court is entitled to examine the
correctness of this statement and determine for itself whether
there were any other basic facts or materials, apart from those
admitted by it, which could have reasonably influenced the
decision of the Detaining Authority and for that purpose, the
Court can certainly require the Detaining Authority to produce
and make available to the Court the entire record of the case
which was before it. That is the least the Court can do to ensure
observance of the requirements of law by the Detaining
Authority. Therefore, in a case where the material before the
District Magistrate is of a character which would in all reasonable
probability be likely to influence the decision of any reasonable
human being, the Court would be most reluctant to accept the
ipse dixit of the District Magistrate that he was not so influenced
and a fortiori, if such material is not disclosed to the detenu, the
order of detention would be vitiated, both on the ground that all
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 22
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
the basic facts and materials which influenced the subjective
satisfaction of the District Magistrate were not communicated to
the detenu as also on the ground that the detenu was denied an
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 24 of 43
opportunity of making an effective representation against the
order of detention.
Relying on Khudi Ram (supra), it is stated in the
case of Ganga Ramchand Bharvani -Vrs.- Under Secretary
to The Government of Maharashtra and Ors. reported in
A.I.R. 1980 Supreme Court 1744 that the mere fact that the
grounds of detention served on the detenu are elaborate, does
not absolve the Detaining Authority from its constitutional
responsibility to supply all the basic facts and materials relied
upon the grounds to the detenu.
In the case of Mehrunissa -Vrs.- State of
Maharashtra reported in (1981) 2 Supreme Court Cases
709, it was held that the fact that the detenu was aware of the
contents of the documents not furnished is immaterial. The
detenu is entitled to be supplied with the copies of all material
documents instead of having to rely upon his memory in regard
to the contents of documents. The failure of the Detaining
Authority to supply copies of such documents was held to have
vitiated the detention.
In the case of Mohd. Zakir -Vrs.- Delhi
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 23
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
Administration reported in (1982) 3 Supreme Court Cases
216, it was reiterated that it being a constitutional imperative
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 25 of 43
for the Detaining Authority to give the documents relied on or
referred to in the order of detention pari passu the grounds of
detention in order that the detenu may make an effective
representation immediately instead of waiting for the documents
to be supplied with. The question of demanding the documents
was wholly irrelevant and the infirmity in that regard was
violative of constitutional safeguards enshrined in Article 22(5).
The Hon'ble Supureme Court in the case of Daktar
Mudi -Vrs.- State of West Bengal reported in (1975) 3
Supreme Court Cases 301 held as follows:
"6....This Court has further held that where
there are several grounds, even if one ground is
vague, then it is difficult to say whether the
ground which is vague and in respect of which
the detenu could not make an effective
representation did not influence the mind of the
Detaining Authority in arriving at his subjective
satisfaction that the detenu would in future be
likely to act in a manner prejudicial to the
maintenance of supplies and services essential
to the community. If the detention order is held
invalid on this count, it would be equally so in a
case where there are other materials on which
the Detaining Authority could have been
influenced in arriving at his subjective
satisfaction but which he has not mentioned in
the grounds of detention, nor communicated
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 26 of 43
them to the detenu. In such circumstances,
whether the other materials on record had any
effect on the mind of the Detaining Authority
cannot be accepted solely on his statement,
because to admit that he alone has such a right
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 24
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
would be to accept that the mere ipse dixit of
the Detaining Authority would be sufficient and
cannot be looked into. There is a possibility that
certain materials on record would disclose that
the activities of the detenu are of a serious
nature having a nexus with the object of the Act,
namely, the prevention of prejudicial acts
affecting the maintenance of supplies and
services essential to the community, and having
proximity with the time when the subjective
satisfaction forming the basis of the detention
order had been arrived at. If these elements
exist, then the Court would be justified in taking
the view that these must have influenced the
subjective satisfaction of the Detaining Authority
and the omission to indicate those materials to
the detenu would prejudice him in making an
effective representation. If so, the detention
order on that account would be illegal."
The view expressed in Golam -Vrs.- State of West
Bengal reported in A.I.R. 1976 Supreme Court 754, is that
the word "grounds" does not merely mean a recital or
reproduction of a ground of satisfaction of the authority
permitting it to detain a person, nor is its connotation restricted
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 27 of 43
to a bare statement of conclusion of facts. All the basis facts and
materials particulars, which influenced the Detaining Authority in
making the order of detention, will be covered by "grounds"
within contemplation of Article 22(5) of Constitution of India and
are required to be communicated to the detenu unless its
disclosure is considered by the authority to be against public
interest. The question whether this requirement is complied with
or not is justiciable. Indeed, it is the duty of the Court as sentinel
of the fundamental freedoms guaranteed by the Constitution, to
see that the liberty of none is taken away except in accordance
with procedure prescribed by law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 25
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
In the case of Mohinder Singh Gill (supra), it has
been held as follows:
"8. The second equally relevant matter is that
when a statutory functionary makes an order
based on certain grounds, its validity must be
judged by the reasons so mentioned and cannot
be supplemented by fresh reasons in the shape
of affidavit or otherwise. Otherwise, an order
bad in the beginning may, by the time it comes
to Court on account of a challenge, get validated
by additional grounds later brought out. We may
here draw attention to the observations of Bose,
J. in Gordhandas Bhanji (supra)
"Public orders, publicly made, in exercise
of a statutory authority cannot be
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 28 of 43
construed in the light of explanations
subsequently given by the officer making
the order of what he meant, or of what
was in his mind, or what he intended to
do. Public orders made by public
authorities are meant to have public
effect and are intended to affect the
actings and conduct of those to whom
they are addressed and must be
construed objectively with reference to
the language used in the order itself.
Orders are not like old wine becoming
better as they grow older."
In the case of Bhut Nath Mete -Vrs.- The State of
West Bengal reported in (1974) 1 Supreme Court Cases
645, the Hon'ble Supreme Court held that Article 22(5) of the
Constitution of India vests a real, not illusory right, that
communication of facts is the cornerstone of the right of
representation and orders based on uncommunicated materials
are unfair and illegal.
In the case of Sasthi Keot (supra), it is held as
follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 26
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
"This has been relied upon by the State as
additional ground in support of the detention,
apart from the theft of cables, recited in the
detention order and repeated in the counter
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 29 of 43
affidavit. Counsel candidly admitted that this
additional circumstance had been placed before
the State Government and the Advisory board,
and certainly was before the District Magistrate
when he passed the detention order. It is
perfectly plain that the authorities have been
influenced by the report of the police that the
petitioner was "a man of desperate habits and
dangerous character and also prone to
committing theft of underground cables." We do
not regard 'desperate habits' and 'dangerous
character' as anything but vague. Apart from the
vice of vagueness which perhaps may not
matter so far as the satisfaction of the
authorities is concerned, every desperate or
dangerous man cannot be run down, under
Section 3 of the MISA. Moreover, this vital yet
injurious dossier about the petitioner has not
been communicated to him and opportunity
afforded for making a proper representation
contra. Therefore, there is violation both of
Article 22(5) of the Constitution and of Section
3(3) of the Act. In this view, we are constrained
to quash the detention order on the petitioner
and direct his release."
In the case of Ameena Begum (supra), it is held
that in the three criminal proceedings where the detenu had
been released on bail, no applications for cancellation of bail had
been moved by the State. In the light of the same, the
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 30 of 43
provisions of the Act, which is an extraordinary statute, should
not have been resorted to when ordinary criminal law provided
sufficient means to address the apprehensions leading to the
impugned detention order. There may have existed sufficient
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 27
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
grounds to appeal against the bail orders, but the circumstances
did not warrant the circumvention of ordinary criminal procedure
to resort to an extraordinary measure of the law of preventive
detention. Reliance was placed in the case of Vijay Narain
Singh -Vrs.- State of Bihar reported in (1984) 3 Supreme
Court Cases 14, wherein it was observed that the law of
preventive detention is a hard law and therefore it should be
strictly construed. Care should be taken that the liberty of a
person is not jeopardised unless his case falls squarely within the
four corners of the relevant law. The law of preventive detention
should not be used merely to clip the wings of an accused who is
involved in a criminal prosecution. It is not intended for the
purpose of keeping a man under detention when under ordinary
criminal law it may not be possible to resist the issue of orders of
bail, unless the material available is such as would satisfy the
requirements of the legal provisions authorising such detention.
When a person is enlarged on bail by a competent criminal
Court, great caution should be exercised in scrutinising the
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 31 of 43
validity of an order of preventive detention which is based on the
very same charge which is to be tried by the criminal Court.
In the case of Jaseela Shaji (supra), it is held that
the right to personal liberty and individual freedom is not to be
arbitrarily taken away even temporarily without following the
procedure prescribed by law. When a detention order is passed,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 28
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
all the material relied upon by the Detaining Authority in making
such an order must be supplied to the detenu to enable him to
make an effective representation. This is required in order to
comply with the mandate of Article 22(5) of the Constitution,
irrespective of whether the detenu had knowledge of such
material or not. It is imperative that every such document which
has been relied on by the Detaining Authority and which affects
the right of the detenu to make an effective representation under
Article 22(5) of the Constitution has to be supplied to the
detenu.
Law is well settled as held in the case of Sama
Aruna -Vrs.- State of Telangana and another reported in
(2018) 12 Supreme Court Cases 150 that the detention order
must be based on a reasonable prognosis of the future behaviour
of a person based on his past conduct in light of the surrounding
circumstances. The live and proximate link that must exist
between the past conduct of a person and the imperative need
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 32 of 43
to detain him must be there. A detention order which is found on
stale incidents, must be regarded an order of punishment for a
crime, passed without a trial though purporting to be an order of
preventive detention. The essential concept of preventive
detention is that the detention of a person is not to punish him
for something he has done but to prevent him doing it. It was
further held that the four old cases, incidents of which are stated
to have taken place nine to fourteen years earlier, ought to have
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 29
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
been excluded from consideration on the ground that they are
stale and could not have been used to detain the detenu or could
not have been considered as relevant for arriving at the
subjective satisfaction that the detenu must be detained.
Incidents which are old and stale and in which the detenu has
been granted bail, cannot be said to have any relevance for
detaining a citizen and depriving him of his liberty without a trial.
16. The Opposite Party No.1 in the detention order has
made pointed reference to the detenu being a habitual offender
by listing only three criminal cases under N.D.P.S. Act in which
the petitioner was involved during the years 2017 to 2024, one
of which was instituted on 18.09.2017, the second case was
instituted on 12.03.2023 and the third case was instituted on
25.01.2024. It appears from the detention order that the
Sponsoring Authority has drawn the attention of these three
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 33 of 43
cases to the Opposite Party No.1 and accordingly, the Opposite
Party No.1 has been pleased to hold the petitioner as a habitual
offender and that his presence in the society is a threat to
innocent persons of the locality/State/Nation. It was further held
that the petitioner was indulged in organizing the illicit trafficking
of narcotic drugs and psychotic substances as well as he has a
high propensity to engage himself in illicit activities.
However, in the counter affidavit filed by Opposite
Party No.3 i.e. Zonal Director, Narcotic Control Bureau,
Bhubaneswar Zonal Division, Bhubaneswar, it is stated that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 30
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
petitioner has a long standing criminal history, extending to
excise-related cases under both the Bihar and Odisha Excise Act.
It is further stated that Detaining Authority has found sufficient
reasons to believe in the propensity of the petitioner's criminal
activities, which span a period of nearly two decades i.e. from
2005 to 2024 and during this period, the petitioner was behind
bars at least eight times for his involvement in various crimes. It
is further stated that apart from the N.D.P.S. cases cited in the
grounds of detention, the petitioner is also implicated in three
cases under the Excise Act and two additional cases under the
Indian Penal Code.
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 34 of 43
In the counter affidavit filed by the Opposite Parties
Nos.1 and 2 also, it is mentioned that the Detaining Authority
has found sufficient reasons with subjective satisfaction against
the petitioner with regard to propensity of his crimes since the
year 2005 till 2024, wherein the petitioner was behind bar at
least eight times as he was involved in various crimes. Apart
from three N.D.P.S. cases against his name, the petitioner has
also three cases under Excise Acts and two more cases under
Indian Penal Code.
Thus, not only the Sponsoring Authority has taken
into account five other cases apart from the three N.D.P.S. Act
cases mentioned in the detention order, but also the Detaining
Authority has reached its subjective satisfaction basing on eight
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 31
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
cases, which were from the year 2005 to 2024 in passing the
detention order. The five cases which were from 2005 onwards
till 2017 were not reflected in the detention order nor its details,
its status and documents of those cases were supplied to the
petitioner to file an effective representation against the order of
detention. Thus, it can be said that the petitioner was not
afforded reasonable opportunity of making effective
representation against the order of detention. It is not known
when those three Excise Act cases and two more cases under
Indian Penal Code were instituted and what was the nature of
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 35 of 43
accusation against the petitioner in those cases, the status of
those cases and if the petitioner was released on bail in those
cases or not and if so when. The possibility of those five old
cases being called stale cases cannot be ruled out. In view of the
principle laid down in the case of Khudiram Das (supra), it can
be said that all the basic facts and materials which influenced the
Detaining Authority in making the order of detention (in this
case, total number of eight cases from 2005 to 2024) have not
been communicated to the petitioner. It is very difficult to accept
that those five cases had not influenced the subjective
satisfaction of the Detaining Authority. Therefore, the omission
to indicate those five cases to the detenu has caused prejudice
to him in making an effective representation. Non-
communication of the details of those five cases to the detenu
which appears to have influenced the Detaining Authority in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 32
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
arriving at its subjective satisfaction, has vitiated the order of
detention. In our humble view, even though the petitioner might
have been aware about those five cases, but since the same has
not been reflected in the detention order and no documents in
connection with those five cases were supplied to him, it has
vitiated the detention order. The petitioner was kept in darkness
that the Detaining Authority has arrived at its subjective
satisfaction also basing on those five cases and therefore, he
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 36 of 43
could not have asked for the documents of such cases to file the
representation. The conduct of the Authority in debarring the
petitioner to make an effective representation violates the
constitutional safeguards enshrined under Article 22 (5) of the
Constitution of India. In view of the ratio laid down in the case of
Daktar Mudi (supra), the detention order can be held to be
invalid as those five cases which could have influenced the
Detaining Authority in arriving at its subjective satisfaction has
not been mentioned in the grounds of detention nor
communicated to the detenu.
17. After hearing the arguments from the learned
counsel for the petitioner on the previous date, an additional
affidavit dated 31.01.2025 was filed by the opposite party no.3
in Court on 31.01.2025, wherein it is stated that the other cases
which were not mentioned in the order of detention but referred
to in the counter affidavit filed by the opposite party were well
before the Detaining Authority as well as the petitioner and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 33
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
petitioner has also been given opportunity to be confronted with
those cases. However, the Detaining Authority has confined its
order of detention to only those cases which are the subject
matter of concern by the Detaining Authority and that the other
criminal cases and the background of the petitioner with respect
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 37 of 43
to the criminal activities has nothing to impact so far as the
criminal activity under the N.D.P.S. Act is concerned.
Such a stand taken at the belated stage by the
opposite party No.3 in the additional affidavit dated 31.01.2025
is completely contrary to the affidavit filed by the opposite
parties nos.1 and 2 wherein it is stated that the subjective
satisfaction has been based taking into account all the eight
cases. Thus affidavit dated 31.01.2025 seems to be an
afterthought story and it is very difficult on our part to place any
reliance on it.
If apart from the three cases under N.D.P.S. Act, the
Sponsoring Authority as well as the Detaining Authority has also
taken into account three cases under the Excise Act and two
additional cases under the Indian Penal Code which were from
the year 2005 onwards and the Detaining Authority has arrived
its subjective satisfaction basing on all the eight cases while
passing the detention order as stated in the counter affidavit
filed by opposite parties nos.1 and 2, it should have been
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 34
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
brought to the notice of the petitioner and he should not have
been kept in darkness about the same. Withholding such
information, while passing the detention order, does not conform
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 38 of 43
to Article 21 of the Constitution of India in the matter of fairness,
justness and reasonableness.
The stand taken by the opposite parties that the
petitioner has not taken the grounds of non-supply of documents
of all the eight cases in the writ petition is illogical and ridiculous.
The petitioner obviously came to know about it when counter
affidavits were filed by the opposite parties. The details of only
three N.D.P.S. Act cases from 2017 to 2024 have been
mentioned in the grounds of detention and documents of only
those three cases were supplied to the petitioner, whereas
counter affidavits indicate that the subjective satisfaction of the
Detaining Authority was not based only on three N.D.P.S. Act
cases from 2017 to 2024, but on eight cases from 2005 to 2024
and thereby the petitioner was not afforded reasonable
opportunity of making effective representation against the order
of detention.
We are not entering into the disputed questions of
fact whether the petitioner has submitted representation as
annexed to the writ petition as Annexure-3 which is dated
17.09.2024 or the representation which is dated 17.09.2024 as
annexed to the counter affidavit filed by opposite parties nos.4
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 35
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
and 5 as Annexure-B/7.
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 39 of 43
In the case on hand, as reflected in the detention
order, the petitioner was detained as he was indulged in three
N.D.P.S. Act cases. The first case was registered as Kantamal
P.S. F.I.R. No.108 of 2017, in which he was on bail and the trial
is pending in the Court of learned Addl. Sessions Judge,
Kandhamal in C.T. Case No.492 of 2017, the second case was
registered on 11.03.2023 vide Odisha Excise P.R. No.1022 of
2022-23 in which the petitioner has been enlarged on bail by this
Court even more than one year prior to the order of detention
and the third case was registered on 25.01.2024 vide NCB
Bhubaneswar Crime No.02 of 2024 in which the petitioner has
been enlarged on bail by this Court. The other five cases are
stale cases which were from 2005 onwards. If those stale cases
are taken out of consideration and if after being released in 2017
N.D.P.S. Act case, the petitioner involved himself in 2023
N.D.P.S. Act case and again after being released in bail, he
involved himself in 2024 N.D.P.S. Act case, since in the N.D.P.S.
Act cases, stringent punishment is prescribed and there is also
bar under section 37 of the N.D.P.S. Act in the matter of grant of
bail, for misutilising the liberty by the petitioner, application for
cancellation of bail could have been moved by the State and in
that event, ordinary criminal law has provided sufficient means
to address the situation. The Authority having not taken recourse
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 36
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 40 of 43
to such remedy, has taken recourse to the provisions of the
1988 Act, which is an extraordinary statute, leading to the
passing of the impugned detention order.
18. Law is well settled that a Court cannot go into
correctness or otherwise of the facts stated or allegations leveled
in the grounds in support of detention. A Court of Law is the last
appropriate forum to investigate into circumstances of suspicion
on which such anticipatory action must be largely based. That,
however, does not mean that the subjective satisfaction of
Detaining Authority is wholly immune from judicial reviewability.
By judicial decisions, Courts have carved out areas, though
limited, within which the validity of subjective satisfaction can be
tested judicially. The Court must apply its mind as to whether
the Detaining Authority has scrupulously followed the procedures
and any infraction or procedural lapses which ultimately result in
violation of the fundamental right guaranteed under Article 21 of
the Constitution of India, will lead to setting aside the said order.
Subjective satisfaction being a condition precedent
for the exercise of the power of preventive detention conferred
on the executive, the Court can always examine whether the
requisite satisfaction is arrived at by the authority; if it is not,
the condition precedent to the exercise of the power would not
be fulfilled and the exercise of the power would be bad.
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 41 of 43
In view of the foregoing discussions, we are of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 37
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
humble view that the Detaining Authority has recorded its
subjective satisfaction not only on the grounds communicated to
the petitioner, but there were some other facts and relevant
materials before the Authority to arrive at its satisfaction. The
involvement of the petitioner in eight cases were before the
Detaining Authority which are likely to have influenced it in
arriving at its subjective satisfaction, but the same were not
mentioned in the grounds of detention. Though the Detaining
Authority mentioned in the grounds of detention to have taken
into account the involvement of the petitioner only in three
criminal cases from 2017 to 2024, but we find that the
subjective satisfaction is reached on the basis of eight criminal
cases against the petitioner instituted from 2005 to 2024. The
Detaining Authority is not justified in taking into account
involvement of the petitioner in other five stale cases as spelt
out in the counter affidavit when the details of such cases have
not been mentioned in the grounds of detention. Therefore, the
Detaining Authority cannot be said to have given sufficient
opportunity to the petitioner to make an effective representation,
in other words, the petitioner is deprived of making an effective
representation against the order of detention in compliance to
the provisions of Article 22(5) of the Constitution of India read
WPCRL No. 129 of 2024 Page 42 of 43
with section 6 of the 1988 Act. The partial withdrawal of grounds
of detention by not supplying all the basic facts and materials
relied upon by the Detaining Authority to the petitioner shall
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 38
Nilakantha Pradhan vs Government Of India on 19 February, 2025
entail the very detention a nullity for being violative of Article
22(5) of the Constitution of India.
19. Accordingly, the detention order dated 23.07.2024
under Annexure-1 and the consequential confirmation order
dated 18.10.2024 under Annexure-4 are liable to be set aside.
Resultantly, the WPCRL is allowed. The impugned
detention order dated 23.07.2024 under Annexure-1 and the
consequential confirmation order dated 18.10.2024 under
Annexure-4 are hereby set aside. The opposite parties are
hereby directed to set the petitioner at liberty forthwith, if he is
not required to be detained in any other case.
There shall be no order as to cost.
..................................
S.K. Sahoo, J.
S.S. Mishra, J. I agree.
................................ S.S. Mishra, J.
Orissa High Court, Cuttack The 19th February 2024/PKSahoo Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA
Date: 19-Feb-2025 11:02:05
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/72333023/ 39
