Nilamadhab Joshi vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... ... on 20 January, 2021
Nilamadhab Joshi vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... ... on 20
January, 2021
Equivalent citations: AIR 2021 (NOC) 576 (ORI.), AIRONLINE 2021 ORI 46
Author: S.K. Mishra
Bench: S.K. Mishra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 6604 OF 2020, and
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) No. 12854 OF 2020
(Applications under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of
India.)
Nilamadhab Joshi ...... Petitioner
Versus
State of Odisha and Others ....... Opposite Parties
Advocate(s) who appeared in these cases by video conferencing mode:-
For Petitioner : Mr. A.K. Biswal, Advocate
For Opposite Party Nos.2 and 5 : Mr. S.K. Mishra, Advocate
For Opposite Party Nos.1, 3 : Mrs. Suman Pattanayak,
and 4 Additional Government Advocate
CORAM : THE CHIEF JUSTICE
MR. JUSTICE S.K. MISHRA
JUDGMENT
20th January, 2021 Dr. S. Muralidhar, CJ.
1. The Petitioner, who is a transport contractor has filed this writ petition challenging the validity of
the tender call notice (TCN) dated 12th May, 2020 for selection and appointment of Level-II
Transport Contractors in the district of Sundargarh.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129804455/ 1
Nilamadhab Joshi vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... ... on 20 January, 2021
2. Initially against a TCN dated 7th February, 2020 which again was floated for selection and
appointment of Level-II Transport Contractors, the Petitioner had filed Writ Petition (Civil)
No.6604 of 2020 in this Court, in which an interim order was passed on 20th February, 2020 to the
effect that the tender process may continue but no final decision will be taken without leave of the
Court.
3. When the second writ petition i.e. W.P.(C) No.12854 of 2020 was first listed before the Court on
9th June, 2020, the following order was passed:
"Heard Mr. A.K. Biswal, learned counsel for the petitioner and learned Additional
Government Advocate appearing for opposite party nos.1 & 4 through Video
Conferencing.
By means of this writ application, the petitioner has prayed for quashing of tender
call notice dated 12.5.2020 under Annexure-6 for appointment of Level-II Transport
Contractor in respect of Sundargarh District. According to Mr. Biswal, earlier, the
present petitioner had challenged the tender call notice dated 7.2.2020 in the district
of Sundargarh in W.P.(C) No.6604 of 2020 covering the same work. This Court vide
its order dated 20.2.2020 while issuing notice to the opposite parties, directed that
the tender might continue but no final decision shall be taken without leave of the
Court till the next date. The said matter has not yet been listed before this Court and
accordingly, the interim order passed therein continues as on date. The opposite
party nos.2 to 5 by over-reaching the process of Court and in order to frustrate the
mandate of the above interim order withdrew the earlier tender call notice and
thereafter a fresh tender call notice in respect of same work has been floated on
12.5.2020. In order to verify as to whether the interim order passed by this Court in
the earlier writ application pertains to the self same work and is still continuing, we
called for the original file from the office and found that the scope of the work is same
as in the present case and the interim order granted therein also continues subsists as
on date. In such background, let notice be issued.
Learned Additional Government Advocate accepts notice on behalf of opposite party
nos.1 & 4. Let two extra copies of the brief be served on her in order to enable him to
file counter affidavit by the next date.
Issue notice to opposite party nos.2,3 & 5 by Registered Post with A.D. fixing a short
returnable date within three weeks. Requisites shall be filed within a week.
List this matter on 1.7.2020 along with W.P.(C) No.6604 of 2020.
In the interim, it is directed that status quo as on today with regard to award of the
work shall be maintained till the next date.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129804455/ 2
Nilamadhab Joshi vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... ... on 20 January, 2021
As lock-down period is continuing for COVID-19, learned counsel for the petitioner
may utilize the soft copy of this order available in the High Court's Website or print
out thereof at par with certified copies in the manner prescribed, vide Court's Notice
No.4587, dated 25.3.2020."
4. The said interim order has continued till date. When the pleadings having been completed in both
the matters, they are taken up for final hearing together.
5. Vis-à-vis both the TCNs i.e. the one dated 7th February, 2020 and the subsequent one dated 12th
May 2020, the grievances of the Petitioner is that by means of Clause 4.1 read with Clause 5.1 and
the definition of the 'family', the Opposite Parties have gone beyond the standard definition and
included relatives such as brothers, sisters and married sons for being debarred from participating
in the tender. The submission in short is that the definition of 'family' as contained in the impugned
TCNs is bad in the eye of law.
6. To further understand the issue, a reference can be made to the relevant clauses of the TCN i.e.
Clauses 4.5 and 5.1, which read as under:
"4.5 The tenderer shall furnish an affidavit in the prescribed format (enclosed at
Annexure-5) declaring non-involvement in commercial interest of his/her family
members or Partners along with their family members or Directors along with their
family members, as the case may be, for consideration of her/his appointment under
this tender.
xx xx xx 5.1 No person shall be appointed as Level-II Transport Contractor under this
tender process, if s/he or the Director or proprietor or partner or any of her/his
family members has a commercial interest in a business relating to Handling
Contractor/State Level Transport Contractor/Level-I Transport Contractor/ Level-II
Transport Contractor/PEG Go-down Lessor and/or custom milling of rice for OSCSC
Ltd. for the district and all the neighbouring districts with common boundary for
which s/he intends to apply under this tender.) The term 'Family' & 'Commercial
Interest" have been defined in detail at Clause-I of the PART-I Technical Bid]"
7. The above clauses have to be read along with definition of 'family' in Part-I pertaining to
"Technical Bid", which reads as under:
"i. The term 'Family' shall mean a. parent b. husband/wife c. sons/daughters
(including adopted children) and their spouse d. full blood siblings (brothers &
sisters from common parents) and their spouse."
8. The terms 'Commercial Interest' has been defined in clause (w), which reads thus:
"w. The term 'Commercial Interest' shall mean a business, partnership or company
for the operation as Handling Contractor/State Level Contractor/Level-I Transport
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129804455/ 3
Nilamadhab Joshi vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... ... on 20 January, 2021
Contractor/Level-II Transport Contractor/ PEG Go-down lessor and/or Custom
Miller for OSCSC Ltd. for the district for which one intends to apply under this tender
and all neighbouring districts with common boundary."
9. The case of the Petitioner is that the above definition has been introduced for the first time only to
somehow qualify the Petitioner from being empanelled as a Level-II Transport Contractor. A
grievance is also made about the stipulation of making the Earnest Money Deposit (EMD). It is
stated that in the impugned tender call notice, the workable rate is 10 to 15% less than the TCN
dated 27th February, 2019 for the year 2019-20. It is contended that the said stipulation is without
any basis though the labour and the transport rate has been hiked in the meantime.
10. In W.P.(C) No.6604 of 2020, a counter affidavit has been filed by the Manager (Law), Orissa
State Civil Supplies Corporation Limited (OSCSL) on behalf of the Opposite Party No.2 and 5. It is
explained that the price bid pursuant to the TCN dated 27th February, 2019 was opened, the
Petitioner was selected for engagement as Level-II Transport Contractor in respect of Rajgangpur,
Kutra Block/Unit. The Petitioner was asked by letters dated 19th September, 2019 to submit the
required documents and execute the agreement by 27th September, 2019. However, the Petitioner
failed to do so.
11. In the meanwhile, by letter dated 27th September 2019, the Managing Director (MD), OSCSCL
instructed that the tender process for appointment of Level-I and II Transport Contractors for the
year biennial 2019-21 should be cancelled if no agreement is executed. Accordingly, the tender
process by the aforementioned TCN dated 27th February, 2019 was cancelled.
12. Thereafter, another TCN dated 7th February, 2020 was issued inviting tenders for engagement
of Level-II Transport Contractors for 21 Units. There was single bidder for two units i.e. Lahunipara
Block and Lathikata block. There were no bids for the other units. This necessitated issuing fresh
tender call notice dated 12th May, 2020. It is however stated that because of the interim order
passed by this Court, no final decision was taken on the said notice.
13. The affidavit also explains the logic behind the change definition 'family'. It is stated that the
intention behind cancellation of the tender was to prevent the formation of 'cartel' by the handing
Contractors i.e. Level-I and Level-II Contractors or PEG Godown owner among themselves and
attempt to control the entire Public Distribution System (PDS). Accordingly, the District Managers
annulled the tender process and have gone for de novo tendering with stringent conditions. This
order was further modified on 15th October, 2019 by expanding the definition of 'family' to include
parents, husband/wife, sons/daughters and their spouses (including adopted children), full blood
siblings and their spouse. It is further decided to debar such bidder to be appointed as Handling
Contractor i.e. Level-I and Level-II Transport Contractors under this tender process, if he/she or
any of her/his family members has a commercial interest in a business relating to handling
contractor/Level-I Transport Contractor/Level-II Transport Contractor, PEG Go-down lessor,
Custom Miller and/or custom milling of rice for OSCSC Ltd. under DCP scheme of Government of
India for the district and its neighbouring district with common boundary. A reference is made to
Clause 15.2 of the tender documents which authorizes the District Tender Committee to reject any
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129804455/ 4
Nilamadhab Joshi vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... ... on 20 January, 2021
or all tender without assigning any reason. According to the said clause, the District Tender
Committee reserves the right to reject any or all tenders without assigning any reason thereof and
does not bind himself to accept the lowest or any tender. Accordingly, it is submitted by the
Opposite Parties that there is no illegality attaching to cancellation of the tender process.
14. A separate counter affidavit has been filed by the OSCSCL on the same lines.
15. Mr. A.K. Biswal, learned counsel appearing for the Petitioner in both the writ petitions contends
that the stipulation in Clauses 4.5 and 5.1 read with the definition of 'family' was discriminatory,
illegal and arbitrary. It is further submitted that it is also irrational that on the one hand the
authority was asking for experienced contractors and on the other hand inserting stipulation that
inevitably inviting experienced persons from participating in the tender.
16. As regards floating of fresh tender, he explains the reasons why the earlier tender could not be
proceeded with when a fresh tender had to be floated. As regards the EMD fixation, it is stated that
as per the OGFR Rules, the tender floated can fix EMD upto 2 to 5% of the estimated tender value.
Clause 6.1 of the tender documents dated 5th February, 2020 fixed the EMD at 5% and therefore,
this was not excessive. It is further pointed out that for determining the workable rate all factors
have to be taken into consideration as per the rates provided with the tender documents by the
District Tender Committee for each unit. It is further explained that it is necessary to exclude some
of the persons already engaged in the activities and having commercial interest as there was a
chance of manipulation of the district supply of good grains for PDS.
17. Having considered the submission of learned counsel for the parties, the Court is not satisfied
that sufficient grounds exist for interference by the Court. The Court is unable to agree that the
definition of 'family' is too broad and wide and was inserted to somehow deliberately disqualify the
persons like the Petitioner. There is a need to ensure a level playing field and a fair and equal
opportunity where competitive bidding is to take place. By debarring the family members, which
could well include the siblings of the person bidding, nothing arbitrary or illegal has been sought to
be introduced into the process done by the Opposite Parties. The measure has a reasonable nexus to
the object of ensuring a fair and level playing field for bidders. It eliminates one possible source of
bias that might vitiate the process. Indeed it was important to break the 'cartel' and domination of
certain family groups to form a network and capture all the available contracts. The expansion of the
definition of 'family', therefore, appears reasonable to the Court and cannot be said to be hit by
Article 14 of the Constitution. Even the stipulation regarding EMD does not appear to be
unreasonable or contrary to any settled law.
18. The Court accordingly finds no ground to interfere in both the writ petitions, which are
accordingly dismissed. The interim orders stand vacated. However, there shall be no order as to
costs.
19. As the restrictions due to the COVID-19 situation are continuing, learned counsel for the parties
may utilize a soft copy of this order/judgment available in the High Court's website or print out
thereof at par with certified copy in the manner prescribed, vide Court's Notice No.4587 dated 25th
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129804455/ 5
Nilamadhab Joshi vs State Of Odisha And Others ....... ... on 20 January, 2021
March, 2020.
............................
S. Muralidhar Chief Justice ......................
S.K. Mishra Judge 20th January, 2021 //S.K. Jena, P.A.//
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/129804455/ 6
