Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties
on 7 October, 2021
Author: B.R.Sarangi
Bench: B.R.Sarangi
ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
WPC (OAC) NO. 1074 OF 2017
And
WPC (OAC) NO. 1956 OF 2017
In the matter of applications under Articles 226 and 227 of
the Constitution of India.
---------------
AFR In WPC (OAC) No.1074 of 2017 Niranajan Das & Ors. ..... Petitioners
-Versus-
State of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties For Petitioners : Mr. B. Routray, Sr. Advocate along with
M/s. S. Das, S.K. Samal, S.P. Nath & S.D. Routray, Advocates For Opp. Parties : Mr. S. Jena,
Standing Counsel, School & Mass Education Deptt.
In WPC (OAC) No.1956 of 2017 Bijay Kumar Sahoo & Ors. ..... Petitioners
-Versus-
State of Odisha & others ..... Opp. Parties For Petitioners : M/s. K.P. Mishra, S. Mohapatra, T.P.
Tripathy, L.P. Dwivedy & M. Das, Advocates.
For Opp. Parties : Mr. S. Jena, Standing Counsel, School & Mass Education Deptt.
// 2 // P R E S E N T:
THE HONOURABLE DR. JUSTICE B.R.SARANGI Date of hearing: 29.09.2021 ::
Date of Judgment: 07.10.2021 DR. B.R. SARANGI, J. Of the two writ petitions, as
mentioned above, WPC (OAC) No.1074 of 2017, in which petitioners are twenty-two
in number, has been filed for the following reliefs:-
"i) Admit the original application,
i) Call for the records,
ii) Issue appropriate order/orders,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 1
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
direction/directions directing the respondents to regularize the services of the
applicants from the admitted date of their joining and extend all consequential
service benefits including the leave and pensionary benefit along with promotional
benefits as per the terms of the provisions of the Pension Rules within a reasonable
time to be fixed by this Hon'ble Tribunal."
And WPC (OAC) No.1956 of 2017, in which petitioners are twelve in number, has
been preferred seeking following reliefs:-
"(i) Direct/order the Respondent No.1 to grant benefit(s) of past service like
continuing of service and notional pay fixation to the Applicants taking into account
their dates of joining as mentioned in the Order No.XVI-HE-
37/2016 18066/HE, dated 03.07.2016 and/or anti-date the date of regularization from the date of
the Order passed in O.A. No.15(C) of 2010;
// 3 //
(i) Pass such other order(s) or issue direction(s) as may be deemed fit and proper in the bona fide
interest of justice."
In both the writ petitions, reliefs sought being similar to each other, they were heard together and
are disposed of by this common judgment.
2. The factual matrix giving rise to filing of both the cases, in a nutshell, is that the National Policy
on Education, 1986 introduced vocational stream at +2 stage to provide alternative source of
income. On 27.07.1988, 31 number of Higher Secondary Vocational Schools were opened by the
State Government under the centrally sponsored Scheme "Vocationalisation of Secondary
Education" vide GO No.33291/EYS during the academic session 1988-89. The staffing pattern of
those schools consisted of a Principal in the junior class-I scale of pay and four vocational teachers
(PGT) in the class-II scale of pay. The State Government issued a circular on 17.03.1989 vide letter
no.13513/NEP 2/89 EYS of Secondary Education for appointment of qualified PG teacher against
vacant post on contract basis since regular recruitment through OPSC was not possible.
// 4 // The candidate having educational qualification at par with that of regular Junior Post
Graduate Lecturers were decided to be appointed in all those 31 colleges. Accordingly, applications
were invited and the petitioners, having requisite qualification of that of the post of Post Graduate
Teacher, offered their candidature and were selected and engaged in the vacant posts of Junior
Lecturer.
2.1 In the second phase, the State Government opened 150 numbers of Higher Secondary Vocational
Schools in the year 1990-91. On 10.12.1990, the Deputy Director of Vocational Education, Odisha
addressed letter to all the Principals I/C of Higher Secondary Vocational Schools for giving
appointment of part time resource persons on contract basis to teach vocational subjects. On
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 2
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
28.01.1991, the Government decided to separate +2 classes from degree colleges and to appoint 220
number of Junior Lecturers in Higher Secondary Vocational Schools vide notification No.3839 of
Education Department. Accordingly, on 01.04.1991, an advertisement was published in local daily
the "Sun Times" by the Directorate of Secondary Education, Odisha wherein applications were
invited from the eligible // 5 // candidates for the posts of Junior Lecturer in Vocational Institutions
of the State. Creation of teaching and non- teaching posts for vocational institutions opened under
the centrally sponsored scheme where the salary of the staff of vocational schools is reimbursed to
the extent of 75% by the Government of India. Therefore, unless the posts were filled up, the State
Government could not claim any reimbursement. Those posts were held by the petitioners having
requisite qualifications of that of Junior Lecturers. 2.2 A gazette notification bearing No.40779
dated 06.06.1996 was issued by the Government of Orissa in Department of Higher Education,
regarding engagement of Part Time Resource Person (PTRP) in Government Higher Secondary
Vocational Schools prescribing therein the educational qualification. On 21.08.1996, another gazette
notification bearing no.58230 was issued regarding engagement of Full Time Resource Person
(FTRP) in Government Higher Secondary Vocational Schools prescribing therein the educational
qualification. Accordingly, an advertisement was issued by the Director, Secondary Education,
Odisha in local daily "The Samaj" on // 6 // 13.07.1999 for recruitment of Full Time Resource
Persons on contract basis. Even though petitioners were continuing as Part Time Resource Persons
on contract basis, but their appointment was never regularized by the opposite parties as Junior
Lecturers, though their services were being utilized against the vacant posts of Junior Lecturer.
Being aggrieved by such action/ inaction, they approached this Court by filing OJC No.9392 of 1999
praying therein for regularization of their service. During pendency of the said writ petition, the
petitioners, after undergoing a rigorous selection process conducted by the state level selection
board with the Director Vocational Education as Chairperson, and taking into consideration their
past service as part time PG Teachers continuing on contract basis against the vacant posts of the
Junior Lecturers, were appointed as Full Time Resource Persons.
2.3 In 2010, this Court transferred OJC No.9392 of 1999 to the Odisha Administrative Tribunal for
adjudication, which was registered as T.A. No.15(C) of 2010. The tribunal, vide order dated
10.07.2014, disposed of the said T.A. No.15(C) of 2010 directing the State opposite parties to // 7 //
regularize the services of the petitioners keeping in view the judgment passed by the tribunal in O.A.
No.2399(C) of 2008 and batch disposed of on 13.09.2011 wherein direction was given to formulate a
scheme for regularization of services of contractual resource persons, according to the resolution
dated 04.11.1996, as lecturers within six months from the date of receipt of the order. As the
judgment of the Odisha Administrative Tribunal was not implemented, C.P. No.543(C) of 2014 was
filed and when the said C.P. was pending, the State Government in Higher Education Department
filed compliance affidavit reflecting therein the regularization of 201 number of Full Time Resource
Persons working in different vocational Junior Colleges re-designated as Junior Lecturers in the
scale of pay of Rs.9300-34800/- with grade pay of Rs.4600/- w.e.f. the date of issue of the order i.e.
03.07.2016. In view of such order, the contempt proceeding was dropped, but the tribunal granted
liberty to the petitioners for claiming any benefits, consequent upon the order passed, by
approaching the legal forum. Hence, the petitioners approached Odisha Administrative Tribunal by
filing O.A. Nos. 1074 (C) of 2017 and O.A. No. 1956 (C) of // 8 // 2017 claiming regularization of
their services from the date of their initial appointment. But on abolition of the tribunal the said
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 3
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
Original Applications have been transferred to this Court and registered as above.
3. Mr. B. Routray, learned Senior Counsel appearing along with Mr. S.K. Samal, learned counsel for
the petitioners in WPC (OAC) No.1074 of 2017 contended that the petitioners, having requisite
qualification for the post of Junior Lecturers, were initially appointed as Part Time Resource
Persons in the year 1991 and subsequently, they were appointed as Full Time Resource Persons
w.e.f. 2001 and have been working uninterruptedly against the substantive vacant posts of Junior
Lecturer from the date of their initial appointment. Therefore, they seek regularization of their
services from the date of their initial appointment, but not from 03.07.2016, the date of passing of
the order of regularization of services. It is contended that the order of regularization of their
services w.e.f. 03.07.2016 is arbitrary, unreasonable and contrary to the provisions of law.
Therefore, the petitioners seek interference of this Court. It is further contended that the petitioners,
having requisite // 9 // qualification for the posts of Junior Lecturer, have discharged their duties as
Junior Lecturer against the vacant posts in Vocational Government Secondary Schools and rendered
continuous service for more than 20 years, which cannot be wiped out while opposite parties
decided to regularize their services w.e.f. 03.07.2016. That itself is contrary to the provisions of law.
To substantiate his contentions, reliance is placed on the judgments of the apex Court in Direct
Recruit Class- II Engineering Officers' Association v. State of Maharastra, AIR 1990 SC 1607 and
Sachin Ambadas Dawale v. State of Maharashtra (W.P. No.2046 of 2010 disposed of on 19.10.2013
by the Bombay High Court and confirmed by the apex Court by dismissing SLP (C) No.39014 of
2013 vide order dated 06.01.2015).
4. Mr. K.P. Mishra, learned counsel for the petitioners in WPC (OAC) No.1956 of 2017 supported the
contentions raised by Mr. B. Routray, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the petitioners in WPC
(OAC) No.1074 of 2017. He further contended that even though the petitioners were allowed to
continue as Part Time Resource Persons w.e.f.
// 10 // 1991 and thereafter as Full Time Resource Persons from 2001 by paying consolidated
remuneration pursuant to agreement executed between the parties and that contract itself is
opposed to public policy. It is further contended that if there is no head of public policy which covers
a case, then the Court must in consonance with public conscience and in keeping with public good
and public interest declare such practice to be opposed to public policy. Even in deciding any case
which may not be covered by authority, Courts have before them the beacon light of the Preamble to
the Constitution. Lacking precedent, the Court can always be guided by that light and the principles
underlying the Fundamental Rights and the Directive Principles enshrined in the Constitution.
To substantiate his contention, he has relied upon Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd.
V. Tarun Kanti Sengupta, AIR 1986 SC 1571.
5. Per contra, Mr. S. Jena, learned Standing Counsel appearing for School and Mass Education
Department raised preliminary objection with regard to maintainability of the writ petition and
referring to the relief sought by the // 11 // petitioners contended that similar prayer was made in
the Original Applications and that having been with the self- same prayer, the petitioner cannot
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 4
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
approach this Court by filing the present writ petitions. Referring to paragraph-5 of the counter
affidavit, he contended that the petitioners were initially appointed as Part Time Resource Persons
in the year 1990-91 in various trades prevailed at that time in a centrally sponsored scheme, namely,
"Vocationalisation of Higher Secondary Education" in a consolidated honorarium. Thereafter, the
Government published a resolution to engage the vocational teachers in the nomenclature as
"resource teacher on full time basis" on a consolidated remuneration of Rs.3,000/- per month.
Therefore, the petitioners were engaged under the temporary scheme and their post may be treated
as schematic post. By virtue of order dated 14.07.2014 passed by the Tribunal in T.A. No.15(C) of
2010, when their services were regularized vide order dated 03.07.2016 from the date of issuance of
such order in the scale of pay Rs.9300-34,800/- with grade pay of Rs.4600/-, the petitioners cannot
claim that the benefit should be extended retrospectively from the date of their initial // 12 //
appointment or as Part Time Resource Persons from 1991 or from the date they have been
continuing as Full Time Resource Persons from 2001 as they claim that they have been discharging
their duty of Junior Lecturers against sanctioned posts. Thereby, he contended that the writ petition
has to be dismissed both on the question of maintainability and on merits.
To substantiate his contention, he has relied upon State of Rajasthan v. Dayalal, (2011) 2 SCC 429;
Secretary to Government, School Educatin Department, Chennai v. R. Govindaswamy, (2014) 4 SCC
769; and State of Tamil Nadu through Secretary to Government, Commercial Taxes and Registration
Department v. A. Singamuthu, (2017) 4 SCC 113.
6. This Court heard Mr. B.Routray, learned Senior Counsel appearing along with Mr. S.K. Samal,
learned counsel for the petitioners in WPC (OAC) No.1074 of 2017; Mr. K.P. Mishra, learned counsel
for the petitioners in WPC (OAC) No.1956 of 2017 and Mr. S. Jena, learned Standing Counsel for
School and Mass Education Department. Pleadings have been exchanged between the parties and
with // 13 // their consent, both the writ petitions are being disposed of finally at the stage of
admission.
7. On the basis of factual matrix as discussed above, the only question to be decided by this Court is,
whether the petitioners' services can be regularized from 1991, i.e. the date of their initial
appointment to the post of Part Time Resource Persons or from the dates they were regularized as
Full Time Resource Persons, as indicated in Annexure-A to the order impugned dated 03.07.2016
issued in compliance of the order dated 14.07.2014 passed by the tribunal in T.A. No.15(C) of 2010
or w.e.f. 03.07.2016?
8. Before effectively answering the above question, it is of relevance to deal with the preliminary
objection raised by Mr. S. Jena, learned Standing Counsel for School and Mass Education
Department with regard to maintainability of the writ petition, relying upon the order dated
10.07.2014 passed by the Odisha Administrative Tribunal in T.A. No.15(C) of 2010, wherein prayer
quoted in paragraph-2 reads thus:
"The applicants have come up with this T.A praying for regularization of their
services as FTRPs (to be // 14 // re-designated as Jr. Lecturers) in view of the long
period of service rendered by them as contractual employees since 1996."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 5
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
Since the petitioners had filed T.A. No.15(C) of 2010 praying for regularization of services as Full
Time Resource Persons (to be re-designated as Jr. Lecturers) in view of long period of service
rendered by them as contractual employees since 1996, it is contended that similar prayer has been
made in the present writ petitions, for which they are not maintainable. But on careful perusal of the
prayer made in both the writ petitions, this Court finds that the same has been couched in different
manner, that is to say the petitioners seek for regularization of services from the admitted dates of
their joining and to extend all consequential benefits including leave and pensionary benefits along
with promotional benefits as per the terms of the provisions of the Pension Rules within a
reasonable time to be fixed by the court. Thereby, the relief sought in these cases cannot be treated
as same so as to render the writ petitions as not maintainable. Otherwise also, after abolition of the
tribunal, these two matters have been transferred to this Court for adjudication under Article 226 of
the // 15 // Constitution of India, but originally they were registered as Original Applications before
the tribunal under Section 19 of the Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985, which no more remains.
Now, they are to be construed as applications filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India. If
that be so, the objection with regard to maintainability of the writ petitions raised by learned
Standing Counsel for School and Mass Education Department on the ground of self-same relief
cannot sustain in the eye of law because this Court can mould the relief sought by the petitioners.
9. "Moulding of relief" principle was recognized by the Supreme Court in Pasupuleti Venkateswarlu
v. The Motor & General Traders, AIR 1975 SC 1709. It was observed therein that though the right to
relief must be judged to exist as on the date a suitor institutes the legal proceeding, the principle that
procedure is the handmaid and not the mistress of the judicial process is also to be noted. Justice
VR Krishna Iyer observed:
"If a fact, arising after the lis has come to court and has a fundamental impact on the
right to relief for the manner of moulding it, is brought diligently to the notice of the
tribunal, it cannot blink at it or be blind to events which stultify or render inept the
decrotal remedy. Equity justifies bending the // 16 // rules of procedure, where no
specific provision or fair play is violated, with a view to promote substantial
justice--subject, of course, to the absence of other disentitling (actors or just
circumstances. Nor can we contemplate any limitation on this power to take note of
updated facts to confine it to the trial Court. If the litigation pends, the power exists,
absent other special circumstances repelling resort to that course in law or justice.
Rulings on this point are legion, even as situations for applications of this equitable
rule are myraid. We affirm the proposition that for making the right or remedy
claimed by the party just and meaningful as also legally and factually in accord with
the current realities, the court can, and in many cases must, take cautious cognizance
of events and developments subsequent to the institution of the proceeding provided
the rules of fairness to both sides are scrupulously obeyed.
10. In Ramesh Kumar v. Kesho Ram, AIR 1992 SC 700, the Supreme Court again following this
principle, i.e. "moulding of relief", observed as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 6
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
"6. The normal rule is that in any litigation the rights and obligations of the parties
are adjudicated upon as they obtain at the commencement of the lis. But this is
subject to an exception. Wherever subsequent events of fact or law which have a
material bearing on the entitlement of the parties to relief or on aspects which bear
on the moulding of the relief occur, the court is not precluded from taking a 'cautious
cognizance' of the subsequent changes of fact and law to mould the relief."
11. In Sheshambal (dead) through LRs v. Chelur Corporation Chelur Building, (2010) 3 SCC 470, the
apex Court laid down the conditions in which the relief can be moulded:
// 17 // "(i) that the relief, as claimed originally has, by reason of subsequent events,
become inappropriate or cannot be granted;
(ii) that taking note of such subsequent event or changed circumstances would
shorten litigation and enable complete justice being done to the parties;
and
(iii) that such subsequent event is brought to the notice of the court promptly and in accordance
with the rules of procedural law so that the opposite party is not taken by surprise."
12. In Samir Narain Bhojwani v. Aurora Properties and Investments, (2018) 17 SCC 203 the apex
Court observed that principle of moulding of relief could at best be resorted to at the time of
consideration of final relief in the main suit and not at an interlocutory stage.
13. In Premalata Panda v. State of Odisha, 2015 (II) OLR 214, relying upon State of Rajasthan v.
M/s. Hindustan Sugar Mills Ltd., AIR 1988 SC 1621 : (1988) 3 SCC 449 where the apex Court held
that the High Court which was exercising high prerogative jurisdiction under Article 226 could have
moulded the relief in a just and fair manner as required by the demands of the situation, this Court,
in exercise of such power under Article 226 of the Constitution of India even though no specific
prayer was // 18 // made in the writ petition, taking into consideration the facts and circumstances
of the case, was inclined to mould the relief and passed order/direction as deemed fit and proper as
prayed for by the learned counsel for the petitioner in the writ petition.
14. In view of the law laid down by the apex Court, so far as "moulding of relief" is concerned, this
Court is of the considered view that even if there is no such specific prayer made in the writ
application, this Court can grant such relief, as has been sought before this Court in course of
hearing, even at the final stage by "moulding the relief".
This Court has also moulded the relief in Ganesh Chandra Behera v. Berhampur University, 2020 (I)
OLR 5.
15. In view of such position, the preliminary question raised with regard to maintainability of the
writ petitions by the learned Standing Counsel for School and Mass Education Department is being
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 7
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
negatived and is answered accordingly.
16. Now, answering to the core question involved in these writ petitions, it is admitted by the
learned Standing Counsel for School and Mass Education Department, // 19 // referring to
paragraph-5 of the counter affidavit, that initial appointment of the petitioners as Part Time
Resource Persons was made in the year 1991 in various trades prevailed at the relevant point of time
in a centrally sponsored scheme, namely, "Vocationalisation of Higher Secondary Education" in a
consolidated honouraruim. Thereafter, the Government published a resolution to engage the
vocational teachers in the nomenclature as "resource teacher on full time basis" in a consolidated
remuneration of Rs.3,000/- per month, pursuant to which the petitioners were engaged as Full
Time Resource Persons by following due procedure of selection in the year 2001 and subsequent
thereto they started discharging their duties and responsibilities of Junior Lecturers.
17. So far as claim made by the petitioners, that regularization of their services should relate back to
the date of their initial engagement as Part Time Resource Persons from 1991, cannot sustain in the
eye of law because part time engagement cannot be construed to be an engagement to discharge the
duty of a particular post. More so, Part Time Resource Persons were engaged for a particular period
and // 20 // particular nature of duty to be discharged by them. Therefore, they can stand apart
from the persons, who are discharging duty as Full Time Resource Persons. But, pursuant to gazette
notification issued on 21.08.1996, by following regular process of advertisement, if they were
engaged as Full Time Resource Persons on contract basis to discharge the duties and responsibilities
against regular posts of Junior Lecturers and their services have been utilized against the vacant
posts, they cannot be denied the benefits of regularization of their services from their initial
appointment as Full Time Resource Persons.
18. Mr. S. Jena, learned Standing Counsel for School and Mass Education Department has placed
much reliance on paragraph-12 (iv) and (v) of Daya Lal (supra), which are extracted below:
"12. xxx xxx xxx
(iv) Part-time employees are not entitled to seek regularization as they are not
working against any sanctioned posts. There cannot be a direction for absorption,
regularization or permanent conti8nuance of part-time temporary employees.
(v) Part-time temporary employees in government-
run institutions cannot claim parity in salary with regular employees of the Government on the
principle of equal pay for equal work. Nor can // 21 // employees in private employment, even if
serving full time, seek parity in salary with government employees. The right to claim a particular
salary against the State must arise under a contract or under a statute."
19. In R. Govindaswamy (supra), the apex Court in paragraph-7 observed as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 8
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
7. In Union of India v. A.S. Pillai, this Court dealt with the issue of regularization of
part-time employees and the Court refused the relief on the ground that part-
timers are free to get themselves engaged elsewhere and they are not restrained from working
elsewhere when they are not working for the authority/employer. Being the part-time employees,
they are not subject to service rules or other regulations which govern and control the regularly
appointed staff of the department. Therefore, the question of giving them equal pay for equal work
or considering their case for regularization would not arise.
In paragraph-8 the apex Court referred to Daya Lal (supra) and in paragraph-9 held as follows:
"9. The present appeals are squarely covered by Clauses (ii), (iv) and (v) of the
aforesaid judgment in Daya Lal case. Therefore, the appeals are allowed. However, in
light of the facts and circumstances of the case as Shri P.P. Rao, learned Senior
Counsel has submitted that the appellant has already implemented the impugned
judgments and does not want to disturb the services of the respondents, the services
of the respondents which stood regularized should not be affected."
20. In A. Singamuthu (supra), the apex Court in paragraph-16 referred to Daya Lal (supra) and held
that Part Time Lecturers are not entitled to seek regularization, as // 22 // they are not working
against any sanctioned posts and they cannot be directed for absorption, regularization or
permanent continuance of part-time temporary employees. It is further held that part-time
temporary employees in government-run institutions cannot claim parity in salary with regular
employees of the Government on the principle of equal pay for equal work. Nor can employees in
private employment, even if serving full-time, seek parity in salary with government employees. The
right to claim a particular salary against the State must arise under a contract or under a statute.
21. In view of law laid down by the apex Court, this Court holds that the claim of the petitioners, that
regularization of their services should relate back to the date when they were engaged as Part Time
Resource Persons, i.e., from the year 1991, cannot be granted.
22. In Sachin Ambadas Dawale (supra), the Bombay High Court in paragraphs-18 and 19, taking
into consideration the facts of that case, observed as follows:
"18. Xxxxx The Lecturers who are appointed in the Private Polytechnic Institutions
after selection // 23 // through the School Committee are appointed on contractual
basis as "Shikshan Sevak" for the period of three years as per the policy of the
Government of Maharashtra incorporated in the resolution dated 27th April, 2000. It
is not in dispute that the selection process through which the petitioners are selected
is much less stringent than the selection process of the 38 wp2046.10 Private
Polytechnic. We see no reason as to why the petitioners, who are otherwise eligible
and qualified for the posts and who are selected by a duly constituted Selection
Committee appointed by the Government of Maharashtra and who are appointed in
sanction posts after the issuance of advertisement and following regular procedure of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 9
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
selection should not be treated at par with their counterparts in the Private
Polytechnic Institutions. We are of the view that the petitioners cannot be
discriminated vis-a-vis their counter parts working in the Private Polytechnic
Institutions. We are conscious that the Lecturers working in the Government
Institutions form a different class than the Lecturers working in the Private
Institutions. However, when all other service conditions are similar, we are of the
view that the petitioners are also entitled for the same benefits as their counterparts
working in the Private Polytechnic Institutions are entitled as far as the conferment
of regularization and permanency are concerned.
19. One more fact needs to be taken into consideration is that even according to the
respondent-State there are more than 5000 teaching posts which are still vacant and
the advertisement issued by the MPSC is only 39 wp2046.10 for 400 posts. It can,
thus, be clearly seen that even after the candidates who would be selected through the
selection process conducted by the MPSC are available, more than 4500 posts will be
vacant. It is, therefore, clear that the petitioners' absorption would in no way affect
the candidates who would now be selected through the MPSC. It is, thus, clear that
the petitioners' continuation in service would not adversely affect the fundamental
right guaranteed under Article 16 to the citizens.
// 24 // We are of the considered view that the respondent- State having extracted
the work from the petitioners for years together, the petitioners cannot be deprived of
the right of regular employment particularly when their entry can neither be termed
as "illegal" nor "back door".
Having so observed, in paragraph-22 of the said case, the Bombay High Court issued following
directions:-
"22. The respondents are directed to regularize the services of such of the petitioners
and confer permanency on such petitioners who have completed 40 wp2046.10 three
years' service with technical breaks. The respondents shall absorb the petitioners
within a period of six weeks. Needless to state that the petitioners who are in
continuous employment till 15.10.2013 shall be continued in service as regular
employees. However, in the facts and circumstances of the case, we direct that the
petitioners shall be entitled to regular salary from 1st November, 2013 and would not
be entitled to claim any monetary benefits for the past services rendered by them in
spite of their regularization. Needless to state that since the petitioners' services are
regularized, they shall be entitled to the continuity in service for all other purposes
except monetary purposes from the date of their first appointment."
Against the said judgment of the Bombay High Court, the State of Maharashtra preferred SLP (C)
No.39014 of 2013 and the apex Court vide order dated 06.01.2015 dismissed the said SLP. Thereby,
the order passed by the Bombay High Court has been confirmed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 10
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
// 25 //
23. If the factual matrix of the aforementioned judgment is taken into consideration, it is squarely
applicable to the present case. There is no dispute that the petitioners were working as Full Time
Resource Persons by following a due process of selection pursuant to advertisement, but they were
paid a consolidated remuneration on contract basis and put into service against regular vacancy of
Junior Lecturers. Instead of giving them regular appointment, a camouflaged approach has been
made allowing the petitioners to discharge their duty with a consolidated amount on the basis of
contract, that itself opposes to public policy.
24. Mr. B. Routray, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the petitioners in WPC (OAC) No. 1074 of
2017 fairly states that he has relied upon the judgment of the apex Court in the case of Direct Recruit
Class-II Engineering Officers' Association (supra) has no application to the present context, as the
said case relates to promotions of direct recruits vis-à-vis promotees.
25. Admittedly the Contract Act does not define the expression "public policy" or "opposed to public
policy". From // 26 // the very nature of things, the expression "public policy", "opposed to public
policy", or "contrary to public policy" are incapable of precise definition. Public Policy, however, is
not the policy of a particular Government. It connotes some matter which concerns the public good
and the public interest. The concept of what is for the public good or in the public interest or what
would be injurious or harmful to the public good or the public interest has varied from time to time.
Therefore, when the petitioners were engaged as Full Time Resource Persons against sanctioned
post of Junior Lecturers with paltry consolidated contractual amount, that itself amounts to
exploitation and opposed to public policy.
26. In Central Inland Water Transport Corporation Ltd. (supra), the apex Court in paragraph-90
observed as follows:
"90. Should then our courts not advance with the times? Should they still continue to
cling to outmoded concepts and outworn ideologies? Should we not adjust our
thinking caps to match the fashion of the day? Should all jurisprudential
development pass us by, leaving us floundering in the sloughs of nineteenth-century
theories? Should the strong be permitted to push the weak to the wall? Should they
be allowed to ride roughshod over the weak? Should the courts sit back and watch
supinely while the strong trample under foot the rights of the weak? We have a // 27
// Constitution for our country. Our judges are bound by their oath to "uphold the
Constitution and the laws". The Constitution was enacted to secure to all the citizens
of this country social and economic justice. Article 14 of the Constitution guarantees
to all persons equality before the law and the equal protection of the laws. The
principle deducible from the above discussions on this part of the case is in
consonance with right and reason, intended to secure social and economic justice and
conforms to the mandate of the great equality clause in Article 14. This principle is
that the courts will not enforce and will, when called upon to do so, strike down an
unfair and unreasonable contract, or an unfair and unreasonable clause in a contract,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 11
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
entered into between parties who are not equal in bargaining power. It is difficult to
give an exhaustive list of all bargains of this type. No court can visualize the different
situations which can arise in the affairs of men. One can only attempt to give some
illustrations. For instance, the above principle will apply where the inequality of
bargaining power is the result of the great disparity in the economic strength of the
contracting parties. It will apply where the inequality is the result of circumstances,
whether of the creation of the parties or not. It will apply to situations in which the
weaker party is in a position in which he can obtain goods or services or means of
livelihood only upon the terms imposed by the stronger party or go without them. It
will also apply where a man has no choice, or rather no meaningful choice, but to give
his assent to a contract or to sign on the dotted line in a prescribed or standard form
or to accept a set of rules as part of the contract, however unfair, unreasonable and
unconscionable a clause in that contract or form or rules may be. This principle,
however, will not apply where the bargaining power of the contracting parties is equal
or almost equal. This principle may not apply where both parties are businessmen
and the contract is a commercial transaction. In today's complex world of giant
corporations with their vast infra- structural organizations and with the State // 28
// through its instrumentalities and agencies entering into almost every branch of
industry and commerce, there can be myriad situations which result in unfair and
unreasonable bargains between parties possessing wholly disproportionate and
unequal bargaining power. These cases can neither be enumerated nor fully
illustrated. The court must judge each case on its own facts and circumstances."
In the aforementioned paragraph, though the apex Court dealt with the issue concerning to the fact
of that case, but taking the present case into consideration and types of contract which have been
forced to utilize against the petitioners by allowing them to join as Full Time Resource Persons to
discharge the duty against the sanctioned posts of Junior Lecturers, which is unfair, unreasonable
and shocks the conscience of this Court and as such, they are opposed to public policy and require to
be adjudged void.
27. In view of the aforesaid facts and circumstances, this Court directs the opposite parties to
regularize the services of the petitioners from the date of their joining as Full Time Resource
Persons, as indicated in Annexure-A to the impugned order dated 03.07.2016 in Annexure-10. Since
the petitioners' services are regularized from the date of their joining as indicated in Annexure-A to
the impugned order // 29 // dated 03.07.2016 in Annexure-10, they shall be entitled to continuity in
service for all other purposes except monetary benefits. Consequentially, the office order dated
03.07.2016 under Annexure-10 is modified to the extent that the services of the petitioners shall be
regularized with effect from "the date of their joining" instead of "date of issuance of the letter".
27. In the result, both the writ petitions are allowed to the extent indicated above. However, there is
no order as to costs.
.............................
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 12
Niranajan Das & Ors vs State Of Odisha & Ors. ..... Opp. Parties on 7 October, 2021
DR. B.R. SARANGI, JUDGE Orissa High Court, Cuttack The 7th October, 2021, Alok
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/78796119/ 13
