Nitin vs State Of U.P. And Another on 2 January, 2025
Nitin vs State Of U.P. And Another on 2 January, 2025
Author: Krishan Pahal
Bench: Krishan Pahal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:580
Court No. - 65
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 31042 of 2024
Applicant :- Nitin
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Ritesh Singh,Suresh Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Om Narayan Pandey
Hon'ble Krishan Pahal,J.
1. List has been revised.
2. Heard Sri Ritesh Singh, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Om Narayan Pandey, learned
counsel for the informant as well as Ms. Ifrah Islam, learned State Law Officer and perused the
record.
3. Applicant seeks bail in Case Crime No. 119 of 2024, under Sections 498A, 323, 304B, 504, 506
I.P.C. and Section 3/4 of the D.P. Act , Police Station Mirzapur, District Shahjahanpur, during the
pendency of trial.
PROSECUTION STORY:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124484131/ 1
Nitin vs State Of U.P. And Another on 2 January, 2025
4. The marriage of the applicant was solemnized with the deceased person as per Hindu rites on
11.05.2022. The applicant and other family members are stated to have subjected her to cruelty for
demand of bullet motorcycle as dowry leading her to death on 08.04.2024.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF APPLICANT :
5. The applicant has been falsely implicated in the present case and he has nothing to do with the
said offence.
6. The FIR is delayed by more than one day and there is no explanation of the said delay caused.
7. The inquest proceeding categorically indicates that the door was broke open by the police and the
deceased person was found hanging to the ceiling as such, it is a clear cut case of suicide.
8. The cause of death has been found to be Asphyxia as a result of ante mortem hanging.
9. Several other submissions have been made on behalf of the applicant to demonstrate the falsity of
the allegations made against him. The circumstances which, as per counsel, led to the false
implication of the applicant have also been touched upon at length.
10. There is no criminal history of the applicant. The applicant is languishing in jail since
16.04.2024. The applicant is ready to cooperate with trial. In case, the applicant is released on bail,
he will not misuse the liberty of bail.
ARGUMENTS ON BEHALF OF INFORMANT :
11. The bail application has been opposed on the ground that the deceased had expired within two
years of her marriage and she had a daughter out of the said marriage.
CONCLUSION:
12. The well-known principle of "Presumption of Innocence Unless Proven Guilty," gives rise to the
concept of bail as a rule and imprisonment as an exception.
13. A person's right to life and liberty, guaranteed by Article 21 of the Indian Constitution, cannot be
taken away simply because the person is accused of committing an offence until the guilt is
established beyond a reasonable doubt. Article 21 of the Indian Constitution states that no one's life
or personal liberty may be taken away unless the procedure established by law is followed, and the
procedure must be just and reasonable. The said principle has been recapitulated by the Supreme
Court in Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of Investigation and Ors., 2022 INSC 690.
14. Reiterating the aforesaid view the Supreme Court in the case of Manish Sisodia Vs. Directorate of
Enforcement 2024 INSC 595 has again emphasised that the very well-settled principle of law that
bail is not to be withheld as a punishment is not to be forgotten. It is high time that the Courts
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124484131/ 2
Nitin vs State Of U.P. And Another on 2 January, 2025
should recognize the principle that "bail is a rule and jail is an exception".
15. Learned State Law Officer could not bring forth any exceptional circumstances which would
warrant denial of bail to the applicant.
16. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused at the
trial. No material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or
thwarting the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or
intimidating witnesses and the like have been shown by learned AGA/State Law Officer.
17. Considering the facts and circumstances of the case, submissions made by learned counsel for
the parties, the evidence on record, and without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case,
the Court is of the view that the applicant has made out a case for bail. The bail application is
allowed.
18. Let the applicant-Nitin involved in aforementioned case crime number be released on bail on
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court
concerned subject to following conditions.
(i) The applicant shall not tamper with evidence.
(ii) The applicant shall remain present, in person, before the Trial Court on dates
fixed for (1) opening of the case, (2) framing of charge and (3) recording of statement
under Section 313 Cr.P.C. If in the opinion of the Trial Court absence of the applicant
is deliberate or without sufficient cause, then it shall be open for the Trial Court to
treat such default as abuse of liberty of bail and proceed against him in accordance
with law.
19. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, it shall be a ground for cancellation of bail.
Identity, status and residence proof of the applicant and sureties be verified by the court concerned
before the bonds are accepted.
20. It is made clear that observations made in granting bail to the applicant shall not in any way
affect the learned trial Judge in forming his independent opinion based on the testimony of the
witnesses.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 Sumit S (Justice Krishan Pahal)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/124484131/ 3
