O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others ....
Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
Author: B. P. Routray
Bench: B. P. Routray
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
WRIT PETITION (CIVIL) Nos.13789, 16422, 24577,
5736, 6152 of 2019 and 1626 of 2020
(Applications under Articles 226 & 227 of the Constitution of India)
In W.P.(C) No.13789 of 2019
O.A.T. Bar Association, Cuttack,
represented by its Secretary Sri Prakash .... Petitioner
Kumar Rout
Mr. Budhadeb Routray, Senior Advocate
Mr. Asok Mohanty, Senior Advocate
Mr. S.K. Pattanaik, Senior Advocate
Mr. B.B. Mohanty, Advocate
-versus-
Union of India and Others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. P.K. Parhi, Assistant Solicitor General
For Opposite Party No.1
Mr. A.K. Parija, Advocate General along with
Mr. M.S. Sahoo, Additional Government Advocate
For the Opposite Party Nos.2 to 4 (State)
Mr. Ravi Iyer, Advocate
For the Intervener
In W.P.(C) No.16422 of 2019
Jadunath Dash .... Petitioner
Mr. B.B. Mohanty, Advocate
-versus-
State of Odisha and Others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. P.K. Parhi, Assistant Solicitor General
For Opposite Party No.2
Mr. A.K. Parija, Advocate General along with
Mr. M.S. Sahoo, Additional Government Advocate
For Opposite Party (State)
W.P.(C) No.13789 of 2019 and connected matters Page 1 of 90
In W.P.(C) No.24577 of 2019
The Odisha Retired Police Officers' .... Petitioner
Welfare Association
Mr. Santosh Kumar Pattanaik
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 1
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
Senior Advocate
-versus-
Union of India and Others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. P.K. Parhi, Assistant Solicitor General
For Opposite Party No.1
Mr. A.K. Parija, Advocate General along with
Mr. M.S. Sahoo, Additional Government Advocate
For Opposite Party (State)
In W.P.(C) No.5736 of 2019
Sri Ras Bihari Mohapatra .... Petitioner
In-Person
-versus-
Union of India and Others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. P.K. Parhi, Assistant Solicitor General
For Opposite Party No.1
Mr. A.K. Parija, Advocate General along with
Mr. M.S. Sahoo, Additional Government Advocate
For Opposite Party (State)
In W.P.(C) No.6152 of 2019
O.S.A.T. Bar Association,
Bhubaneswar, represented by its .... Petitioner
Secretary Sri Pramoda Kumar Dash
Mr. B.B. Mohanty, Advocate
-versus-
Secretary to Government of India and .... Opposite Parties
Others
Mr. P.K. Parhi, Assistant Solicitor General
For Opposite Party No.1
Mr. A.K. Parija, Advocate General along with
Mr. M.S. Sahoo, Additional Government Advocate
For Opposite Party (State)
W.P.(C) No.13789 of 2019 and connected matters Page 2 of 90
In W.P.(C) No.1626 of 2020
Sri Saroj Kumar Sahoo and Others .... Petitioners
Mr. B.B. Mohanty, Advocate
-versus-
Union of India and Others .... Opposite Parties
Mr. P.K. Parhi, Assistant Solicitor General
For Opposite Party No.1
Mr. A.K. Parija, Advocate General along with
Mr. M.S. Sahoo, Additional Government Advocate
For Opposite Party (State)
CORAM:
THE CHIEF JUSTICE
JUSTICE B. P. ROUTRAY
JUDGMENT
07.06.2021 Dr. S. Muralidhar, CJ.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 2
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
1. The abolition of the Odisha Administrative Tribunal (OAT) by a notification dated 2nd August,
2019 issued by the Department of Personnel and Training (DoPT), Ministry of Personnel, Public
Grievances and Pension, Government of India has been challenged in these six writ petitions.
2. Two of these petitions i.e. W.P. (C) No.13789 of 2019 and W.P. (C) No. 6152 of 2019 are by the Bar
Associations of the OAT in Cuttack and Bhubaneswar respectively, W.P. (C) No.24577 of 2019 is by
the Odisha Retired Police Officers' Welfare Association. The remaining three petitions are by
individuals.
The Background
3. The background to these writ petitions is that by the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Act 1976,
Article 323-A was inserted in the Constitution of India. Article 323-A (1) states that Parliament, by
law, may provide for the adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of disputes and complaints
with respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public services and
posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any local or other authority
within the territory of India or under the control of the Government of India or of any corporation
owned or controlled by the Government. Article 323-A (2) spells out what such a law made by the
Parliament should provide for. Article 323- A (3) contains a non obstante clause that states that the
said provision would have effect notwithstanding anything contained in any other provision in the
Constitution, or in any other law, for the time being in force. The Statement of Object and Reasons
(SOR) appended to the 42nd Amendment Bill explained the objects of the insertion of Article 323-A
of the Constitution of India being, inter alia, the reduction of "mounting arrears in High Court" and
"to secure the speedy disposal of service matters".
4. In terms of Article 323-A (1) and (2) of the Constitution of India, the Parliament enacted the
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (‗AT Act') and it came into effect on 27th February, 1985. The
AT Act envisaged the creation of a Tribunal, both for the Centre and the States, which was expected
to supplant/substitute the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution.
Against the decision of such Tribunal, the aggrieved party could file a Special Leave Petition in the
Supreme Court of India under Article 136 of the Constitution.
5. While Section 4 (1) of the AT Act talks of the establishment of the Central Administrative Tribunal
(CAT), Section 4 (2) provides for the establishment of the State Administrative Tribunal (SAT). In
terms thereof, on the receipt of a request in that behalf from the State concerned, the Central
Government may by notification establish an SAT, which would thereafter exercise ―the jurisdiction,
powers and authority(cid:130) conferred on it by the AT Act.
6. As far as the State of Odisha is concerned, the Central Government established the OAT, by a
notification dated 4th July, 1986 published in the Gazette of India. The OAT began functioning as
such with effect from 14th July, 1986.
7. Pursuant to the AT Act, five Benches of the CAT were established on 1st November, 1985. Even
before the said Benches could be established, several writ petitions were filed in the High Court as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 3
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
well as the Supreme Court of India challenging the constitutional validity of Article 323-A as well as
the provisions of AT Act.
8. By an interim order dated 31st October, 1985 reported in S.P. Sampath Kumar v. Union of India
(1985) 4 SCC 458, the Supreme Court directed certain amendments to be carried out in the AT Act
with a view to ensuring the functioning of the CAT ―along constitutionally sound principles(cid:130).
Pursuant to an undertaking given in that behalf by the then Attorney General for India (AG) to the
Supreme Court at the interim stage, the Administrative Tribunal (Amendment) Act, 1986 was
enacted to bring about the changes suggested by the Supreme Court. Thereafter when the cases were
finally heard by the Supreme Court, it had before it the AT Act as amended by the Act of 1986. A
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court in its final judgment in S.P. Sampath Kumar v. Union of
India AIR 1987 SC 386 concluded that the AT Act, even after the amendment, did not measure up
the requirement of an effective substitute to the High Courts and to achieving that end suggested
further amendments to the provisions governing the form and content of the CAT. The amendments
as suggested by the Supreme Court were given effect to by a further Administrative Tribunal
(Amendment) Act, 1987 (Act 51 of 1987).
9. Between the amendment to AT Act in 1987 and the decision of the seven-Judge Constitution
Bench of the Supreme Court delivered on 18th March, 1997 in L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India
AIR 1997 SC 1125, several decisions had been rendered by different Division Benches (DBs) of the
Supreme Court interpreting various aspects of the AT Act. These included J.B. Chopra v. Union of
India AIR 1987 SC 357, M.B. Majumdar v. Union of India AIR 1990 SC 2263; Amulya Chandra
Kalita v. Union of India, 1991 (1) SCC 181 and Dr. Mahabal Ram v. Indian Council of Agriculture
Research (1994) 2 SCC 401.
10. Another development was that in the meanwhile eight States had set up SATs which were
functioning on the date that the decision in L. Chandra Kumar was rendered. In para 21 of the
judgment in L. Chandra Kumar the dates of the establishment of the SATs were noted as under:
"Andhra Pradesh (1st November, 1989) Himachal Pradesh (1st November, 1986)
Karnataka (6th October, 1986) Madhya Pradesh (2nd August 1988) Maharashtra
(8th July 1989) Orissa (14th July, 1986) Tamil Nadu (12th December, 1988) and
West Bengal (16th January, 1995)"
11. Yet another development, as has been noted in the judgment in L. Chandra Kumar was that a
Full Bench of the Andhra Pradesh High Court in Sakinala Harinath v. State of Andhra Pradesh
(1994 (1) APLJ (HC) 1 declared Article 323A (2) (d) of the Constitution as unconstitutional to the
extent it empowered Parliament to exclude the jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226 of
the Constitution; additionally, Section 28 of the AT Act was held to be to unconstitutional to the
extent it divested the High Courts of jurisdiction under Article 226 of the Constitution in relation to
service matters. Additionally it was held that the Constitutional Courts i.e. the High Courts and the
Supreme Court were alone competent to exercise the power of judicial review to pronounce upon the
constitutional validity of statutory provisions and rules. Accordingly, the decision of the Supreme
Court in S.P.Sampath Kumar (supra) was held to be 'per incuriam' and not binding on the High
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 4
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
Courts. The Full Bench of the AP High Court noted that in any event the issue of constitutionality of
Article 323- A (2) (d) was not in question in Sampath Kumar (supra) and, therefore, the said
decision could not be held to be an authority on that aspect. The Full Bench of the AP High Court in
Sakinala Harinath (supra) further held that the remedy of an SLP under Article 136 to the Supreme
Court was not a real safeguard and the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court under Article 32 of the
Constitution was also not a help in such matters. Accordingly, the AP High Court held that although
the judicial power could be vested in a Court or a Tribunal, the power of judicial review of the High
Courts under Article 226 of the Constitution could not be excluded even by the Constitution.
12. As a result of the above post Sampath Kumar decisions of the Supreme Court and the A.P. High
Court, a doubt arose as to the correctness of the decision in Sampath Kumar. This issue was raised
by a two-Judge DB of the Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar v. Union of India (1995) 1 SCC 4
(order dated 2nd December, 1995) which inter alia included a challenge to the validity of Section 5
(6) of the AT Act.
13. The questions formulated for consideration by the seven-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in
L. Chandra Kumar were as under:
(1) Whether the power conferred upon Parliament or the Stale Legislatures, as the
case may be, by Sub-
clause (d) of Clause (2) of Article 323-A or by Sub- clause (d) of Clause (3) of Article 323-B of the
Constitution, to totally exclude the jurisdiction of 'all courts', except that of the Supreme Court
under Article 136, in respect of disputes and complaints referred to in clause (1) of Article 323- A or
with regard to all or any of the matters specified in Clause (2) of Article 323-B, runs counter to the
power of judicial review conferred on the High Courts under Articles 226/227 and on the Supreme
Court under Article 32 of the Constitution?
(2) Whether the Tribunals, constituted either under Article 323-A or under Article 323-B of the
Constitution, possess the competence to test the constitutional validity of a statutory provision/rule?
(3) Whether these Tribunals, as they are functioning at present, can be said to be effective
substitutes for the High Courts in discharging the power of judicial review? If not, what are the
changes required to make them conform to their founding objectives?
14. By a unanimous judgment in L. Chandra Kumar (dated 18th March, 1987), the seven-Judge
Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court concluded as under:
"91. .....all decisions of Tribunals, whether created pursuant to Article 323-A or
Article 323-B of the Constitution, will be subject to the High Court's writ jurisdiction
under Articles 226/227 of the Constitution, before a Division Bench of the High Court
within whose territorial jurisdiction the particular Tribunal falls.
xx xx xx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 5
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
93. ......The Tribunals are competent to hear matters where the vires of statutory
provisions are questioned. However, in discharging this duty, they cannot act as
substitutes for the High Courts and the Supreme Court which have, under our
constitutional setup, been specifically entrusted with such an obligation. Their
function in this respect is only supplementary and all such decisions of the Tribunals
will be subject to scrutiny before a Division Bench of the respective High Courts. The
Tribunals will consequently also have the power to test the vires of subordinate
legislations and rules. However, this power of the Tribunals will be subject to one
important exception. The Tribunals shall not entertain any question regarding the
vires of their parent statutes following the settled principle that a Tribunal which is a
creature of an Act cannot declare that very Act to be unconstitutional. In such cases
alone, the concerned High Court may be approached directly. All other decisions of
these Tribunals, rendered in cases that they are specifically empowered to adjudicate
upon by virtue of their parent statutes, will also be subject to scrutiny before a
Division Bench of their respective High Courts. We may add that the Tribunals will,
however, continue to act as the only courts of first instance in respect of the areas of
law for which they have been constituted. By this, we mean that it will not be open for
litigants to directly approach the High Courts even in cases where they question the
vires of statutory legislations (except, as mentioned, where the legislation which
creates the particular Tribunal is challenged) by overlooking the jurisdiction of the
Tribunal concerned."
15. The other conclusion as regards the constitutional validity of Section 5 (6) of the AT Act was that
where a question involving the interpretation of a statutory provision or rule in relation to the
Constitution arises for the consideration of a single Member Bench of the Administrative Tribunal,
the proviso to Section 5 (6) would automatically apply and the Chairman or the Member concerned
shall refer the matter to a Bench consisting of at least two Members, one of whom must be a Judicial
Member. This would ensure that questions involving the vires of a statutory provision or rule would
never be adjudicated by a single Member Bench or a Bench which does not consist of a Judicial
Member. So construed, Section 5 (6) of the AT Act would no longer be susceptible to charges of
unconstitutionality.
16. Ultimately, the Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar held that Clause 2(d) of Article 323-A and
Clause 3(d) of Article 323-B, to the extent they exclude the jurisdiction of the High Courts and the
Supreme Court under Articles 226/227 and 32 of the Constitution, are unconstitutional. Section 28
of the Act and the "exclusion of jurisdiction" clauses in all other legislations enacted under the aegis
of Articles 323-A and 323-B would, to the same extent, be unconstitutional. The jurisdiction
conferred upon the High Courts under Articles 226/227 and upon the Supreme Court under Article
32 of the Constitution was held to be ―part of the inviolable basic structure of our Constitution(cid:130).
While the said jurisdiction could not be ousted, ―other courts and Tribunals may perform a
supplemental role in discharging the powers conferred by Articles 226/227 and 32 of the
Constitution(cid:130).
Abolition of the MPAT
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 6
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
17. One fall out of the judgment in L. Chandra Kumar was that some of the SATs were abolished. As
far as the Madhya Pradesh Administrative Tribunal (MPAT) is concerned, with the reorganization of
State of Madhya Pradesh (M.P.) under the Madhya Pradesh Reorganization Act, 2000 (MPR Act),
the State of M.P and the State of Chhatisgarh, under a mutual agreement in terms of Section 74 (1)
of the MPR Act, decided to abolish the MPAT and a notification dated 25th July, 2001 was issued to
that effect.
18. The writ petitions challenging the abolition of the MPAT were disposed of by the High Court of
Madhya Pradesh by a judgment dated 14th May, 2002 in W.P.(C) No.3531 of 2001 (Madhya Pradesh
High Court Bar Association v. Union of India). It was held that Section 74 (1) of the MPR Act
empowered the States of MP and Chhatisgarh to abolish a Tribunal constituted under a Central Act.
However, the State Governments would still have to request the Central Government to issue a
notification to abolish the MPAT and the Central Government would be bound to do so. Sections 74
(2) and (3) of the MPR Act were held to be ultra vires Articles 14, 16 and 21 of the Constitution. One
of the reasons put forth before the High Court by the State of M.P to abolish the MPAT was that
after the decision of the Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar, the MPAT remained only an
"additional tier" in the administration of justice with there being no finality to its decision as was
envisaged under the AT Act. The State of M.P. was of the view that the MPAT failed to fulfil the
objects of its establishment since its decisions would be subject to the writ/supervisory jurisdiction
of the High Court.
19. The decision of the High Court of MP was challenged before the Supreme Court. By a decision
dated 17th December, 2004 in M.P. High Court Bar Association v. Union of India, (2004) 11 SCC
766 (hereafter ‗the MPAT Abolition case') the Supreme Court affirmed the decision of the High
Court of MP and held as under:
"73........ from the record of the case, it is amply clear that relevant, germane, valid
and proper considerations weighed with the State Government and keeping in view
development of law and the decision of the larger Bench of this Court in L. Chandra
Kumar, a policy decision has been taken by the State Government to abolish State
Administrative Tribunal. Parliament also empowered the State Government to take
an appropriate decision by enacting sub-section (1) of Section 74 of the Act of 2000
and in exercise of such power, the State Government had taken a decision. The
decision, in our opinion, cannot be regarded as illegal, unlawful or otherwise
objectionable.
Abolition of the TNAT
20. In the meanwhile, as far as Tamil Nadu Administrative Tribunal (TNAT) is concerned, the
Government of Tamil Nadu by its letters dated 10th June 1994, 12th June 2001 and 10th August,
2004 requested the Government of India to abolish the TNAT through an amendment. After the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the MPAT Abolition case, the Chief Secretary, Government of
Tamil Nadu sent another letter dated 11th February, 2005 requesting the Central Government for
abolition of the TNAT through a notification.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 7
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
21. It must be noted at this stage that even while the Union of India's appeal against the judgment of
M.P. High Court was pending, the Government of India appears to have accepted the decision of
M.P. High Court and issued a notification on 17th April, 2003 abolishing the MPAT.
22. According to the Government of Tamil Nadu, there was no option for the Central Government
but to accept the request of the State government to issue such a notification. Accordingly, the
Government of Tamil Nadu stopped appointing the Chairman and the Administrative Members of
the TNAT after their retirements in 2002. Thereafter the TNAT was manned by the sole Vice
Chairman, who also retried on 2nd June, 2004. Subsequently, no one was appointed and the TNAT
became defunct with 30,000 cases pending for disposal.
23. It was in those circumstances that writ petitions were filed by the Tamil Nadu Government All
Department Watchman and Basic Servants Association; the Administrative Tribunal's Bar
Association and the Tamizhaga Village Administrative Officers' Association before the Madras High
Court for a mandamus to the State of Tamil Nadu to fill up the vacancies in TNAT and allow it to
function effectively until it stood abolished by the Central Government through a proper procedure
which would take a long time.
24. The stand of the Central Government before the Madras High Court was that though the
Government of Tamil Nadu had sent a proposal for abolition of the TNAT, it could not be done by a
notification but only by a law made by the Parliament. It was pointed out that Section 74 of the MPR
Act provided for abolition through notification but such a provision was not available as far as the
State of Tamil Nadu was concerned and therefore, a suitable Parliamentary amendment to the AT
Act was necessary. It was stated that such a proposal was in fact contemplated.
25. A DB of the Madras High Court by a judgment dated 25 th April 2005 in Writ Petition No.1724
of 2005 and batch (Tamil Nadu Government All Department Watchman and Basic Servants
Association v. Union of India) dismissed the writ petitions holding that in light of the judgment of
the Supreme Court in the MPAT Abolition case once a policy decision was taken by the Government
of Tamil Nadu to abolish the TNAT, and the said policy decision was accepted by the Central
Government, the latter was obliged to issue a notification rescinding the earlier notification by
which the TNAT was established. Invoking Section 21 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (GC Act), the
Madras High Court concluded that since no mode to rescind the notification establishing the TNAT
had been provided in the AT Act, Section 21 of the GC Act will have to be invoked for rescinding the
notification earlier issued establishing the TNAT. The Madras High Court held that there was no
necessity for the Central Government to await the amendment to the AT Act by the Parliament, and
the mere issuance of the notification was sufficient to abolish the TNAT.
26. Upon this there were two developments. One was that a SLP(C) No.16449 of 2005 filed by the
Tamizhaga Village Administrative Officer's Association in the Supreme Court against the above
judgment of the Madras High Court was dismissed in limine by a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme
Court on 16th August 2005, by a one-line order which read: "The Special Leave Petition is
dismissed." The second development was that the Union of India filed a separate Special Leave
Petition against the said judgment which came to be numbered as Civil Appeal No.951 of 2006,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 8
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
upon leave being granted by the Supreme Court. No interim order was passed therein by the
Supreme Court staying the operation of the judgment of the Madras High Court.
27. The Government of India appeared to have accepted the judgment of the Madras High Court and
issued a notification on 17th February 2006, abolishing the TNAT. In other words, by invoking
Section 21 of the GC Act read with Section 4 (2) of the AT Act, the Central Government implicitly
accepted the interpretation of those provisions by the Madras High Court and rescinded the earlier
notification establishing the TNAT without waiting for the amendment to the AT Act.
Bill to amend the AT Act
28. Nevertheless, consistent with the stand of the Central Government before the Madras High
Court, the Administrative Tribunals (Amendment) Bill, 2006 was tabled in Parliament on 16th
March, 2006. This also contemplated amendments to the AT Act consistent with the decision in L.
Chandra Kumar. The S.O.R. appended to the Bill noted the fact that three of eight State
Governments viz., Himachal Pradesh (H.P), M.P and Tamil Nadu had requested the Central
Government for abolition of the respective SATs and that there was therefore a need for amendment
of the AT Act "in order to provide for an enabling provision for abolition of the Tribunal and also for
transfer of pending cases to some other authority after the Tribunal is abolished." The Bill proposed
introduction of Chapter IV-A in the AT Act titled "Abolition of Tribunals" and Chapter IV-B titled
"Appeal to the High Courts".
29. The said Bill was referred to the Rajya Sabha Standing Committee of Personnel, Public
Grievances, Law and Justice. The Committee submitted its 17th report on 5th December, 2006 inter
alia recommending that the power to abolish an SAT should not be granted to the executive and that
the proposal for such abolition should invariably have the concurrence of the Parliament. The
Committee further recommended that appeals from the order of the SAT should be provided only to
the Supreme Court and not to the High Courts since "High Courts are already overburdened with a
huge number of pending cases(cid:130). It also recommended that "if statutory provisions of appeal to the
Supreme Court cannot be envisaged, a clarifying amendment should be made that the order of a
Tribunal finally disposing of an application will not be called in question in any Court, except by way
of Special Leave Petition in the Supreme Court(cid:130). Another recommendation of the Committee was
that ―when a legislation is made the Judicial Impact Statement and financial commitment should be
anticipated and measured". It was further noted that the nodal Ministry for ATs should be the
Ministry of Law and Justice and not the Ministry of Personnel, Public Grievances and Pensions.
Specific to the TNAT, the Committee did not approve granting retrospective effect to the notification
of the Government of India abolishing the TNAT "since it would not be proper to validate the
notification till the judgment is given by the Apex Court in the SLP filed challenging the abolition".
Abolition of some SATs
30. For reasons that are not very clear, nothing further was heard of the aforementioned Bill. The
proposed amendments to the AT Act, therefore, did not come about. On the other, hand the Central
Government appears to have acceded to the requests by State Governments by issuing notifications
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 9
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
abolishing the SATs. A pattern appears to have been established which involved the Central
Government requiring the State Government to obtain the concurrence of the High Court concerned
before making a request for abolition of the SAT. This fact was mentioned in the notification dated
8th July 2008 abolishing the HPAT, where the second paragraph states "And whereas the
Government of Himachal Pradesh, after obtaining the concurrence of the High Court of the
Himachal Pradesh, has now made a request for abolition of Himachal Pradesh Administrative
Tribunal (HPAT)." The notification expressly stated that this was being done in exercise of power
conferred under Section 4(2) of the ATA read with Section 21 of the GC Act. As regards the Andhra
Pradesh Administrative Tribunal (APAT), an identically worded notification was issued by the
Government of India on 14 th January 2020 abolishing it.
31. In light of the above developments, when Civil Appeal No.951 of 2006 filed by the Union of India
against the judgment of the Madras High Court upholding the decision to abolish the TNAT was
taken up for hearing by the Supreme Court on 28th March 2017, it was informed that the appeal had
been rendered infructuous. The appeal was disposed of as such leaving the question of law open.
32. It may be noted here that subsequently the HPAT was again established under Section 4(2) of
the ATA by the Government of India by a notification dated 29th December 2014. Five years
thereafter, for a second time, by another notification 26th July 2019, the Government of India again
abolished the HPAT.
33. Thus, of the eight SATs that were functional as of 18th March 1997, when the Supreme Court
delivered its judgment in L. Chandra Kumar, five of them viz., the MPAT, the TNAT, the HPAT, the
OAT and the APAT have since been abolished.
Abolition of the OAT
34. Now turning to the OAT, it had started functioning with effect from 14th July 1986 with one
Chairman and three Members. An additional Bench was set up in Bhubaneswar, comprising a Vice
Chairman and a Member, with effect from 1st July, 1994. On 15th January 2014, the State
Government took a decision to create one more Bench of the OAT at Cuttack with two Members i.e.
one Judicial and another Administrative, thus bringing the total number of Members including the
Chairman to eight. By this time, there were two circuit Benches of the OAT, one at Sambalpur and
the other at Berhampur.
35. It appears that on 17th July 2013, the State of Odisha Cabinet met to consider abolition of the
OAT, but this was not considered expedient at that point in time. However, when it met on 9th
September 2015, the State Cabinet approved in principle the proposal for abolition of the OAT with
the following observations:
"(i) Since this proposal will lead to an increased work load for the High Court, it was
decided in principle that the entire establishment of the Tribunal could be transferred
to the High Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 10
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
(ii) Government of India will also be moved after discussing with the High Court for
creating a few more judgeships in the High Court to deal with the extra work. The
State Government will be totally supportive to the proposal for increasing judgeship
of our High Court. Discussions will also be held with the High Court regarding the
pending cases in the Tribunal."
36. In a press release issued soon thereafter, the Government of Odisha gave its reasons for the
decision as under:
"(1) Odisha Administrative Tribunal was established on 14th July, 1986 under the
Administrative Tribunal Act, 1985 by Government of India on the request of
Government of Odisha. The Tribunal under the Act was to have similar jurisdiction as
the High Court.
The objective of the formation of the Tribunal was to enable quick disposal of the grievances of the
government employees.
(2) However, with the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar (1997) the
provision of the Act that the aggrieved parties could appeal before the Supreme Court against the
orders of the Tribunal was held unconstitutional, as it was deemed to be inconsistent with the basic
structure of the Constitution. Hence the parties aggrieved with the orders of the Tribunal may
approach the High Court first. Thus, the very objective of the establishment of the Tribunal to give
quick justice to the government employees could not be achieved. Accordingly, the proposal for
abolition of Odisha Administrative Tribunal was considered by the Cabinet and was approved in
principle.
(3) After approval of the Cabinet, the proposal will be sent to the Government of India for issue of
the notification for abolition of the Odisha Administrative Tribunal. In view of increased workload
for the High Court after approval of the proposal, it has been decided to move Government of India
after discussion with the High Court for creating more Judgeships in the High Court if necessary, to
discuss with High Court as to how the pending cases will be dealt."
37. On 16th September 2015, the Chief Secretary, Government of Odisha wrote to the Secretary,
DoPT, Government of India stating that as a result of the judgment in L. Chandra Kumar, the very
purpose of having an SAT for speedy redressal of the grievances of the employees of the State
Government was not fulfilled as "any way the aggrieved parties have to approach Hon'ble High
Court before approaching the Apex Court for final verdict." While enclosing a note explaining the
reasons for the decision arrived at by the State Government, the Chief Secretary intimated the
Central Government that "appropriate measures would be taken to deal with the pending cases and
regarding redeployment of the staff and pending cases before the SAT so that the transition becomes
smooth to the extent possible." The Chief Secretary accordingly requested the Central Government
to issue the necessary notification under the AT Act for abolition of the OAT.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 11
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
38. The enclosed note set out the statistics regarding the workload of the OAT and the pendency of
cases. Set out in the note was a chart showing in a tabular form the institution, disposal and
pendency of the cases before the OAT. At the end of 2014 there were 54, 334 pending cases. It was
noted that during 2014 there were four Members of the OAT (including the Chairman) and the
disposal per Member came to 8.91 cases per day and that "as an institutional mechanism it seemed
the Tribunal was not able to provide a speedy decision to the aggrieved parties".
39. Conscious that there would be an additional load on the High Court Judges, the Government of
Odisha in the aforesaid letter to the DoPT stated that it would take "appropriate action to further
strengthen Hon'ble High Court of Orissa including increase in judgeships to deal with the additional
workload at the level of the Hon'ble High Court after abolition of the OAT. It is stated that the
arrangement has also been made regarding existing staff and resources provided to the OAT so that
the High Court would be able to deal with cases presently pending before the OAT.(cid:130)
40. In response to the above letter of the Government of Odisha, the DoPT on 12th January 2016
wrote to the Chief Secretary, Government of Odisha stating that the matter had been considered in
consultation with the Department of the Legal Affairs and that the Legal Adviser there had advised
that prior to seeking the opinion of the AG, the following information/clarification were required:
"(i) "The views of the concerned High Court with regard to the proposal of abolition
of OAT, transfer of cases of the OAT to the High Court and also the transfer of
employees from the OAT to High Court.
(ii) The Administrative Tribunal (AT) Act contemplates transfer of cases from the
High Court to the Administrative Tribunals on its constitution vide Section 29 of the
Act. However, there is no provision for transfer of cases to the High Court on
abolition of the Administrative Tribunal. As such, we would like to know what will be
the legal basis of transfer of the cases pending with OAT Odisha on its abolition to the
High Court.
(iii) Whether in the past there is any precedent regarding transfer of cases from OAT
to High Court, if so, the same may be provided."
2. In view of the above, it is requested to kindly obtain the views of Odisha High Court with regard to
the proposal of abolition of OAT, transfer of cases of the OAT to the High Court and also the transfer
of employees from the OAT to High Court and communicate the same to this Department within a
week positively.
3. As regards observations of Legal Adviser as at sub paras ii) and iii) of para 3 above, it is requested
to kindly furnish the requisite information/clarification to this Department within a week positively.
4. Further, necessary action on your proposal shall be taken on receipt of the above
information/clarification from Government of Odisha and Hon'ble High Court. As such, the
time-line of providing the requisite information/clarification within a week may kindly be adhered
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 12
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
to."
41. A copy of the above letter was sent to the Registrar General (RG) of the Orissa High Court as well
as to the Registrar of the OAT along with the enclosures for information.
42. On the basis of the above letter of the DoPT, the Principal Secretary in the General
Administration Department (GAD), Government of Odisha addressed a letter to the RG of this Court
on 1st February, 2016 stating that the Government of Odisha was of the view that the OAT was not
able to serve its objective particularly after the decision in L. Chandra Kumar and that the purpose
of having an SAT for speedy redressal of the grievances of the State Government employees was not
fulfilled since the aggrieved parties had to approach the High Court before approaching the Apex
Court for a final verdict. According to the Government of Odisha, as stated in its letter, the abolition
of the OAT would reduce the burden of the litigation of the Government and also reduce the time for
resolution of the disputes. The Government of Odisha stated that it would take appropriate action to
further strengthen the High Court including increase of judgeship to deal with the additional
workload at the level of the High Court after abolition of the OAT.
43. In its letter dated 1st February 2016, the Government of Odisha further pointed out that in
response to its letter, the Government of India had sought the views of the High Court on the
proposal to abolish the OAT, the transfer of the cases from the OAT to the High Court and transfer
of the employees from the OAT to the High Court. The Secretary, GAD requested the RG to place
before the High Court the issues on
(i) arrangement for transfer of cases of the OAT to the High Court;
(ii) transfer of employees from the OAT to High Court;
(iii) modalities for disposal of service related cases in the High Court and
(iv) creation of more judgeships to deal with the extra workload and further requested to
communicate the views of the Hon'ble Court in the matter to the Department at an early date.
44. A communication dated 25th April 2018 was sent by the DoPT, Government of India to the
Government of Odisha stating that the competent authority had "in principle" approved the
proposal for abolition of the OAT subject to the following conditions:
"(i) Government of Odisha will suitably adjust the employees of the OAT as intimated
by them;
(ii) Decision with regard to disposal of pending cases will be left to the Government of
Odisha."
45. Thereafter it appears that by another letter dated 28th May, 2018 the DoPT informed the State
Government that after receiving the comments on the points noted in its letter dated 25 th April
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 13
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
2018, it would take three to four months time for the DoPT to finalise the abolition of the OAT.
46. The State Government then again wrote to the RG of this Court on 3rd July, 2018 for placing the
matter before the High Court. On 5th July, 2018 the High Court sought the details of the assets and
employees position in the OAT. The Deputy Registrar, OAT sent a request letter for information on
7th July, 2018 and this was placed before the RG of the High Court on 9th July, 2018.
47. On 5th February, 2019 the RG of this Court wrote a letter addressed to the DoPT, Government of
India as well as the Principal Secretary, GAD, Government of Odisha stating as under:
―In adverting to the Letters referred to above on the above subject, I am directed to
say that the court after due deliberation have been pleased to resolve to accept the
decision to be taken by the Central Government and State Government in this regard.
This is for favour of information.(cid:130)
48. It may be noted at this stage, that after the decision of the Government of Odisha to abolish the
OAT became public, it ceased to make appointments to fill up the vacancies in the OAT. This led to
the OAT Bar Association, Cuttack filing W.P.(C) No.15693 of 2017 in this Court seeking a mandamus
to the Government of Odisha to fill up the vacancies in the OAT. Another W.P.(C) No.22635 of 2017
was filed by the OSAT Bar Association, Bhubaneswar in this Court on 27th October, 2017 seeking a
similar relief.
49. In response to both the writ petitions the Government of Odisha filed replies disclosing its
proposal to abolish the OAT. It appears that in the said writ petitions an order was passed on 10th
January, 2019 by this Court directing the State Government to appoint a Chairperson (Judicial),
OAT on ad hoc basis for a period of one year. This order was challenged by the Government of
Odisha by filing SLP (C) Nos.4701 and 4702 of 2019 in the Supreme Court. However, on 21st
February, 2019 the Government of Odisha decided to implement the above order while
simultaneously writing to the Government of India seeking abolition of the OAT.
50. In the meanwhile even before the notification was issued by the Central Government, W.P. (C)
No.5362 of 2019 was filed by the OAT Bar Association, Cuttack in this Court questioning the
decision dated 9th September, 2015 and the subsequent decisions of the Government of Odisha and
the ‗in principle' approval of the proposal by the Government of India vide its letter dated 25th
April, 2018 to abolish the OAT. In the said writ petition, notice was issued on 11th April, 2019 by this
Court.
The impugned notification
51. While the said writ petitions were pending, the DoPT published in the Official gazette dated 2nd
August, 2019 the impugned notification which reads as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 14
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
―G.S.R.552 (E)-Whereas, in exercise of the powers, conferred by sub-section (2) of
section 4 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 (13 of 1985) and on receipt of the
request from the Government of the State of Odisha in this behalf, the Central
Government has established the Odisha Administrative Tribunal with effect from the
14th July, 1986 vide notification of the Government of India in the Ministry of
Personnel, Public Grievance and Pensions (Department of Personnel and Training),
published in the Gazette of India, Extraordinary, Part II, Section 3, Sub-section (i),
vide number GSR 934 (E), dated the 4th July, 1986.
And whereas, the Government of the State of Odisha, after obtaining the concurrence
of the High Court of Orissa, has now made a request for abolition of the said Odisha
Administrative Tribunal;
Now, therefore, in exercise of the powers conferred by sub-section (2) of section 4 of
the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, read with section 21 of the General Clauses
Act, 1897 (10 of 1897), the Central Government hereby rescinds the said notification
number G.S.R. 934 (E), dated the 4th July, 1986, except as respects things done or
omitted to be done before such rescission, with effect from the date of publication of
this notification in the Gazette of India.
(F.No.A-11014/10/2015-AT) SRINIVAS R. KATIKITHALA,Addl. Secy.(cid:130) The present
petitions
52. W.P. (C) No.13789 of 2019 was filed by the OAT Bar association at Cuttack challenging the
constitutional validity of the above notification. The said writ petition was listed for hearing first on
7th August, 2019. The DB passed a detailed order noting the contentions of both the counsel for the
Petitioners as well as the Advocate General appearing for the State of Odisha and directed notice to
issue in the petition. This Court further while adjourning the case to 5th September, 2019 directed
as under:
―In the meantime, it is made clear that the State Government will not transfer any
proceeding to any other authority or any other Court. The State Government will also
file their response.
However, it will be open for the applicant to move for transfer of his Original
Application to this Court in case of exigency, which shall be subject to the result of
the writ petition.(cid:130)
53. Thereafter apart from petitions filed to challenge the same notification, other writ petitions were
filed in this Court praying that applications pending in the OAT be transferred to this Court. Many
such writ petitions have been disposed of by this Court granting that relief.
54. Pursuant to the notice issued in the petitions challenging the abolition of the OAT, a reply was
filed by the GAD, Government of Odisha on 28th August, 2019. An additional counter affidavit was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 15
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
filed on 23rd September, 2019. The Petitioners filed their rejoinder to the said counter affidavit to
which again a reply was filed by the State of Odisha on 25th November, 2019. The Union of India
filed a separate affidavit on 4th September, 2019, inter alia, adopting the same stand as the State of
Odisha to the effect that in terms of Section 21 of the GC Act, the Central Government has the power
to rescind the notification in terms of which the OAT had been established. The Petitioners filed a
rejoinder to the said affidavit as well. The pleadings in the accompanying petitions are more or less
on the same lines and are, therefore, not being discussed in detail here.
55. This Court heard the submissions of Mr. B. Routray, learned Senior counsel, Mr. Asok Mohanty,
learned Senior counsel, Mr. S.K. Patnaik, learned Senior counsel, Mr. U.C. Mohanty, learned
counsel, Mr. R.K. Sahoo, learned counsel, Mr. B.B. Mohanty, learned counsel, Mr. R.B. Mohapatra,
learned counsel appearing in person for the Petitioners. They also filed detailed written
submissions. Mr. R. Iyer, learned counsel, was allowed to intervene in W.P. (C) No.13789 of 2019 in
his individual capacity. He made detailed oral arguments and also submitted a written note.
56. On behalf of the Opposite Parties, the Court heard the submissions of Mr. A.K. Parija, learned
Advocate General for the State of Odisha, Mr. M.S. Sahoo, learned Additional Government Advocate
and Mr. P.K. Parhi, learned Assistant Solicitor General on behalf of Union of India.
Submissions on behalf of the Petitioners
57. The submissions on behalf of the Petitioners and the intervener may be summarised thus:
(i) Having an SAT is an administrative necessity in terms of Article 323-A (1) of the
Constitution of India given the object behind its insertion by the Constitution (42nd
Amendment) Act and particularly in light of Clause 5 of the SOR accompanying its
corresponding Bill. Adopting the rule of purposive construction, the word ‗may' in
Article 323-A (1) should be read as ‗shall' in acknowledgment of the overflowing
docket of the High Court as well as the Supreme Court. Reliance is placed on the
decisions in Sampath Kumar, L. Chandra Kumar, Madras Bar Association v.
Union of India (2014) 10 SCC 1, Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Ltd. v. Union of India (2016) 9 SCC 103
and Rojer Mathew v. Union of India (2020) 6 SCC 1. Reference is also made to the decisions in
Mahaluxmi Rice Mills v. State of U.P. (1998) 6 SCC 590, Smt. Bachahan Devi v. Nagar Nigam,
Gorakhpur (2008) 12 SCC 372 and Dillip Kumar Basu v. State of West Bengal (2015) 8 SCC 744.
(ii) The impugned notification dated 2nd August, 2019 issued by the DoPT, Government of India is
invalid as it is not expressly stated to have been taken in the name of the President of India. In other
words it is not in compliance with the requirement of Articles 77 (1) and (2) of the Constitution of
India. Reliance is placed on the decisions in State of Uttaranchal v. Sunil Kumar Vaish (2011) 8 SCC
670 and Bachhittar Singh v. State of Punjab AIR 1963 SC
395.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 16
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
(iii) A mere noting in the file cannot be said to be the decision of the Government unless it is
sanctified by issuing an order in accordance with Article 77 (1) and (2) or Articles 166 and 192 of the
Constitution of India. The decision in the file culminates in an order affecting the rights of the
parties only when it is expressed in the name of the President or the Governor. In the present case
no material has been placed on record to show that the order dated 2nd August, 2019 has been
expressed in the name of the President in the manner envisaged under Article 77 (2) of the
Constitution of India. Reliance has placed in the decisions of State of Bihar v. Kripalu Shankar
(1987) 3 SCC 34, Rajasthan Housing Board v. Krishna Kumari 1993 (2) SCC 84, M/s. Sethi Auto
Service Station v. Delhi Development Authority (2009) 1 SCC 180, Shanti Sports Club v. Union of
India (2009) 15 SCC 705 as well as Gulf Goans Hotels Co. Ltd. v. Union of India (2014) 10 SCC 673.
(iv) Neither under Article 323-A (1) of the Constitution of India nor under the AT Act has the High
Court been assigned any specific role in the matter of establishment or abolition of an SAT.
Consequently, the so-called ‗concurrence' obtained of the High Court for the decision to abolish the
OAT is non est.
(v) Unlike Article 371-D of the Constitution, the Parliament has not provided in Article 323-A, for
the abolition of an SAT and without such an express provision, the executive cannot by a mere
notification abolish the OAT. Power has been granted to the Parliament to make a law only for
‗establishing' an AT and not for its abolition. The impugned notification is therefore in excess of the
powers granted to the executive and is illegal and unconstitutional.
(vi) With the impugned notification bringing to an end the disputes pending before the OAT, the
litigants are left without a similar forum as mandated by the Parliament to be established. In such
circumstances, the power under Section 21 of the GC Act to rescind the notification establishing the
OAT is not available either to the Government of Odisha or the Government of India. When viewed
in light of the subject matter and the context of Section 4 (2) of the AT Act read with Article 323A (1)
of the Constitution which contemplates only the establishing of a SAT, Section 21 of the GC Act
cannot be invoked to bring to an end disputes pending in the OAT. Reliance is placed on the
decisions in State of Bihar v. DN Ganguly AIR 1958 SC 1018, Lt. Governor of Himanchal Pradesh v.
Avinash Sharma AIR 1970 SC 1576 and State of Madhya Pradesh v. Ajay Singh (1993) 1 SCC 302.
(vii) In this context, it is further submitted that since the decision to establish an SAT is
quasi-judicial in nature, in the absence of an express provision in that behalf in the AT Act, such a
decision cannot be nullified by resorting to Section 21 of the GC Act. What cannot be done directly
cannot be sought to be done indirectly. The decisions in Samundra Devi v. Narendra Kaur (2008) 9
SCC 100;
Ram Chandra Singh v. Savitri Devi (2004) 12 SCC 713; Indian National Congress v. Institution of
Social Welfare (2002) 5 SCC 685 and Industrial Infrastructure v.CIT (2018) 4 SCC 494 are referred
to.
(viii) Once the Central Government took a decision to establish the OAT, it became functus officio
and was incompetent to issue any further notification under Section 21 of the GC Act rescinding the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 17
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
earlier notification. Reference in this regard is made to the decisions in State Bank of India v. S.N.
Goyal (2008) 8 SCC 92 and Government of Uttar Pradesh v. Raja Mohammad Amir Ahmad Khan
AIR 1961 SC 787.
(ix) Since the impugned notification has adverse civil consequences for the concerned stakeholders,
they were required to be heard before the decision was taken and, therefore, the impugned
notification violates the principles of natural justice. Reliance is placed on the decisions in State of
Orissa v. Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei, AIR 1967 SC 1269, S. L. Kapoor v. Jagmohan, AIR 1981 SC 136,
Sahara India v. CIT, (2008) 14 SCC 151 and Siemens Engineering v. Union of India, AIR 1976 SC
1785.
(x) It is not open for the State Government or the Government of India to simply decide that the
jurisdiction which has been vested by Parliament in the SAT should now vest in the High Court and
that cases pending before the OAT could ipso facto stand transferred to the High Court. It is
submitted that the power to create or enlarge jurisdiction is legislative in character so also the power
to confer a right of appeal or to take away a right of appeal and that this can be done only by the
Parliament. Reliance is placed on the decision in A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Nayak, AIR 1988 SC 1531.
(xi) The decision to abolish the OAT on the basis of the decision in L. Chandra Kumar is attacked as
being perverse, irrational, unreasonable and violative of Article 14 of the Constitution. It is stated
that the ratio of L. Chandra Kumar which was concerned with reducing the workload of the Supreme
Court of India has been wrongly understood by the Government of Odisha as providing the reason
for abolishing the OAT. Nowhere in the decision in L. Chandra Kumar is any opinion expressed by
the Supreme Court that the SATs are redundant. On the contrary, the decision in Rojer Mathew
(supra) reveals that the need for Tribunals is still felt. No judicial impact assessment as
contemplated either by the Parliamentary Standing Committee or the decision of the Supreme Court
in Rojer Mathew (supra) has been undertaken to justify the abolition of the OAT for the purpose of
rendering speedy justice to Government servants. The report of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee which has rejected the proposal to abolish the SATs through mere notifications of the
government is admissible in evidence and can be relied upon. Reliance is placed on the decision in
Kalpana Mehta v. Union of India, (2018) 7 SCC 1.
(xii) The irrationality is writ large when it is understood that even after abolition of the OAT, there
would be a three-tier litigation which a Government employee has to face - first before the Single
Judge of the High Court, then before the DB and thereafter before the Supreme Court under Article
136 of the Constitution. This has been completely lost sight of both by the Government of Odisha as
well as the Government of India.
(xiii) Morever, the OAT was functioning with two regular benches at Bhubaneswar and Cuttack and
two circuit benches at Sambalpur and Berhampur. This provided easy, speedy and affordable access
to the aggrieved Government servants. All these advantages would be lost if all of the Government
servants had to approach only the High Court in Cuttack for redressal of their grievances.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 18
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
(xiv) The figures of pendency of cases in the High Court and the number of unfilled vacancies of
High Court Judges over the last 20 years make it clear that far from ensuring speedy disposal of the
70,000 and odd applications pending before the OAT which would stand transferred to the High
Court as a result of the abolition of the OAT, the disposal of such pending cases, not to speak of the
fresh ones, would get interminably delayed. The very rationale is questionable. The decision to
abolish the OAT is, in the circumstances, against the larger interests of the Government employees
and defeats their constitutional rights to speedy and fair justice under Articles 14, 21 read with 39A
of the Constitution.
(xv) Out of the 70,000 odd cases, only 1453 have been transferred thus far and over the past 19
months not one of the transferred cases has been taken up for hearing in the High Court. In the
absence of a provision like Section 29 of the AT Act, the transfer of the petition to the High Court is
without legal basis. Mere creation of additional post of High Court Judges may not solve the
problem given the delay in filling up even the existing vacancies.
(xvi) There has been no specific denial in the reply filed by the Government of Odisha to the
averment in para 7 of the writ petition that the decision to abolish the OAT was triggered by the
prospect of the top-ranking officials of the State of Odisha facing charges of contempt. The OAT was
abolished only with a view to avoiding such proceedings. The principle of "non-traverse" is invoked
in support of the plea that the impugned notification is an instance of mala fide exercise of power for
extraneous considerations. Reliance is placed on the decisions in Controller of Court of Ward v. G.N.
Ghorpade (1973) 4 SCC 94 and Sushil Kumar v. Rakesh Kumar (2003) 8 SCC 673.
(xvii) There has been a deliberate misconstruing of the decisions of the Supreme Court in the L.
Chandra Kumar and the MPAT Abolition case and the decision of the Madras High Court in TNAT
Abolition case. A case is an authority only for what it actually decides and not for what may logically
follow from it. Reliance is placed on the decisions in State of Orissa v. Md. Illiyas AIR 2006 SC 258,
State of Haryana v. M.P. Mohla (2007) 1 SCC 457 and Sreenivasa General Traders v. State of Andhra
Pradesh AIR 1983 SC 1246.
(xviii) The decision to abolish the OAT cannot be termed as a policy decision only to avoid judicial
review. Reliance is placed on the decision in Centre for Public Interest v. Union of India, (2003) 7
SCC 532.
Submissions on behalf of the Opposite Parties
58. The submissions on behalf of the Opposite Parties i.e. Union of India as well as the State of
Odisha may be summarized as under:
(i) Article 323-A (1) is only an enabling provision. It vests the Parliament with the
power to enact laws for the establishment of the CATs and the SATs for adjudication
of disputes/complaints relating to recruitment and conditions of service of
Government servants. Since the very procedure for establishing an SAT envisages a
request being made by the State Government through the Central Government and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 19
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
only thereafter for the Central Government to issue a notification establishing an
SAT, Article 323-A (1) is not a self-executing provision
(ii) Even the law made by Parliament in terms of Article 323-A (1) by itself does not
establish an SAT. It also only enables the establishing of an SAT. The word 'may'
under Article 323-A (1) has therefore to be read in the above context. It cannot,
therefore, be said to be mandatory in the sense that it gives no option to the Central
or State Government on the establishing an Administrative Tribunal. It is only a
permissive provision. Reliance is placed on the decision in the MPAT Abolition Case
(iii) The establishment or abolition of an SAT is a decision in the domain of the
respective Governments and is an essentially a policy decision. The scope of judicial
review of such policy decision is extremely limited.
(iv) After the judgment in L. Chandra Kumar, one more tier of litigation has been
added with all decisions of the OAT being reviewable judicially by the High Court
under Articles 226 / 227 of the Constitution. Therefore, as a policy, it was decided by
State of Odisha that no useful purpose would be served in continuing with the OAT
since it no longer subserves the object of speedy justice.
Such a policy decision cannot be said to be arbitrary or unreasonable or mala fide. As pointed out in
the MPAT Abolition case, the question is not of advisability or propriety but the legality or
rationality, reasonability and constitutionality thereof.
(v) The impugned policy decision was based on relevant germane and valid reasons, and does not
call for interference by the High Court under Article 226 of the Constitution. Reference is made to
both the L. Chandra Kumar and the MPAT Abolition case.
(vi) All the relevant materials were taken into account by the Government of Odisha while deciding
to abolish the OAT. In particular, the impact it was likely to have on the High Court was taken into
account and therefore it was decided to support the move for increasing the judge strength in the
High Court of Odisha. Simultaneously, it was decided to increase the strength of the administrative
staff of the High Court by making the staff of the OAT available to the High Court to deal with the
additional workload. The correspondence with the Central Government reveals that the factum of
pendency of cases, the rate of disposal of such cases by the OAT and the time taken for disposal of
cases generally were all taken into account. It cannot therefore be said that the decision is arbitrary
or irrational.
(vii) The consultation with the High Court was in furtherance of the need to take into account the
impact the decision to abolish the OAT would have on the functioning of the High Court. For the
same reason, the Central Government also felt it necessary for the High Court to be consulted. If
without consulting the High Court, the State and Central Government had unilaterally decided on
the transfer of the cases pending in the OAT to the High Court that would have been improper and
also would have rendered the decision arbitrary. Therefore, there is nothing illegal in such a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 20
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
procedure.
(viii) The power to rescind the notification flows from a reading of Section 4 (2) of the AT Act read
with Section 21 of the GC Act. The establishment of the OAT was by a process of a request by the
State Government to the Central Government, based on the State Government's assessment of the
need for the OAT. On that basis a notification was issued by the Central Government. At a
subsequent stage, if the State Government for valid reasons decides as a policy to not continue with
the OAT then it certainly has the power to withdraw the request and ask that the OAT be abolished.
If it is conceded that the establishment of an SAT requires a subjective satisfaction of the concerned
State government before proceeding to make a request to the Central Government under Section 4
(2) of the AT Act and then as a logical corollary, as is implicitly recognized in Section 21of the GC
Act, due to a change in the circumstances the process can be reversed and upon the request of the
State Government, the Central Government can rescind the earlier notification. There is no statutory
or constitutional prohibition against such a procedure being adopted, particularly since it again
involves a process of consultation between the State Government and the Central Government based
on a policy decision. The power to rescind the notification is inherent to the power to issue it.
Reliance is placed on the decision of Madras High Court in the TNAT Abolition case as well as the
decision of the Supreme Court in the MPAT Abolition case.
(ix) The Central Government has in any event accepted the legal proposition that for abolishing an
SAT a mere notification by the Central Government is sufficient for the purpose of Section 4 (2) of
the AT Act read with Section 21 of the GC Act and does not require an amendment by Parliament to
the AT Act. The question of law left open by the Supreme Court therefore does not survive for
consideration in view of the subsequent development where the SATs for M.P, H.P, A.P, and Tamil
Nadu have been abolished by the Central Government by notifications invoking Section 21 of the GC
Act read with Section 4 (2) of the AT Act. The decisions in D.N. Ganguli (supra) and Ajay Singh
(supra), are distinguishable on facts and have no relevance in the context of the present case.
(x) Neither Article 166 nor Article 77, which requires orders to be expressly passed in the name of
the Governor of a State or the President of India is a mandatory provision. Reliance is placed on the
decision in R. Chitralekha v. State of Mysore 1964 (6) SCR 368, which in turn relied upon on the
decision in Dattatreya Moreshwar Pangarkar v. State of Bombay 1952 SCR 612. Reliance is also
placed on the observations in Narmada Bachao Andolan v. State of M.P. (2011) 12 SCC 333.
(xi) Article 371D inserted in the Constitution of India by the 32nd Amendment Act of 1974, confers a
special status on Andhra Pradesh and is a Code in itself. It provides both for the establishment and
the abolition of the APAT by the President of India. This is very different from Article 323-A, which
was inserted subsequently. In fact, after the enactment of the AT Act under Article 323A (1), the
APAT was abolished and re- established under the AT Act with effect from 1st November, 1989. It
was finally abolished by a notification of the Government of India on 14th January, 2020.
(xii) Although Section 29 of the AT Act does not envisage transfer of cases from the SAT to the High
Court but only the other way around, the practice that has consistently been followed in abolition of
the SATs is to transfer all the pending cases before the SATs to the corresponding High Courts. This
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 21
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
is because with the abolition of the SATs, the position that was in existence prior to the
establishment of the SATs would revive. So the pending cases before the SATs would naturally have
to be adjudicated by the High Court. This is also reflected in the order dated 7 th August, 2019
passed by the High Court in these cases.
(xiii) Moreover, the proposal put forth by the State Government in this regard has been accepted by
the High Court on its administrative side. Through judicial orders passed by the High Court under
Article 226 of the Constitution some of the pending OAs before the OAT have already been
transferred to the High Court. Therefore, it is incorrect for the Petitioners to contend that there is no
forum available for the adjudication of the cases pending before the OAT.
(xiv) It cannot possibly be contended that adjudication of a writ petition in the High Court is not
preferable to adjudication in the first instance by the OAT. There is no empirical data to show that
the cases in the OAT were being disposed of faster than similar cases by the High Court. The litigant
is therefore in one sense better off with the abolition of the OAT.
Issues for consideration
59. On the basis of the above submissions, the following issues arise for consideration before this
Court:
(i) Under Article 323-A (1) of the Constitution, is it mandatory for an SAT to be
established?
(ii) Can the abolition of an SAT be brought about by a notification issued by the
Government of India under Section 4 (2) of the AT Act read with Section 21 of the GC
Act or does it require a specific provision in that regard both in Article 323A of the
Constitution and in the AT Act?
(iii) In the context of (ii) above is the impugned notification in a nature of a
quasi-judicial decision? Inasmuch as it has been made without affording the
stakeholders a hearing, is it violative of the principles of natural justice?
(iv) Is the impugned notification abolishing the OAT arbitrary, irrational and
unreasonable, inasmuch as, it is based on an incorrect understanding of the ratio of
the decision of the Constitution Bench of the Supreme Court of India in L. Chandra
Kumar and in any event not based on relevant material but extraneous
considerations? In other words, is it violative of Article 14 of the Constitution?
(v) Given the huge pendency of the cases in the High Court, and there being no
prospect of filling up of all the vacancies of Judges, and the fact that there would be in
any event two tiers of litigation in High Court itself as a result of the transfer to the
High Court of cases pending in the OAT upon its abolition, is not the impugned
notification arbitrary, irrational and unsustainable in law as it does not subserve the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 22
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
object of speedy justice for Government servants?
(vi) Is the impugned notification dated 2nd August, 2019 issued by the DoPT,
Government of India, bad in law since it is not a decision expressly stated to be in the
name of the President of India in terms of Article 77 of the Constitution?
Issue (i): Under Article 323-A (1) of the Constitution, is it mandatory for an SAT to be established?
60. When Parliament passed the Constitution (42nd Amendment) Bill, 1976 by which it introduced,
inter alia, Articles 323-A and 323-B in the Constitution under Part XIV A titled 'Tribunals', the SOR
appended to the Bill explained the reasons for its introduction as under:
"5. To reduce the mounting arrears in High Courts and to secure the speedy disposal
of service matters, revenue matters and certain other matters of special importance
in the context of the socio-economic development and progress, it is considered
expedient to provide for administrative and other tribunals for dealing with such
matters while preserving the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court in regard to such
matters under article 136 of the Constitution. It is also necessary to make certain
modifications in the writ jurisdiction of the High Courts under Article 226."
61. It can be seen straightaway that there are two types of Tribunals envisaged in Part XIV-A of the
Constitution. Article 323-A (1) is exclusively for Administrative Tribunals i.e. Tribunals to deal with
complaints and disputes with respective recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed
to public services and posts under the Union or State Government or any local authority. Article
323B deals with the Tribunals for "other matters".
62. Article 323-A (1) of the Constitution consciously uses the word 'may' while describing the power
of the Parliament and it reads as under:
"323A. Administrative Tribunals (1) Parliament may, by law, provide for the
adjudication or trial by administrative tribunals of disputes and complaints with
respect to recruitment and conditions of service of persons appointed to public
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State or of any
local or other authority within the territory of India or under the control of the
Government of India or of any corporation owned or controlled by the Government."
(emphasis supplied)
63. There is merit in the contention of the Opposite Parties that in the context in which it occurs, the
word ‗may' denotes that the power under Article 323-A (1) vested in the Parliament to make a law is
an enabling one. In other words, the Court is unable to accept the plea put forth by learned counsel
for the Petitioners that the word 'may' in the context in which it occurs in the provision has to be
read as 'shall', thereby giving no option to the Governments of the Centre and the States to establish
Administrative Tribunals.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 23
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
64. This interpretation gets further strengthened when one examines Article 323-A (2), which talks
of the contents of such a law made by Parliament and reads as under:
"(2) A law made under clause (1) may --
(a) provide for the establishment of an administrative tribunal for the Union and a
separate administrative tribunal for each State or for two or more States;
(b) specify the jurisdiction, powers (including the power to punish for contempt) and
authority which may be exercised by each of the said tribunals;
(c) provide for the procedure (including provisions as to limitation and rules of
evidence) to be followed by the said tribunals;
(d) exclude the jurisdiction of all courts, except the jurisdiction of the Supreme Court
under Article 136, with respect to the disputes or complaints referred to in clause (1);
(e) provide for the transfer to each such administrative tribunal of any cases pending
before any court or other authority immediately before the establishment of such
tribunal as would have been within the jurisdiction of such tribunal if the causes of
action on which such suits or proceedings are based had arisen after such
establishment;
(f) repeal or amend any order made by the President under clause (3) of article 371D;
(g) contain such supplemental, incidental and consequential provisions (including
provisions as to fees) as Parliament may deem necessary for the effective functioning
of, and for the speedy disposal of cases by, and the enforcement of the orders of, such
tribunals." (emphasis supplied)
65. Therefore, the word 'may' is used both in Articles 323A (1) as well as Article 323A (2),
underscores the nature of the provision being directory and not mandatory. Again, this gets
reflected in the wording of Sections 4 (1) and 4 (2) of the AT Act which read thus:
―4. Establishment of Administrative Tribunals.--
(1) The Central Government shall, by notification, establish an Administrative
Tribunal, to be known as the Central Administrative Tribunal, to exercise the
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the Central Administrative Tribunal
by or under this Act.
(2) The Central Government may, on receipt of a request in this behalf from any State
Government, establish, by notification, an Administrative Tribunal for the State to be
known as the.......(name of the State) Administrative Tribunal to exercise the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 24
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
jurisdiction, powers and authority conferred on the Administrative Tribunal for the
State by or under this Act.(cid:130) (emphasis supplied)
66. While Section 4 (1) of the AT Act, by using the modal verb ―shall(cid:130) gives no choice to the central
government in setting up a CAT, Section 4 (2) of the AT Act uses another modal auxiliary verb ‗may'
to denote a discretion available to the central government in the matter of setting up an SAT. This
also explains why it is not as if for every State in the Union of India there is an SAT. By 1997, i.e.
roughly eleven ten years since the AT Act, as amended in 1986, became effective, only eight of the
States had established SATs. This was taken note of by the Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar. As
of date, five of the said SATs stand abolished. These are the MPAT, the TNAT, the HPAT, the OAT
and the APAT. This is another indication of the legal position that the provisions of Article 323A (1)
have not been understood as making it mandatory for an SAT to be established.
67. While the decisions in Sampath Kumar and L. Chandra Kumar do discuss the efficacy of the CAT
and the SATs, there is nothing in those decisions to say that an SAT, once established, cannot be
abolished. In other words, the decisions in Sampath Kumar and L. Chandra Kumar do not suggest
that a State Government, which may have initially felt the need to establish an SAT, cannot
subsequently decide to re-visit that decision and ask for its abolition.
68. The other decisions cited by counsel for the Petitioners are also not supportive of the
propositions advanced by them on the interpretation of Article 323-A (1) of the Constitution. The
decision in Madras Bar Association (supra) focused on the independence and efficacy of the
National Company Law Tribunal, as an adjudicatory body, insofar as it was expected to take over the
jurisdiction and functions of a Company Court in the High Court in the matter of winding up of, and
mergers and amalgamations of companies. The question whether a statutory Tribunal set up in
terms of a law under Article 323-A (1) could be abolished was not an issue that arose there. The
decisions in Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam Limited (supra) or even Rojer Mathew (supra) are also not
helpful in understanding the scope and ambit of Article 323A (1) of the Constitution of India
vis-à-vis the issue of the abolition of the Tribunals established thereunder. The central question in
the latter two decisions was whether it was desirable to have provisions in the statutes creating such
Tribunals which envisage a direct appeal to the Supreme Court from the decisions of those
Tribunals. The question there was not whether the word 'may' in Article 323A (1) was directory or
mandatory or whether under Section 4 (2) of the AT Act a State Government which had requested
the Central Government to establish an SAT could at a subsequent point in time withdraw such
request and ask for rescinding the notification establishing the SAT.
69. The deployment of the device of ‗purposive interpretation' to decide whether a particular
provision is mandatory or directory has been explained in several decisions including Bachachan
Devi v. Nagar Nigam, Gorakhpur (supra) and Dillip Kumar Basu (supra). The rule was explained in
Bachachan Devi v. Nagar Nigam, Gorakhpur (supra) as under:
―12. Mere use of word 'may' or 'shall' is not conclusive. The question whether a
particular provision of a statute is directory or mandatory cannot be resolved by
laying down any general rule of universal application. Such controversy has to be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 25
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
decided by ascertaining the intention of the Legislature and not by looking at the
language in which the provision is clothed. And for finding out the legislative intent,
the Court must examine the scheme of the Act, purpose and object underlying the
provision, consequences likely to ensue or inconvenience likely to result if the
provision is read one way or the other and many more considerations relevant to the
issue.(cid:130)
70. Examining the scheme of Article 323-A (1) of the Constitution, the purpose and object
underlying the provision and the consequences likely to ensue or the inconvenience likely to result if
the word ―may(cid:130) occurring therein is to be read as ‗shall', the Court is not persuaded that it should
be so read. It cannot be said that merely because the High Courts are overburdened with pending
cases that the word ‗may' should be read as 'shall'. While the burden on the High Courts or the
Supreme Court may be one factor informing the decision of the Central Government or the State
Government to establish a Tribunal, it cannot be the only factor. As pointed out by the Supreme
Court in the above decision there are ―many more considerations relevant to the issue.(cid:130) These
would include examining the data of institutions and disposal of cases by the Tribunal, the rate of
such disposal, the quality of the decisions being rendered, how often they are overturned on appeal
or review by a superior judicial forum and so on. It must be recalled here that the question of
satisfaction about the quality of adjudication by the Tribunals generally was adverted to by the
Supreme Court not only in L. Chandra Kumar but also in Madras Bar Association (supra) and Rojer
Mathew (supra). This has also been extensively discussed in the reports of the Law Commission of
India.
71. The experiment of creating Tribunals, to hive off many of the areas over which disputes are
pending in the High Courts and civil Courts to alternative dispute resolution bodies, is a work in
progress. Professor Marc Galanter felicitously refers to Tribunals as the ‗bypasses' created to
manage the case bottlenecks in the regular courts which he likens to the ‗highways.' In a piece titled
'To the Listed Field...': The Myth of Litigious India (2009) Vol. 1:65 Jindal Global Law Review (at
75) he notes:
―For large sectors of society and large areas of conduct, courts afford no remedies or
protections. When pressure builds up to provide useable remedies for a particular
sort of grievance, the solution, understandably, is not to undertake the Sisyphean
task of reforming the lower courts but to bypass them....The typical bypass is the
establishment of a tribunal with exclusive jurisdiction over cases on a particular
topic, such as those that deal with motor vehicle accidents, consumer complaints or
labour disputes. The Central Administrative Tribunal, for example, has jurisdiction
over ‗service matters' including disputes about government employment,
promotions, pensions and the like.(cid:130) In the same piece Prof. Galanter notes that
―many of these tribunals are plagued by overcrowded dockets, similar to those in the
regular courts.(cid:130) Further he presciently notes that such tribunals ―frequently display
similar deficiencies - crowding, excessive formalism, expense, delay and truncated
remedies.(cid:130)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 26
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
72. Then there are a host of other less-acknowledged factors that defeat the object for which the
Tribunal is established in the first place. These include the failure to promptly fill the vacancies in
the posts of Chairpersons, Vice Chairpersons and Members, both Judicial and Technical, in these
Tribunals. The OAT was no exception to this as two of the companion petitions in this batch reveal.
Then there is the problem of proper and complete staffing of the Tribunals.
73. The question of the independent functioning of some of the Tribunals, from the point of view of
the tenure and conditions of service of their Members, is yet another issue that recently engaged the
attention of the Supreme Court in Rojer Mathew (supra). Earlier, pursuant to the directions issued
by the Supreme Court in Gujarat Urja Vikas Nigam (supra), the Law Commission of India (LCI)
submitted its 272nd Report on ‗Assessment of Statutory Frameworks of Tribunals in India' on 27th
October, 2017. It recommended, inter alia, that if the possibility of every order of a statutory
Tribunal being challenged in the High Court is to be avoided then an Appellate Tribunal, on par with
the High Court, should be provided for in the statute under which a Tribunal is established.
74. The decision to continue a Tribunal which has failed to meet some or many of its objectives has
to be informed by a variety of factors some of which have been discussed hereinbefore. Since it is a
work in progress, India is to witness to both the creation of and dismantling of Tribunals for a
variety of reasons. The most recent instance is the issuance of the Tribunals Reforms
(Rationalization and Conditions of Service) Ordinance, 2021 which resulted in the dismantling, with
effect from 4th April 2021, of nearly 11 Appellate Boards and Tribunals under various statutes
including the Intellectual Property Appellate Board, the Copyright Appellate Board, the Film
Certification Appellate Board and so on. One of the reasons cited by the government in bringing
forth the Ordinance is empirical data which reveals that the Tribunals have not been able to ensure
speedy justice and that they invariably constitute an ‗additional tier' of litigation leading to costs
and delays.
75. Tribunalisation is a work in progress also because of the degrees of specialisation that are
required in niche areas and where the Tribunals have to necessarily comprise both technical and
judicial members. The Telecom Disputes Settlement and Appellate Tribunal and the National Green
Tribunal fall in this category. While some of the Tribunals may not be able to effectively discharge
their adjudicatory functions without the participation of such technical members, the same may not
hold true for certain other Tribunals, like for instance Administrative Tribunals. Further, attempts
at getting the Tribunals to substitute the High Court is fraught with problems associated with
ensuring the independence of such tribunals from the executive, as the decision in Rojer Mathew
(supra) shows. The essential reason for this is that judicial review by the High Courts under Article
226 of the Constitution has been recognized as a basic feature of the Constitution by the decision in
L. Chandra Kumar.
76. In the above context, the abolition of an SAT, resulting in the revival in the High Court of the
petition pending before the SAT, can hardly be said to contradict the original purpose and intent,
which was to have High Courts adjudicate disputes involving Government servants in the area of
their employment and service conditions. Further, considering that there are SATs still functioning
only in three or four States in the country, the government employees in a majority of the States
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 27
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
have to approach the concerned High Court in the first instance for redressal of their grievances. It
cannot therefore be argued that the abolition of the OAT, resulting in either the transfer of the
pending petitions to the High Court, or institution of fresh petitions there as a Court of first
instance, undermines access to justice as was sought to be contended. In other words, a parallel
cannot be drawn between pursuing a writ petition in the High Court before a Single Judge with
pursuing an original application in the OAT. The former remedy would any day be the preferred one
for a litigant. Therefore, the contention that by abolition of the OAT there will be denial of access to
justice to the litigant is not an acceptable proposition.
77. All of the above factors have to be kept in view while interpreting the word 'may' occurring in
Article 323A (1) of the Constitution. When viewed in that context it cannot be said that Article 323A
(1) was intended to make it mandatory for either the Central Government or the State Government
to establish an SAT irrespective of the actual need for such a tribunal and for it to be effective in
achieving the object of securing fair and speedy justice.
Issue (ii): Can an SAT be abolished by a Central Government Notification issued under Section 21
GC Act?
Issue (iii): Is the impugned notification quasi-judicial in nature?
78. Issues (ii) and (iii) are in a sense inter-linked as will be noticed hereafter. They are accordingly
being dealt with together. The central question that arises for consideration is whether there is an
inherent power under Section 4 (2) of the AT Act read with Section 21 of the GC Act enabling a State
Government or the Central Government to rescind a notification establishing an SAT? This question
arises from the principal contention in these petitions that the impugned notification dated 2nd
August 2019 could not have been issued by the DoPT, Government of India without an enabling
provision in Article 323-A of the Constitution and the AT Act.
79. Since both sides have relied extensively upon the decisions in the MPAT Abolition Case and the
TNAT Abolition Case, the Court takes up those cases for an elaborate discussion.
80. As far as MPAT Abolition case is concerned, it is evident from a reading of the background facts
set out in the decision that the decision to abolish the MPAT did not flow from Section 21 of the GC
Act but Section 74 (1) of the MPR Act. It was the latter provision that envisaged both the
Governments of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh by mutual agreement deciding to discontinue
the MPAT even though it was established under the AT Act, a central Act. In other words, although
Article 323A (1) itself did not expressly provide for abolishing an SAT, as far as the MPAT was
concerned, the MPR Act, which was also a law made by Parliament empowered the M.P and
Chhattisgarh Governments to decide to abolish the MPAT. This is an important distinction to be
kept in view while examining this decision.
81. Importantly, the passage in the MPAT Abolition case, which is relied upon by the Opposite
Parties in the present case acknowledges that Section 74 (1) was not in the nature of a "delegated
legislation" but a ‗conditional legislation'. Referring to the decision in Hamdard Dawakhana (Wakf)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 28
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
Lal v. Union of India 1960 (2) SCR 671, the Supreme Court agreed with the conclusion of the High
Court in that case that the power to abolish the MPAT could be validly traced to the legislative power
flowing from Section 74 (1) of the MPR Act and not Section 4 (2) of the AT Act. There was no
occasion therefore in the MPAT Abolition Case to discuss whether on a collective reading of Section
4 (2) of the AT Act read with Section 21 of the GC Act, the abolition of the MPAT could be justified.
In fact Section 74 (1) of the MPR Act opened with a non-obstante clause that allowed the States of
M.P and Chhattisgarh, notwithstanding the absence of a provision to that effect in the AT Act to take
a decision to continue with or abolish the MPAT. This explains the conclusion in para 34 of the
judgment of the Supreme Court in the MPAT Abolition Case, which reads as under:
"34.xxx A conjoint reading of Article 323-A of the Constitution, Section 4 of the
Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 and Sections 74 (1) and 85 of the Act of 2000, in
our considered opinion, leaves no room for doubt that Parliament authorised the
State of Madhya Pradesh as well as the new State of Chhattisgarh to take an
appropriate decision with regard to State Administrative Tribunals having
jurisdiction over those States. Parliament empowered both the successor States to
take an appropriate decision to continue such Tribunals, to abolish them or to
constitute separate Tribunals. It cannot be said that by enacting such a provision,
Parliament had violated any mandate or the Act of 2000 is ultra vires Article 323- A
or any other part of the Constitution." (emphasis supplied)
82. Therefore, learned counsel for the Petitioners are right in their contention that the MPAT
Abolition case cannot support the proposition that there is an inherent power in the Central
Government and the State Government under Section 4 (2) of the AT Act read with Article 323A (1)
of the Constitution and Section 21 GC Act to abolish an SAT by rescinding a notification that was
issued to establish it in the first place.
83. However, the decision in the MPAT Abolition case supports the case of the Opposite Parties as
regards certain other propositions which will be discussed hereafter.
84. Turning now to the TNAT Abolition case, it will be recalled there is no provision in the AT Act,
parallel to Section 74 (1) of the MPR Act that enables the State Government to abolish an SAT.
Specific to the TNAT, while the Government of Tamil Nadu kept writing to the Central Government
to issue an appropriate notification for its abolition, the Central Government took the stand that till
an amendment was made to the AT Act providing for such abolition, it could not be brought about
by a mere notification. This stand of the Central Government is noted by the Madras High Court in
its decision as under:
"On the other hand, the stand taken by the Central Government, the first respondent
herein, is that though the Government of Tamil Nadu has sent a proposal to the
Central Government for abolition, this cannot be done through Notification. The
appropriate legislation for this proposal has to be brought in the Parliament and the
same is being contemplated by the Law Department which after due processing and
approval will be brought before the Parliament. Mere Notification of the Central
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 29
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
Government would not suffice in this case, since Section 74 of the Madhya Pradesh
Reorganisation Act, 2000 would specifically provide for the abolition through
Notification. But, such a provision is not available in this State. Therefore, suitable
Parliamentary amendment to the Administrative Tribunal Act is necessary to
consider such proposal. The necessary steps for the same are being taken by the
Central Government."
85. It appears from the discussion that follows the above passage that the Madras High Court
proceeded on the basis that after the decision of the Supreme Court in the MPAT Abolition case, the
Central Government could straightaway issue a notification rescinding the earlier notification
establishing the TNAT. The Madras High Court also referred to the observations of the Division
Bench of M.P High Court which were referred to by the Supreme Court in the MPAT Abolition Case,
which read thus:
"35. It was then contended that once the power to constitute a Tribunal had been
exercised, Parliament was denuded of any power to make any legislation providing
for abolition of such Tribunal. The Division Bench negatived the contention and
observed:
"It is difficult to swallow that Parliament after enacting law on a particular subject
shall have no power to amend, modify or repeal the same. The power of Parliament,
in our opinion, does not exhaust by enactment of any law and we are of the
considered opinion that Parliament can make law in relation to a subject for which it
has as the legislative competence, notwithstanding the fact that law on a particular
subject was enacted by Parliament earlier. The theory of exhaustion is unknown so
far as the legislative powers are concerned. What Parliament has done, Parliament
can undo."
86. It is necessary to bear in mind that the above passage draws a distinction between Parliament's
power "to make legislation providing for abolition of such Tribunal", an example of which would be
Section 74 (1) of the MPR Act, and the power of the central or state government to do so. The
Madras High Court acknowledged that "the analogous provision of Section 74 (1) of the [MPR] Act
was not available in the instant case" and that "similarly no specific procedure has been provided for
abolition of a Tribunal in the Administrative Tribunals Act."
87. It is therefore not difficult to discern why the Madras High Court had to resort to Section 21 of
the GC Act which reads thus:
"Power to issue, to include power to add to, amend, vary or rescind, notifications,
orders, rules or bye- laws.--
Where, by any Central Act or Legislation, a power to issue notifications, orders, rules
or bye-laws is conferred, then that power includes a power, exercisable in the like
manner and subject to the like sanction, and conditions (if any), to add to, amend,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 30
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
vary or rescind any notifications, orders, rules or bye- laws so issued."
88. After discussing the provision, the Madras High Court held as under:
"18. The above section would indicate that the power to create includes the power to
destroy, and also the power to alter what is created. In other words, the power to
rescind a notification is inherent in the power to issue the notification. As such, the
specific provision regarding the power to vary, amend, or rescind notification etc.
could also be made in the Act itself. It is also well settled that where the specific
provision is made in the Act itself, the specific provision would prevail and in that
case there is no need to invoke Section 21 of the General Clauses Act. Since there is no
provision at all in the Administrative Tribunals Act regarding the mode of abolition of
the Tribunal, in our opinion, the provisions of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
would apply. If any notification issued by the Government is to be rescinded by virtue
of the powers given under Section 21 of the General Clauses Act, such power to
rescind the notification must be exercised in like manner and subject to the like
sanction and condition as in the case of issuing the notification.
19. In view of the above circumstances, we are of the considered opinion that since no
mode to rescind the notification establishing the Tribunal has been provided in the
Administrative Tribunals Act, the provisions of Section 21 of the General Clauses Act
will have to be invoked for rescinding the Notification earlier issued establishing the
Tribunal."
89. While it is true that the SLP filed by one of the Petitioners before the Madras High Court was
dismissed by the Supreme Court in limine by a one-line order, clearly that cannot constitute an
approval of the decision of the Madras High Court in the TNAT Abolition case. This legal position
has been explained by the Supreme Court in Kunhayammed v. State of Kerala (2000) 6 SCC 359
which was recently re-affirmed by a three-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Khoday Distilleries
Ltd. v. Sri Mahadeshwara Sahakara Sakkare Karkhane Ltd. (2019) 4 SCC 376
90. Independent of the above SLP, a separate appeal was filed by the Union of India raising a
question of law based obviously on its stand before the Madras High Court viz., that a suitable
amendment to the AT Act is necessary for the Central government to consider the State
Government's proposal for abolition of the TNAT. It was on this aspect that leave appears to have
been granted. However, as already noticed the Government of India issued a notification on 17th
February 2006 abolishing the TNAT by invoking Section 21 of the GC Act. This was done even
before a Bill was tabled in Parliament on 16th March, 2006 to amend the AT Act by inserting
Chapter-IVA titled: "Abolition of Tribunals". The SOR accompanying the Amendment Bill
acknowledged the request made by the Government of Tamil Nadu as well as the Governments of
H.P and M.P for similar of the corresponding SATs. It appears the Central Government was even at
that stage of the view that without expressly amending the AT Act to provide for abolition of an SAT,
that result could not be achieved merely by issuing a notification invoking Section 21 of the GC Act.
This also appears to have had the endorsement of the Parliamentary Standing Committee of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 31
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
Rajya Sabha which examined the said Bill and submitted its report in December, 2006. It is not
necessary at this stage to discuss the decision in Kalpana Mehta (supra) for the proposition that
reports of Parliamentary Standing Committees can be considered as evidence. However, at the same
time such reports cannot be said to be binding on the government.
91. The fact remains that the proposed amendments to the AT Act did not come about. In the
meanwhile, the Central Government proceeded to issue notifications abolishing the MPAT, the
HPAT, and the TNAT even while its appeal was pending in the Supreme Court. In doing so the
Central Government appears to have followed a uniform pattern by which it required the State
Government to consult the concerned High Court and seek its concurrence for the proposal to
abolish the SAT. This was with the express purpose of acknowledging the burden that would be cast
on the High Court if the SATs were to be abolished since all cases pending before the SAT would
stand transferred to the High Court.
92. This also explains why when the appeal of the Union of India against the decision of the Madras
High Court the TNAT Abolition case was taken up by the Supreme Court in 2017, it was rightly
submitted that the appeal has been rendered infructuous. In fact it was rendered infructuous only
because in the meanwhile the Central Government had by invoking Section 21 of the GC Act issued
notifications abolishing the SATs in the three States as noted hereinabove. Nevertheless the
Supreme Court of India left the question of law open for decision. This is only meant that the
decision of the Madras High Court in the TNAT abolition case ought not to be treated as a
precedent. To this extent, the submission of learned counsel for the Petitioners is well-founded.
93. The result of the above discussion is that neither the decision of the Supreme Court in the MP
Abolition case nor of the Madras High Court in the TNAT Abolition case can be relied upon by the
Opposite Parties as precedents in support of the proposition that even without an enabling provision
in the AT Act, the abolition of an SAT can be brought about by a notification being issued by the
Central Government rescinding an earlier notification by which it was established.
94. Accordingly the above question of law requires a detailed examination. The major premise on
which Section 21 of the GC Act operates is that what can be done can also be undone. In this context,
the Court takes up for discussion first the decision in the D.N. Ganguly case (supra). It was held
therein that the question whether or not Section 21 of the GC Act applies to the provisions of a
particular statute "would depend upon the subject matter, context and the effect of the relevant
provisions of the said statute". In that context, it was examined whether a notification referring an
industrial dispute to an Industrial Tribunal for adjudication by the appropriate Government under
Section 10 (1) of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947 could be rescinded by the same Government? It
was explained that once an order in writing is made by the appropriate Government referring the
industrial dispute to the Tribunal for adjudication under Section 10 (1) of the I.D. Act, the
proceedings before the Tribunal "are deemed to have commenced and deemed to have concluded on
the day of the award made by the Tribunal becomes enforceable under Section 17(A)". It was noted
by the Supreme Court that if the power claimed by the appellant is conceded to the appropriate
Government, it would be open to the appropriate Government "to terminate the proceedings before
the Tribunal at any stage and not refer the industrial dispute to any other industrial tribunal at all".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 32
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
95. This appears to be a crucial distinguishing factor as far as the present case is concerned. While it
could be argued that it would be possible for the State Government and the Central Government
acting in tandem to bring an end to the adjudication of a particular dispute pending before the OAT
by invoking Section 21 of the GC Act and abolishing the OAT itself, that is not what is sought to be
done here. It is not as if upon the abolition of the OAT, the cases pending there are in limbo. The
consequence of such abolition is that the cases pending before the OAT stand transferred to and
would be heard by the High Court from the stage at which they were before the OAT. In that sense
therefore, by invoking Section 21 of the GC Act, the Opposite Parties are not bringing all the disputes
pending before the OAT for adjudication to an end.
Consequently the decision in the D.N. Ganguly case (supra) does not quite help the case of the
Petitioners.
96. In Ajay Singh (supra), the context was the reconstitution of the Commission set up under the
Commission of Inquiries Act, 1952 by taking recourse to the power to amend under Section 21 of the
GC Act. The Supreme Court negatived the contention by holding as under:
"We have no doubt that the rule of construction embodied in Section 21 of the
General Clauses Act cannot apply to the provisions of the Commissions of Inquiry Act
1952 relating to reconstitution of a Commission constituted thereunder since the
subject- matter, context and effect of such provisions are inconsistent with such
application. Moreover, the construction made by us best harmonises with the subject
of the enactment and the object of the legislation. Restoring public confidence by
constituting a Commission of Inquiry to investigate into a 'definite matter of public
importance' is the purpose of such an exercise. It is, therefore, the prime need that
the Commission functions as an independent agency free from any governmental
control after its constitution. It follows that after appointment, the tenure of
members of the commission should not be dependent on the will of the Government,
to secure their independence. A body not so independent is not likely to enjoy the
requisite public confidence any may not attract men of quality and self-respect. In
such a situation, the object of the enactment would be frustrated. This aspect
suggests that the construction made by us, apart from harmonising the provisions of
the statute, also promotes the object of the enactment while the construction
suggested by the appellant frustrates both."
97. In the instant case, the Opposite Parties are right in contending that the invocation of Section 21
of the GC Act to rescind the notification establishing the OAT does not militate against the scheme
of the AT Act and in particular, Section 4 (2) thereof. In fact it results in the pending disputes
standing transferred to the High Court for adjudication. Far from bringing the case to an end, an
even more efficacious forum viz., the High Court will deal with the case. From the point of view of
the litigant, this should be viewed as furthering the cause of justice and not hindering it.
Consequently, the decision in Ajaib Singh (supra) also is of no assistance to the Petitioners.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 33
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
98. In Indian National Congress (I) (supra) the Supreme Court viewed the decision of the Election
Commission of India under Section 29-A (7) of the representation of the People Act, 1951 to be
quasi-judicial in nature. Therefore, it was held that the registration could not be subsequently
cancelled without a specific enabling provision in the RP Act itself. Recourse could not be taken to
Section 21 GC Act for that purpose. In same vein in Industrial Infrastructure Development
Corporation (Gwalior) M.P. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax AIR 2018 SC 3560 the Supreme
Court held that the order granting registration under Section 12-A of the Income Tax Act, 1961 was a
quasi-judicial one and that, therefore, it could be withdrawn/cancelled only when there was an
express power vested in the CIT under the Income Tax Act to do so. Since there was no such express
power, resort could not be had to Section 21 of the GC Act to bring about that result.
99. The above decisions are distinguishable on facts and are inapplicable to the case on hand for the
reason that the Court is unable to accept the proposition put forth by the Petitioners that the
decision of the State Government to establish the OAT was a quasi- judicial one. While the SAT by
itself performs a judicial function, the decision of the State and Central Governments to ether
establish it under Article 323-A (1) read with Section 4 (2) of the AT Act, or to abolish it, cannot be
said to be anything but an administrative one. The Court would hasten to add that this distinction
becomes important only for the purpose of answering the question whether such a decision can be
rescinded by invoking Section 21 of the GC Act.
100. The Court is at this stage not suggesting that because the decision may be an administrative
one, it is not amenable to judicial review. After the decision in A.K. Kraipak v. Union of India AIR
1970 SC 150, the distinction between an administrative and a quasi-judicial power was obliterated in
the context of the question whether an administrative order could also be tested on the touchstone
of justness and fairness. The Supreme Court in the said decision explained:
―The dividing line between an administrative power and a quasi-judicial power is
quite thin and is being gradually obliterated. For determining whether a power is an
administrative power or a quasi-judicial power one has to look to the nature of the
power conferred, the person or persons on whom it is conferred, the framework of
the law conferring that power, the consequences ensuing from the exercise of that
power and the manner in which that power is expected to be exercised. Under our
Constitution the rule of law pervades over the entire field of administration. Every
organ of the State under our Constitution is regulated and controlled by the rule of
law. In a welfare State like ours it is inevitable that the jurisdiction of the
administrative bodies is increasing at a rapid rate. The concept of rule of law would
lose its vitality if the instrumentalities of the State are not charged with the duty of
discharging their functions in a fair and just manner. The requirement of acting
judicially in essence is nothing but a requirement to act justly and fairly and not
arbitrarily or capriciously. The procedures which are considered inherent in the
exercise of a judicial power are merely those which facilitate if not ensure a just and
fair decision. In recent years the concept of quasi-judicial power has been undergoing
a radical change. What was considered as an administrative power some years back is
now being considered as a quasi- judicial power.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 34
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
101. Thus, even if the act of rescinding a notification establishing the OAT is termed as an
administrative order, it can still be judicially reviewed on the known parameters in the realm of
administrative law. That is not to say however, that it is an order to which Section 21 of the GC Act
cannot apply. For that purpose it will still have to be seen whether in fact, as the Petitioners suggest,
the impugned notification is a quasi-judicial order.
102. The distinctions between administrative and quasi-judicial orders have been attempted to be
drawn in the past. In Indian National Congress (I) (supra) the Supreme Court observed that ―the
presence of a lis or contest between contending parties before a statutory authority, in the absence
of any other attributes of a quasi-judicial authority is sufficient to hold that such a statutory
authority is a quasi judicial authority. However, in the absence of a lis before a statutory authority,
the authority would be quasi-judicial authority if it is required to act judicially.(cid:130)
103. A clear example of what could be termed as a purely administrative function was the decision in
State of Bombay v. Kushaldas Advani AIR 1950 SC 222. There, the Respondent was a tenant of a
flat. On 26th February 1946, the Bombay Government requisitioned the flat under Section 3 of the
Bombay Land Requisition Ordinance 1947, and allotted it to another refugee from Sind. On 4th
March 4 1946, the Petitioner filed a petition for a writ of certiorari. The Bombay High Court granted
it upon which the Government went in appeal to the Supreme Court. Section 3 of the Ordinance
read as follows:
―Requisition of land--If in the opinion of the Provincial Government it is necessary or
expedient to do so, the Provincial Government may by order in writing requisition
any land for any public purpose:
Provided that no land used for the purpose of public religious worship or for any
purpose which the Provincial Government may specify by notification in the Official
Gazette shall be requisitioned under this section.
104. The Supreme Court in State of Bombay v. Kushaldas Advani (supra) by a majority of 4:2 agreed
with the contention of the Appellant State that under S. 3 of the Ordinance the decision of the
Provincial Government to requisition certain premises was ―clearly a matter of its opinion and
therefore not liable to be tested by any objective standard.(cid:130) It was held that the decision as to
whether the premises were required for a public purpose was also a matter for the opinion of the
Provincial Government, and not a matter for judicial investigation, and therefore the making of the
order was in no sense a quasi-judicial decision, but an administrative or ministerial order.
Therefore, the High Court could not have issued a certiorari to interfere with the decision.
105. In the present case too, the decision to establish the OAT in terms of Section 4 (2) of the AT Act,
or the decision to dismantle it subsequently, cannot be characterised as a quasi-judicial order. It did
not involve any lis or dispute between parties that required to be decided applying the principles of
natural justice. The decision whether or not to have an SAT was based on a subjective satisfaction of
the governments and was of universal application, not tailored to the facts of a particular case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 35
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
106. Viewed objectively since the very process of establishing the OAT involved a proposal by the
State Government, without which it could never have been established, it is difficult to accept the
proposition put forth by the Petitioners that the State Government cannot be, at a subsequent point
in time, for valid reasons, withdraw such request. In other words, it is difficult to countenance the
proposition that once the State Government agrees to activate the proposal to establish an OAT, and
that proposal is accepted by the Central Government culminating in its establishment by a
notification, it can at no point in time thereafter be abolished even if the State Government feels that
the circumstances do not warrant its continuation. Of course, the Court will have to ask whether the
exercise of the power under Section 21 of the GC Act is inconsistent with the subject-matter, context
and effect of the provisions of the AT Act? In this context, it requires to be observed that as long as
the disputes which were pending adjudication before the OAT are not left in the lurch, and their
continued adjudication by a competent judicial forum is ensured, there can be no legal objection to
the exercise of the power under Section 21 of the GC Act to rescind the notification establishing the
OAT.
107. To summarise the discussion thus far, the Court is of the view that the impugned decision to
abolish the OAT not being a quasi- judicial one but an administrative decision, there is no bar on the
State and Central Governments invoking Section 21 of the GC Act read with Section 4 (2) of the AT
act to rescind the notification earlier issued establishing the OAT. The power to rescind the
notification establishing the OAT is sustained also because no prejudice is being caused to the
litigants whose cases are pending in the OAT. The pending cases, and the cases to be instituted
hereafter, will be heard in the High Court. Therefore, the Court sustains the argument of the
Opposite Parties in the instant case that the invocation of Section 21 of the GC Act does not result in
either the extinguishment of the cases pending before the OAT without an alternative forum or any
consequential denial of justice.
108. Tied to the argument of the Petitioners that the impugned notification is in the nature of a
quasi-judicial order, are the incidental arguments that are required to be dealt with. In view of the
conclusion reached by this Court hereinbefore that the impugned decision to abolish the OAT is
administrative one and not quasi-judicial, the contention of the Petitioners that it had to be in
compliance of the principles of natural justice requires to be rejected. With the litigants being
assured of the continued adjudication of their cases by the High Court, there was no prejudice
caused and therefore there was no requirement of the Governments of the State and the Centre
having to afford a hearing to the ‗stakeholders' before taking such decision. Consequently, the
decisions in Dr. (Miss) Binapani Dei, S.L. Kapoor, Sahara India and Siemens Engineering (supra)
have no applicability to the present case.
109. Equally, the proposition that what cannot be done directly, cannot be done indirectly does not
have any applicability here nor do the decisions in Samundra Devi (supra) and Ram Chandra Singh
(supra). For the reasons discussed elaborately it is plain that there is no prohibition in Article 323-A
(1) of the Constitution or Section 4 (2) of the AT Act against the abolition of an SAT for reasons that
are germane and valid once the continued need for it ceases to exist.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 36
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
110. The contention that having once established the OAT, the Central Government was rendered
‗functus officio' and could not have further exercised the power to abolish it does not impress the
Court. The doctrine of functus officio is generally associated with judicial and quasi-judicial
functions and not with administrative functions. For instance in Raja Mohammad Amir Ahmad
Khan (supra) it was in the context of the Collector determining the duty as a quasi judicial body.
Once he performed that function, he was rendered "functus officio". Likewise, in S.N. Goyal (supra),
the conduct of disciplinary proceedings was a quasi-judicial function. In the present case, the
decision to abolish the OAT was purely an administrative function.
111. The contention based on the decision in A.R. Antulay v. R.S. Nayak (supra) that the power to
create or enlarge jurisdictions is legislative in character and Parliament alone can exercise it is
inapposite in the context of the present case. Here, neither is the jurisdiction of the High Court
being created nor enlarged. There is simply a revival of a jurisdiction that has always existed. In
other words, the jurisdiction of the High Court to adjudicate disputes involving government servants
has been revived by the Parliament by abolishing the OAT.
Issue (iv) and (v) Is the impugned notification abolishing the OAT arbitrary, irrational,
unreasonable and violative of Article 14?
112. The grounds of challenge to the impugned notification on the anvil of Article 14 are two-fold.
One is that it is arbitrary, unreasonable and irrational inasmuch as it is based on an incorrect
understanding of the decision in L. Chandra Kumar and there existed no material to arrive at the
conclusion that the OAT required to be abolished. The second is that relevant facts concerning the
impact the decision would have on the functioning of the High Court, defeating the object of speedy
justice, were overlooked.
113. In examining if a decision by the Government, whether quasi- judicial or administrative,
satisfies the test of non-arbitrariness the Court has to apply the principles of Wednesbury
reasonableness i.e. the tests set out in Associated Provincial Picture Houses v. Wednesbury
Corporation (1948) 1 KB 223. The Court will examine if ―the order was contrary to law, or relevant
factors were not considered, or irrelevant factors were considered; or the decision was one which no
reasonable person could have taken.(cid:130) In 1983, Lord Diplock in Council for Civil Services Union v.
Minister of Civil Services, (1983) 1 AC 768 (the GCHQ case) summarised the principles of judicial
review of administrative action as based upon one or other of the following viz. illegality, procedural
irregularity and irrationality.
114. The Supreme Court in Om Kumar v. union of India AIR 2000 SC 3689 elaborated on the
concept of ‗proportionality' that was suggested as an additional factor to be accounted for by Lord
Diplock in the GHCQ case. Justice M. Jagannadha Rao writing for the Court in Om Kumar (supra)
explained:
―By 'proportionality', we mean the question whether, while regulating exercise of
fundamental rights, the appropriate or least restrictive choice of measures has been
made by the legislature or the administrator so as to achieve the object of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 37
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
legislation or the purpose of the administrative order, as the case may be. Under the
principle, the Court will see that the legislature and the administrative authority
'maintain a proper balance between the adverse effects which the legislation or the
administrative order may have on the rights, liberties or interests of persons keeping
in mind the purpose which they were intended to serve'. The legislature and the
administrative authority are, however, given an area of discretion or a range of
choices but as to whether the choice made infringes the rights excessively or not is for
the Court. That is what is meant by proportionality.(cid:130)
115. The correspondence between the three main actors in the present case viz., the Government of
Odisha, the Government of India and the High Court of Orissa reveals that several factors were
taken into account in arriving at the conclusion that the OAT required to be abolished. The note
dated 16th September, 1995 submitted by the Government of Odisha to the Central Government
listed out the factors that were considered by the State Government. This included the effect of the
decision in L. Chandra Kumar, the working of the OAT with reference to the expenditure incurred in
the years 2014-15 and 2015-16 (both Plan and Non-Plan), the ‗institution, Disposal and Pendency
of cases for the year 2014', and the arrangements being contemplated to account for the impact the
move would have on the functioning of the High Court. Therefore, there was sufficient material to
support the view of the State Government that OAT was not served the purpose of delivery of speedy
justice to the litigants.
116. On its part when the Central Government responded to the request by the letter dated 12th
January, 2016 it sought to know the views of the High Court on the proposal for the abolition of the
OAT and what the legal basis would be for the transfer of the cases pending before the OAT to the
High Court.
117. The procedure adopted by the Central Government which required the State Government to
elicit the views of the High Court on the proposal for abolishing the OAT may not be one
contemplated by Article 323-A (1) of the Constitution or Section 4 (2) of the AT Act. However, that
does not make the procedure illegal or arbitrary. On the other hand, the failure to consult the High
Court on a decision that would directly impact its functioning might have rendered the decision
arbitrary and unreasonable. The prior consultation with the High Court on the administrative side
was reflective of the fact that both the Central government and the State Government took into
account a very relevant factor viz., the judicial impact the decision to abolish the OAT would have on
the working of the High Court. Further, it is evident that the Central Government agreed to go ahead
with notifying the rescinding of the earlier notification of the establishment of the OAT, thus
bringing about its abolition, only after the High Court conveyed its concurrence and not otherwise.
The Central Government appears to have followed a similar procedure in the matter of the abolition
of the HPAT and the APAT as well. The Court is, therefore, unable to accept the submission of the
Petitioners that this procedure was extra-legal and invalidated the decision to abolish the OAT.
118. Also, the Court finds no illegality or impropriety attaching to the decision to transfer all the
cases pending in the OAT to this Court. This is nothing but a restoration of the status quo ante the
date of the commencement of the OAT. With its abolition, the litigants waiting before the OAT for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 38
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
adjudication of their cases cannot obviously be left in the lurch. If there was no OAT, they would
have filed their petitions in the High Court. It is that very position that is sought to be achieved by
the move to transfer all pending cases to the High Court. Further, the Full Court of the High Court
on its administrative side had before it all the correspondence between the Governments inter se
and with the High Court. The High Court, after considering all of the materials, conveyed its
concurrence to the proposal to abolish the OAT. This was a necessary step furthering the ends of
justice and with a view to ensuring that the litigants before the OAT were not left high and dry.
119. The process involved in the decision making, which alone is the scope and ambit of the judicial
review being undertaken by this Court in these petitions, satisfies the legal requirements spelt out in
Wednesbury viz., that relevant materials have been accounted for and those not relevant have been
eschewed. Further, the test of proportionality expounded in the GHCQ case viz., ensuring that a
proper balance is maintained between the adverse effects which the ―administrative order may have
on the rights, liberties or interests of persons keeping in mind the purpose which they were intended
to serve(cid:130) stands satisfied in the present case. The executive and judicial branches of the State have
through active consultation ensured that the litigants before the OAT are not denied justice and that
the pending cases stand transferred to the High Court to be heard by it.
120. The view taken by State Government that as a result of the decision of the Supreme Court in L.
Chandra Kumar one more tier of litigation had been added thereby not subserving the need for
speedy justice cannot be termed as being based on a misunderstanding of the said decision. It is
interesting to note that this was a factor adverted to by the Law Commission of India (LCI) when it
submitted to the Government of India in 1998 its 162nd Report on the ‗Functioning of the CAT'.
The LCI observed (at p. 112):
―The Supreme Court has laid down in L. Chandra Kumar's case (supra) that an
aggrieved party can have recourse to the jurisdiction of the respective High Court
under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India, against the decision of the Central
Administrative Tribunal. The repercussions of this development of law have already
been felt. The Karnataka Government has sought to abolish the Karnataka State
Administrative Tribunal. In the news items in the recent past, it has appeared that
even the Central Government is proposing to abolish CAT. The remedy of judicial
review by the High Court provided against the decision of the Administrative
Tribunal and a possible further appeal to the Supreme Court under Article 136 is not
only time- consuming but also expensive. Besides this, the various High Courts may
interpret differently any statutory provision concerning the service conditions
governing the employees. Thus the lack of uniformity in the High Court decisions and
consequently in CAT benches will create confusion in the mind of the litigant. It will
further make the public lose faith in seeking justice through the judiciary, and thus
undermine the democratic norms. The Commission is of the considered view that a
National Appellate Administrative Tribunal be constituted on the lines of the
National Consumer Disputes Redressal Commission under section 20 of the
Consumer Protection Act, 1986. It shall be manned by a retired Chief Justice of a
High Court or a retired Judge of the Supreme Court of India. An appeal, on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 39
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
substantial questions of law and fact may lie to the proposed Appellate forum, against
the decision of the Central Administrative Tribunal. The proposed forum may have
branches all over the country to reduce the cost of litigation to the litigant. The
decision of the proposed Appellate court will be binding on all benches of CAT. The
proposed forum will be of status higher than a High Court but below the Supreme
Court. An appeal may lie against the decision of the proposed appellate forum to the
Supreme Court.(cid:130)
121. The impact of the decision in L. Chandra Kumar on the functioning of the ATs prompted the
LCI to submit its 215 th report in 2008 exclusively on that topic. The report titled: ‗L. Chandra
Kumar be revisited by Larger Bench of Supreme Court' made a strong pitch for establishing an
Appellate Tribunal by amending the AT Act. It recommended, inter alia, that:
―8.2 We feel that if there may be an impression that there has to be at least one
appeal provided against the orders passed by the Tribunal before the matter may
reach the Supreme Court, intra-tribunal appeal, similar to the one provided in every
High Court either by way of letters patent appeal or a writ appeal, can be provided
under the Act of 1985 itself. By way of suitable amendment thus brought about in the
Act of 1985, a provision for intra- tribunal appeal can be made so that an order
passed by a single Member Bench would be amenable to appeal before a Division
Bench, and the decision of a Division Bench can be challenged before a Bench
consisting of three or more Members. Four zones in the country, viz., North, East,
West, and South, can be made where the appeals from various Benches may be filed.
This may only involve creation of, at the most, eight to ten posts of Members in the
Tribunal. After the decision recorded by an appellate Bench, the matter can be taken
to the Supreme Court by way of special leave petition.(cid:130)
122. The above report was submitted in the wake of the report of the Parliamentary Standing
Committee on the AT (Amendment) Bill 2006, which has been referred to earlier in this judgment.
While these suggestions do not appear to have found favour with the Parliament, and the
amendments did not see the light of the day, they do point to the fact that the ATs were being viewed
as not subserving the object for which they were established viz., delivering speedy justice to the
litigants whose cases were before them.
123. In this context, the observations of the Supreme Court in the MTAT Abolition case are relevant.
There a similar contention put forth on behalf of the Appellant in that case viz., that the decision of
the M.P and Chhatisgarh Governments was "illegal, irrelevant and ill-founded" was expressly
negatived by the Supreme Court. After quoting the passages from L. Chandra Kumar the Supreme
Court in the MPAT Abolition case observed as under:
"57. From the discussion hereinabove, it is clear that after the Constitution
(Forty-second Amendment) Act, 1976, the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985 came
to be enacted by Parliament. The position prevailed at that time was the law laid
down by the Constitution Bench of this Court in S.P. Sampath Kumar. Invoking
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 40
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
sub-section (2) of Section 4 of the Administrative Tribunals Act, 1985, the State of
Madhya Pradesh requested the Central Government to constitute a Tribunal for civil
servants in the State. It was also on the basis of pronouncement of law in S.P.
Sampath Kumar. The notification was issued by the Central Government in 1988 and
the State Administrative Tribunal was established for the State of Madhya Pradesh.
At that time, as per well-settled legal position, decisions rendered by the
Administrative Tribunals constituted under the Act of 1985 were "final" subject to
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 136 of the Constitution. No person aggrieved
by a decision of State Administrative Tribunal could approach the High Court of
Madhya Pradesh in view of Clause (d) of Article 323-A (2) of the Constitution read
with Section 28 of the Act of 1985 and the declaration of law in S.P. Sampath Kumar.
If, in view of subsequent development of law in L. Chandra Kumar, the State of
Madhya Pradesh felt that continuation of State Administrative Tribunal would be
"one more tier" in the administration of justice inasmuch as after a decision is
rendered by the State Administrative Tribunal, an aggrieved party could approach
the High Court under Article 226/227 of the Constitution of India and, hence, it felt
that such tribunal should not be continued further, in our opinion, it cannot be said
that such a decision is arbitrary, irrational or unreasonable. From the
correspondence between the State of Madhya Pradesh and Central Government as
well as from the affidavit in reply, it is clear that the decision of this Court in L.
Chandra Kumar had been considered by the State of Madhya Pradesh in arriving at a
decision to abolish State Administrative Tribunal. Such a consideration, in our
opinion, was relevant, germane and valid. It, therefore cannot be said that the
decision was illegal, invalid or improper."
124. Further, the Supreme Court in the MPAT Abolition case observed as under:
"71. Thus, from the correspondence between the State of Madhya Pradesh and the
Central Government and from various letters and communications and also from the
decision which has been taken by the Cabinet, it is clear that the State Government
took into account a vital consideration that after the decision of this Court in L.
Chandra Kumar, an aggrieved party could approach the High Court, the object for
establishment of the Tribunal was defeated. In our opinion, in the light of the facts
before the Court, it cannot be said that the decision to abolish State Administrative
Tribunal taken by the State of Madhya Pradesh can be quashed and set aside as mala
fide".
125. It was argued before the Supreme Court in the MPAT Abolition case that no survey had been
conducted by the State Government and no reasons were recorded why the MPAT had been
abolished. The Supreme Court in that context observed as under:
"73. We are unable to uphold even this argument. In our judgment, if a decision is
illegal, unconstitutional or ultra vires, it has to be set aside irrespective of laudable
object behind it. But once we hold that it was within the power of the State
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 41
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
Government to continue or not to continue State Administrative Tribunal and it was
open to the State Government to take such a decision, it cannot be set aside merely
on the ground that such a decision was not advisable in the facts of the case or that
other decision could have been taken. While exercising power of judicial review, this
Court cannot substitute its own decision for the decision of the Government."
126. The above observations are a complete answer to similar contentions advanced by the
Petitioners before this Court. With there being sufficient materials on record to support the decision
of the State of Odisha to seek the abolition of the OAT, it cannot be said that the said decision is
arbitrary, irrational or violative of Articles 14, 19 and 21 of the Constitution. The submissions in this
regard by the Petitioners are rejected.
127. Learned counsel for the parties have placed before this Court materials to demonstrate the
mounting arrears in this Court over the past few years. At the same time, as against the sanctioned
strength of twenty seven judges, the working strength has rarely exceeded twenty in the last twenty
years. It is questioned therefore by the Petitioners, perhaps not without justification, whether the
litigant before the High Court whose case has been transferred from the OAT can reasonably hope
for a quicker disposal of her case? Further, it is pointed out that the transferred case is likely to be
heard by a learned Single Judge of this Court with an appeal from that decision to the DB. Perhaps
this was lost sight of by the State and Central governments when they concluded that by abolishing
the OAT an additional tier of litigation could be avoided. There would in any event now be two tiers
of litigation, in the High Court itself.
128. These are hard facts that cannot be disputed. At the same time, the question is whether the
High Court can step into the shoes of the administrators and interfere with the decision only
because another view is possible to be taken? To repeat the words of the Supreme Court in the
MPAT Abolition case: ―it cannot be set aside merely on the ground that such a decision was not
advisable in the facts of the case or that other decision could have been taken. While exercising
power of judicial review, this Court cannot substitute its own decision for the decision of the
Government.(cid:130)
129. The further fact is that the High Court was consulted on this issue and the Full Court of the
High Court on the administrative side concurred with the proposal of the Central and State
Government that the OAT was required to be abolished as it was not serving the purpose for which it
was established. This was obviously with the expectation of the Bench strength increasing in due
course. The performance of the Tribunals generally has come in for adverse comment by the
Supreme Court in L. Chandra Kumar as well as Madras Bar Association (supra). From the point of
view of the litigant, when presented with a choice of going with her case first before the OAT or
before the High Court, it would not be surprising if she opts for the latter course. If she is going to
have to wait before the OAT, she might prefer waiting before the High Court even to begin with.
130. It appears that with passage of time in the experimental phase of ATs, a call had to be taken by
many of the State Governments about the efficacy of continuing with the SATs based on their
performance and the outcomes. They have tried the experiment for over three decades and feel the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 42
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
need for a change. It may not be proper for the High Court to decide to overturn that decision only
because a different view is possible. Again from the point of view of the litigant unless the ‗bypass'
of a Tribunal is as good as the ‗highway' of a High Court, the assurance of equal and fair justice may
be rendered illusory. This is reflected in the following recommendations of the LCI in its 272nd
report submitted in 2017:
―8.21 The Commission is of the view that in order to achieve the goal for which the
Tribunals have been established i.e., to reduce the burden of Courts, it is desirable
that only in those cases where the Statute establishing the Tribunal does not have a
provision for the establishment of an Appellate Tribunal for hearing an appeal from
the decision of said Tribunal, the High Court may be allowed to be approached by
way of an Appeal against the decision of a Tribunal. Every order emanating from the
Tribunal or its Appellate Forum, wherever it exists, attains finality. Any such order
may be challenged by the aggrieved party before the Division Bench of the High
Court having territorial jurisdiction over the Tribunal or its Appellate Forum.
8.22 For the effective working of this idea, it will be necessary that the Appellate
Tribunals established must act judiciously and that such Appellate Tribunals should
be constituted at par with the High Courts and the members appointed in these
Tribunals should possess the qualifications equivalent to that of the High Court
Judges.
8.23 If appeals against the decision of Appellate Tribunals are brought before the
concerned High Courts in a routine manner, then the entire purpose of establishing
Tribunals will get frustrated. Therefore, the Commission is of the view that the
aggrieved party against the decision of such Appellate Tribunal should be able to
approach the Supreme Court on the grounds of Public or National importance and
not before any other authority.(cid:130)
131. We appear to be far from elevating the status of the ATs to that of the High Courts by adopting
the changes suggested by the LCI. The experiment that commenced in 1986, by establishment of the
OAT, in the expectation of speeder justice for government servants, has stood belied by the passage
of time. In the circumstances, the decision to discontinue the OAT in the expectation that revival of
those cases before the High Court would offer a better deal to the litigant, cannot be termed an
arbitrary or unreasonable. One expectation is replaced by another. These are difficult choices with
which beyond a point the High Court cannot interfere. This expectation cannot be said to be
unfounded at this stage. Only the passage of time will tell us whether this expectation was justified.
It is too early in the day to reject it as unreasonable.
132. The proposition of ‗non-traverse' does not impress this Court. There is nothing in the
pleadings that lays a factual foundation for the allegation, in para 7 of the petition, that the decision
to abolish the OAT was motivated by Government servants wanting to avoid contempt proceedings
before the OAT. In any event, all the cases would be transferred to be heard by the High Court and
those Government servants cannot avoid facing the contempt proceedings there. When the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 43
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
averment itself stands on non-existent foundation, its non-traverse does not advance the case of the
Petitioners that the impugned notification is an instance of malice in law or based on extraneous
considerations. The reliance by the Petitioners on the decisions in Ghorpade (supra) or Sushil
Kumar (supra) is, therefore, misplaced.
Issue (vi): Is the impugned notification bad in law since it is not expressly stated to be in the name of
the President of India?
133. It was vehemently argued on behalf of the Petitioners that since the impugned notification
dated 2nd August, 2019 is not expressed to be issued in the name of the President, it is invalid.
Further, it was urged that a mere decision on the file, without it culminating in a properly issued
order, was not a valid decision that could be acted upon.
134. The above submission overlooks the legal position that the requirement in Article 77 (1) [and
correspondingly in Article 166] of the Constitution is not mandatory but directory. In Dattatreya
Moreshwar Pangarkar (supra), Justice Das speaking for the majority explained as under:
"Strict compliance with the requirements of Article 166 gives an immunity to the
order in that it cannot be challenged on the ground that it is not an order made by the
Governor. If, therefore, the requirements of that article are not complied with, the
resulting immunity cannot be claimed by the State. This, however, does not vitiate
the order itself action to be expressed and authenticated in the manner therein laid
down but an omission to comply with those provisions does not render the executive
action a nullity. Therefore' all that the procedure established by law requires is that
the appropriate Government must take a decision as to whether the detention order
should be confirmed or not under section 11(1)."
135. This was reiterated in State of Bombay v. Purushottam Jog Naik (1952) SCR 674 and reaffirmed
in Ghaio Mall and Sons v. State of Delhi (1959) SCR 1424.In R. Chitralekha (supra), a Constitution
Bench of the Supreme Court reiterated the proposition that the provisions of Article 166 of the
Constitution are only directory and not mandatory in character and, even if they are not complied
with their validity is not impaired as long as it can be established as a question of fact that the
impugned order was issued in fact by the State Government or the Governor.
136. Again in Narmada Bachao Andolan (supra), it was held as under:
"27. The decision of any Minister or officer under the Rules of Business made under
Articles 77(3) and 166(3) of the Constitution is the decision of the President or the
Governor respectively and these articles do not provide for "delegation". That is to
say, that decisions made and actions taken by the Minister or officer under the Rules
of Business cannot be treated as exercise of delegated power in real sense, but are
deemed to be the actions of the President or Governor, as the case may be, that are
taken or done by them on the aid and advice of the Council of Ministers."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 44
O.A.T. Bar Association vs Union Of India And Others .... Opposite ... on 7 June, 2021
137. Consequently, this Court is not persuaded that in the present case the failure to mention in the
impugned notification that it has been issued on behalf of the President of India vitiates it.
Conclusion
138. For all of the aforementioned reasons, the Court is of the view that no ground has been made
out for the Court to interfere with the impugned notification dated 2nd August 2019. Accordingly,
all the writ petitions are dismissed. But in the circumstances, there shall be no order as to costs.
139. In light of the above conclusion, since all the pending cases before the OAT would automatically
stand transferred to this Court, the interim order dated 7th August 2019 is no longer required to be
continued. It is accordingly vacated.
140. As the restrictions due to resurgence of COVID-19 situation are continuing, learned counsel for
the parties may utilize a printout of the order available in the High Court's website, at par with
certified copy, subject to attestation by the concerned advocate, in the manner prescribed vide
Court's Notice No.4587, dated 25 th March, 2020 as modified by Court's Notice No.4798, dated 15
th April, 2021.
(S. Muralidhar) Chief Justice ( B.P. Routray) Judge K.C. Bisoi/Sr.Secy.
S.K. Jena/M. Panda/PA S. Guin/Sr. Steno
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/19631342/ 45
