Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
Bench: Jyoti Saran, Chakradhari Sharan Singh
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT PATNA
Miscellaneous Appeal No.481 of 2015
======================================================
Om Prakash Bhagat, son of Dharmnath Bhagat, Resident of Town Narpatganj, P.S.- Narpatganj,
District- Araria.
... ... Appellant/s Versus Smt. Gauri Devi, daughter of Birendra Bhagat, resident of Village and P.O.-
Jeewachhpur, P.S.- Bhimpur, District- Supaul, presently residing at Murliganj, P.S. Murliganj,
District- Madhepura.
... ... Respondent/s ======================================================
Appearance :
For the Appellant/s : Mr. Uma Shankar Prasad, Sr. Advocate Ms. Meera Kumari,
Advocate Mr.Sunil Kumar, Advocate For the Respondent/s : Ms. Anju Mishra,
A d v o c a t e
======================================================
CORAM: HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE JYOTI SARAN and HONOURABLE MR.
JUSTICE CHAKRADHARI SHARAN SINGH C.A.V. JUDGMENT (Per:
HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE CHAKRADHARI SHARAN SINGH) Date :
16-08-2019 The appellant-husband has questioned the legality of the judgment and
order dated 27.08.2015, passed by the learned Principal Judge, Family court, Araria
in Matrimonial Suit No. 11 of 2002 whereby an application of the appellant seeking
dissolution of his marriage with the respondent filed under Section 13 of the Hindu
Marriage Act (hereinafter referred to as 'the Act') has been dismissed. The appellant
had sought the decree of divorce on the grounds of cruelty and desertion.
2. The marriage between them was admittedly solemnised on 13.07.1994 at the parental home of the
respondent Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 at Murliganj in the district of
Madhepura. The appellant is a resident of Narpatganj in the district of Araria. The appellant's family
has another residential establishment at village Jeebachhpur in the district of Supaul.
3. It has been the case of the appellant that nearly a fortnight, after the marriage, the respondent
had gone back to her parental home with her brother and it was only on initiative and persuasion of
the appellant that the respondent returned to the matrimonial home on 22.02.1995, after a ritual
called 'Ruksadi' or 'Bidai' or 'second marriage'. Again, after short stay with the appellant, the
respondent went back to her parental home with her brother on 15.03.1995, just before Holi festival,
as per the customs. From March 1995 to April 1996, the respondent stayed at her parental home
despite persuasion and request made by the appellant but the appellant always showed reluctance in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 1
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
joining the appellant's company. She, however, came to village Jeebachhpur in 1996 where the
appellant and the respondent stayed together for some time and went thereafter to Narpatganj. The
respondent became pregnant, whereafter she again went back to her parental home with her
mother, according to the appellant, without his consent and to his annoyance. A female child was
born to them when the respondent was at her parental home, whereafter Patna High Court MA
No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 she came back to village Jeebachhpur. The appellant and the
respondent lived together at Jeebachhpur and Narpatganj for nearly 9-10 months. The respondent
again conceived. The mother of the respondent was insisting for the respondent being taken to the
parental home for better care during pregnancy period despite all facilities made available to the
respondent in the matrimonial home. The mother of the respondent, allegedly took her from
Narpatganj to the parental home at Murliganj deceitfully, without the appellant's consent and to his
grave annoyance and inconvenience. A second female child was born some time in 1998-99. It has
been alleged in the application seeking divorce that during this period, when the respondent stayed
with the appellant, the respondent's behaviour was abnormal and whimsical with the appellant. It is
said that the respondent and her mother behaved with the appellant inappropriately and many a
times the appellant was assaulted by the respondent, when the appellant approached her and
demanded cohabitation. She declined to cook food 'at time'(sic) and she did not serve meal to the
appellant and his parents and 'thus she misbehaved which caused serious difficulties in the family'.
The appellant further alleged that the respondent's behaviour and habits were extremely unbearable
and she used to go to Murliganj and come back to Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt.
16-08-2019 matrimonial home with her henchman. Since the respondent had created an unhealthy
atmosphere because of her conduct, a Panchayati was held on 19.05.1995 and a Panchnama was
prepared. The respondent, however, continued with her behaviour, ignoring the terms of
Panchnama and withdrew herself from the appellant's society. She was claiming separation by
transfer of the property in the house situate in village Jeebachhpur and she, thus, caused mental
torture to the appellant, the only son of his parents.
4. He further alleged that the respondent poured kerosene oil on a bundle of jute kept in a separate
house and set it ablaze. She attempted to burn herself and committed suicide.
5. Alleging desertion, he pleaded in the application that the respondent started living separately,
refusing to live in the association of the appellant and did not allow him any opportunity to
cohabitate. The application seeking dissolution of marriage was filed in 2002, as according to the
appellant, respondent had left the company of the appellant since 1998.
6. It is noteworthy that in the application seeking divorce, the appellant did not take any plea of
adultery against the respondent, as a ground for dissolution of marriage.
7. Controverting the assertions made in the application seeking dissolution of marriage a written
statement was filed. The Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 allegations of cruelty
and intentionally leaving the company of the appellant were denied. She asserted that she had
always been willing to be in company with the appellant and discharge her marital obligations. She
asserted that, as a matter of act, she always attempted to be with the appellant but she was
compelled to live at Jeebachhpur, because of ill-treatment meted out to her by her in-laws. She also
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 2
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
asserted that she was very respectful to her in-laws and ready to remain in company with the
appellant. She never left her matrimonial home at any point of time without the appellant's consent.
She denied completely the allegation of her misbehaviour with her in-laws and demand of any
separation in the joint family property. Since the respondent had given birth to two female children,
her in-laws and the appellant were planning marriage of the appellant with another girl in Nepal,
which was objected to by the respondent, leading to filing of the divorce case, with baseless
allegations. Because the respondent was being ill-treated by her in-laws and the husband, she filed
criminal case under Section 498-A of the IPC. She expressed her willingness to live with the
appellant and discharge marital obligations, in her written statement.
8. Based on rival pleadings, the learned Principal Judge, Family Court, Araria famed the following
issues for determination Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 :
"(i) Whether the case, as framed, is maintainable?
(ii) Whether the petitioner has got any cause of action sue this respondent?
(iii) Whether the abnormal behaviour of respondent cause mental and physical
torture to the petitioner?
(iv) Whether the respondent voluntarily deserted the petitioner as such refused to
spending life as husband and wife without any just reason?
(v) Whether the petitioner is entitled to a decree of divorce?
(vi) What other relief or reliefs, the petitioner is entitled to?"
9. In the background of the issues so framed, the parties adduced evidence, oral and documentary.
Eight (8) witnesses deposed for the appellant before the court below whereas three (3) witnesses
deposed in favour of the respondent.
10. Dealing with Issue No. 3, as noted above, the learned Principal Judge recorded his findings that
the pleadings of the appellant was vague and sketchy, inadequate to make out a case for grant of
decree of divorce on the ground of cruelty. Learned Principal Judge also recorded his finding that
the allegation of cruelty could not be substantiated, even on consideration of the depositions of the
PWs.
11. Dealing with Issue No. 4 i.e. whether respondent Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt.
16-08-2019 had voluntarily deserted the appellant, the leaned Principal Judge opined that the onus
was on the appellant to prove that respondent had deserted him without any reasonable cause and
that despite genuine efforts made by the appellant to bring the respondent back, the respondent
refused to live with the appellant, which he failed to discharge. Learned Principal Judge accordingly
recorded that the allegation of desertion could not be proved. On the point of adultery, learned
Principal Judge has recorded in paragraph 11 of the impugned judgment that the faint allegation of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 3
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
adultery has been levelled against the respondent in the pleadings and testimony of witnesses but in
absence of the adulterer as party to the proceeding, the plea of adultery could not be dealt with.
12. After having decided the main issues No. 3 and 4, other issues, which were formal in nature,
have been decided and considering the pleadings and oral and documentary evidence adduced,
learned Principal Judge finally concluded in his impugned judgment that the appellant had failed to
establish a case for issuance of decree of divorce on the ground of cruelty and desertion.
13. We have heard Mr. Uma Shankar Prasad, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Ms. Meera Kumari
and Mr. Sunil Kumar for the appellant and Ms. Anju Mishra, learned Advocate Patna High Court
MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 appearing on behalf of respondent.
14. Before we proceed to discuss the matter on merits, we must indicate that we made several
serious efforts for amicable resolution of dispute between the contesting parties keeping in mind the
welfare of the family and the two children born out of the marriage, who have now crossed 20 years
of age and are yet to be married. Despite the fact that earlier, judgment was reserved in this case on
13.07.2018, noticing some hope of amicable resolution of the matrimonial dispute between the
parties, when the matter was listed on 20.07.2018, the Court had desired the parties to meet in the
Chambers of Dr. Uma Shankar Prasad, learned Senior Advocate. This matter was thereafter taken
up on several dates. Following order, which was passed on 20.07.2018, needs to be noticed at this
stage:
"The parties have been requested to explore the possibility of resolution amicably.
Let a meeting take place of the parties in the Chambers of Dr. Uma Shankar Prasad in
between 28th to 30th of July, 2018 as regarding future course to be taken in the case
of children.
Let the matter come up on 3rd of August, 2018 under the same heading allowing the
parties to inform as to the outcome of the meeting."
15. The lower court records have been received. We Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt.
16-08-2019 have perused the records and we have given our anxious consideration to the pleadings
of the parties, evidence adduced by them as well as the submissions made on their behalf.
16. Dr. Uma Shankar Prasad, learned Senior Counsel for the appellant has submitted that the court
below has committed serious error of law by holding the allegations of cruelty made in the plaint to
be a vague and on the basis of the depositions of the witnesses, a case for grant of decree of
dissolution of marriage could not be made out on the ground of cruelty and desertion. He has
submitted that the evidence adduced at the trial has not been appreciated by the learned Principal
Judge in correct perspective and the findings recorded by him are totally erroneous. He has
submitted that even if there was no specific pleading in the plaint to make out a case for dissolution
of marriage on the ground of cruelty and desertion, if both the parties had led evidence on the issue,
then the strict rule of specific pleading could not defeat the cause of the appellant. In support of his
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 4
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
submission he has relied on Supreme Court's decision in case of Bhagwati Prasad vs. Chandramaul
(AIR 1966 SC 735). He has submitted that it is evident from the pleadings and evidence on record
that respondent had refused cohabitation with the appellant without any justification and, therefore,
a case of mental cruelty has been Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 made out.
According to him, the pleadings and evidence show that the appellant had to suffer acute pain and
agony which made it impossible for the appellant to live with the respondent as husband and wife.
He has relied on Supreme Court decision in case of Samar Ghosh vs. Jaya Ghosh reported in (2007)
4 SCC 511 and has contented that since there has been a long period of continuous separation
between the parties, it can be easily concluded that the matrimonial bond between the two is beyond
repair. He has submitted that the long separation between the appellant and the respondent ever
since 1999 leads to a clear inference that there has been irretrievable breakdown of marriage.
Relying on the said decision he has submitted that refusal by the respondent to cook food may also
amount to mental cruelty and according to him, the court below erred in holding that no case of
cruelty could be established on the basis of pleadings and evidence adduced on behalf of the
appellant before the learned Principal Judge in the suit for divorce.
17. Reliance has also been placed on Supreme Court decision in case of Raj Talreja vs. Kavita Talreja
(AIR 2017 SC 2138) to submit that the conduct of respondent should be held to be causing mental
cruelty to the appellant.
18. On the basis of rival submissions made on behalf of Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt.
16-08-2019 the parties and materials available on record, following are the points which have
emerged for determination in the present appeal :-
(i) Whether the appellant was able to establish a case of cruelty against the
respondent, sufficient for grant of a decree for dissolution of marriage?
(ii) Whether on the basis of evidence adduced before the court below in the
matrimonial suit the appellant could establish his case of desertion as ground for
dissolution of the marriage?
(iii) Whether on the ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage, a decree of
divorce should be granted, in the facts and circumstances of the present case?
(iv) Whether the learned Principal Judge, Family Court erred in refusing to grant
decree of divorce on the ground of cruelty and desertion.
19. What amounts to mental cruelty has been extensively discussed by the Supreme Court in case of
Samar Ghosh (supra), which has been followed and explained in subsequent judgment in case of Raj
Talveja vs. Kavita Talveja (supra). In case of Raj Talreja (supra) the Supreme Court has opined and
held that cruelty in matrimonial behaviour defies any definition and its categories can never been
closed. Whether the husband is cruel to his wife or the wife is cruel to her husband has to be
ascertained and judged by taking into account the entire facts Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015
dt. 16-08-2019 and circumstances of the given case and not by any pre- determined rigid formula.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 5
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
Cruelty in matrimonial cases can be of infinite variety - it may be subtle or even brutal and may be
by gesture and words, the Supreme Court observed.
20. The crucial aspect of the matter, which we need to consider in this matter, is as to whether the
evidence adduced by the appellant before the court below was sufficient to establish a case of
cruelty. For the said proposition we need to address the pleadings and evidence on record. We have
carefully seen the application filed by the appellant under Section 13 of the Act. The application
contains several allegations against the respondent blaming that the respondent did not behave
'appropriately' with the family members including the appellant and sometimes she withdrew her
association and conjugal company from the husband. There is nothing, however, in the pleading as
to in what manner and at what point of time and at what place the respondent did not behave with
the appellant 'appropriately'. Similarly, there is allegation against the respondent of pestering the
appellant and his family members for partition in the family/ transfer of family property in her
name.
21. We now need to refer to the evidence of witnesses who deposed before the court below.
Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019
22. The appellant, PW-8, filed his affidavited deposition before the court below stating that the
behaviour of the respondent was not good with the appellant and his parents, because of which a
Panchayati was held. He deposed that the respondent had not only set ablaze the jute bundles, she
had attempted to burn herself. According to him, the respondent refused to live with the appellant
since 1998. Because of her conduct, a criminal case was lodged for the offence punishable under
Section 436 and 504 of the Indian Penal Code against the respondent and in retaliation the
respondent filed a criminal case for the offence punishable under Section 498-A of the IPC. It is
evident from the evidence of the appellant (PW-8) that it does not refer to any specific instance of
alleged misbehaviour or cruelty on the part of the respondent. There is vague assertion that her
behaviour was not proper with him and his family members. He has given emphasis on the incident
when the respondent had put on fire the substantial quantity of jute and had attempted to burn
herself which had led to lodging of case under Sections 435 and 504 of the IPC. PW-1 Ram Narayan
Malakar has also not deposed anything specific on the point of cruelty. He has deposed that the
respondent had disturbed family peace because of which her mother-in-law had died. There is
nothing significant and specific in the deposition of Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt.
16-08-2019 PW-1 with reference to any incident which can be said to be constituting act of cruelty
committed by the respondent. In cross- examination, he had admitted that his father was a Bataidar
of the appellant. Similarly, PW-2 has also vaguely stated that the behaviour of the respondent was
not good with her in-laws and she had gone back to her parental home 5-7 days after the marriage.
In his cross-examination, however, though he admitted that he had never gone to the house of the
appellant, he deposed that because of the behaviour of the respondent, her mother-in-law
(appellant's mother) died. In cross-examination, he admitted that she died in Nepal and was not
knowing about her ailment leading to her death. Evidence of PW-3 is equally vague on the point of
behaviour of the respondent. PW-4 is cousin of the appellant. His deposition is equally vague.
According to him, behaviour of the respondent was not suitable with her in-laws and there used to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 6
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
be quarrel in the family, most of the time because of her. He further deposed that mother of the
appellant died of heart attack because of improper behaviour of the respondent. PW-5 is another
cousin of the appellant. According to him, since the respondent was quarrelsome and did not
discharge her marital obligations, her mother-in-law had left for Viratnagar where she died of heart
attack. He has vaguely commented upon 'conduct' of the Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt.
16-08-2019 respondent and at same time has expressed his ignorance about the persons with whom
the respondent was having illicit relationship. PW-6 is said to have been a party to the Panchayati
and he has also vaguely deposed that respondent's behaviour was improper because of which the
appellant's mother died. In cross- examination, however, he has said that he had no concern with
the affairs of the family of the appellant. PW-7 is the father of the appellant. He has deposed that
behaviour of the respondent with him and her husband was very poor. He further deposed that
mother of the respondent used to guide her for getting the land belonging to the appellant's family
transferred in her name. He is also not specific about any particular instance(s) for making out a
case of cruelty.
23. Examination-in-chief of the respondent as DW-1 was filed on affidavit. She deposed that she had
been dispossessed from her matrimonial home by the appellant without any reason. In her
cross-examination, she denied the allegation of her improper behaviour. In response to a query in
cross-examination with reference to acquittal of the persons named in the criminal case lodged by
her for offence punishable under Section 498-A of the IPC, she deposed that she could not take any
step against the judgment of acquittal because of her poor financial condition. It Patna High Court
MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 was also pointed out to her that despite her knowledge about the
illness of her husband, she did not even enquire about his well- being, the respondent expressed
ignorance about any such ailment. She specifically deposed that she did not have any information
about her husband's ailment, if any.
24. The daughters of the appellant and respondent also filed their examination-in-chief on affidavits
supporting the case of the respondent. From their deposition in examination-in-chief and
cross-examination, it appears that DW-2, the first daughter had attempted to contact the appellant
on phone so as to persuade him to pacify the relationship between the appellant and respondent but
the appellant did not respond properly. The evidence of 2nd daughter as DW-3 also supports the
case of the respondent. According to her, they were forcibly ousted from the house of the appellant.
25. On close scrutiny and appreciation of the evidence of witnesses, it is easily evincible that the
allegation of bad, improper, inappropriate behaviour of the respondent with the appellant and his
family members is totally vague. It has been vaguely stated that she refused to cook food and
misbehaved with her in-laws. It further transpires from the evidence that the in-laws of the
respondent were not happy with the respondent's interest in Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015
dt. 16-08-2019 music which she was fond of and took interest, despite the objection of her in-laws.
In this regard too, there is nothing specific either in the pleadings or in the evidence adduced on
behalf of the appellant. There is a crucial aspect of the matter on which much emphasis has been
given on the respondent's conduct of setting on fire the jute, by the respondent leading to lodging of
complaint Case No. 137C of 2002 in the court of Sub-Divisional Officer, Birpur. The case was
pending till disposal of the matrimonial case on 27.08.2015. The respondent was charged of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 7
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
commission of offence under Sections 435 and 504 of the IPC in which the respondent was finally
convicted by judgment and order dated 18.06.2016, passed by the learned Judicial Magistrate, 1st
Class-II, Supaul in Trial No. 173 of 2016, copy of which has been brought on record by way of an
affidavit filed on behalf of the appellant.
26. Much emphasis has been given, in course of argument on behalf of the appellant, that this Court
should consider the said proved conduct of the respondent amounting to mental cruelty for the
purpose of Section 13(1)(i-a) of the Act.
27. The fact that the appellant and his family members have been acquitted of the charge of offence
punishable under Section 498-A of the IPC by a judgment of Sub-Divisional Patna High Court MA
No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 Magistrate, Madhepura dated 29.06.2011, passed in Trial No. 304 of
2011 has also been emphasised on behalf of the appellant to contend that the court below has failed
to appreciate in proper perspective, the evidence adduced on behalf of the appellant to establish a
case of mental cruelty.
28. So far as the plea and evidence of desertion as ground for dissolution of marriage is concerned,
whereas it has been the stand of the appellant that the respondent had deserted the appellant by
severing her company with the appellant without any reasonable cause, it has been the case of the
respondent that though she was ready and willing to live with the appellant and lead a happy and
purposeful conjugal life by discharging her all marital obligations. It is true that the parties have
admittedly not lived together and led conjugal life for now nearly two decades. The question which
emerges is as to who deserted whom, answer of which will have to be searched in the evidence at the
trial. Great emphasis has, however, been laid by Mr. Uma Shankar Prasad that, in any event, since
the parties are living separately for nearly two decades, they cannot be reasonably asked to continue
to live together. The matrimonial bond, according to him, between the contesting parties is
irreparable and in support of his contention he has placed heavy reliance on the Supreme Court's
Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 decision in case of Samar Ghosh (supra).
29. In our considered view, apart from the conduct of the respondent of having set on fire, the jute
kept in the court-yard of the house of the appellant by the respondent, there is no specific
misconduct or wrong behaviour of the respondent amounting to cruelty, as is alleged. There is no
denial that she has been held guilty of commission of offence under Section 435 of the IPC. The
question is, whether the said conduct of the respondent, which finally resulted into a finding of her
guilt in a judicial proceeding, can be said to be amounting to mental cruelty as valid ground for
seeking dissolution of marriage? To answer this aspect, we need to take note of his own statement of
the appellant in paragraph 10 of his application under Section 13(1) of the Act which reads thus :
"10-That the respondent is a selfish, whimsical and unscrupulous lady and does not
want to live under the guardianship and command of the petitioner or his parents.
Once, it so happened that the respondent was insisting her husband and inlaws to
transfer the property of village Jeewachhpur in her name and the petitioner and his
parents were making unheard of it, the respondent poured kerosene oil on the
bundles of Jute kept in a separate house weighing about more than 50 quintals and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 8
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
also on her person and put fire by match stick on the jute, bundles and also tried to
burn herself anyhow the people Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019
assembled and put off the fire and saved her."
30. If the said averment is to be taken into account, respondent cannot be said to have set the jute
bundle on fire for damaging the said property of the appellant/ appellant's family. From his own
showing of the appellant, respondent had attempted to injure herself and was subsequently saved by
the people, somehow or the other, in the incident which had taken place in 1998. This is indicative of
the fact that the respondent herself was in trauma and mental agony which had compelled her to
take extreme step of making an attempt to commit suicide in course of which she sustained burn
injuries. In any case, filing of Complaint Case No. 137/2002 is a development subsequent to filing of
matrimonial suit, for it is apparent that the complaint case was filed by the appellant's father after
filing of the matrimonial suit. In our view, the developments subsequent to filing of the matrimonial
suit cannot be the basis to seek relief for dissolution of marriage in absence of necessary amendment
in the application, inasmuch as, the respondent did not have opportunity to meet an allegation
made in the complaint case, while opposing the plea for divorce on the grounds mentioned in the
application seeking divorce. The acquittal of the appellant and his family members of the offence
punishable under Section 498-A IPC in a trial arising Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt.
16-08-2019 out of complaint case filed by the respondent, since the offence could not be established
against them beyond all reasonable doubt, in itself can not be a determinative factor to reach a
conclusion that the lodging of the complaint case itself was an act which would amount to mental
cruelty. It can maximum be said on that basis that the respondent had failed to establish her case in
the criminal trial.
31. In all fairness to learned Senior Counsel Mr. Uma Shankar Prasad we must refer to the
Constitution Bench decision of the Supreme Court in case of Bhagwati Prasad (supra) which has
been relied upon by him to canvass his point that where substantial matters relating to title of both
the parties to a suit are touched, though indirectly or even obscurely, in the issues, and evidence has
been led about them, then the argument that a particular matter is not expressly taken in the
pleadings would be purely formal and technical which should not be allowed to succeed in the
present case. The answer to the said submission lies in paragraph 10 of the decision in case of
Bhagwati Prasad (supra) itself, portion of which read thus :
"10.------What the Court has to consider in dealing with such an objection is: did the
parties know that the matter in question was involved in the trial, and did they lead
evidence about it? If it appears that the parties did not know Patna High Court MA
No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 that the matter was in issue at the trial and one of
them has had no opportunity to lead evidence in respect of it, that undoubtedly
would be a different matter. To allow one party to rely upon a matter in respect of
which the other party did not lead evidence and has had no opportunity to lead
evidence, would introduce considerations of prejudice, and in doing justice to one
party, the Court cannot do injustice to another."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 9
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
32. There can not be two opinions over the legal proposition lucidly enunciated in case of Bhagwati
Prasad (supra) that the Court is required to consider as to whether the parties knew that the matter
in question was involved in the trial and did further lead evidence about it. If it was not within the
knowledge of the party that the matter was in issue at the trial and one of them had no opportunity
to lead evidence in respect of that, it would certainly introduce consideration of prejudice and as the
Supreme Court has held, 'in doing justice to one party, the Court cannot do injustice to another'.
33. The alleged act of the respondent of causing fire in 2002, which was subject-matter of the
complaint case filed by the appellant's father subsequent to filing of the matrimonial case, was not a
matter before the learned Principal Judge, Family Court. There was no pleading and the respondent
was, thus, completely unaware that the said incident could be a ground for establishing Patna High
Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 case of mental cruelty. The appellant had referred to an
incident of 1998 in which, as has been noticed above, respondent had attempted to commit suicide
and injured herself.
34. Coming now to the decision in case of Samar Ghosh (supra), in a quest for a correct definition of
a mental cruelty, the Supreme Court has referred to not only the dictionary meaning of the said
expression but has referred to a catena of decisions of the Supreme Court and of foreign Courts and
has enumerated certain instances of human behaviour which may be relevant in dealing with cases
of mental cruelty. However, enumerating the instances the Supreme Court observed that mental
cruelty is a problem of human behaviour which exists all over the world. Human mind is extremely
complex and human behaviour is extremely complicated and, therefore, to assimilate the entire
human behaviour in one definition is almost impossible, the Supreme Court said and added that
what is cruelty in one case may not amount to cruelty in another, as concept of cruelty differs from
person to person, depending upon his upbringing level of sensitivity, educational, family and
cultural background, social status, customs, traditions, religious beliefs, human values and their
value system. The prudent and appropriate way to adjudicate the case would be to evaluate it on its
peculiar facts and Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 circumstances while taking
so many factors in consideration, the Supreme Court has held in Samar Ghosh (supra). The
instances of human behaviour relevant for dealing with cases of mental cruelty, as enumerated in
paragraph 101 in case of Samar Ghosh (supra) are as follows :
"101. (i) On consideration of complete matrimonial life of the parties, acute mental
pain, agony and suffering as would not make possible for the parties to live with each
other could come within the broad parameters of mental cruelty.
(ii) On comprehensive appraisal of the entire matrimonial life of the parties, it
becomes abundantly clear that situation is such that the wronged party cannot
reasonably be asked to put up with such conduct and continue to live with other
party.
(iii) Mere coldness or lack of affection cannot amount to cruelty, frequent rudeness of
language, petulance of manner, indifference and neglect may reach such a degree that
it makes the married life for the other spouse absolutely intolerable.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 10
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
(iv) Mental cruelty is a state of mind. The feeling of deep anguish, disappointment,
frustration in one spouse caused by the conduct of other for a long time may lead to
mental cruelty.
(v) A sustained course of abusive and humiliating treatment calculated to torture,
discommode or render miserable life of the spouse.
(vi) Sustained unjustifiable conduct and behaviour of one spouse actually affecting
Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 physical and mental health of
the other spouse. The treatment complained of and the resultant danger or
apprehension must be very grave, substantial and weighty.
(vii) Sustained reprehensible conduct, studied neglect, indifference or total departure
from the normal standard of conjugal kindness causing injury to mental health or
deriving sadistic pleasure can also amount to mental cruelty.
(viii) The conduct must be much more than jealousy, selfishness, possessiveness,
which causes unhappiness and dissatisfaction and emotional upset may not be a
ground for grant of divorce on the ground of mental cruelty.
(ix) Mere trivial irritations, quarrels, normal wear and tear of the married life which
happens in day-to-day life would not be adequate for grant of divorce on the ground
of mental cruelty.
(x) The married life should be reviewed as a whole and a few isolated instances over a
period of years will not amount to cruelty.
The ill conduct must be persistent for a fairly lengthy period, where the relationship has deteriorated
to an extent that because of the acts and behaviour of a spouse, the wronged party finds it extremely
difficult to live with the other party any longer, may amount to mental cruelty.
(xi) If a husband submits himself for an operation of sterilisation without medical reasons and
without the consent or knowledge of his wife and similarly, if the wife undergoes vasectomy or
abortion without medical reason or without the consent or knowledge of her husband, such an act of
the spouse may lead to mental Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 cruelty.
(xii) Unilateral decision of refusal to have intercourse for considerable period without there being
any physical incapacity or valid reason may amount to mental cruelty.
(xiii) Unilateral decision of either husband or wife after marriage not to have child from the
marriage may amount to cruelty.
(xiv) Where there has been a long period of continuous separation, it may fairly be concluded that
the matrimonial bond is beyond repair. The marriage becomes a fiction though supported by a legal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 11
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
tie. By refusing to sever that tie, the law in such cases, does not serve the sanctity of marriage; on the
contrary, it shows scant regard for the feelings and emotions of the parties. In such like situations, it
may lead to mental cruelty."
35. In case of Raj Talreja(supra) the Supreme Court again reiterated that cruelty can never be
defined with exactitude and what is cruelty will depend upon the facts of each case. Mere filing of
complaint is not cruelty. Merely because no action is taken on the complaint or after trial the
accused is acquitted may not be a ground to such accusation of the wife as cruelty within the
meaning of the Act, the Supreme Court held in case of Raj Talreja(supra). The Supreme Court,
however, made the following observation in paragraph 10 in case of Raj Talreja (supra) :
"10.......However, if it is found that the allegations are patently false, then there can be
no manner of doubt that the said Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt.
16-08-2019 conduct of a spouse levelling false accusations against the other spouse
would be an act of cruelty. In the present case, all the allegations were found to be
false. Later, she filed another complaint alleging that her husband along with some
other persons had trespassed into her house and assaulted her. The police found, on
investigation, that not only was the complaint false but also the injuries were self
inflicted by the wife. Thereafter, proceedings were launched against the wife under
Section 182 of IPC."
36. It may be noted here that in case of K. Srinivas Rao vs. D.A. Deepa reported in (2013) 5 SCC 226
the Supreme Court held that making unfounded indecent defamatory allegations against the spouse
or his or her relatives in the pleadings, filing of complaints or issuing notices which may have
adverse impact on the business prospect or the job of the spouse and filing repeated false complaints
and cases in the court against the spouse would, in the facts of a case, amount to mental cruelty.
37. Facts of a case would determine whether a particular act amounts to cruelty or mental cruelty as
ground for dissolution of marriage under Section 13(1)(i-a) of the Act. The categories of cruelty in
matrimonial cases are never closed, observed Lord Denning in Sheldon vs. Sheldon (1966) 2 WLR
993 which has been referred to with approval in case of Raj Talreja (supra) while Patna High Court
MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 observing that cruelty in matrimonial behaviour defies any
definition. Whether the husband is cruel to his wife or the wife is cruel to her husband will have to
be ascertained and adjudged by looking into the entire facts and circumstances of the given case and
not by any pre-determined rigid formula.
38. In the background of enunciation of law by the Supreme Court in case of Samar Ghosh (supra)
and Raj Talreja (supra) and Ravi Kumar vs. Julmidevi [(2010) 4 SCC 476] we need to examine the
correctness of finding recorded by the learned Principal Judge, Family court in the impugned
judgment and order who had the opportunity to watch the demeanour of the parties while deposing
their evidence.
39. We have extensively noted the pleadings of the parties before the court below in the matrimonial
case and the evidence adduced in the proceedings before the learned Principal Judge, Family Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 12
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
In our opinion, the appellant miserably failed to establish a case of mental cruelty which can be said
to be sufficient for grant of a decree for dissolution of marriage. This finding is in the background of
vagueness of allegations made in the application seeking dissolution of marriage and the evidence
adduced by the parties. We are also of the view that the finding recorded by the trial court that the
appellant failed to make out his Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 case of
desertion by the respondent as a ground for dissolution of marriage, in our opinion, does not suffer
from any legal or factual infirmity. We answer points no. 1 and 2, set out for determination in the
present appeal accordingly, and we, thus, concur with the findings recorded by the court below.
40. The next question, thus, takes us to the 3rd point framed for determination i.e. as to whether on
the ground of irretrievable breakdown of marriage a decree of divorce should be granted, in the facts
and circumstances of the present case or not. For the said purpose, we may refer the observation
made by the Supreme Court in case of Samar Ghosh (supra), paragraph 102 of which reads thus :
"102. When we take into consideration aforementioned factors along with an
important circumstance that the parties are admittedly living separately for more
than sixteen-and-a-half years (since 27- 8-1990) the irresistible conclusion would be
that matrimonial bond has been ruptured beyond repair because of the mental
cruelty caused by the respondent."(emphasis added)
41. In case of Samar Ghosh (supra) the Supreme Court had reached an irresistible conclusion that
matrimonial bond had ruptured beyond repair 'because of mental cruelty caused by the respondent'
in that case.
Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019
42. Since, in our view, the appellant alleged but failed to prove mental cruelty against the
respondent, he cannot take advantage of long separation between them, to make out a case that
matrimonial bond has been ruptured beyond repair, because of mental cruelty caused by the
respondent.
43. It has been aptly observed by the Supreme Court in case of Samar Ghosh (supra) in
paragraph-99 that the concept of cruelty would differ from person to person depending upon
his/her upbringing, level of sensitivity, educational, family and cultural background, financial
position, social status, customs, traditions, religious beliefs, human values and their value system.
44. In course of interactions, which we had with the appellant and the respondent, we noticed that
the respondent was opposed to dissolution of marriage not only on the ground that the appellant
had failed to establish his case of mental cruelty and desertion but more because it would cast
serious stigma on her, considering the social status and cultural background of the parties, which
would seriously jeopardise her living in the society with dignity and marriage of the daughters. We
take note of the fact that the appellant did offer some piece of land to the respondent in course of the
present proceeding, in the matrimonial village, for sustenance of the respondent and the two
daughters. Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 The respondent appeared to be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 13
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
justified in her stand that she could not stay in her matrimonial home in a village as a divorcee of the
appellant. In our opinion, considering the social status of the parties and their cultural background,
decree for dissolution of marriage cannot be granted to the appellant in the special facts and
circumstances of the case particularly when the appellant has failed to make out a case of mental
cruelty. We answer 3rd and 4th points of determination accordingly.
45. This appeal is, thus, dismissed.
46. While dismissing the appeal, we cannot lose sight of the fact that the respondent is residing with
her two daughters at her parental home presently. Maintenance has been allowed in favour of the
respondent @ Rs. 10,000=00 per month by the court below, in payment of which the appellant has
been irregular. When this appeal was taken up on 03.08.2019, we had noticed that arrears of
maintenance to the tune of nearly Rs. 3 lakhs was due for payment. Taking note of this fact, we had
directed the appellant to clear the arrears by making payment in installments of Rs. 20,000=00 per
month in addition to the monthly maintenance amount @ Rs. 10,000=00 per month.
47. During our attempt to explore possibility of resolution of the dispute, we had asked the appellant
to come out Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 with the details of his movable and
immovable properties. The appellant by way of supplementary affidavit filed on 31.10.2018 has
given the details of the properties held by him. According to the appellant, after partition in the
family with his sisters he got 3.67 and ½ acres of land and residential houses at Narpatganj and
Jeebachpur. It has also been stated that certain part of land was acquired for construction of NH-57,
consequent upon which an amount of Rs. 27,28,591=00 has been paid to him by way of
compensation. The said amount has also been partitioned among the appellant and his three sisters.
Initially, an amount of Rs. 27,28,591=00 was found payable and he had received total sum of Rs.
24,20,260=00 after adjusting TDS. There is yet another portion of land, which is under acquisition.
During the last interaction, which we had with the parties on 03.07.2019, the appellant had offered
to pay a sum of Rs. 15 lakhs for marriage of the two daughters and 3 bighas of land to the
respondent for her sustenance. He also offered that he would transfer 1 katha of land to the
respondent as well as daughters with absolute right, title, interest and possession out of his share
over the homestead land, for residential purpose.
48. It has also transpired that the appellant is likely to receive shortly, another amount of
compensation against Patna High Court MA No.481 of 2015 dt. 16-08-2019 acquisition of his land.
49. In the background of the above, and in order to protect the interest of the respondent and her
daughters, after having dismissed the appeal, we pass following order :-
(i) The appellant shall deposit a sum of Rs. 15 lakhs in the account of the respondent
within three months from today which amount shall be utilised for the purpose of
marriage and education of the two daughters.
(ii) The appellant shall not deal with any of his immovable properties without leave of
this Court nor shall appropriate any amount, which he receives in future on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 14
Om Prakash Bhagat vs Smt. Gauri Devi on 16 August, 2019
acquisition of land, by way of compensation.
(iii) The appellant shall keep on paying the amount of maintenance with arrears in
installment as already directed.
(iv) The respondent shall be at liberty to apply for enhancement of the amount of
maintenance by making application before the family court, which, if filed, shall be
decided by the family court within two months from the date of filing of such
application.
( Chakradhari Sharan Singh, J) Jyoti Saran, J : I agree.
Rajesh/- (Jyoti Saran, J)
AFR/NAFR AFR
CAV DATE 03.07.2019
Uploading Date 20.08.2019
Transmission Date NA
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/83788341/ 15
