Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28
February, 2025
ORISSA HIGH COURT : CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.6323 of 2010
In the matter of an Application under Articles 226 & 227 of
the Constitution of India, 1950
***
Orissa State Co-operative Bank Ltd. Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru Marg Bhubaneswar-1, Orissa
Represented through Managing Director Tusarkanti Panda Aged about 54 years Son of Sri Krushna
Chandra Panda. ... Petitioner
-VERSUS-
1. Union of India, Represented through Secretary to Govt., Ministry of Labour, Central Secretariat
New Delhi.
2. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner-II, (Compliance) Bhabisyanidhi Bhawan, Janpath
Unit-IX, Bhubaneswar District: Khordha.
3. Jaisima Das Aged about 58 years Son of Natabar Das Village: Punga, District: Jagatsinghpur.
4. Khirod Kumar Das Aged about 59 years Son of Late Kailash Chandra Das Village: LV 79, Breet
Colony Bhubaneswar, District: Khordha.
5. Chittaranjan Lenka Aged about 56 years Son of late Chandra Sekhar Lenka At: Badagada Uppar
Sahi PO: Baragada, Breet Colony Bhubaneswar District: Khordha.
6. Barada Prasad Mohanty Aged about 66 years Son of Late Sai Mohanty At: 5-Budheswar Colony
PS: Budheswari, Bhubaneswar District: Khordha.
7. Bhuban Mohan Sinha Aged about 59 years Son of Subodha Chandra Singh Of 1930,
Chitamaieswar Colony Bhubaneswar District: Khordha.
8. Kunjabihari Khatai Aged about 62 years Son of Late Bharambar Khatei Of Dewank Patna, PO:
Banamalipur District: Khordha.
9. Sudhir Kumar Gadanayak Aged about 67 years Son of Late Sarat Chandra Gadanayak Village:
N-4, 323, IRC Village, Nayapali Bhubaneswar, District: Khordha.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 1
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
10. Damadar Jena Aged about 50 years Son of Jhula Jena Village: Budhipada PO: Sisio, District:
Khordha.
11. Roja Panda Aged about 55 years Wife of Chittaranjan Panda of 95/3, Road No.11 Jagannath
Nagar, Rasulgarh Bhubaneswar.
12. Sarbeswar Mohapatra Aged about 62 years Son of Late Lochana Mohapatra of 5-2574 Niladree
Vihar Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar District: Khordha.
13. Choudway Benaya Kumar Das Aged about 57 years Son of Late Choudhway Duryodhan Das Plot
no.GA 41, Niladree Vihar Chandrasekharpur, Bhubaneswar District: Khordha.
14. Rama Chandra Panda Aged about 60 years Son of Late Braja Kishore Panda Plot No.656/23/92
Nayapali Bhubaneswar, District: Khordha.
15. Bhimasen Mati Aged about 50 years Son of Late Banamali Mati Village: 138/751 near Smuti Das
Godown PO: Breet Colony, Bhubaneswar District: Khordha.
16. Ajambar Sahoo Aged about 55 years Son of late Narayan Sahoo At/PO: Malapatna District:
Kendrapara.
17. Umesh Chandra Mohanty Aged about 61 years Son of Late Padma Charan Mohanty EW 24/8/12,
Chandrasekharpur District: Khordha.
18. Tuna Mishra Aged about 51 years Son of Rama Chandra Mishra Village: Khanditar, PS: Kuakiha
District: Khordha.
19. Salil Kumar Ray Aged about 61 years Son of Brajendra Ray At/PO: Mohanpur, PS: Aul
District-Kendrapara.
20. Renubala Choudhury L & T Raintree Boubrard Tower (Byatranarayanapara) Near GKUK
College, Bangalore - 560 092. ... Opposite Parties.
Counsel appeared for the parties:
For the Petitioner : Mr. Budhadev Routray, Senior Advocate assisted by Mr. Jagadish
Biswal, Advocate and M/s. D.K. Mohapatra, D. Routray, S. Jena, P.K. Sahoo, K.
Mohanty and R.P. Dalai, Advocates For the Opposite Party : Mr. Ajay Kumar Ray,
No.1 Senior Panel Counsel For the Opposite Party : Mr. Bimbisar Dash, No.2 Senior
Panel Counsel And In the matter of an Application under Articles 226 & 227 of the
Constitution of India, 1950 Orissa State Co-operative Bank Ltd. Pandit Jawaharlal
Nehru Marg Bhubaneswar-1, Orissa Represented through its Managing Director Sri
Tusarkanti Panda, Aged about 54 years Son of Sri Krishna Chandra Panda....
Petitioner
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 2
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
-VERSUS-
1. Union of India, Represented through Ministry of Labour, Ministry of Labour,
Central Secretariat New Delhi.
2. Regional Provident Fund Commissioner-II, (Compliance) Bhabisyanidhi Bhawan,
Janpath Unit-IX, Bhubaneswar District: Khordha.
3. Orissa State Cooperative Bank Retired Employees Association At: OSCB Building,
Unit-4 Pandit Jawaharlal Nehru Marg Bhubaneswar-751001 District: Khurda
Represented through its General Secretary Tarachand Mahanta Aged about 66 years
Son of Late Natabar Mahanta At: Plot No.468/2627, Sri Vihar 3B Lane, P.O.: Patia
Bhubaneswar, PIN: 751031 District: Khordha. ... Opposite Parties.
Counsel appeared for the parties:
For the Petitioner : Mr. Asok Mohanty, Senior Advocate assisted by M/s. Lopamudra
Pradhan and Soumya Subhadourshni Mohanty, Advocates For the Opposite Party :
Mr. Millan Kumar, No.1 Central Government Counsel For the Opposite Party : Mr.
Bimbisar Dash, No.2 Senior Panel Counsel P R E S E N T:
HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE MURAHARI SRI RAMAN Date of Hearing :
19.02.2025 :: Date of Order : 28.02.2025 O RDER Challenging order dated
18.11.2003 under Annexure-3 passed by the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner,
Bhubaneswar, Odisha-Opposite Party No.2, wherein holding that the "Sanchayan
Daily Deposit Agents" are classified as "temporary employee" engaged by the Odisha
State Co-operative Bank Ltd., it was directed that the Petitioner-employer is required
to extend benefits as envisaged in the Scheme under the provisions of the Employees'
Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 from the due dates of their
eligibility under Section 7A, the Petitioner has approached this Court by way of filing
this writ petition invoking provisions under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution
of India with the following prayer(s):
"It is therefore prayed that this Hon(cid:128)ble Court may graciously be pleased to:-
i) Admit the writ application;
ii) Call for the records;
iii) Issue Rule Nisi calling upon the opposite parties to show cause as to why the
impugned order dtd.18.11.2003 under Annexure-3 and the order dtd.21.01.2010 of
the appellate Tribunal under Annexure-4 shall not be quashed;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 3
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
iv) And if the opposite parties fail to show cause or show insufficient cause, issue a
writ in the nature of certiorari or any other appropriate writ/writs, order/orders,
direction/directions in quashing impugned order dtd.18.11.2003 under Annexure-3
and the order dtd.21.01.2010 of the Appellate Tribunal under Annexure-4.
v) And issue a writ in the nature of Mandamus or any other appropriate writ/writs,
order/orders, direction/directions in declaring that 35 number of S.D.D. agents are
not the employees of the Bank and are not entitled to get any benefit under the
Scheme framed pursuant to E.P.F. and M.P. Act, 1952;
vi) And/or pass such other order/orders, direction/directions as this Hon(cid:128)ble Court
may think fit and proper for the ends of justice;
And for this act of kindness, the petitioner as in duty bound shall ever pray."
1.1. The petitioner also laid challenge to order dated 21.01.2010 passed in ATA No.2(10) of 2004 by
the Employees' Provident Fund Appellate Tribunal (Camp at Bhubaneswar) whereby dismissing the
appeal, the view of the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner, Bhubaneswar, Odisha vide
Annexure-3 has been upheld treating the "commission" to be "remuneration" falling within the
scope of Section 2(b) of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952.
W.P.(C) No.23057 of 2010:
1.2. In W.P.(C) No.23057 of 2010, the Petitioner has made following prayer(s):
"It is, therefore, prayed that this Hon(cid:128)ble Court may graciously be pleased to:-
i) Admit the writ application;
ii) Call for the records;
iii) Issue Rule Nisi calling upon the opposite parties to show cause as to why the
interim order dated 16.09.2010 and 11.10.2010 issued by the Provident Fund
Commissioner under Annexures-9 and 13 respectively shall not be quashed.
iv) And if the opposite parties fail to show cause or show insufficient cause issue a
writ in the nature of certiorari quashing the interim order dated 16.09.2010 and
11.10.2010 issued by the Provident Fund Commissioner under Annexures-9 and 13
respectively.
v) Issue a writ in the nature of mandamus or any other appropriate writ/writs,
order/orders, direction/directions directing the opposite parties to accept the
exemption proposal submitted as per the direction of this Hon(cid:128)ble Court in order
dated 25.01.2005 passed in OJC No.15660 of 1997 and further direct the opposite
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 4
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
parties to grant exemption to the petitioner bank.
vi) And/or pass such other order/orders, direction/directions as this Hon(cid:128)ble Court
may think fit and proper for the ends of justice.
And for this act, the petitioner shall as in duty bound ever pray."
Facts:
2. Facts, as adumbrated by the writ petitioner in W.P.(C) No.6323 of 2010 reveal that
the Petitioner-Odisha State Cooperative Bank Limited (for short, "Bank") engaged
thirty-five numbers of Sanchayan Deposits Agents (abbreviated, "SDD") on
20.07.1996 for collection of deposits under Sanchayan Daily Deposit Account with
certain terms and conditions on commission basis inter alia that Agents would get 3%
commission on the total deposit collected by him in each month. However, after
closure of said Scheme, the engagements of thirty-five agents were automatically
ceased.
2.1. Therefore, the said Agents approached the Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner by filing petitions to bring them to the fold of Provident Fund Scheme.
After receipt of the notice, the Petitioner-Bank vide letter
No.OSCB/10020/2003-04/, dated 15.11.2003 filed objection stating therein that the
said thirty-five agents were not the employees of the Bank.
2.2. Thereafter, the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner-II (Compliance, Odisha,
Bhubaneswar vide order No.OR/BBS/Circle/16/OR/822/3, dated 18.11.2003 under
Annexure-3 passed the following order:
"It is admitted that the "Commission" paid to SDD agents are paid in lieu of service
rendered to the Bank by such agents. Further such payment is made with certain
written understanding as per the terms and conditions. Thus this payment in lieu of
service rendered to the Bank can be nothing but "emoluments" may it be termed as
wages, salary, pay, Commission etc. Hence, by definition of 2(b) of the Act, 1952
these SDD agents are wage earners and since they are engaged in connection with the
promotion of the Banks core business i.e. "borrowing"
they are employees of the bank. Further as per definition of Staff service rules of the Orissa State
Co-operative Bank Ltd at item No.4 "Temporary employee means an employee who has been
appointed for a limited period for work which is of an essentially temporary nature or who is
employed temporarily as an additional employee in connection with the temporary increase in work
and is not made permanent". By virtue of this definition the SDD Agents can be classified as
temporary employee but they are proved as employees engaged by the Bank for its business
purpose.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 5
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
Thus it can be concluded that SDD Agents are conclusively engaged for promotion of the Bank(cid:128)s
business i.e. promotion/increase in deposits. It can be further concluded that SDD Agents are
engaged in connection with the Banking business only and not for their own separate individual
enterprise.
Hence, I Rabindra Samal, Regional Provident Fund Commissioner-II (Compliance), Orissa,
Bhubaneswar in exercise of the powers conferred upon me Under Para-26- B of the Scheme(cid:128) 52
decide by due application of mind, having gone through the fact and circumstances of the case that
the SDD Agents engaged by M/s. Orissa State Co-Op. Bank Ltd are the employees of the Bank as
defined under Section 2(f) of the Act' 52 and commission paid in lieu of the service rendered by the
SDD Agents are nothing but emoluments which is nothing but wages as defined under Section 2(b)
of the Act'52. I, therefore, direct the employer of M/s. Orissa State Co-Op. Bank Ltd., Bhubaneswar
to extend benefits as provided under the three schemes of the Act' 1952 to these 35 SDD Agents from
due dates of their eligibility immediately and furnish statutory returns within 15 days of assessment
of dues by A.P.F.C.(CC-I) under Section 7A of the Act'1952."
2.3. Being aggrieved by the said Order dated 18.11.2003 passed by the Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner-II, Bhubaneswar, the Petitioner-employer approached the Employees' Provident
Fund Appellate Tribunal (Camp Court) at Bhubaneswar by filing an appeal bearing ATA No.2(10) of
2004 for setting aside the order dated 18.11.2003, which stood disposed of vide Order dated
21.01.2010 (Annexure-4) with the following observation:
"In the case of Burmah Sheel Oil Storage and Distributing Co. Ltd. Vrs. Regional
Provident Fund Commission, Delhi reported in 1981, Vol.II LLJ Page 86, the
Hon(cid:128)Court held that "basic wages are those which are paid to all the employees of a
concern and are generally paid to employees of all concerned." Similar view was held
by this lordship in case of Manipal Academy of Higher Education Vrs. P.F.
Commissioner reported in the 2008 (5) SCC page 428. In this case the order passed
by the authority and the appeal memo filed by the appellant revealed that the
commission agents were working for the bank and the appellant was supervising and
controlling their work and they are also paid the equal amount of commission to the
agents. In other words, the agents are getting their remuneration for their services
rendered to the bank so they can be treated as employee of the bank and the
commission paid to them is treated as wages. The circular dated 27.08.2009 shows
that commission agents are the employees of the Bank. Since the appellant has
engaged more than 20 employees, it is rightly coming under the ambit of E.P.F. & MP
Act, 1952. Hence ordered, the appeal stands dismissed. Copy of order be sent to both
the parties. File be consigned to record room. "
2.4. Still dissatisfied, with prayer to set aside the dated 18.11.2003 under Annexure-3 passed by the
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner-II, Bhubaneswar and order dated 21.01.2010 under
Annexure-4 passed by the Appellate Tribunal, the Petitioner-Bank (Employer) approached this
Court by way of this writ petition invoking extraordinary jurisdiction under Articles 226 and 227 of
the Constitution of India.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 6
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
Hearing:
3. Pleadings, being completed and exchanged between the learned counsel for
respective parties, on their consent, this matter is taken up for final hearing at the
stage of admission.
3.1. Accordingly, heard Mr. Budhadev Routray, learned Senior Advocate appearing
along with Mr. Jagadish Biswal, learned counsel appearing for the Petitioner and Mr.
Ajay Kumar Ray, learned Senior Panel Counsel appearing for Opposite Party No.1
and Mr. Bimbisar Dash, learned Senior Panel Counsel appearing for Opposite Party
No.2 in W.P.(C) No.6323 of 2010 and Mr. Asok Mohanty, learned Senior Advocate
appearing along with Ms. Lopamudra Pradhan, learned Advocate and Ms. Soumya
Subhadourshni Mohanty, learned Advocate appearing for the Petitioner and Mr.
Millan Kumar, learned Central Government Counsel appearing for Opposite Party
No.1 and Mr. Bimbisar Dash, learned Senior Panel Counsel appearing for Opposite
Party No.2 in W.P.(C) No.23057 of 2010.
3.2. On conclusion of hearing, the matter stood reserved for preparation and
pronouncement of Order.
Rival contentions and submissions:
4. Reiterating the facts as narrated in the writ petition, Sri Budhadev Routray,
learned Senior Advocate appearing for the Petitioner-Bank submitted that the order
passed by the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner is illegal and contrary to the
law. Referring to definitions of terms "basic wages" in clause (b) and "employee" in
clause (f) of Section 2 of the Employees' Provident Funds and Miscellaneous
Provisions Act, 1952 (for short, "the EPF and MP Act"), he submitted that the SDD
Agents can at no stretch of imagination fall within the meaning of "employee" and
they receive "commission" which does not fall within the meaning of "basic wages".
Section 2(f) says that any person who is employed for wages in any kind of work and
Section 2(b) deals with "basic wages"
which unequivocally lays down that it does not include "commission".
4.1. He further submitted that the decisions relied on by the learned Tribunal vide order dated
21.01.2010 are not applicable to this case. Agents are engaged only for collection of money not to
function as employee of the Bank.
4.2. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Petitioner drew attention of this Court to Annexure-1,
i.e., appointment order dated 20.07.1996 issued to thirty-five SDD Agents, and submitted that the
said Agents are appointed with certain terms and conditions, wherein paragraph-7 reads as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 7
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
"7. You are not an employee of the bank in any sense. The relationship between you
and the bank is only that of an Agent and principal. The service rules and service
conditions relating to the employees of the bank, have no application in your case and
you shall not be entitled to any salary, provident fund or any other benefits,
ordinarily, allowed to the staff of the bank under its service conditions and rules. "
4.3. He further relied paragraph-14 of the said terms and conditions, which quoted hereunder:-
"14. As our Agent, for collecting deposit under 'Sanchayan Daily Deposits', you shall
be paid commission @ 3% on the total deposits collected by you in every month. No
commission will be paid on deposits under Sanchyan Daily Deposit Scheme received
by the Branch directly from a depositor. No commission shall be paid on lump sum
collections received in anticipation to refund of such "Sanchayan Daily Deposit
Accounts" and in that connexion, decision of the bank will be final and binding on
you. Further, the rate of commission is liable to reduction, alternative or revision at
the discretion of the Bank and without any previous initiation or notice to you."
4.4. Therefore, he submitted that the Agents are not the "employees" of the Bank and the
observation of the Provident Fund Commissioner-II, Bhubaneswar vide order dated 18.11.2003 and
the Appellate Tribunal vide order dated 21.01.2010 to grant 35 SDD agents all the benefits as
provided under the Scheme framed under 1952 Act is illegal and liable to be quashed.
4.5. Amplifying further Sri Budhadev Routray urged that in identical case, the same Regional
Provident Fund Commissioner did consider similar dispute with regard to the status of the SDD
Agents by referring to the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court vide order dated 05.04.2007,
which is enclosed to the rejoinder affidavit as Annexure-7. Reliance has been placed on the following
observation contained in the said order:
"*** 6.1) From the above discussion and in light of the order of the Hon(cid:128)ble Supreme
Court in the case of Bridge and Roof Company (India) Ltd. Vrs. Union of India1 it is
very clear that commission has been excluded from the term basic wages. In the
instant case the complaint Agents of the Bank are being paid commission and
nothing else by the Bank which is proportionately based on the collection made by
individual Agent. Hence from the statement filed by the employer and accepted by
the Agents. It is very clear that the commission is not fixed and the Agents do not get
any fixed commission whether they collect any deposits or not. From the discussion
as above it is concluded that the Agents are engaged by the Bank for collection
purpose only and in lieu of the 1 Reported at (1963) 3 SCR 978, wherein it has been
held as follows:
"This brings us to the consideration of the question of bonus, which is also an
exception in cl. (ii). Now the word „bonus(cid:128) has been used in this clause without any
qualification. Therefore, it would not be improper to infer that when the word
„bonus(cid:128) was used without any qualification in the clause, the legislature had in mind
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 8
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
every kind of bonus that may be payable to an employee. It is not disputed on behalf
of the respondents that bonuses other than profit bonus were in force and well known
before the Act came to be passed in 1952. *** It may be, as we have pointed out
earlier, that if there were no exceptions to the main part of the definition in s.2(b),
whatever was payable in cash as price for labour and arose out of contract would be
included in the term „basic wages(cid:128), and that reward for labour which did not arise
out of contract might not be included in the definition. But the main part of the
definition is subject to exceptions in cl. (ii), and those exceptions clearly show that
they include even the price for labour. It is therefore not possible to accept the
contention on behalf of the respondents that whatever is price for labour and arises
out of contract is included in the definition of „basic wages(cid:128) and therefore production
bonus which is a kind of incentive wage would be included."
amount collected the Bank pays commission to the Agent out of the profit payable to the depositors.
The Agents even though working in connection with the work of the bank, they are not getting any
wages against the work done which is one of the basic requirement for qualifying to be an employee
under the provisions of Employees Provident Funds & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952. As such,
it is held that as the employees are getting no wages from the bank and they cannot be treated as
employee for the purpose of Employees Provident Funds & Miscellaneous Provisions Act, 1952 and
as such, they do not qualify to become the member of the fund."
5. Mr. Asok Mohanty, learned Senior Advocate appearing for the Petitioner in W.P.(C) No.23057 of
2010 supporting the arguments made by Mr. Budhadev Routray, learned Senior Advocate appearing
for the Petitioner (in W.P.(C) No.6323 of 2010) made a reference to paragraph 38 of the writ
petition, which reads as under:
"38. That the petitioner humbly begs to submit that while the petitioner bank has
brought to the notice of the Commissioner not only about the pendency of the writ
application, but also the proposal submitted by the petitioner bank in conformity
with the provisions provided under Section 17C of the Act the Regional provident
Fund Commissioner should not have issued letter dated 16.09.2010 and
consequential letter dated 11.10.2010 both letter/order under Annexur-9 and 13. The
action of the authorities in issuing such letters are not only illegal, arbitrary but also
contrary to the provisions of the act in as much as it is in contravention of the interim
order passed by this Hon'ble Court in the aforesaid writ application bearing W.P.(C)
No.6323 of 2010. Hence both the order dated 16.09.2010 and 11.10.2010 are liable to
be quashed."
6. Mr. Bimbisar Dash, learned Senior Panel Counsel appearing for Opposite Party No.2 agreed with
the submissions of the learned Senior Advocate appearing for the Petitioner(s) submitted that the
order under Annexure-7 enclosed to rejoinder affidavit has not been challenged.
Conclusion:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 9
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
7. For better appreciation, Section 2(b) and Section 2(f) defining the terms "basic wages" and
"employee" respectively under the EPF and MP Act, 1952 are extracted hereunder:
"(b) "basic wages" means all emoluments which are earned by an employee while on
duty or on leave or on holidays with wages in either case in accordance with the terms
of the contract of employment and which are paid or payable in cash to him, but does
not include--
(i) The cash value of any food concession;
(ii) any dearness allowance (that is to say, all cash payments by whatever name called
paid to an employee on account of a rise in the cost of living), house-rent allowance,
overtime allowance, bonus, commission or any other similar allowance payable to the
employee in respect of his employment or of work done in such employment;
(f) "employee" means any person who is employed for wages in any kind of work,
manual or otherwise, in or in connection with the work of an establishment, and who
gets his wages directly or indirectly from the employer."
8. Considered the averments and documents forming part of writ petition and diligently taken note
of arguments advanced by Sri Budhadev Routray, learned Senior Counsel appearing in W.P.(C)
No.6323 of 2010 and Sri Asok Mohanty, learned Senior Counsel appearing in W.P.(C) No.23057 of
2010 and counter arguments advanced by Sri Bimbisar Dash, learned Senior Panel Counsel in both
the writ petitions.
8.1. Definition of the term "employee" as envisaged in Section 2(f) of the EPF & MP Act suggests
that for being an "employee" one has to get wages directly or indirectly. In the present case as the
record reveals there is no dispute that the Bank has been extending "commission", which term is
conspicuously excluded from the purview of the term "basic wages" defined under Section 2(b).
Careful reading of said clause (b) of Section 2 unambiguously leads to depict that such commission
is required to be shown as "payable to the employee".
8.2. As it appears from the impugned order, the Appellate Tribunal hypothetically construing
"commission" to be "wages" did not discuss with respect to "employee" as envisaged in Section 2(f).
Furthermore, the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner in his order merely based on document
like "cancellation of agent-ship" proceeded to hold that there was employer-employee relationship,
which appears to be erroneous approach and contrary to order dated 05.04.2007 passed by the
Regional Provident Fund Commissioner-II (Annexure-7, relating to M/s. Urban Co-operative Bank
Ltd., Rourkela), which is conceded by Sri Bimbisar Dash, Senior Panel Counsel as not challenged
before any higher fora. Both the authorities failed to address the factual position vis-à-vis statutory
provision in proper perspective.
8.3. It is felt expedient to have reference to Indian Banks Association, Bombay (represented by
Deputy General Manager, Syndicate Bank, Zonal Office, Hyderabad) Vrs. Workmen of Syndicate
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 10
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
Bank, 1997 SCC OnLine AP 226, wherein it has been observed that:
"14. There is no dispute that the payment to the deposit collectors is by way of a
commission on the collections made by them. There is also no dispute that the
commission is the remuneration to them. The substantive provision of Section
10(1)(b)2 [of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949] prohibits employment 2 Section 10 of
the Banking Regulation Act, 1949 stands as follows:
"[10. Prohibition of employment of managing agents and restrictions on certain
forms of employment.--
(1) No banking company--
(a) shall employ or be managed by a managing agent; or
(b) shall employ or continue the employment of any person--
(i) who is, or at any time has been, adjudicated insolvent, or
has suspended payment or has compounded with his creditors, or who is, or has
been, convicted by a criminal court of an offence involving moral turpitude; or
(ii) whose remuneration or part of whose remuneration takes the form of commission
or of a share in the profits of the company:
Provided that nothing contained in this sub-clause shall apply to the payment by a
banking company of--
(a) any bonus in pursuance of a settlement or award arrived at or made under any
law relating to industrial disputes or in accordance with any scheme framed by such
banking company or in accordance with the usual practice prevailing in banking
business;
(b) any commission to any broker (including guarantee broker), cashier-contractor,
clearing and forwarding agent, auctioneer or any other person, employed by the
banking company under a contract otherwise than as a regular member of the staff of
the company; or
(iii) whose remuneration is, in the opinion of the Reserve Bank, excessive; or
(c) shall be managed by any person--
(i) who is a director of any other company not being--
(a) a subsidiary of the banking company, or
(b) a company registered under section 25 of the Companies Act, 1956 (1 of 1956):
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 11
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
Provided that the prohibition in this sub-clause shall not apply in respect of any such
director for a temporary period not exceeding three months or such further period
not exceeding nine months as the Reserve Bank may allow; or
(ii) who is engaged in any other business or vocation; or
(iii) whose term of office as a person managing the company is for a period exceeding
five years at any one time:
Provided that the term of office of any such person may be renewed or extended by
further periods not exceeding five years on each occasion subject to the condition that
such renewal or extension shall not be sanctioned earlier than two years from the
date on which it is to come into force: Provided also that where the term of office of
such person is for an indefinite period, such term, unless it otherwise comes to an
end earlier, shall come to an end immediately on the expiry of five years from the
date of his appointment or on the expiry of three months from the date of or
continuance of employment of any person whose remuneration or part of it takes the
form of a commission. The proviso permits the payment of commission, as
remuneration provided the payment is made not to be a regular member of the staff
but to a person who is employed under a contract otherwise than as a regular
member of the staff. A reading of the substantive provisions as well as the exception
unmistakably shows the intention of the Parliament that the person to whom a
commission is payable as remuneration cannot be a regular staff of the bank but that
he may be employed on contract. Employment on the basis of contract is, under the
scheme of the section, treated on a different footing than a person who is a regular
staff of the bank. A deposit collector, like the respondent, would be one who is
squarely covered by the exception, commencement of section 8 of the Banking Laws
(Miscellaneous Provisions) Act, 1963 (55 of 1963), whichever is later:
Provided further that nothing in this clause shall apply to a director, other than the
managing director, of a banking company by reason only of his being such director.
Explanation.--
For the purpose of sub-clause (iii) of clause (b), the expression "remuneration", in
relation to person employed or continued in employment, shall include salary, fees
and perquisites but shall not include any allowances or other amounts paid to him for
the purpose of reimbursing him in respect of the expenses actually incurred by him in
the performance of his duties.
(2) In forming its opinion under sub-clause (iii) of clause (b) sub-section (1), the
Reserve Bank may have regard among other matters to the following:--
(i) the financial condition and history of the banking company, its size and area of
operation, its resources, the volume of its business, and the trend of its earning
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 12
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
capacity;
(ii) the number of its branches or offices;
(iii) the qualifications, age and experience of the person concerned;
(iv) the remuneration paid to other persons employed by the banking company or to
any person occupying a similar position in any other banking company similarly
situated; and
(v) the interests of its depositors.
*** (6) Any decision or order of the Reserve Bank made under this section shall be
final for all purposes."
i.e., the proviso, since his remuneration totally consists of commission for which reason he could not
be a regular staff. If he would have been a regular staff from the date of his engagement as a deposit
collector, he could not have been paid remuneration by way of commission. Such engagement of
him, and of the deposit collectors who were admittedly engaged after the 1949 Act, would have been
against the provision of law and would have been null and void. ***
16. A distinction has to be drawn between employment as regular staff of the bank and as workmen
only without being regular staff. The concept of a person being a workman but not being a regular
staff is conceivable. In different decisions of the Supreme Court, to which we shall presently refer,
piece-rated workers and job workers have been found to be workmen, though they may not be
regular staff. What is prohibited under Section 10(1)(b) of the Banking Regulation Act, 1949, is to
treat persons, who are in receipt of commission as remuneration, as regular workers. Sri
Narasimham rightly concedes the respondents not to be regular staff and also does not for such
claim. We accordingly hold as such.
17. Even so, the question yet remains whether the deposit collectors are workmen of the banks and,
if so, to what relief they are entitled. That workmen are also in employment in apparent from the
definition of workmen in S. 2(s) of the Industrial Disputes Act. It is the submission of Sri K.
Srinivasa Murthy that the instances of employment of the deposit collectors show them as holding
"contract for service" instead of "contract of service" with the banks for which reason they cannot be
said to be in employment of the bank but that they are independent contractors who have
voluntarily taken up the job of popularising the scheme of voluntary deposits and to earn a
commission therefor. It is the submission of Sri Narasimham on the other hand that the various
facets of the control exercised by the bank shows the respondents to be workmen and that the
determination as to whether they are workmen, being a finding of fact reached by the Tribunal, is
not available to be varied in a writ of certiorari. Contending as such, our attention has been invited
to the decision in Dharangadhara Chemical Works, Ltd. Vrs. State of Saurashtra, AIR 1957 SC 264,
wherein it has ruled that the question whether the relationship between the parties is one as
between employer and employee or between master and servant is a pure question of fact which the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 13
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
Tribunal has a jurisdiction to determine, and that the determination is not liable to be questioned in
proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India unless, at the least, it is shown to be fully
unsupported by evidence. It is on the other hand argued by Sri K. Srinivasa Murthy placing reliance
on the decision in Lloyds Bank Vrs. Parma Lal Gupta, 1961 -- I L.L.J. 18 and Burmah Shell Oil
Storage and Distribution Company of India, Ltd. Vrs. Burmah Shell Management Staff Association
and vice versa, 1970 --II L.L.J. 590, both decisions of the Supreme Court, that the determination of
the question is a mixed question of fact and law, i.e., it is a question of whether a proper inference
has been drawn applying accepted principles. In Lloyds Bank case (vide supra), the Court observed
that if the inference drawn by the Tribunal in regard to the status of the three workmen involved the
application of certain legal decisions, that necessarily becomes a mixed question of law and fact and
the respondent would not be justified in raising a preliminary objection that the appellant would not
be allowed to urge against the correctness of the finding of the Tribunal on such mixed question of
fact and law. The Court, however, administered the caution saying;
„We would however like to add that even if the question raised is one of fact and law, we would not
readily interfere with the conclusion of the Tribunal unless we are satisfied that such conclusion is
manifestly or obviously erroneous.(cid:128) In the latter case, even though the principle for decision of the
question was not specifically mentioned, the Court held-- the conclusion of the Tribunal of the
Transport Engineer to be a workman to be a misdirection to itself. The Court held, from the
admitted facts, the Transport Engineers as one could not have been held to be a workman.
18. Even though in Dharangadhara case (vide supra), the question was held one to be one of pure
fact and in Lloyds Bank case (vide supra), as one of fact and law, yet there is necessarily no conflict
between the two pronouncements and, closely analysed, both the decisions reflect the same view. In
Dharangadhara case (vide supra), itself, their Lordships observed that the finding of fact could be
disturbed by a writ of certiorari if the finding was fully unsupported by evidence. This in itself was a
statement of the parameters of the exercise of the writ jurisdiction under certiorari in respect of all
findings reached by Tribunals vested with the power of determining any fact. Broadly stated, the
situations which invite interference by the High Court while exercising certiorari jurisdiction are
that the finding is based on no evidence or that it is essentially based on extraneous considerations
of facts which are not germane to the issue and thirdly, where the finding reached is such which
cannot be reached by any reasonable process of inference. So far as the third one is concerned it
would include in itself the question of perverse consideration, that is, where the conclusion is one
which is manifestly Contrary to accepted legal principles and has been reached either in ignorance
or in avoidance of the same. In Lloyds Bank case (vide supra), their Lordships were reiterating the
same thing while saying that it is a mixed question of law and fact, but that the Court would not
interfere with the conclusion of the Tribunal unless it is manifestly erroneous. Even after
Dharangadhara case (vide supra), several decisions of the Apex Court bearing on the question as to
whether a person is to be treated as a workman or not has been handed down and in all those cases
the Court has gone into the question of examining the various aspects of the work discharged by the
workman and has laid down the tests as to when and when not the person concerned should be
treated as workman. In deciding the question, the Court was obviously going into appreciation of
facts. But the limit is to be drawn where such aspects have been taken into consideration and
applying the tests, the conclusion has been reached by the Tribunal. When such is the case, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 14
Orissa State Co-Operative Bank Ltd vs Union Of India on 28 February, 2025
Court would not interfere merely because the conclusion is one which is different from the one
which could have been reached by the Court. As has been observed in Lloyds Bank case (vide supra),
the conclusion must be manifestly and obviously erroneous."
8.4. Therefore, this Court is of the considered view that the matter deserves to be reconsidered by
the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner in the light of the discussions made supra.
9. In the wake of the above, order dated 18.11.2003 passed by the Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner-II (Compliance), Odisha (Annexure-3) and order dated 21.01.2010 passed by the
Employees' Provident Fund Appellate Tribunal in ATA No.2(10) of 2004 in W.P.(C) No.6323 of
2010 and order dated 16.09.2010 passed by the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner (C&R),
Odisha (Annexure-9) and order dated 11.10.2010 passed by the Regional Provident Fund
Commissioner-II(C&R), Odisha (Annexure-13) in W.P.(C) No.23057 of 2010 are set aside and the
matter is remitted to the Regional Provident Fund Commissioner-II (Compliance), Odisha,
Bhubaneswar for fresh consideration keeping in view the discussions and observations made supra.
10. With the above observation, both the writ petitions [W.P.(C) No.6323 of 2010 and W.P.(C)
No.23057 of 2010] stand disposed of, but in the circumstances there shall Signature Not be no order
as to costs. Verified Digitally Signed Signed by: ASWINI KUMAR SETHY Designation: Personal
Assistant (Secretary-in-Charge) Reason: Authentication (MURAHARI SRI RAMAN) Location:
ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date: 28-Feb-2025 14:08:11 JUDGE High Court of Orissa,
Cuttack The 28th February, 2025//Laxmikant/Suchitra
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170698301/ 15
