P.Arockiyasamy vs The Authorised Officer/Chief Manager on 14 December, 2021
P.Arockiyasamy vs The Authorised Officer/Chief Manager on 14
December, 2021
Author: Pushpa Sathyanarayana
Bench: Pushpa Sathyanarayana, P.Velmurugan
WP (MD)No.22355/2019
BEFORE THE MADURAI BENCH OF MADRAS HIGH COURT
DATED : 14.12.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MRS. JUSTICE PUSHPA
SATHYANARAYANA
AND
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE P.VELMURUGAN
W.P.(MD)No.22355 of 2019
and W.M.P.(MD)No.19129 of 2019
P.Arockiyasamy .. Petitioner
Vs.
1.The Authorised Officer/Chief Manager,
Indian Bank,
Zonal Officer – Chennai,
“Vairam”, 112, Sir Thyagaraya Road,
T.Nagar, Chennai – 600 017.
2.The Branch Manager,
Indian Bank,
Kochadai Branch,
2/3, G.V.Towers, Opp. Fenner India,
Near Passport Office, Melakkai Main Road,
Kochadai, Madurai.
3. N.Subburaj,
Proprietor,
M/s.RMS Flour Mill,
No.2/32C, Raja Mill Compound,
Workshop Road, Madurai-624 001. .. Respondents
(R2 & R3 cause title amended as per the order
dated 13.12.2021 made in
W.M.P(MD)No.17595 of 2021)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185131171/ 1
P.Arockiyasamy vs The Authorised Officer/Chief Manager on 14 December, 2021
***
Page 1/13
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) WP (MD)No.22355/2019
Prayer : Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India praying to issue a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus calling for
the records relating to the impugned communication
Ref.No.ZO/LEGAL/SARFAESI/ KOCHADAI/465, dated 19.09.2019
issued by the first respondent and quash the same and
consequently direct the first and second respondents to pay the
amount of Rs.3,77,500/- along with interest up to date.
***
For Petitioner :
Mr.V.Veerapandian,
for M/s.Vastlaw Associates
For Respondents : Mr.Jawahar Ravindran,
Standing Counsel for RR 1 and 2
ORDER
PUSHPA SATHYANARAYANA, J.
The communication of the respondents Bank dated 19.09.2019 rejecting the request of the
petitioner to refund 25% of the sale auction amount deposited by him or to offer loan for the balance
75% of the sale consideration for the action conducted on 24.08.2018 under the SARFAESI Act and
also forfeiting the amount so deposited by him, is under challenge in this writ petition.
2. The case of the writ petitioner is that he is running a small road side eatery and with the fond
hope of buying a property, he participated in the e-auction brought out by the respondents Bank on
24.08.2018 with respect to the property at No.6, Iswaryam Nagar, Narasingham village-IV Bit,
owned by the third respondent, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis which was brought to auction for
committing default in repayment of credit facilities, pursuant to the notice dated 20.07.2018 and
emerged as a successful bidder, by tendering a sum of Rs.15.10 lakhs against the upset price of
Rs.12.85 lakhs. In terms of the conditions of the said notice, he remitted 25% of the bid amount on
27.08.2018, which was pegged at Rs.3,77,500/- and agreed to pay 75% of the amount, which was
Rs.11,32,500/- within 15 days thereafter. Thus, the sale was confirmed in his favour. Based on the
same, the title documents were furnished to him, so as to enable him to avail housing loan facilities.
When the same were furnished to the Banks and subjected for legal opinion, it came to light that the
third respondent has no valid title over the subject property. The petitioner brought these facts to
the knowledge of the second respondent and sought for credit facilities to pursue further in the
matter, to which, the second respondent also agreed upon and assured to arrange for credit
facilities. The petitioner also submitted a representation on 28.02.2019 to the second respondent in
this regard. But he was issued with the impugned notice dated 19.09.2019. Hence, the present
petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185131171/ 2
P.Arockiyasamy vs The Authorised Officer/Chief Manager on 14 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
3. The second respondent filed a counter-affidavit dated 19.11.2019 resisting the prayer of the writ
petitioner. The second respondent questioned the maintainability of the writ petition on the ground
that the petitioner has to invoke the appellate jurisdiction of the Debts Recovery Tribunal under
Section 17 of the Securitisation and Reconstruction of Financial Assets and Enforcement of Security
Interest Act, 2002 (in short, 'the SARFAESI Act') against the action of the secured creditor under
Section 13(4) and prayed for dismissal of this writ petition. It is also contended that even on merits,
the writ petition is liable to be dismissed. The second respondent has given no assurance to the
petitioner to extend credit facility for the subject e-auction purchase, which is not permissible under
the SARFAESI Act, but they only assured to extend housing loan facility for constructing building
after purchase. The second respondent claimed that there was no dispute with regard to the title of
the third respondent, as loan was sanctioned only after obtaining legal opinion. The second
respondent alleged that the petitioner could not secure any loan or mobilize funds to deposit the
remaining 75% amount and thus, only to get refund of 25% of the amount deposited by him, he
started to spin a yarn, which fact is evidenced by non-production of the legal opinion allegedly
obtained by the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis petitioner qua the title of the property.
4. Heard the learned counsel on either side and perused the materials placed before this Court.
5. When this petition came up for hearing on 22.10.2019, this Court passed the following order :
"3. According to the petitioner this communication is anti-dated. The petitioner's
case is that on receipt of the documents of title from the respondent bank after
payment of Rs.3,77,500/- they obtained legal opinion and found that the title was
defective. It is not the case of the respondent Bank that the borrower had defective
title to the property. However, they seek to rely on Rule 9(4) of the Security Interest
Enforcement Rules, 2002 to justify their forfeiture.
4. In our considered view, if there is a defective title, no person can be compelled to
purchase a property especially when the respondent bank is a nationalised bank. If
there is a defective title, it is not clear as to how loan was sanctioned to the third
respondent. These are all issues which we need to consider in the writ petition. Thus,
considering the conduct of the respondent Bank, we direct the respondent bank to
deposit Rs.3,77,500/- to the credit of this Writ Petition in W.P.(MD)No. 22355 of
2019, before the Indian Bank, Madurai Bench of Madras High Court branch within
one week from the date of receipt of a copy of this order. On such deposit, the same
shall be retained by the Bank in an interest bearing account and abide by the orders
that may be passed in the writ petition.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
5. Learned Counsel who accepted notice for the respondent Bank seeks time to file
counter. The respondent bank after complying with the above direction is directed to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185131171/ 3
P.Arockiyasamy vs The Authorised Officer/Chief Manager on 14 December, 2021
file counter affidavit before the next hearing date.
6. List the matter for hearing on 18.11.2019."
The said direction was complied with and the same was recorded in the order dated 07.07.2021.
6. From the above, it is clear that this Court entertained the instant writ petition on the premise that
the title of the property is not clear, which was not disclosed to the petitioner. In the
counter-affidavit also, it is not the stand of the respondents Bank that the title documents were
given to the petitioner earlier to satisfy himself about the title of the property. When the petitioner is
not satisfied with the title of the property, the respondents Bank, having not shown the title deeds to
him earlier, cannot compel him to purchase the property. Thus, the claim of the respondents Bank
qua the maintainability need not be gone into.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
7. The second respondent relied upon Rule 9(5) of the Security Interest (Enforcement) Rules, 2002,
to pass the impugned order and the said provision reads as follows :
"9. Time of sale, issue of sale certificate and delivery of possession, etc. -
(1) ....
(5) In default of payment within the period mentioned in sub-rule (4), the deposit
shall be forfeited and the property shall be resold and the defaulting purchaser shall
forfeit all claim to the property or to any part of the sum for which it may be
subsequently sold. ....... "
8. The learned counsel for the petitioner relied on a recent order of the First Bench of this Court in
Shanmugavelu V. The Authorised Officer, Central Bank of India, reported in 2021-5- L.W. 289, to
contend that the impugned order is erroneous. In the said case, the original auction-purchaser, who
deposited the initial bid amount, questioned the order of forfeiture passed by the Bank before the
Debts Recovery Tribunal II, Chennai (DRT), which, in turn, while setting aside the order permitted
the Bank to retain a portion of the amount, i.e., five lakh, towards the expenses incurred in
conducting the sale for the second time. When the Bank took it on appeal before the Debt Recovery
Appellate Tribunal, Chennai (DRAT), it enhanced the retention of amount by the Bank to fifty
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis five lakhs. Both the secured creditor - bank and the original
auction- purchaser of the property questioned the propriety of the order passed by the DRAT
enhancing the forfeiter originally ordered by the DRT before this Court. While setting aside the
order of the DRAT and restoring the order of the DRT, the First Bench held as follows :
"10. Section 74 of the Contract Act, 1872 provides for compensation for breach of
contract where the penalty is stipulated. Section 73 of the Contract Act is the general
rule that provides for compensation for loss or damage caused by breach of contract
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185131171/ 4
P.Arockiyasamy vs The Authorised Officer/Chief Manager on 14 December, 2021
and Section 74 is where the quantum is specified. What Section 73 of the Contract Act
mandates is that a party who suffers as a result of a breach committed by the other
party to the contract "is entitled to receive from the party who has broken the
contract, compensation for any loss or damage caused to him thereby, which
naturally arose in the usual course of things from such breach, or which the parties
knew, when they made the contract, to be likely to result from the breach of it". Any
detailed discussion on such provision would be beyond the scope of the present lis
and may require many more sheets that may be conveniently expended in the present
exercise. Indeed, Section 73 of the Contract Act is in the nature of a jurisprudential
philosophy that is accepted as a part of the law in this country. In short, it implies
that only such of the loss or damage suffered by the party not in breach, may be
recovered from the party in breach, as a consequence of the breach. It is possible that
as a result of the breach, the party not in breach does not suffer any adverse impact.
It is also possible, as in the present case, that as a consequence of the breach, the
party not in breach obtains a benefit. In such https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis cases,
where no loss or damage has been occasioned to the party not in breach, such party
cannot extract any money merely on account of such breach, as the entitlement in law
to compensation is not upon the commission of breach, but only upon any loss or
damage being suffered as a consequence thereof. That is elementary.
11. Even in cases of liquidated damages, where the quantum specified is regarded as a
genuine pre-estimate by parties to the contract, there needs to be some loss or
damage suffered for the party not in breach to even be entitled to claim the amount
quantified in the contract itself. The factum of having suffered damages in such a
situation has to be established, though the quantum of the loss need not be, since the
contract contains a genuine pre-estimate thereof.
12. Rule 9(5) of the said Rules of 2002 has to be seen as an enabling provision that
permits forfeiture in principle. However, such Rule cannot be conferred an exalted
status to override the underlying ethos of Section 73 of the Contract Act. In other
words, Rule 9(5) has to yield to the principle recognised in Section 73 of the Contract
Act or it must be read down accordingly. Thus, notwithstanding the wide words used
in Rule 9(5) of the said Rules, a secured creditor may not forfeit any more than the
loss or damage suffered by such creditor as a consequence of the failure on the part of
a bidder to make payment of the consideration or the balance consideration in terms
of the bid. It is only if such principle, as embodied in Section 73 of the Contract Act, is
read into Rule 9(5) of the said Rules, would there be an appropriate answer to the
conundrum as to whether a colossal default of the entirety of the consideration or the
mere default of one rupee out of the consideration would result in the identical
consequence of forfeiture as indicated in the provision.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185131171/ 5
P.Arockiyasamy vs The Authorised Officer/Chief Manager on 14 December, 2021
13. In any event, notwithstanding the reference to Section 35 of the Act of 2002, the
apparent overriding effect of the provisions of the Act of 2002 has to be tempered in
the light of Section 37 of the Act. Though Section 37 of the Act refers to several
statutes by name, the residual limb of such provision recognises "or any other law for
the time being in force", which would embrace the Contract Act within its fold. It is
completely unacceptable that by virtue of the delegated legislation as in the Rules of
2002, the fundamental principle envisaged in the Contract Act would get diluted or
altogether disregarded.
.....
20. Before parting, there is another aspect that has to be referred to for the
completeness of the discussion. The purpose of the Act of 2002 is to ensure speedy
recovery of the debt due to secured creditors covered by such statute. Towards such
end, the provisions of the said Act and the Rules made thereunder give primacy to the
secured creditor in initially assessing the quantum of debt due and in proceeding
against the securities furnished for realising such debt due. However, no secured
creditor, not even by embracing the provisions of the said Act of 2002, can unjustly
enrich itself or obtain any more by way of resorting to any of the measures
contemplated under Section 13(4) of the Act or otherwise than the debt that is due to
it and the costs that may have been incurred in course of trying to recover the debt
due. In a sense, if the forfeiture provision in Rule 9(5) of the said Rules is ready to
imply what the secured creditor in this case seeks to, it may result in a secured
creditor unjustly enriching itself, which is not permissible."
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Applying the ratio enunciated in the above judgment, without any
semblance of doubt, this Court has to arrive at a conclusion that the order impugned, as it is, is bad
in the eye of law. This Court in the said judgment observed that "for any quantum to be awarded on
account of the damages, there is a twin exercise which has to be undertaken : the first limb of the
exercise is to ascertain the factum ; it is only upon the factum being established that the quantum
may be assessed.
9. Admittedly, the respondents Bank brought the property for auction, sold it and adjusted the sale
proceeds in the default account of the third respondent. Considering factual position, we are of the
view that suffice it to allow the respondents Bank to retain a sum of Rs.50,000/- (Rupees fifty
thousand only) towards the expenses for conducting the auction for the second time and the
respondents Bank has to necessarily refund the balance of the amount deposited by the petitioner.
10. Accordingly, the respondents Bank are permitted to encash the deposit made by them for a sum
of Rs.3,77,500/- to the credit of this writ petition before the Indian Bank, Madurai Bench of Madras
High Court, along with interest accrued as on the date of https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
encashing it, and after retaining a sum of Rs.50,000/-, are directed to refund the remaining sums of
money to the petitioner on the same day.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185131171/ 6
P.Arockiyasamy vs The Authorised Officer/Chief Manager on 14 December, 2021
11. With the above observations and direction, the writ petition stands allowed. No costs.
Consequently, connected Miscellaneous Petition is closed.
(P.S.N., J.) (P.V., J.)
14.12.2021
Index : Yes / No
Internet: Yes
gg
To
1. The Authorized Officer/Chief Manager,
Allahabad Bank,
Zonal Office-Chennai,
"Vairams", 112, Sir Thyagaraya Road,
T.Nagar, Chennai-600 017.
2. The Branch Manager,
Allahabad Bank, Kochadai Branch,
2/3, G.V.Towers, Opp. Fenner India,
Near Passport Office, Melakkal Main Road,
Kochadai, Madurai-625 016.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
PUSHPA SATHYANARAYANA, J.
AND
P.VELMURUGAN, J.
gg
14.12.2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185131171/ 7
P.Arockiyasamy vs The Authorised Officer/Chief Manager on 14 December, 2021
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/185131171/ 8
