P.Rajamanickam vs The Secretary To Government on 16 December, 2021
P.Rajamanickam vs The Secretary To Government on 16
December, 2021
Author: M.S.Ramesh
Bench: M.S.Ramesh
W.P.No.14737 of 2017
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 16.12.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE M.S.RAMESH
W.P.No.14737 of 2017
P.Rajamanickam ...Petitioner
-Vs-
1.The Secretary to Government,
Co-operation, Food and Consumer
Protection Department,
Fort St.George, Chennai-9.
2.The Registrar of Co-operative
Societies,
No.170, N.V.N.Maligai,
Kilpauk, Chennai-10. ...Respondents
Prayer: Writ Petition filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
praying to issue a Writ of Certiorarified Mandamus, calling for the records of
the order in G.O.(2D).No.77 dated 30.08.2012 and consequential order in
G.O.(3D).No.12 dated 31.08.2012 on the file of the 1st respondent, quash the
same and direct the respondents to permit the petitioner to retire from service
and pay all monetary benefits with 9% statutory interest from the date of
superannuation till payment.
1/18
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) W.P.No.14737 of 2017
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151981848/ 1
P.Rajamanickam vs The Secretary To Government on 16 December, 2021
For Petitioner : Mr.M.Palaniswamy
For R1 : Mr.C.Selvaraj,
Additional Government Pleader
For R2 : Mr.S.Jayachandran,
Government Advocate
ORDER
With the consent of both the parties, this writ petition is taken up for final disposal.
2. The petitioner herein, while serving as a Deputy Registrar under the second respondent herein,
was subjected to surcharge proceedings under Section 87 of the Tamil Nadu Cooperative Societies
Act, 1983 and an enquiry under Section 81 of the Tamil Nadu Cooperative Societies Act, 1983, as
well as a disciplinary action.
3. Insofar as the surcharge proceedings are concerned, the same is now pending before this Court in
C.M.A.(CS).No.4 of 2005 under Section 152 of the Act, pursuant to the orders of this Court passed in
C.R.P.No.2749 of 2013. The disciplinary action initiated under Rule 17(b) of the Tamil Nadu Civil
Services (Discipline and Appeal) Rules, ended in favour of the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
petitioner and further action was dropped. In this background, on 30.08.2012, the first respondent
herein had passed an order of suspension, by not permitting the petitioner to retire on his date of
superannuation, i.e. 31.08.2012. Consequently, another order was passed on 31.08.2012, retaining
him in service under Rule 56(1)(c) of the Fundamental Rules. These orders are under challenge in
the present writ petition.
4. The learned counsel for the petitioner would submit that a mere pendency of the surcharge
proceedings will not entitle the respondents to retain the petitioner in service and without
permitting him to retire from service. In support of such a submission, the learned counsel placed
reliance on a decision of the Hon'ble Full Bench of this Court in the case of S.Andiyannan Vs. The
Joint Registrar, Co-operative Societies, Madurai and another reported in 2015 Writ L.R. 755, as well
as a decision of the Hon'ble Division Bench of this Court in the case of The Management, V.T.742
Tiruvannamalai District Consumer Co-operative Wholesale Stores Ltd. Vs. R.Dhayalan and another
passed in W.A.No.1395 of 2021, dated 25.08.2021.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
5. This apart, the learned counsel would also submit that Rule 56(1)(c) of the Fundamental Rules
entitles the Government to retain a person in service after the age of superannuation, whenever
there are charges or enquiries in criminal proceedings and therefore, since the proceedings under
Section 87 of the Act cannot not be deemed as a criminal proceeding, the action on the part of the
respondents in placing reliance on Rule 56(1)(c), cannot be substantiated.
6. Per contra, the learned Additional Government Pleader appearing for the first respondent would
place reliance on the averments made in the counter affidavit and submit that the surcharge
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151981848/ 2
P.Rajamanickam vs The Secretary To Government on 16 December, 2021
proceedings and the disciplinary action are separate independent actions and even though the
petitioner may have been exonerated from the departmental action, the loss that had occurred to the
Government is yet to be recovered, which is the subject matter of the appeal under Section 152 of the
Act and which is pending. In this background, the learned Additional Government Pleader would
submit that there is no infirmity in the action initiated by the respondents in placing the petitioner
under suspension and not permitting him to retire.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
7. Rule 56(1)(c) of the Fundamental Rules enables the Government to retain a Government servant
in service, after the age of retirement, whenever charges of criminal misconduct or other grave
charges are contemplated or is pending. The relevant rule is extracted hereunder for convenience.
"Rule 56(1)(c) of Fundamental Rules provides that “Notwithstanding anything
contained in Clause (a), a Government servant –
(i) who is already under suspension on a charge of misconduct; or
(ii) in respect of whom an order of suspension has been issued and against whom an
enquiry into grave charges of criminal misconduct is pending; or
(iii) in respect of whom an order of suspension has been issued and against whom an
enquiry into allegations of criminal misconduct is pending;
(iv) in respect of whom an order of suspension has been issued and an enquiry into
grave charges is contemplated or is pending; or
(v) in respect of whom an order of suspension has been issued and a complaint of
criminal offence is https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis under investigation or trail shall
not be permitted to retire on his reaching the date of retirement, but shall be retained
in service until the enquiry is concluded and the final orders passed thereon."
8. While dealing with the scope of surcharge proceedings under Section 87 of the Act, the Hon'ble
Full Bench in the case of S.Andiyannan's case (supra) had observed that such surcharge proceedings
need not be penal in nature, in the following manner:-
"28.So far as the second legal question is concerned, it is crystal clear that the object
of Section 87 of the Act is only to recover the loss caused to any co-operative
institution by an employee, if it is established as per procedure known to law.
Surcharge need not be penal in nature, if the loss caused by him is admitted by the
employee or established by the authority against him, that could be recovered by the
co-operative society. However, even surcharge proceedings cannot be initiated after
the retirement of an employee to recover the same from his retiral benefits."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151981848/ 3
P.Rajamanickam vs The Secretary To Government on 16 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
9. Likewise, in R.Dhayalan's case (supra), the claim of a Government employee for retirement
benefits was considered favourably, when the decision of the surcharge proceeding came to be
challenged by the Society.
While holding that the respondents therein would not be justified in denying the retirement benefits
to the petitioner therein, the Hon'ble Division Bench had placed reliance on another Division Bench
order in the case of R.Murugesan Vs. The Joint Registrar of Coop. Societies, Thiruvannamalai
Region, Thiruvannamalai passed in W.A.No.1856 of 2012 dated 23.03.2011, as well as the decision
of the Hon'ble Full Bench in S.Andiyannan's case (supra). The relevant portion of the order of the
Hon'ble Division Bench reads as follows:-
"6. Even prior to the Full Bench decision, a Division Bench of this Court in
W.A.No.1856 of 2012, vide the judgment dated 23.03.2011 (R.Murugesan V. The
Joint Registrar of Coop.
Societies, Thiruvannamalai Region, Thiruvannamalai) held that the co~operative
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis employee cannot be kept under suspension beyond
the date of superannuation, in the absence of any provision under the Tamil Nadu
Co~operative Societies Act or under the Bye~laws of the Societies. At this juncture, it
is apt to reproduce paragraphs 6 and 7 of the judgment of the said Division Bench of
this Court in the following manner :
“6. The core issue that arises for consideration in this writ appeal, is that in the
absence of any rule, whether it is open to the first respondent to initiate and continue
the disciplinary proceedings after attaining the age of superannuation. The said issue
is no longer res integra, as it has been answered by a Division Bench of this Court
reported in 2010 (2) CTC 569 (M.K.S.Balasubramanian vs. Kancheepuram Central
Cooperative Bank Limited, rep. by its Special Officer). In the said judgment, the
Division Bench, wherein one of us (NPVJ) is a member, has taken into consideration
the judgments reported in 1999 (3) SCC 666 (Bhagsrathi Jena vs. Board of Directors,
O.S.F.C., and others), 2006 (4) MLJ 504 (F.Muthusamy vs. Tamil Nadu Cements
Corporation Ltd., 2007 (5) CTC 491 (N.Kunnai Gowder vs. The Coimbatore District
Co~operative Milk Producers-- Union Ltd., 2008 (2) SCC 41 (U.P.State Sugar
Cooperation Ltd., and Others vs. Kamal Swaroop Tondon) and also distinguished the
judgment rendered by the Division Bench of this Court reported in 2010 (2) CTC 234
(Registrar of Co~operative Societies, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Kilpauk,
Chennai~10 and another vs. G.Manoharan) and held as follows:
“9. It is an admitted case of the respondent that the byelaw though provided for a
right to continue the Bank to proceed with disciplinary proceedings after allowing the
appellant to retire the said amendment is stayed by this Court and the said stay order
is still in force. Hence, the said amendment cannot be relied on by the respondent to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151981848/ 4
P.Rajamanickam vs The Secretary To Government on 16 December, 2021
sustain the order retaining the power to proceed with Disciplinary Proceedings after
permitting the appellant to retire.
10. In the decisions reported in 2008(2) MLJ 585 and F. Muthusamy v. Tamil Nadu
Cements Corporation Ltd., 2006 (4) MLJ 504, it is held that disciplinary proceedings
cannot continue after retirement unless the service rules provides for such right to
continue.
11. In the decision, reported in Bhagsrathi Jena v. Board of Directors, O.S.F.C., and
others, 1999 (3) SCC 666, in a similar matter in para 7 it is held thus:
"In view of the absence of such a provision in the above said regulations, it must be
held that the Corporation had no legal authority to make any reduction in the retiral
benefits of the appellant. There is also no provision for conducting a disciplinary
enquiry after retirement of the appellant and nor any provision stating that in case
misconduct is established, a deduction could be made from retiral benefits. Once the
appellant had retired from service on 30.6.1995, there was no authority vested in the
Corporation for continuing the departmental enquiry even for the purpose of
imposing any reduction in the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis retiral benefits
payable to the appellant. In the absence of such an authority, it must be held that the
enquiry had lapsed and the appellant was entitled to full retiral benefits on
retirement."
12. Thus, the respondent is not justified in imposing the condition namely reserving its right to
proceed disciplinary proceedings while allowing the appellant to retire from his service on
33. 2005. The direction given by the learned Single Judge to the respondent to retain the amount of
Rs.2,69,933/~ from terminal benefits payable to the appellant is perfectly justified as the
respondent can effect recovery of the loss sustained after initiating surcharge proceedings under
Section 87 of Tamil Nadu Co~operative Societies Act, 1983, which is extracted hereunder:
"87. Surcharge.- (1) Where in the course of an audit under Section 80 or an inquiry
under Section 81 or an inspection or investigation under Section 82 or inspection of
books under Section 83 or the winding~up of a society, it appears that any person
who is or was entrusted with the organisation or management of the society or any
past or present officer or servant of the society has misappropriated or fraudulently
retained any money or other property or been guilty of breach of trust in relation to
the society or has caused any deficiency in the assets of the society by breach of trust
or wilful negligence or has made any payment which is not in himself or any person
specially authorised by him in this behalf, of his own motion or on the application of
the board, liquidator or any creditor or contributory may frame charges against such
person or officer or servant and after giving a reasonable opportunity to the person
concerned and in the case of a https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis deceased person, to
his representative who inherits his estate, to answer the charges, make an order
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151981848/ 5
P.Rajamanickam vs The Secretary To Government on 16 December, 2021
requiring him to repay or restore the money or property or any part thereof with
interest at such rate as the Registrar or the person authorised as aforesaid thinks just
or to contribute such sum to the assets of the society by way of compensation in
respect of the misappropriation, misapplication of funds, fraudulent retainer, breach
of trust or wilful negligence or payments which are not in accordance with this Act,
the rules or the bye~laws as the Registrar or the person authorised as aforesaid
thinks just:..."
The above provision empowers to proceed against a person whether he was an officer or a servant,
either past or present and even if the person is dead recovery can be made from the legal heir of the
said person if he inherited the property. In the decision reported in U.P. State Sugar Co~operation
Ltd. and others v. Kamal Swaroop Tondon, 2008 (2) SCC 41, it is held that a retired employee could
be proceeded to recover the loss caused by him and amount could be recovered from the retirement
benefits. In para 40 it is held thus:
".....in our considered opinion, the High Court was wrong in holding that the
proceedings were initiated after the respondent retired and there was no power,
authority or jurisdiction with the Corporation to take any action against the writ
petitioner and in setting aside the orders passed against him. In our judgment,
proceedings could have been taken for the recovery of financial loss suffered by the
Corporation due to negligence and carelessness attributable to the respondent
employee. The impugned action, therefore, cannot https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
be said to be illegal or without jurisdiction and the High Court was net right in
quashing the proceedings as also the orders issued by the Corporation. The Appeal,
therefore, deserves to be allowed by setting aside the order of the High Court."
Ultimately, the Division Bench has modified the order passed by the learned Single Judge, by
holding that the condition to continue the disciplinary proceedings after retirement against the
appellant therein is unsustainable and granting liberty to the respondent to proceed with the
surcharge proceedings under Section 87 of the Tamil Nadu Co~operative Societies Act, 1983 for the
alleged loss."
7. In yet another judgment of this Court made in W.P.No.27170 of 2011, dated 29.11.2013, wherein
one of us (NPVJ) is a member, a similar issue was considered in the light of the decision reported in
2012 (3) CTC 488 (P.Thangavel vs. The Chairman, Common Cadre Committee/Joint Registrar of
Co~operative Societies), and M.K.S.Balasubramanian-s case was also considered and all other
decisions on that legal point, have been submitted and this Court held that the Co~operative
employee cannot be kept under suspension beyond the date of superannuation, as there is no
provision either under the Tamil Nadu Co~operative Societies Act or under the bye~laws and
granted liberty to initiate surcharge proceedings for the alleged loss."
7. The writ Court has allowed the writ petition on the ground that in the absence of rule
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis or as per the dictum laid down by the Full Bench in
S.Andiyannan's case (cited supra), the disciplinary proceedings cannot be continued against a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151981848/ 6
P.Rajamanickam vs The Secretary To Government on 16 December, 2021
person, who had retired, however serious, the act of misconduct committed by the employee of the
Society.
8. The contention of the learned counsel for the appellant is that the Writ Court had not
distinguished the disciplinary proceedings and the surcharge proceedings. In the instant case, the
surcharge proceedings had concluded, as no appeal was filed by the employee and it has reached
finality. It is the argument of the learned counsel for the appellant that if the first respondent/
employee is allowed to retire, it will be difficult for the Society to recover the amount from him, as
the retiral benefits have to be disbursed to him.
9. As the employee, the first respondent is entitled for the retiral benefits after his retirement and
even the Gratuity of an employee cannot be treated as a charge and it is for the service rendered by
him. Therefore, the statutes are https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis conscious of the fact that the
Provident Fund and the Gratuity Fund cannot be attached or be subject to any other process of any
court or other authority, which is made clear under Sections 78 and 79 of the Tamil Nadu
Co~operative Societies Act. Therefore, we see no reason to interfere with the order of the learned
Single Judge.
10. At this stage, it is pertinent to state that Section 87 of the Tamil Nadu Co~operative Societies
Act, which deals with the surcharge proceedings, itself provides for recovery of the quantified
amount from the employee by invoking the Tamil Nadu Revenue Recovery Act, 1864 treating the
same as an arrear of land revenue. Therefore, there is no merit in the argument of the appellant
stating that if the retirement benefits are disbursed to the respondent, it would be difficult for them
to recover the amount."
10. A perusal of the aforesaid decisions, in the light of the Fundamental Rule 56(1)(c), would reveal
that the Government would not be entitled to keep a Government servant under suspension, without
permitting https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis him to retire, on the ground that the surcharge
proceedings are pending. As a matter of fact, the Fundamental Rule 56(1)(c) would apply only to
cases where there are charges of misconduct or grave charges or criminal misconduct is pending or
is contemplated or a complaint of criminal investigation is under trial. These exemptions under the
Fundamental Rule 56(1)(c) will not include the surcharge proceedings and in the light of the
decisions cited above, I am of the view that a mere pendency of the surcharge proceedings would not
entitle the Government to place their employees under suspension, on the ground that the surcharge
proceedings under Section 87 of the Act are pending.
11. It would be appropriate to mention here that the payment of gratuity is an entitlement of the
Government employee and in the absence of any specific rules or regulations to withhold it on the
ground that, the surcharge proceedings are pending for recovery of the alleged loss to the
Government, there is absolutely no justification in the action initiated by the respondent herein.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151981848/ 7
P.Rajamanickam vs The Secretary To Government on 16 December, 2021
12. The Hon'ble Division Bench of this Court in the case of The Joint Registrar of Co-operative
Societies, Namakkal and others Vs. K.Ambarayan and another passed in W.A.Nos.663 and 668 of
2015 dated 11.04.2018, had ratified this proposition in the following manner:-
"8.The employee must be in a position to enjoy the benefits consequent to his
retirement. The payment of gratuity is not a matter of charity. It is the entitlement of
the employee to receive the gratuity. There should be a valid reason to detain the
payment of statutory benefits. We are therefore of the view that the appellants were
not justified in keeping the benefits under the pretext that surcharge proceedings
were pending. We therefore confirm the order passed by the learned single Judge."
13. For all the foregoing reasons, I do not find any legality in the impugned orders passed by the first
respondent herein and accordingly, the orders dated 30.08.2012 and 31.08.2012 on the file of the
first respondent are quashed. Consequently, there shall be a direction to the first respondent herein
to pass orders, permitting the petitioner to retire from his service and pay him all the
Death-cum-Retirement benefits, as expeditiously as possible, https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis in
any event, within a period of four weeks from the date of receipt of a copy of this order.
14. The Writ Petition stands allowed, accordingly. No costs.
16.12.2021 Index:Yes/No Internet:Yes/No Speaking order/Non-speaking order hvk To
1.The Secretary to Government, Co-operation, Food and Consumer Protection Department, Fort
St.George, Chennai-9.
2.The Registrar of Co-operative Societies, No.170, N.V.N.Maligai, Kilpauk, Chennai-10.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis M.S.RAMESH,J.
ata/hvk 16.12.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/151981848/ 8
