P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
Author: A. Guneshwar Sharma
Bench: A. Guneshwar Sharma
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
Cril. Petition No.44 of 2022
Khumukcham Joykisan Singh, aged about 57 years, S/O (L) Kh.
Ingocha Singh, a resident of Khoyathong Polem Leikai, P.O. &
P.S. Lamphelpat, Imphal West District, Manipur.
....... Petitioner/s
- Versus -
1. The State of Manipur, represented by the Secretary (Home),
Government of Manipur, Old Secretariat, Imphal West, Manipur -
795001;
2. The Director General of Police, Imphal West, Manipur - 795001;
3. The Superintendent of Police, Imphal West, Manipur - 795001; &
4. The Officer-in-Charge, Imphal Police Station, Imphal, Manipur -
795001.
...... Respondent/s
BEFORE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE A. GUNESHWAR SHARMA For the Petitioner : Mr. Th.
Jugindro, Advocate Mr. M. Birendrajit, Advocate For the Respondents : Mr. Athouba Khaidem, PP
Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 1 Date of Hearing : 26.07.2023 Date of Judgment & Order :
11.12.2023 JUDGMENT & ORDER (CAV) [1] Heard Mr. Th. Jugindro, learned counsel and Mr. M.
Birendrajit, learned counsel for the petitioner and Mr. Athouba Khaidem, learned PP for the State
Respondents.
[2] The present petition is filed by the petitioner under Section 482 Cr.P.C. for quashing and setting
aside the FIR being FIR No.7 (1) 1996 registered on the file of Imphal Police Station under Sections
121, 121-A of IPC and Section 13 of Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act, 1967 or discharge him from
the proceeding of the FIR.
[3] The case of the petitioner is the FIR was lodged by one K. Budhichandra Singh, SI of RAPF
Commander X Ray 22 before the officer-in- charge, Imphal Police Station, Imphal 03-01-1996
alleging inter-alia amongst others that on 03-01-1996 on receipt of a specific information, and then
along with police party of RAPF carried out a raid at the house of one Laimayum Nabakishwar
Sharma of Mahabali, Imphal East. In that, the petitioner and four other persons were arrested by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 1
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
using reasonable forces.
Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 2 The name of those persons are (1) Ningombam Nabachandra Singh
@ Nabamacha @ Yaiphaba, 35 yrs, S/O N. Iboyaima Singh of Thangmeiband Lourung Purel Leikai,
S/S Secretary (Home) and i/c of Finance of the so called outlaw organisation PREPAK, (2)
Khumukcham Kisan @ Joykisan Singh @ Theko, 32 yrs. S/O Kh. Ingocha Singh of Khoyathong
Polem Leikai, (3) Laimayum Indrajit Sharma, 26 yrs. S/O L. Imo Sharma of Loklaobung and (4)
Laimayum Nabakishwor Sharma, 27 yrs. S/O L. Nodia Sharma of Mahabali Mamang Leikai.
[3.1] During body search of N. Nabachandra Singh, some important documents relating to PREPAK,
a sum of Rs.3000/- (Rupees three thousand), three numbers of round rubber stamp (seal), one line
seal with one red ink stamp pad i.e. two round seal of PREPAK and one round seal of Addl. D.C.
Noklak, Tuensang Dist., Nagaland and the line seal for Addl. D.C. Noklak, Tuensang Dist.,
Nagaland, three numbers of colour photographs of PREPAK and two nos. of typed demand letter
books (101 pages in each) of PREPAK in the name of Secry. Finance were recovered and seized from
his possession under a formal seizure memo. [3.2] On the body search of Kh. Kisan Singh, one typed
demand letter book in the name of Secry., Finance (101 pages) of PREPAK and one N.V. Cril. Petn.
No.44 of 2022 Page 3 Scooter bearing Regn. No.MN0B-6222 Cairo dust in colour were recovered
and seized from his possession under a formal seizure memo. On spot interrogation, arrested
accused. N. Nabachandra Singh disclosed that he was Secry. (Home) i/c Secry., Finance of PREPAK
organisation. Other arrested associates were working under him as hard-core activists of the said
PREPAK organisation. It was also disclosed that they were responsible in collection of huge
amounts of money from different firms, association and from general public, etc. for their party
fund. The activities of the said hard core PREPAK activist amounted to wage war against Govt. of
India and to over-owe to the general public with cool calculation and malevolent design. Then, on
received of the said report, the OC/Imphal - PS registered regular case under FIR. No.7 (1) 1996 IPS
U/S 121/121-A, 13 U A (P) Act against the petitioner and others on 3-1-1996 and directed one SI H.
Rameshwor Sharma to investigate the case. On 31st January, 2022, the Superintendent of Police,
Imphal West District, Manipur furnished the required report, required documents and submitted
present case status and certified copies of FIRs addressed to Shri A. Gautam Sharma, Advocate. In
the said letter in Sl. No.1 shown the FIR No.7(1) 1996 IPS reflected present status of the case by
showing as submitted under Draft CS Vide M/No.7/12SP-IW/02.
Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 4
[4] Mr. Th. Jugindro, learned counsel for the petitioner has
submitted that the petitioner did not commit any offence as alleged in the FIR of Imphal P.S. under
FIR No.7 (1) 1996 IPS U/S 121/121-A read with Section 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention)
Act 1967 and that even if the contents of the FIR are taken at their face value and accepted as
correct, then also no offence under Sections 121/121-A read with Section 13 of UA (P) Act, made out
against the petitioner. He has further submitted that the petitioner did not commit any offence as
alleged in the impugned FIR dated 03-01-1996 and that the allegation made in the FIR in respect of
the alleged incriminating articles such as one typed demand letter book in the name of Secretary,
Finance (101 pages) of PREPAK and one N.V. Scooter bearing Regd. No. MN0B-6222 Cairo dust in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 2
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
colour were recovered, even if taken at their face value, do not constitute any cognizable offence
against the petitioner and therefore, it is prayed to quash and set aside the said impugned FIR No.7
(1) 1996 IPS U/S 121/121-A, 13 U A (P) Act. [5] Mr. Th. Jugindro, learned counsel for the petitioner
has further reiterated that at the relevant points of time, the petitioner was well known social worker
and social activist particularly in his Thangmeiband Assembly Constituency and the petitioner is an
Indian Politician and member of the Manipur Legislative Assembly and he is an elected member of
Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 5 MLA/(Manipur Legislative Assembly) from Thangmeiband
Assembly Constituency, Imphal West District, Manipur in 2022 Manipur Legislature Assembly
Election. Since 2012, he is an elected Member of the Manipur Legislative Assembly and that he did
not commit any offence as alleged in the FIR of Imphal Police Station under FIR No.7 (1) 1996 IPS
U/S 121/121- A IPC read with Section 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967, and that
even if the contents of the FIR has taken at their face value and accepted as correct then also no
offence U/S 121/121-A IPC, read with Section 13 of the Unlawful Activities (Prevention) Act 1967,
made out against the petitioner.
[5.1] Mr. Th. Jugindro, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that after the registration of
the said FIR and in the investigation done so far till date, the I.O. could not collect sufficient
materials in support of the accusation made in the FIR and that a bare perusal of the FIR does not
reveal a cognizable offence against the petitioner and as such the impugned FIR be quashed.
[5.2] Learned counsel for the petitioner has pointed out that the petitioner is not a member of the so
called unlawful organization Prepak and he never associated or worked under the other accused
person namely Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 6 N. Nabachandra Singh (Accused No.1 in the said
impugned FIR) as hard core activist. He has further submitted that, till date, the respondent
authority did not find out even a single iota of evidence against the petitioner. It is pertinent to
mention that if the prosecution has enough evidence against the petitioner in connection with the
said impugned FIR, it should have filed a report or charge sheet under section 173 of Cr.P.C. before
the concerned Court. In fact, the authority could not file a charge sheet U/S 173 of Cr.P.C. against
the petitioner before the concerned Court till date even after 26 years of lodging the said FIR. [6]
Mr. Th. Jugindro, learned counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner is now elected
member of Manipur Legislature Assembly from the Thangmeiband Assembly Constituency for three
times consecutively. However, the prosecution could not file the charge-sheet or either submit a
final report against the petitioner. This is a politically motivated case. In fact, due to above
mentioned FIR, the image of the petitioner is affected in a negative way in the society. Learned
counsel for the petitioner has submitted that the petitioner always follows the process of law and
gives full cooperation in the investigation. In spite of this, the prosecution could not find out any
single prima facie material against the petitioner in order to file the charge sheet U/S 173 of Cr.P.C.
before the Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 7 concerned Court against the petitioner. Thus, the said
impugned FIR is liable to be quashed and set aside.
[7] Mr. Athouba Khaidem, learned PP for the State relies on the affidavit dated 10.11.2022 filed on
behalf of respondent Nos.2, 3 and 4. It is submitted that that an FIR No. 7(1)1996 IPS U/S 121/121-A
IPC & 13 UA (P) Act has been registered by the Officer in Charge, Imphal PS on receiving of a
written report from one K. Budhichandra Singh, SI of Rapid Action Police Force, against the present
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 3
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
petitioner and the other three persons arrested on the charge of being hard core PREPAK Activists.
It is submitted that there is prima facie case made out against the petitioner in the investigation. It is
submitted that it was a fact that during the body search of the petitioner on 0301-1996 by the police
officer (the complainant of the FIR case No. 7(1)1996 IPS U/S 121/121-A,IPC and 13 UA (P) Act, one
demand letter book (typed) in the name of Secretary, Finance (101 pages) of PREPAK (a banned
organization) and one NV Scooter bearing Regn. No. MNOB-6222 Cario dust in colour were
recovered and seized from his possession by preparing a seizure memo. The seizure of the
incriminating documents from his possession connects the petitioner in the crime. Para 11 and 12 of
the counter affidavit dated 10.11.2022 filed on behalf of respondent Nos.2, 3 and 4 read as under:
Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 8
11. That, with reference to Para No. 10 of the Petition, the deponent humbly submits that there id
prima facie evidence against the four persons including the petitioner for prosecution U/S 121/121-A
IPC & 13 UA(P) Act, a draft charge sheet was submitted to the SP/CID(CB) with case records for
taking prosecution sanction from the concerned authority on 25-6-2002 vide SP/IW memo No.
7/12/SP-
IW/2002 dated 25-6-2002. The SP/CID(CB) forwarded the case record to Special Secretary, Home,
Government of Manipur for prosecution sanction vide memo No. 14/3(9)2002(CB) dated
1410-2002.
12. That, with reference to Para No. 11 of the Petition, the deponent humbly submits that the case
was submitted to the SP/CID(CB) with a draft Charge Sheet for taking prosecution sanction from
the concerned authority to prosecute the petitioner and the 3 arrested persons by submitting charge
sheet u/s 173 CrPC. But, despite vigorous searches in the Home Department of the Government of
Manipur, the case records could not be traced out till date. But, still efforts have been taken up to
find the case record from the Home Department.
[8] Ad directed in order dated 03-02-2023, an additional affidavit dated 13-03-2023 on behalf of
respondent No.3 wherein was filed explaining the status of missing case record. It is stated that that
on 24-06- 2002, the Officer-in-Charge, Imphal PS submitted the entire case records of Cril. Petn.
No.44 of 2022 Page 9 the FIR Case No. 7(1)1996 IPS u/s 121/121-A IPC & UA(P) Act following the
prima facie established against the 4(four) accused persons (as submitted by the I. O. Th. Manglem
Singh) to the Superintendent of Police, Imphal West for taking prosecution sanction of the accused
persons from the competent authority under section 10/13/UA(P) Act. The Superintendent of
Police, Imphal West forwarded the entire case records to the Superintendent of Police, CID(Crime
Branch), Manipur under M/No. 7/12/SP-IW/2002 dated 25-06-2002. The Superintendent of
Police, CID (Crime Branch), Manipur forwarded the same records to the Special Secretary (Home),
Govt. of Manipur under M/No. 14/3(9)2002(CB) dated 14-10-2002 for the same purpose. The
entire case records including a proposed charge sheet, original FIR with OE, seized original demand
letters of PREPAK (101 pages), the entire case diaries including carbon copies, original seizure
memo with carbon copies, statement of the PWs examined, interrogation statements of the accused
persons, prayer report to the concerned 'Magistrate for remanding to police custody and for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 4
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
remanding to judicial custody were sent to the Home Dept., Govt. of Manipur. Hence, no documents
except the FIR copy in the book is available for the re-investigation. Para 3 of the additional affidavit
dated 13.03.2023 filed on behalf of respondent No.3 reads as under:
Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 10
3. That, the concerned Courts were also approached many times for finding out the correspondence
letters of the police and judicial remand but no document could be found. In the absence of the
original seizure record, seized PREPAK demand letters (exhibit), case diaries, court correspondence
for taking police and judicial custody, signatures and statements of the persons who signed on the
seizure memo, interrogation reports of the accused persons and the signature of the accused person
on the seizure record, it would be not impossible to re-construct the case and re-submit the proposal
for prosecution sanction against the accused persons. It would be possible only when the case record
forwarded to the Home Department are traced out. [9] Mr. Th. Jugindro, learned counsel for the
petitioner has relied on the cases of: (1) Vakil Prasad Singh Vs. State of Bihar: AIR 2009 SC 1822
[delay in investigation and no progress for 17 years]; (2) J. Lalthangsei Vs. State of Manipur: 2019
Legal Eagle (Manipur) 230 [even after 18 years from the registration of FIR, no chargesheet filed];
(3) Lokesh Kumar Jain Vs. State of Rajasthan: (2013) 11 SCC 130 [delay of 13 years and loss of
original documents]; (4) Pankaj Kumar Vs. State of Maharashtra: AIR 2008 SC 3077 [delay of 8
years in investigation]; and (5) Oinam Lukhoi Singh Vs. State of Manipur:
2022 Legal Eagle (Manipur) 23 [no evidence against accused found in the
investigation]. In all these cited cases, the criminal proceedings were Cril. Petn.
No.44 of 2022 Page 11 quashed exercising the inherent power under Section 482
CrPC. It is prayed that the FIR be quashed on the grounds of- (a) delay in
investigation, (b) no materials against the petitioner, and (c) loss of case records
including draft chargesheet and other original documents.
[10] Mr. Kh. Athouba, learned PP draws the attention of this Court to the different
heads of offences as mentioned in the FIR and has stated that the allegations against
the accused and others are very serious one such as waging war against the nation
and indulging in unlawful activities.
While considering an application for quashing of an FIR or a criminal proceeding
involving threat to national unity, the court ought to take extra care and to treat such
case different from ordinary criminal case. It is pointed out that in the present case,
the petitioner and others were arrested in possession of incriminating materials and
they all belonged to a banned outfit. The only difficulty for the prosecution is the
missing original records. The FIR and the proceedings should not be quashed on this
ground alone and the prosecution should be given more time to trace the missing
record. Learned PP reiterates that the present case is not covered by any of the seven
conditions laid down in the case of State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal: 1992 Supp (1) SCC
335. It is also stated that the petitioner has become an MLA much after the
registration of the FIR and subsequent Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 12 election to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 5
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
State Assembly has no bearing in the criminal case pending against him. It is prayed
that the petition be rejected.
[11] This Court has considered the rival submissions at bar, the materials on record
and the relevant law in this regard. It will be fruitful to discuss the settled proposition
of law with respect to quashing of criminal proceedings in exercise of inherent power
conferred by Section 482 CrPC.
[12] In the celebrated case of R.P. Kapur v. State of Punjab: AIR 1960 SC 866, a 3
Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, for the first time, discussed and
summarized the principles of quashing of FIR by a High Court. The relevant para 6 is
reproduced below:
The inherent power of High Court under S. 561A, Criminal P. C. cannot be exercised
in regard to matters specifically covered by the other provisions of the Code. The
inherent jurisdiction of the High Court can be exercised to quash proceedings in a
proper case either to prevent the abuse of the process of any court or otherwsie to
secure the ends of justice. Ordinarily criminal proceedings instituted against an
accused person must be tried under the provisions of the Code, and the High Court
would be reluctant to interfere with the said proceedings at an interlocutory stage. It
is not possible, desirable or expedient to lay down any inflexible rule which would
govern the exercise of this inherent jurisdiction.
Some of the categories of cases where the inherent jurisdiction to quash proceedings
can and should be exercised are:
(i) Where it manifestly appears that there is a legal bar against the institution or
continuance of the criminal proceeding in respect of the offence alleged. Absence of
the requisite sanction may, for instance, furnish cases under this category.
Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 13
(ii) Where the allegations in the First Information Report or the complaint, even if
they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety, do not constitute the
offence alleged; in such cases no question of appreciating evidence arises; it is a
matter merely of looking at the complaint or the First Information Report to decide
whether the offence alleged is disclosed or not.
(iii) Where the allegations made against the accused person do constitute an offence
alleged but there is either no legal evidence adduced in support of the case or the
evidence adduced clearly or manifestly fails to prove the charge. In dealing with this
class of cases it is important to bear in mind the distinction between a case where
there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is manifestly and clearly
inconsistent with the accusation made and cases where there is legal evidence which
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 6
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
on its appreciation may or may not support the accusation in question. In exercising
its jurisdiction under S. 561-A the High Court would not embark upon an enquiry as
to whether the evidence in question is reliable or not. That is the function of the trial
magistrate, and ordinarily it would not be open to any party to invoke the High
Court's inherent jurisdiction and contend that on a reasonable appreciation of the
evidence the accusation made against the accused would not be sustained.
[13] In the famous case of State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal: 1992 Supp (1) SCC 335 @ Para 102 & 103,
a 2 Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, relying on the principles laid down in the RP Kapur
case (supra), illustrated circumstances under which criminal proceedings could be quashed
exercising inherent power under Section 482 CrPC of extraordinary power under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the Code under
Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a series of decisions relating to
Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 14 the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article 226 or the
inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted and reproduced above, we
give the following categories of cases by way of illustration wherein such power could be exercised
either to prevent abuse of the process of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though
it may not be possible to lay down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelised and
inflexible guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases wherein
such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even if they are
taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie constitute any offence or
make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any, accompanying
the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an investigation by police officers under
Section 156(1) of the Code except under an order of a Magistrate within the purview of Section
155(2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected
in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against
the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a
non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a
Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155(2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on
the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 7
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the
concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance
of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act, Cril.
Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 15 providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
view to spite him due to private and personal grudge.
103. We also give a note of caution to the effect that the power of quashing a criminal proceeding
should be exercised very sparingly and with circumspection and that too in the rarest of rare cases;
that the court will not be justified in embarking upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness
or otherwise of the allegations made in the FIR or the complaint and that the extraordinary or
inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the court to act according to its whim or
caprice. [14] In the case of Lokesh Kumar Jain v. State of Rajasthan:
(2013) 11 SCC 130 Para 27 &28, Hon'ble Supreme Court held that since the materials
documents could not be produced during the investigation without any valid reasons,
pending of the case for a long time and no possibility of producing the materials
documents, the FIR was quashed. Para 27 & 28 are reproduced below:
27. During the investigation in spite of several requests made by the investigating
agency (police), the records in respect of the allegation were not produced. No
evidence came against the appellant Lokesh Kumar Jain, from the file of the
Education Department. As the case was pending since long and there was no
possibility of availability of record in the near future, FR No. 67 of 2000 against the
appellant was filed before the CJM, Dausa. The CJM, Dausa by his order dated
18-11-2000 on perusal of the final report, in exercise of the power conferred under
Section 156(3) CrPC directed the SHO, Dausa to re-
investigate the case with the assistance of the complainant and to procure the original records. In
spite of the order dated 18-11-
Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 16 2000, for nine years, records were not made available, as is
apparent from the inquiry report dated 15-12-2008.
28. There is nothing on the record, even by way of counter- affidavit filed before this Court to show
that record has now been traced to make it available to the investigating agency. There is no
probability of finding out original documents or evidence mentioned in the counter-affidavit.
Though, delay has been alleged on the part of the appellant, there is nothing on the record to suggest
that the appellant caused delay in the matter of investigation. On the other hand, the silence on the
part of the respondent regarding availability of the original record or other evidence before the
investigating agency shows that the delay was caused due to the inaction on the part of the
respondent. Therefore, in our view, keeping investigation pending for further period will be futile as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 8
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
the respondent including the Directorate for the State Literacy Programme is not sure whether the
original records can be procured for investigation and to bring home the charges. Considering the
fact that delay in the present case is caused by the respondent, the constitutional guarantee of a
speedy investigation and trial under Article 21 of the Constitution is thereby violated and as the
appellant has already been exonerated in the departmental proceedings for identical charges,
keeping the case pending against the appellant for investigation, is unwarranted, the FIR deserves to
be quashed. [15] In the case of Neeharika Infrastructure Pvt. Ltd. vs. State of Maharashtra and Ors.:
MANU/SC/0272/2021: AIR 2021 SC 1918, a 3 Judge Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court laid
down the principles of quashing of FIR/complaint relying upon a catena of cases including the
leading cases of RP Kapur (supra) and Bhajan Lal (supra). The relevant para are reproduced below:
Conclusions:
23. In view of the above and for the reasons stated above, our final conclusions on the
principal/core issue, whether the High Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 17 Court would
be justified in passing an interim order of stay of investigation and/or "no coercive
steps to be adopted", during the pendency of the quashing petition Under Section
482 Code of Criminal Procedure and/or Under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India and in what circumstances and whether the High Court would be justified in
passing the order of not to arrest the Accused or "no coercive steps to be adopted"
during the investigation or till the final report/chargesheet is filed Under Section 173
Code of Criminal Procedure, while dismissing/disposing of/not entertaining/not
quashing the criminal proceedings/complaint/FIR in exercise of powers Under
Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure and/or Under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India, our final conclusions are as under:
i) Police has the statutory right and duty under the relevant provisions of the Code of
Criminal Procedure contained in Chapter XIV of the Code to investigate into a
cognizable offence;
ii) Courts would not thwart any investigation into the cognizable offences;
iii) It is only in cases where no cognizable offence or offence of any kind is disclosed
in the first information report that the Court will not permit an investigation to go on;
iv) The power of quashing should be exercised sparingly with circumspection, as it
has been observed, in the 'rarest of rare cases (not to be confused with the formation
in the context of death penalty).
v) While examining an FIR/complaint, quashing of which is sought, the court cannot
embark upon an enquiry as to the reliability or genuineness or otherwise of the
allegations made in the FIR/complaint;
vi) Criminal proceedings ought not to be scuttled at the initial stage;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 9
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
vii) Quashing of a complaint/FIR should be an exception rather than an ordinary
rule;
viii) Ordinarily, the courts are barred from usurping the jurisdiction of the police,
since the two organs of the State operate in two specific spheres of activities and one
ought not to tread over the other sphere;
ix) The functions of the judiciary and the police are complementary, not overlapping;
x) Save in exceptional cases where non-interference would result in miscarriage of
justice, the Court and the judicial process should not interfere at the stage of
investigation of offences;
Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 18
xi) Extraordinary and inherent powers of the Court do not confer an arbitrary
jurisdiction on the Court to act according to its whims or caprice;
xii) The first information report is not an encyclopaedia which must disclose all facts
and details relating to the offence reported. Therefore, when the investigation by the
police is in progress, the court should not go into the merits of the allegations in the
FIR. Police must be permitted to complete the investigation. It would be premature
to pronounce the conclusion based on hazy facts that the complaint/FIR does not
deserve to be investigated or that it amounts to abuse of process of law.
After investigation, if the investigating officer finds that there is no substance in the application
made by the complainant, the investigating officer may file an appropriate report/summary before
the learned Magistrate which may be considered by the learned Magistrate in accordance with the
known procedure;
xiii) The power Under Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure is very wide, but conferment of wide
power requires the court to be more cautious. It casts an onerous and more diligent duty on the
court;
xiv) However, at the same time, the court, if it thinks fit, regard being had to the parameters of
quashing and the self-restraint imposed by law, more particularly the parameters laid down by this
Court in the cases of R.P. Kapur (supra) and Bhajan Lal (supra), has the jurisdiction to quash the
FIR/complaint;
xv) When a prayer for quashing the FIR is made by the alleged Accused and the court when it
exercises the power Under Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure, only has to consider whether
the allegations in the FIR disclose commission of a cognizable offence or not. The court is not
required to consider on merits whether or not the merits of the allegations make out a cognizable
offence and the court has to permit the investigating agency/police to investigate the allegations in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 10
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
the FIR;
xvi) The aforesaid parameters would be applicable and/or the aforesaid aspects are required to be
considered by the High Court while passing an interim order in a quashing petition in exercise of
powers Under Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure and/or Under Article 226 of the Constitution
of India. However, an interim order of stay of investigation during the pendency of the quashing
petition can be passed with circumspection. Such an interim order should not require to be Cril.
Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 19 passed routinely, casually and/or mechanically. Normally, when the
investigation is in progress and the facts are hazy and the entire evidence/material is not before the
High Court, the High Court should restrain itself from passing the interim order of not to arrest or
"no coercive steps to be adopted" and the Accused should be relegated to apply for anticipatory bail
Under Section 438 Code of Criminal Procedure before the competent court. The High Court shall
not and as such is not justified in passing the order of not to arrest and/or "no coercive steps" either
during the investigation or till the investigation is completed and/or till the final report/chargesheet
is filed Under Section 173 Code of Criminal Procedure, while dismissing/disposing of the quashing
petition Under Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure and/or Under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India.
xvii) Even in a case where the High Court is prima facie of the opinion that an exceptional case is
made out for grant of interim stay of further investigation, after considering the broad parameters
while exercising the powers Under Section 482 Code of Criminal Procedure and/or Under Article
226 of the Constitution of India referred to hereinabove, the High Court has to give brief reasons
why such an interim order is warranted and/or is required to be passed so that it can demonstrate
the application of mind by the Court and the higher forum can consider what was weighed with the
High Court while passing such an interim order.
xviii) Whenever an interim order is passed by the High Court of "no coercive steps to be adopted"
within the aforesaid parameters, the High Court must clarify what does it mean by "no coercive
steps to be adopted" as the term "no coercive steps to be adopted" can be said to be too vague and/or
broad which can be misunderstood and/or misapplied.
[16] From the above reproduced case laws, it is clear that the High Court, in exercise of its inherent
extra ordinary jurisdiction as conferred by Section 482 CrPC, can quash an FIR/complaint and
criminal proceedings if- (a) the complaint on the face value of it does not disclose a cognizable
offence;
(b) the same is an abuse of process of law; (c) it is barred by law; (d) there is Cril. Petn. No.44 of
2022 Page 20 no legal evidence; (d) unexplained delay in investigation; and so on. The rule laid
down in RP Kapur case (supra) is consistently followed by Hon'ble Supreme Court in a catena of
cases including the cases reported as (2005) 13 SCC 540, (2006) 6 SCC 669 and (2005) 13 SCC 705.
It is the settled principle of law that an FIR and criminal case can be quashed if it does not disclose a
cognizable offence; it is an abuse of process of law; it is barred by law; or its continuation will be
harassment to the accused. However, this extra ordinary power is to be exercised in exceptional
cases which warrant resorting to the same in the peculiar facts and circumstance of a particular case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 11
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
The rule laid down in RP Kapur (supra) and Bhajan Lal (supra) cases holds the field and is followed
consistently.
[17] The fact of the present case has to be analyzed in terms of the ratio propounded in RP Kapur
(supra) and Bhajan Lal (supra) cases. [18] In the present case, at the time of the arrest of the
petitioner and others, a large number of incriminating documents were seized from their
possession. Such materials were sufficient to press charge of waging war against the nation and
taking part in unlawful activities to the detrimental to nation's unity. None of the seven conditions of
Bhajan Lal (supra) is satisfied. However, the difficulty in continuing with the FIR is that the same
cannot be proceeded further due to non-availability of the draft chargesheet Cril. Petn. No.44 of
2022 Page 21 along with all the original documents, such as, original seizure records, material
exhibits, case diaries, statements of the accused and witnesses, etc. as reflected in the affidavit filed
by the respondents before this Court. In absence of these original documents, trial cannot be
proceeded and that too in absence of any prosecution sanction. It is stated in the affidavit that the
submission of chargesheet will be possible only when the record is traced out. [19] It is seen that the
present case does not fall within any of the seven conditions laid down in Bhajan Lal (supra) case.
However, on the other hand, it satisfies condition (iii) as prescribed in RP Kapur (supra), ie, no legal
evidence to pursue the case further. The case in hand is also similar to the facts of Lokesh Kumar
Jain (supra) where FIR was quashed for non- production of original documents due to untraceable
and delay in investigation for 13 years. In the present case also, all the original documents and
records are missing and there is a delay of 27 years without any explanation. The records are
missing since 2002. In such circumstances, this Court is of considered opinion that keeping the FIR
further will be nothing a harassment to the petitioner. Since the complete case record is missing for
more than 11 long years without any possibility of being traced, the FIR No. 07(01)1996 IPS under
Sections 121/121-A IPC and Section 13 UAP Act and all incidental proceedings are quashed against
the petitioner and other co-accused persons. The FIR is also quashed against the co-accused who are
non-applicants in the Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 22 present petition due to the peculiar fact of
the missing original records. The proceedings against the co-accused will also face the same fate as
the petitioner herein. No cost.
JUDGE
FR/NFR
-Larson
KH. Digitally signed
by KH. JOSHUA
JOSHUA MARING
Date: 2023.12.11
MARING 16:10:30 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 12
P.S. Lamphelpat vs The State Of Manipur on 11 December, 2023
Cril. Petn. No.44 of 2022 Page 23
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/146725312/ 13
