P.Sankar vs Sundaramoorthy on 3 January, 2020
P.Sankar vs Sundaramoorthy on 3 January, 2020
Equivalent citations: AIRONLINE 2020 MAD 831
Author: S.M.Subramaniam
Bench: S.M.Subramaniam
A.S.No.567 of 2013
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 03.01.2020
CORAM:
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM
Appeal Suit No.567 of 2013
&
M.P.No.1 of 2013
P.Sankar ...Appellant
Vs..
1.Sundaramoorthy
2.Sundari @ Ganasundaram ...Respondents
Appeal Suit filed under Section 96 C.P.C., 1908 against the
Judgement and Decree dated 11.10.2013 passed in O.S.No.108 of
2006 on the file of the Principal District Judge, Puducherry.
For Appellant : Mr.V.Ayyadurai, Senior counsel
For Mr.V.Balamurugane
For Respondents : Mr.D.Ravichander
JUDGMENT
The judgement and decree dated 11.10.2013 passed in O.S.No.108 of 2006 is under challenge in the
present First Appeal. http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116074750/ 1
P.Sankar vs Sundaramoorthy on 3 January, 2020
2.The plaintiff is the appellant in the First Appeal and the defendants are the respondents in the
First Appeal. The suit was instituted for specific performance and the contention of the plaintiff
before the Trial Court was that the first defendant offered to sell the plaint schedule property to the
plaintiff for a sum of Rs.5,15,000/- and entered into a written sale agreement on 11.02.2004. On the
said date of agreement, the plaintiff paid an advance amount of Rs.2,00,000/- and agreed to pay the
balance on fulfilment of conditions scribed in the agreement. The plaintiff states that he was ready
and willing to perform his part of contract but the defendant was postponing the same without any
reason. Thus, on 03.03.2006, the plaintiff issued a pre-suit notice to the first defendant calling upon
him to perform his portion of the contract.
3.It is stated that the first defendant in order to defraud the plaintiff disposed the suit property in
favour of the second defendant after receipt of the pre-suit notice. The second defendant was fully
aware of the sale agreement between the plaintiff and the first defendant. Therefore, the sale by the
first defendant in favour of the http://www.judis.nic.in second defendant is non-est, void ab-initio.
The second defendant is not a bonafide purchaser. Hence, the plaintiff made a relief of specific
performance for execution of sale deed in respect of the suit property on receipt of the balance sale
consideration of Rs.3,15,000/-.
4.The first defendant in his written statement denied the averments, he first denied the execution of
the sale agreement and contended that the sale agreement itself is a bogus one. The first defendant
has stated that on 13.08.2003, he entered into a sale agreement with the second defendant and the
sale price was fixed at Rs.2,60,000/- and he received a sum of Rs.50,000/- as advance. Time for
execution of sale deed was fixed as 3 years from the date of agreement of sale. Thereafter, the
plaintiff approached the first defendant to purchase his fathers property for more price for which the
defendant disclosed the said sale agreement with the second defendant.
5.The first defendant approached the second defendant about the contentions in the plaint and for
which she told that the plaintiff never approached her. The first defendant came to know about the
fraud http://www.judis.nic.in played by the plaintiff and requested for blank papers on which
defendants signed for the which the plaintiff gave evasive reply and said that he misplaced the said
papers. The father of the defendant executed a sale deed in respect of the suit property and based on
the settlement deed, the first defendant executed and registered sale deed after receiving the balance
sale consideration. Two sale deeds were registered on 19.04.2006.
6.The second respondent filed a written statement stating that he is a bonafide purchaser of the suit
property. The father of the first defendant executed the settlement deed in respect of the suit
schedule properties in favour of the first respondent on 31.03.2006. As per the settlement deed, the
first defendant became the absolute owner of the suit property. Thereafter, the first defendant
executed the sale deeds in favour of the second defendant on 31.03.2006 and therefore the sale
deeds are valid in the eye of law. The second defendant state that he is in possession of the suit
property and the plaintiff has no right whatsoever and accordingly the suit is liable to be quashed.
7.The Trial Court framed the following issues; http://www.judis.nic.in “(i)Whether the first
defendant entered into a sale agreement dated 11.02.2004 with the plaintiff to sell the schedule
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116074750/ 2
P.Sankar vs Sundaramoorthy on 3 January, 2020
property?
(ii).Whether the sale agreement is legally
sustainable in law?
(iii).Whether the plaintiff was ready and willing to perform his part of contract?
(iv)Whether the plaintiff is entitled for the relief of specific performance of contract?
(v)To what relief?
8. The learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant made a submission that under
Section 13 of the Specific Relief Act, even in case, there is a defect in the title or in the case of an
imperfect title, the rights are conferred. Therefore, in the present case, though these defendants
(seller) was not having clear title in respect of the suit property at the time of entering into the suit
agreement. Subsequently, the father of the defendant executed a settlement deed in favour of his son
and therefore, the title was acquired by the 1st defendant and in such circumstances, the trial Court
ought to have decreed the suit in favour of the plaintiff. In support of the said contentions, the
learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant cited the judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India in http://www.judis.nic.in the case of Renu Devi Vs. Mahendra Singh and
others, reported in (2003) 10 SCC 200 and the relevant paragraph 12 is extracted hereunder:
“12. There is yet another aspect of the matter. Assuming it for a moment that on
22-3-1979 the donors had not actually acquired title to the property and yet they had
gifted this property to their daughter-in-law and grandsons it cannot be denied that
they had a pre-existing interest in the suit property by virtue of their being members
of a joint Hindu family and their interest and right to partition having been upheld by
the so-called preliminary decree dated 13-2-1978. By the subsequent decree dated
24-5-1979 they did acquire a clear and complete title in the same property which they
had gifted on 22-3-1979. On the principle of feeding the grant by estoppel the
subsequent acquisition of title under the decree dated 24-5-1979 shall enure to the
benefit of the donee under the deed of gift dated 22-3-1979 for whatever infirmity
there was (though we have held that there was none) in the title of Rameshwar Singh
and Dhaneshwari Devi it stood cured by the final decree dated 24-5-1979. The
doctrine of feeding the grant by estoppel which is in essence a principle of equity
stands statutorily recognised in India by Section 43 of the Transfer of Property Act.
Section 43 of the TP Act does not in terms apply to the facts of the present case,
inasmuch as the deed dated 22-3-1979 is not a transfer for http://www.judis.nic.in
consideration; we are referring to Section 43 abovesaid as illustrative of the doctrine
and its statutory recognition in Indian law."
The Hon'ble Supreme Court in the above cited case, discussed Section 43 of the
Transfer of Property Act and arrived a conclusion that the said provision does not in
terms apply to the facts of that case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116074750/ 3
P.Sankar vs Sundaramoorthy on 3 January, 2020
9. In the case of Tanu Ram Bora Vs. Promod Ch.Das(dead) through Legal representatives and
Others, reported in (2019) 4 SCC 173, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India held as follows:
“6.4. Section 43 of the TP Act provides that where a person fraudulently or
erroneously represents that he is authorised to transfer certain immovable property
and professes to transfer such property for consideration, such transfer shall, at the
option of the transferee, operates on any interest which the transferor may acquire in
such property at any time during which the contract of transfer subsists. Thus, if at
the time of transfer, the vendor/transferor might have a defective title or have no title
and/or no right or interest, however subsequently the transferor acquires the right,
title or interest and the contract of transfer subsists, in that case at the option of the
transferee, such a transfer is valid. In such a situation, http://www.judis.nic.in the
transferor cannot be permitted to challenge the transfer and/or the transferor has no
option to raise the dispute in making the transfer.
6.5. The intention and objects behind Section 43 of the TP Act seem to be based on
the principle of estoppel as well as the equity. The intention and objects seem to be
that after procuring the money (sale consideration) and transferring the land,
thereafter the transferor is estopped from saying that though he has sold/transferred
the property/land on payment of sale consideration, still the transfer is not binding
on him. That is why Section 43 of the TP Act gives an option to the transferee and not
the transferor. The intention of Section 43 of the Act seems to be that nobody can be
permitted to take the benefits of his own wrong. In the facts and circumstances of the
case, Section 43 of the Act would come into play and protect the rights of the original
plaintiff.” In this case also, the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India discussed about
Section 43 of the Transfer of Property Act. More specifically, where a person
fraudulently or erroneously represents that he is authorised to transfer certain
immovable property and professes to transfer such property for consideration, such
transfer shall, at the option of the transferee, operates on any interest which the
transferor may acquire http://www.judis.nic.in in such property at any time during
which the contract of transfer subsists.
10. The High Court of Allahabad in the case of Pahunchi Lal Vs. Man Singh, reported in 1971 SCC
ONLINE ALL 308, held as follows:
“12. The third ground that since the Court itself could not acquire Bhumidhari rights
in the Sirdari plots as it could not make any application under the provisions of the
U.P. Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act is devoid of substance. The
undertaking of the defendant as vendor that he shall take steps under the U.P.
Zamindari Abolition and Land Reforms Act to obtain Bhumidhari rights in the
Sirdari land agreed to be sold is by itself enforceable under the terms of the contract
evidenced by the document Ext. I dated 4-5-1963. Section 13(b) of the Specific Relief
Act can usefully be referred to in this connection which says that if the concurrence of
other persons is necessary for validating the title, and they are bound to concur at the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116074750/ 4
P.Sankar vs Sundaramoorthy on 3 January, 2020
request of the vendor or lessor, the purchaser or lessee may compel him to procure
such concurrence. I think the Court has the power and jurisdiction under Section
13(b) of the Specific Relief Act to compel the defendant to take steps and obtain
Bhumidhari rights in the Sirdari land agreed to be sold. This agrument also fails."
http://www.judis.nic.in
11. The Andhra Pradesh High Court, in the case of Muthabathula Arjayya Vs. Rambala Venkata
Surya Gopala Krishnamurthy and another, reported in 1971 SCC ONLINE AP 177, held as follows:
“30. In Silla Chandra v. Rama chandra Sahu, (AIR 1964 SC 1789) the Supreme Court
applied the provisions of Section 18(a) to an agreement of sale executed by a person
who styled himself as the Managing Member and Karta of the family. The agreement
also contained a condition that he and his mother would execute a deed of sale within
a period of one year from the date of the execution of the agreement of sale. The
vendor did not execute the sale deed and the vendee instituted a suit for specific
performance of the contract. Their Lordships observed that the vendor had interest
in the entire house and so had his mother, though in case of actual partition the
interest of each would have been fixed at half. If the vendor was not competent to
pass title with respect to the entire house during the lifetime of his mother, he can be
said to have imperfect title to it. On the death of the mother, he obtained title to and
interest in the portion of the house which on a private partition subsequent to the
contract to sell had taken place between him and his mother and that therefore he
has to make good his http://www.judis.nic.in contract out of the property he
acquired subsequent to the contract to sell.
31. The aforesaid cases are akin to the case before us and applying the principles
enunciated in those cases, it can be held that in the instant case the inamdar has only
an imperfect title and is not a case of absence of title.
32. Section 18 of the Specific Relief Act has been applied also to cases where a person,
at the time of agreement of sale, had no title in the property agreed to be sold. Clause
(a) of Section 18 gives right to the purchaser to compel the vendor to make good the
contract out of any interest the vendor has acquired in the property after the contract
of sale. The expression “any interest” is very wide in its amplitude and also denotes a
case in which a vendor who has no title to the property acquires title after the
contract of sale. There is nothing in clause
(a) to limit the expression “any interest” only to cases where a person has title to the
property and later he acquires an interest which enables him to give a valid title to
the purchaser. This view was taken by a single Judge of the Nagpur High Court in
Pundlik Daryaji v. Jainarayan Maliram Shop, (AIR 1949 Nag 83). The defendant
therein purchased certain properties at an auction sale for arrears of land revenue.
Before the sale was confirmed in his favour, he entered into an agreement to execute
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116074750/ 5
P.Sankar vs Sundaramoorthy on 3 January, 2020
a sale deed in favour of the plaintiff. On confirmation of the sale in favour of the
defendant, he refused to execute a sale http://www.judis.nic.in deed and the plaintiff
brought a suit for specific performance. It was argued before the learned Judge that
the expression ‘imperfect title’ in Section 18 did not include absence of title. On the
date of the agreement of sale, the defendant therein had no title to the property as the
sale had not been confirmed. The learned Judge repelled this argument observing
that by virtue of clause
(a) of Section 18, the vendee can compel the vendor to make good the contract out of
any interest in the property subsequently acquired by the vendor. This, according to
the learned Judge, indicated that the words ‘imperfect title’ would include even
complete absence of title. The learned Judge then referred to the rule of English law
that if a man sells an estate to which he has no title and, after the conveyance
acquires the title, he will be compelled to convey it to the purchaser and relied upon
(1864) 10 HLC
191. This case has been distinguished by a learned Judge of the Bombay High Court
in Bhiku Keru v. Dashrath, (AIR 1967 Bom 267). While distinguishing, the learned
Judge has held that in the circumstances of the case, the Nagpur High Court came to
the conclusion that it was a case of imperfect title and not a case of absence of title.
While making this remark, the learned Judge of the Bombay High Court has not
taken into consideration the interpretation of clause (a) of Section 18 of the Specific
Relief Act made by the Nagpur High Court. The Supreme Court case referred to
above, namely, Silla Chandra's http://www.judis.nic.in case, (AIR 1964 SC 1789) has
not expressed any opinion on this aspect of the matter and left the question open.
The Supreme Court in Kalyanpur Lime Works case, (AIR 1954 SC 165) also had no occasion to
consider whether the expression ‘imperfect title’ can take in the case of absence of title. Pundalik
Darya ji's case, (AIR 1949 Nag
83) has been referred to in Mulla's Commentary on Contract and Specific Relief Act and no adverse
comment has been made in regard to that decision.”
12. Paragraph 30 of the above cited Judgement, wherein it is held that on the death of the mother,
he obtained title to and interest in the portion of the house which on a private partition subsequent
to the contract to sell had taken place between him and his mother and that therefore, he has to
make good his contract out of the property he acquired subsequent to the contract to sell.
13. Relying on the said judgment, the learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant
reiterated that in the present case also, at the time of entering into the suit agreement, the seller may
not have the valid title and he signed the agreement on behalf of his father. However, his father
executed a settlement in his favour, who is none http://www.judis.nic.in other than son and
therefore, the 1st defendant acquired title and under these circumstances, by invoking Section 13 of
the Specific Relief Act, the trial Court ought to have considered for grant of relief of specific
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116074750/ 6
P.Sankar vs Sundaramoorthy on 3 January, 2020
performance in favour of the plaintiff.
14. The learned counsel appearing on behalf of the respondents disputed contentions by stating that
the suit property had already been sold in favour of the 2nd respondent and the said circumstances
narrated by the appellants would not have any application in respect of the facts and circumstances
of the present case.
15. The 1st sale agreement was entered into between the 1st respondent and the 2nd respondent,
which is marked as EX.B1 document and dated 13.08.2003. As per Ex.B1, the sale agreement dated
13.08.2003 is the first sale agreement and therefore, there is no irregularity in executing the sale in
favour of the 2 nd respondent by the 1st respondent. The suit sale agreement was entered into
between the appellant and the 1st respondent, which is marked as Ex.A1 and dated 11.02.2004,
more specifically, subsequent to the sale agreement entered in favour of the 2nd respondent in
Ex.B1. This apart, the sale http://www.judis.nic.in deed executed by the 1st respondent in favour of
the 2nd respondent in Document No.1925 of 2006 is also marked as Ex.B6, dated 31.06.2006. This
being the factum, the trial Court is right in rejecting the relief of specific performance.
16. The learned counsel for the respondent is of an opinion that the relief of specific performance is
an equitable relief and weighing the entire facts and circumstances, the trial Court rejected the relief
of specific performance in favour of the appellant and there is no irregularity as such.
17. The learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the appellant, while rebutting the contentions
mainly contended that Ex.B1 sale agreement is a fraudulent document, which was a created one.
After entering into a sale agreement with the appellant on 11.02.2004, Ex.B1 document dated
13.08.2003 was created in order to validate the sale executed in favour of the 2nd respondent by the
1st respondent on 31.03.2006. In other words, Ex.B1 is a fraudulent document, created for the
purpose of defending the suit before the trial Court and therefore, the said document cannot be
relief upon. http://www.judis.nic.in
18. The plaintiff Mr.Sankar was examined as P.W.1, Mr.Vaithianathaswamy, the attester of the sale
agreement is examined as P.W.2 and Exs.A.1 to A.6 are marked. On the side of the defendants, the
first defendant Mr.Sundaramurthy is examined as D.W.1, Smt.Rani was examined as D.W.2, the
second defendant Tmt.Sundari @ Gnanasundaram is examined as D.W.3, Thiru G.Selvaraj, one of
the attester of the sale agreement is examined as D.W.4 and Exs.B.1 to B.6 are marked.
19.With reference to Issue No.1, the Trial Court considered the fact that whether the sale agreement
was entered between the plaintiff and the first defendant under Ex.A.1 sale agreement, dated
11.02.2004. The contention of the first defendant was that he never executed Ex.A.1 sale agreement.
The plaintiff has stated that he entered into a sale agreement with the second defendant under
Ex.B.1 dated 13.08.2003 to sell the suit schedule property and at that point of time, the plaintiff
requested the first defendant that he will meet the second respondent and get the Ex.B.1 sale
agreement cancelled and for that the plaintiff obtained the signatures of the first defendant and his
http://www.judis.nic.in wife in blank papers and using that blank papers Ex.A.1 sale agreement is
fabricated and the suit is instituted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116074750/ 7
P.Sankar vs Sundaramoorthy on 3 January, 2020
20.The Plaintiff P.W.1 deposed that the first defendant offered to sell the plaint schedule property
for a sum of Rs.5,15,000/- and both of them entered into a sale agreement and on that day he paid
an advance amount of Rs.2 lakhs. P.W.2 corroborates the testimony of P.W.1 by saying that the first
defendant Ex.A.1 sale agreement dated 11.02.2004 was attested by D.W.2, the wife of D.W.1.
Therefore, the Trial Court found that the agreement entered into between the plaintiff and the
defendant i.e., Ex.A.1 Sale agreement was executed and the contention of the first defendant that
Ex.A.1 is fabricated cannot be sustained.
21.With reference to Issue No.2, whether the sale agreement is legally sustainable, the Trial Court
found that the suit schedule property is not belonging to the first defendant. It was not disputed by
the parties that the father of the first defendant Mr.Kothandaraman is the absolute owner of the suit
schedule property. Under Ex.B.2 settlement deed dated 06.04.2004, the first defendant's father
settled the http://www.judis.nic.in schedule property and other properties in favour of his son, the
first defendant. Therefore, till 06.04.2004 i.e., the date of settlement, the first defendant is not the
owner of the suit schedule property. Ex.A.1 sale agreement was dated 11.02.2004, prior to the date
of settlement deed. Therefore, as on the date of the agreement Ex.A.1, the first defendant was not
the absolute owner of the suit schedule property. He became the owner of the suit schedule property
only after the settlement deed Ex.B.2 dated 06.04.2004 executed by the father of the first defendant.
22.Based on these documents, the Trial Court came to the conclusion that at the time of execution of
the suit sale agreement, the first defendant was not the owner of the suit schedule property and
therefore, he had no capacity to execute any such agreement and the agreement itself is null and
void as he was not the owner of the property. There was no power of attorney or otherwise in respect
of grant of permission in favour of the first defendant by his father to deal with the suit schedule
property. In the absence of any such documents, the Trial Court arrived at a conclusion that the first
defendant, who was not the owner of the suit schedule property at the time of execution of
http://www.judis.nic.in Ex.A.1 sale agreement, the suit for specific performance cannot be granted.
23.This being the factum established before the Trial Court, this Court is of the considered opinion
that the first defendant, with reference to the documents filed, was not the absolute owner of the suit
schedule property so as to specifically enter into an agreement from the plaintiff on 11.02.2004. The
contract itself is void. The agreement entered into between the plaintiff and the first defendant
cannot be executed at all. Thus, the Trial Court has rightly arrived at a conclusion that the
agreement is an invalid one and based on such invalid agreement, relief of specific performance
cannot be granted at all.
24.With reference to issue No.3, the Trial Court found that since Ex.A.1 sale agreement is not an
enforceable contract, the question of execution of Ex.A.1 sale agreement and the question of
readiness and willingness does not arise at all. With reference to the alternate relief, the Trial Court
considered the same in favour of the plaintiff and directed the first defendant to return the advance
amount of http://www.judis.nic.in Rs.2,00,000/- to the plaintiff with interest @ 12% per annum
from 11.02.2004 till date of decree and thereafter 6% till payment. Consequently, the suit for specific
performance was dismissed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116074750/ 8
P.Sankar vs Sundaramoorthy on 3 January, 2020
25.This Court is of the considered opinion that the plaintiff could not able to establish that he
entered into a valid sale agreement with the the first defendant. On verification of the documents,
the Trial Court found that, on the date of sale agreement Ex.A.1 the first defendant was not at all the
owner of the suit schedule property. The father of the first defendant was the absolute owner of the
property and he settled the property subsequently after the agreement, which is marked as Ex.B.2.
Thus, the Trial Court is right in arriving at a conclusion that as on the date of the sale agreement, the
first defendant was not the owner of the suit schedule property and therefore, the agreement cannot
be enforced and the relief as such sought for cannot be granted in favour of the plaintiff. However,
the Trial Court considered the grant of alternate relief in favour of the plaintiff and directed the first
defendant to return the advance amount of Rs.2,00,000/- with interest @ 12% per annum from
11.02.2004 till date of decree and thereafter 6% till payment.
http://www.judis.nic.in
26. Considering the arguments advanced by the learned Senior counsel appearing on behalf of the
appellant with reference to Section 13 of the Specific Relief Act, this Court is of an opinion that even
presuming that the trial Court arrived a conclusion that the agreement between the appellant and
the 1st defendant is a void document as the 1st respondent was not having a valid title in respect of
the suit schedule property. Even, in such circumstances, this Court is of the considered opinion that
the entire facts and circumstances are to be considered, more specifically, for grant of the relief of
specific performance. Even in case, the 1st respondent acquired title after execution of the
settlement deed by his father, the same would not provide an absolute right to claim the relief of
specific performance. The in equability, if any would arise in the event of grant of specific
performance is also to be considered by the Court.
27. Under these circumstances, this Court would like to refer the recent judgment of the Hon'ble
Supreme Court of India in the case of Surinder Kaur v. Bahadur Singh, reported in 2019 (8) SCC 575
and the relevant paragraph 14 is extracted hereunder:
http://www.judis.nic.in “14. A perusal of Section 20 of the Specific Relief Act clearly
indicates that the relief of specific performance is discretionary. Merely because the
plaintiff is legally right, the court is not bound to grant him the relief. True it is, that
the court while exercising its discretionary power is bound to exercise the same on
established judicial principles and in a reasonable manner. Obviously, the discretion
cannot be exercised in an arbitrary or whimsical manner. Sub-clause (c) of
sub-section (2) of Section 20 provides that even if the contract is otherwise not
voidable but the circumstances make it inequitable to enforce specific performance,
the court can refuse to grant such discretionary relief. Explanation (2) to the section
provides that the hardship has to be considered at the time of the contract, unless the
hardship is brought in by the action of the plaintiff.”
28. Applying the said principles with reference to the facts and circumstances of the present case,
this Court is of an opinion that the judgment of the trial Court is to be upheld and accordingly, the
judgment and decree 11.10.2013 passed in O.S.No.108 of 2006 stands confirmed and the Appeal
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116074750/ 9
P.Sankar vs Sundaramoorthy on 3 January, 2020
Suit stands dismissed. No costs. Consequently, the connected Miscellaneous Petition also stands
dismissed.
03.01.2020 http://www.judis.nic.in mrm/kak Index : Yes Speaking Order To The Principal District
Judge, Puducherry.
http://www.judis.nic.in S.M.SUBRAMANIAM, J.
Mrm/kak http://www.judis.nic.in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116074750/ 10
