P.Saravanan vs The Executive Engineer on 3 December, 2021
P.Saravanan vs The Executive Engineer on 3 December, 2021
Author: S.M.Subramaniam
Bench: S.M.Subramaniam
WP No.34953 of 2014
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 03-12-2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S.M.SUBRAMANIAM
WP No.34953 of 2014
And
MP No.1 of 2014
P.Saravanan .. Petitioner
vs.
1.The Executive Engineer,
Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB),
Tidel Park, Taramani,
Chennai – 113.
2.The Assistant Executive Engineer,
Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB),
Tidel Park, Taramani,
Chennai – 113.
3.The Assistant Engineer,
Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB),
New No.15, II Street,
Indira Nagar Section,
Chennai - 20. .. Respondents
1/16
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) WP No.34953 of 2014
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116395851/ 1
P.Saravanan vs The Executive Engineer on 3 December, 2021
Writ Petition is filed under Article 226 of the Constitution of
India, praying for the issuance of a Writ of Certiorari, quashing the order/
communication dated 04.12.2014 issued by the third respondent directing
the petitioner to pay an amount of Rs.1,15,039/- (One Lakh Fifteen
Thousand and Thirty Nine only) determined in an arbitrary manner.
For Petitioner : No Appearance
For Respondents : Mr.L.Jaivenkatesh,
Standing Counsel for TANGEDCO.
ORDER
The impugned order/communication dated 04.12.2014, issued by the third respondent on audit
objections, is under challenge in the present writ petition.
2. The petitioner was asked to pay the demanded amount within the specified period from the date
of issuance of the order/communication by the third respondent.
3. The petitioner states that he is a businessman and he is staying along with his father for the past
about 48 years. He has been paying https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the electricity consumption
charges even during the survival of his after and after the death of his father, regularly without any
arrears to the Tamil Nadu Electricity Board. During the month of September 2014, when the staff of
the petitioner went to the office of the third respondent to pay the electricity dues, the officials in the
third respondent's office told the staff of the petitioner that an amount of Rs.1,15,000/- is due
towards arrears of consumption charges during the period from January 2012 to May 2013.
4. The respondents are providing electricity service connection to the house of the petitioner in SC
No.203-027-78. The petitioner states that he has been remitting the current consumption charges
regularly.
5. While-so, the impugned order/communication has been issued by the third respondent based on
audit objections. As the petitioner has no other remedy, he is constrained to move the present writ
petition.
6. The Consumer Grievance Redressal Mechanism constituted under Regulation 18 of the Tamil
Nadu Electricity Supply Code is not https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis applicable in respect of
order/communication issued by the third respondent based on the audit objections.
7. It is further referred that under the Regulations for Consumer Grievance Redressal on the
Electricity Ombudsman, the Forum constituted cannot adjudicate the issues relating to demand
notice on audit objections. Under the said Regulation, unauthorised use of electricity as detailed
under Section 126 and offences and penalties as detailed under Sections 135 to 141 of the Electricity
Act, 2003, are excluded from the purview of this Forum. Therefore, the Forum constituted is not
competent to entertain an application with reference to the grievances raised by the petitioner in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116395851/ 2
P.Saravanan vs The Executive Engineer on 3 December, 2021
present writ petition.
8. The learned Standing Counsel, appearing on behalf of the TANGEDCO, disputed the said ground
by stating that the Forum constituted under the Regulations for Consumer Grievance Redressal
Forum and Electricity Ombudsman is empowered to adjudicate certain nature of disputes. In
respect of consumer grievance redressal mechanism provided https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
under the Regulation 11 of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code Forum is empowered to
adjudicate the issues as contemplated under the said Regulations. Therefore, the petitioner has to
approach the Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum provided under Regulation 18 of the Tamil
Nadu Electricity Supply Code.
9. This Court has to consider the scope of Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code at the first instance.
10. Regulation 2(g) defines 'Consumer' means “any person who is supplied with electricity for his
own use by a Licensee, the Government or by any other person engaged in the business of supplying
electricity to the public under the Act or any other law for the time being in force and includes any
person whose premises are for the time being connected for the purpose of receiving electricity with
the works of a Licensee, the Government or such other person, as the case may be”.
11. Regulation 2(pp) defines “ 'Person' shall include any https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis company
or body corporate or association or body of individuals, whether incorporated or not, or artificial
jurisdical person”.
12. Regulation 2(r) denotes “ 'Supply', in relation to electricity, means the sale of electricity to a
Licensee or Consumer”.
13. Chapter II of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code deals with electricity charges, billing and
recovery.
14. Regulation 3 stipulates 'Categories of supply'. Regulation 4 deals with 'charges recoverable by the
Licensee'. Regulation 5 speaks about the 'miscellaneous charges'. Regulation 6 provides 'Minimum
charges'. Regulation 7 denotes 'Installation of Meter'. Regulation 8 stipulates 'Meter reading, billing
and intervals'. Regulation 9 contemplates 'Meter readings when there is changes in sanctioned
demand, etc.'. Regulation 10 deals with 'Inaccessibility of meter for reading'. Regulation 11 speaks
about 'Assessment of billing in cases where there is no meter or meter is defective'. Regulation 12
denotes 'Errors in billing'. Regulation 13 speaks https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis about 'Servicing
of bills'. Regulation 14 contemplates 'Due dates and notice periods'. Regulation 15 speaks about
'Mode of payment'. Regulation 16 contemplates 'Option to pay charges in advance'. Regulation 17
denotes 'Agreement with respect to supply : Issues on recovery of charges. Regulation 18 speaks
about 'Consumer Grievance Redressal'.
15. Regulation 18 contemplates “ 'Consumer Grievance Redressal'.--All grievances of the consumers,
relating to the provisions under Regulations 3 to 17 of this Code shall be referred by the consumer to
the respective Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum constituted under the Act”.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116395851/ 3
P.Saravanan vs The Executive Engineer on 3 December, 2021
16. Therefore, in respect of Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, the Consumer Grievance Redressal
Forum is constituted under Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code. As per the
above provision, all grievances of the consumers relating to the provisions under Regulations 3 to 17
of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code shall be referred by the consumer to the respective
Forum. Therefore, any consumer https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis aggrieved from and out of the
actions initiated, which all are falling under the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, more
specifically, under Regulations 3 to 17 are entertainable by Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum
constituted under Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code.
17. Providing of electricity service connection, supply of electricity meter reading, bills, defects,
non-payment recovery, all these aspects are falling under Regulations 3 to 17 of the Tamil Nadu
Electricity Supply Code.
18. In the present case, the case of the petitioner is that the demand notice falls under Regulation 11
i.e., 'Assessment of billing in cases where there is no meter or meter is defective'. In the case of the
petitioner, audit objection was raised in respect of the meter reading and the consumption charges
are determined by the Authorities under the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code. Therefore, the
petitioner is at liberty to approach the Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum constituted under
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code.
19. The contention of the petitioner that the Forum created under Regulations for Consumer
Grievance Redressal Forum and Electricity Ombudsman is under different context and therefore,
the Forum created under the above Regulations may not be applicable in the case of the petitioner.
In the case where the Forum is created under the above Notification dated 08.01.2004, the kind of
grievances are explained in Regulation 5. Therefore, those Regulations referred is inapplicable with
reference to the case of the petitioner, as the petitioner's case falls under the Tamil Nadu Electricity
Supply Code and more specifically, the impugned demand notice was issued by exercising the
powers under the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code. Each case is to be considered with reference
to the facts and circumstances along with the Regulations applicable.
20. The demand notice when issued based on the audit objections on the ground that the meter was
defective, the case falls under Regulation 11 and therefore, the petitioner has to approach the
Consumer https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Grievance Redressal Forum constituted under
Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code and not under the other Regulations.
21. Two different Regulations provide redressal mechanisms and the each such Forum or
mechanism constituted under the Regulation must entertain the grievances of the consumer in
respect of the powers conferred on such Forums. It is unnecessary to raise confusion in such
matters, when the subject matters of adjudication are enumerated in the Regulation itself. In the
Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code, the subject matters are defined and Regulation 18 also
stipulates that the grievances falling under Regulations 3 to 17 shall be adjudicated before the
Consumer Grievance Redressal Forum constituted under Regulation 18 of the Tamil Nadu
Electricity Supply Code. This being the scope of the provisions, the petitioner is bound to exhaust
the alternate remedy provided under the Tamil Nadu Electricity Supply Code.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116395851/ 4
P.Saravanan vs The Executive Engineer on 3 December, 2021
22. The petitioner states that when the demand is prima facie illegal, the writ petition is
entertainable. In this regard, it is to be noted that https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the demand
notice is the initiation of action. Any demand notice or show cause notice is issued based on certain
determination or based on certain allegations. Demand notice is issued by the Competent
Authorities by determining certain issues in accordance with the Statute or Regulations and
communicate the decision to the person concerned, who in turn is at liberty to accept the demand or
deny the demand and prefer an appeal before the Competent Appellate Authority or the mechanism
created under the Statute. Thus the demand notices or show cause notices are issued in different
context. The difference between demand notice and show cause notice is that show cause notice is
issued based on certain allegations asking the noticee to submit his explanations in respect of the
allegations. It is an opportunity provided otherwise. Demand notice is a notice where the Competent
Authority decides certain issues or determine the charges or otherwise based on the provisions of
the Act or the Rules or based on certain facts and such determination of issues are communicated to
the persons concerned, asking his response to the demand. It is left open to the person concerned
either to comply with the demand or raise an objection by approaching the Appellate Authority or
the Competent Forum created under https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the Act.
23. Let us now consider whether the High Courts can adjudicate such disputed issues. This Court is
of an unambiguous opinion that based on certain defective meter, certain charges are determined.
Whether the meter was defective or not, whether the reading made by the Authorities are proper or
improper, whether the petitioner has not informed the defects in the meter to the Authorities or not
and all the factors, which all are involved in these issues are to be ascertained for the purpose of
forming an opinion and the High Court cannot conduct such an elaborate enquiry in the writ
proceedings under Article 226 of the Constitution of India.
24. The power of judicial review under Article 226 of the Constitution of India is to scrutinise the
processes through which a decision taken by the Authorities in consonance with the provisions of
the Law, but not the decision itself. Thus, the High Courts are insisting for exhausting the alternate
remedy as the findings of the Appellate Authority or the Forum is https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
of greater assistance for the purpose of exercise of judicial review under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India in an effective manner. In the event of venturing into the original adjudication
merely based on the affidavit and counter-affidavit filed in the writ petition, no doubt there is a
possibility of omission, commission, error or otherwise, which would cause prejudice to either of the
parties.
25. Therefore, in all circumstances, the High Court is expected to entertain the writ petition after
exhausting the statutory remedies provided under the Act or the Rules or Regulations in order to
provide complete justice. Exhausting the statutory remedies are of paramount importance. This
exactly is the reason for multiplicity of proceedings. If the writ petitions are entertained in a routine
manner against all such show cause notices and demand notices, then thereafter a direction is
issued and further writ petition is filed and almost 3 to 4 writ petitions are filed, which is taking
years together for the litigants to get justice from the Court of Law, which really causes mental agony
to the litigants. Thus, the High Court is expected to exercise restrain in entertaining such writ
petitions, wherein the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis statutory remedies are provided and the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116395851/ 5
P.Saravanan vs The Executive Engineer on 3 December, 2021
very legislative intention for providing such statutory remedies are to ensure that the parties
adjudicate the issues and resolve the disputes through such mechanisms. The purpose and object of
such remedies can never be undermined and the High Courts must allow such Authorities to
exercise their powers contemplated under the provisions of the Act or the Rules or Regulations.
26. This being the principles to be followed, this Court is of an opinion that the petitioner has to
adjudicate all such disputed issues before the Competent Forum created under the Tamil Nadu
Electricity Supply Code in the manner prescribed. Accordingly, the petitioner is at liberty to
approach the Forum and in the event of approaching the Forum, the period during which the writ
petition was pending before the High Court is to be taken into consideration for the purpose of
condoning the delay if any petition to condone the delay is filed by the petitioner and the issues
raised between the parties are to be considered on merits and in accordance with law and as
expeditiously as possible.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
27. With the abovesaid observations, the writ petition stands dismissed. However, there shall be no
order as to costs. Consequently, connected miscellaneous petition is also dismissed.
03-12-2021 Index : Yes/No. Internet : Yes/No. Speaking Order/Non-Speaking Order.
Svn To
1.The Executive Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB), Tidel Park, Taramani, Chennai –
113.
2.The Assistant Executive Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB), Tidel Park, Taramani,
Chennai – 113.
3.The Assistant Engineer, Tamil Nadu Electricity Board (TNEB), New No.15, II Street, Indira Nagar
Section, Chennai – 20.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis S.M.SUBRAMANIAM, J.
Svn WP 34953 of 2014 03-12-2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/116395851/ 6
