P.Sivakumar vs V.Vijayakumar on 23 December, 2021
P.Sivakumar vs V.Vijayakumar on 23 December, 2021
Author: R.N.Manjula
Bench: R.N.Manjula
Crl.R.C.No.448 of 2016
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED: 23.12.2021
CORAM:
THE HON'BLE Ms.JUSTICE R.N.MANJULA
Crl.R.C.No.448 of 2016
P.Sivakumar ... Petitioner
Vs.
V.Vijayakumar ... Respondent
Criminal Revision Case filed under Sections 397 and 401 Cr.P.C praying
to set aside the judgment passed in C.A.No.5 of 2015 on the file of XVI
Additional Sessions Court, Chennai, dated 20.11.2015, confirming and
sentence passed by the learned Metropolitan Magistrate (Fast Track Court
No.4, George Town, Chennai) in C.C.No.2510 of 2012 dated 10.12.2014.
For Petitioner : Mr.S.Kaithamalai Kumaran
For Respondent : Mr.K.Nirmal Kumar
for Mr.N.Narayanasamy
***
ORDER
The Criminal Revision Case has been preferred challenging the judgment of the XVI Additional
Sessions Court, Chennai, dated 20.11.2015 made in C.A.No.5 of 2015, confirming the judgment of
the learned https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Metropolitan Magistrate (Fast Track Court No.4)
George Town, Chennai, dated 10.12.2014 made in C.C.No.2510 of 2012.
2. This case has arisen out of a private complaint given by the petitioner/complainant on the
allegations that the revision petitioner had availed a loan of Rs.13,50,000/- from the respondent
and agreed to repay the same with interest at the rate of 12% per annum and also issued a post dated
cheque dated 10.07.2012 for a sum of Rs.13,50,000/- towards discharging the same. The above
cheque was drawn on Vijaya bank, Olavakkode Branch, Palakkad District and the cheque was
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/70107870/ 1
P.Sivakumar vs V.Vijayakumar on 23 December, 2021
presented for collection with the respondent ICICI bank, R.K.Salai Branch, Chennai on 11.07.2012.
It was returned on 14.07.2012 for want of sufficient funds. After issuing statutory pre-suit notice and
complying with the legal mandates, the complainant has filed by the complaint against the accused
for committing the offence under Section 138 r/w 142 of the Negotiable Instruments Act
(hereinafter referred as N.I. Act).
3. The case was taken on file by the Metropolitan Magistrate (Fast Track Court No.4) George Town,
Chennai in C.C.No.2510 of 2012 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis dated 10.12.2014. When the
petitioner / accused was questioned about the offence committed by him, he pleaded innocence and
claimed to be tried. Hence, the trial was conducted.
4. On the side of the complainant, one (1) witness was examined as PW.1 and six (6) documents
were marked as Ex.P.1 to Ex.P.6. When the incriminating evidence found in the evidence of the
prosecution was put to the accused and questioned under Section 313 Cr.P.C., he denied the same.
On the side of the accused, he himself examined as DW.1 and three (3) documents were marked as
Ex.D1 to Ex.D3.
5. After the conclusion of the trial and on consideration of the materials available on record, the
learned trial Judge, found the accused guilty for the offence under Section 138 of N.I. Act, convicted
and sentenced him to undergo Simple Imprisonment for 2 years and awarded an amount equal to
the cheque amount (i.e.) Rs.13,50,000/- as compensation payable to the complainant.
6. Against the said conviction, the accused has filed an appeal in C.A.No.5 of 2015, before the XVI
Additional Sessions Court, Chennai. The https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis same was dismissed by
the learned XVI Additional Sessions Judge vide judgment dated 20.11.2015, confirming the order of
the trial Court. Aggrieved over the same, the petitioner/accused preferred the present Criminal
Revision Case.
7. Heard the learned counsel for the petitioner/accused and the learned counsel for the
respondent/complainant.
8. The learned counsel for the revision petitioner/accused submitted that even in the reply notice
sent by him to the statutory notice, he had stated that the cheque was stolen by his Manager and
given it to the complainant for the purpose of foisting a case; the documents produced by the
accused would show that on the alleged date of loan transaction i.e., on 10.05.2012, he was not
available in Chennai and he had participated in a chit auction at Palakkad, Kerala, conducted by the
Kerala State Finance Limited; the lower Courts have omitted to appreciate those evidence in a
proper perspective and given the benefit of the rebuttal proof to the revision petitioner; the
respondent did not have financial wherewithal to lend a sum of Rs.13,50,000/- as the loan to the
revision petitioner and the same was also not properly appreciated by the Courts below.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/70107870/ 2
P.Sivakumar vs V.Vijayakumar on 23 December, 2021
9. The learned counsel for the respondent/complainant submitted that the trial Court has dealt with
the defence documents and recorded clear findings that it is non acceptable; during the course of
cross examination of PW.1, it was suggested on behalf of the revision petitioner that the
respondent/complainant did not have financial wherewithal to lend a huge amount as loan to him
and he stated that he is engaged in an export business and he is earning good income and is paying
Income tax; the said fact was not denied by the revision petitioner; once the fact has been
appreciated by the trial court and later re-appreciated by the Sessions Court, the High Court should
not once again appreciate the question of fact in the revision proceedings, unless there is any patent
omission or commission in appreciation of evidence and that caused gross discourage of justice.
10. Points for consideration:
“Whether the lower Appellate Court is right in confirming the judgment of the
learned trial Judge and whether the judgment of the Appellate Court is fair, proper or
legal?” https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
11. The fact that the revision petitioner and the respondent are known to each other is not denied.
The contention of the revision petitioner is that the impugned cheque was not issued by him directly
to the respondent by way of loan amount and that the cheque was stolen by his Manager Sivaprasad
and handed over to the complainant for the purpose of this case. There is no document or evidence
placed before the Court to substantiate the fact that the cheque was stolen by the Manager of the
revision petitioner and it was misused by the respondent. When the execution of the cheque is not
denied, the mandatory presumption under Section 118 and 139 of N.I.Act, goes in favour of the
complainant and it has to be presumed that the cheque was issued only for discharging a legally
enforceable debt or liability. However, the accused is at liberty to rebut the initial presumption by
either adducing probable evidence from his side or by exposing the improbabilities in the case of the
complainant. In the present case on hand, the revision petitioner has primarily relied on Ex.D1
which is said to be the extract of the register of auction proceedings which was held on 10.05.2012.
It is seen from the said document that the name of Sivaprasad has been written against No.23 and
and it is written as 'Proxy - Sivaprasad'. It is claimed by the revision petitioner that the above
endorsement 'Proxy – Sivaprasad' in Ex.D2 is produced to show that
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the revision petitioner had participated in the auction proceedings
as a proxy for Sivaprasad, who is his Manager.
12. The learned trial Judge had appreciated the probability of the defence taken by the revision
petitioner on the basis of Ex.D2 by observing that it is highly improbable for a proprietor to
represent by his Manager. In the normal course it would be on the reverse only. The Manager would
be sent by the proprietor to participate in the proceedings on his behalf. And it has been similarly
re-appreciated by the Appellate Court also. As I find no factual illegality or any apparent error on the
record in appreciating the drove fact; it is not necessary to look into it once again from a different
angle.
13. In this context, it is relevant to cite the decision relied by the learned counsel for the respondent
held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Kishan Rao Vs. Shankar Gouda and reported in (2018) 8 SCC
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/70107870/ 3
P.Sivakumar vs V.Vijayakumar on 23 December, 2021
16. The relevant portion is extracted hereunder:
“11.The trial court after considering the evidence on record has returned the finding
that the cheque was issued by the accused which contained his signatures. Although,
the complainant led oral as well as documentary evidence to prove his case, no
evidence was led by the accused to rebut the presumption regarding existence of debt
or liability of the accused.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
12. This Court has time and again examined the scope of Sections 397/401 CrPC and
the ground for exercising the revisional jurisdiction by the High Court. In State of
Kerala v. Puttumana Illath Jathavedan Namboodiri [State of Kerala v. Puttumana
Illath Jathavedan Namboodiri, (1999) 2 SCC 452 : 1999 SCC (Cri) 275] , while
considering the scope of the revisional jurisdiction of the High Court this Court has
laid down the following : (SCC pp. 454-55, para
5) “5. … In its revisional jurisdiction, the High Court can call for and examine the
record of any proceedings for the purpose of satisfying itself as to the correctness,
legality or propriety of any finding, sentence or order. In other words, the jurisdiction
is one of supervisory jurisdiction exercised by the High Court for correcting
miscarriage of justice. But the said revisional power cannot be equated with the
power of an appellate court nor can it be treated even as a second appellate
jurisdiction. Ordinarily, therefore, it would not be appropriate for the High Court to
reappreciate the evidence and come to its own conclusion on the same when the
evidence has already been appreciated by the Magistrate as well as the Sessions
Judge in appeal, unless any glaring feature is brought to the notice of the High Court
which would otherwise tantamount to gross miscarriage of justice. On scrutinising
the impugned judgment of the High Court from the aforesaid standpoint, we have no
hesitation to come to the conclusion that the High Court exceeded its jurisdiction in
interfering with the conviction of the respondent by reappreciating the oral evidence.
…”
13. Another judgment which has also been referred to and relied on by the High
Court is the judgment of this Court in Sanjaysinh Ramrao Chavan v.
Dattatray Gulabrao Phalke [Sanjaysinh Ramrao Chavan v. Dattatray Gulabrao Phalke, (2015) 3 SCC
123 : (2015) 2 SCC (Cri) 19] . This Court held that the High Court in exercise of revisional
jurisdiction shall not interfere with the order of the Magistrate unless it is perverse or wholly
unreasonable or there is non-consideration of any relevant material, the order cannot be set aside
merely on the ground that another view is possible. Following has been laid down in para 14 : (SCC
p. 135) “14. … Unless the order passed by the Magistrate is perverse or the view taken by the court is
wholly unreasonable or there is non-consideration of any relevant material or there is palpable
misreading of records, the Revisional Court is not justified in setting aside the order, merely because
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/70107870/ 4
P.Sivakumar vs V.Vijayakumar on 23 December, 2021
another view is possible. The Revisional Court is not meant to act as an appellate court. The whole
purpose of the revisional jurisdiction is to preserve the power in the court to do justice in accordance
with the principles of criminal jurisprudence. The revisional power of the court under Sections 397
to 401 CrPC is not to be equated with that of an appeal. Unless the finding of the court, whose
decision is sought to be revised, is shown to be perverse or untenable in law or is grossly erroneous
or glaringly unreasonable or where the decision is based on no material or where the material facts
are wholly ignored or where the judicial discretion is exercised arbitrarily or capriciously, the courts
may not interfere https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis with decision in exercise of their revisional
jurisdiction.”
14.In the above case also conviction of the accused was recorded, the High Court set aside [Dattatray
Gulabrao Phalke v. Sanjaysinh Ramrao Chavan, 2013 SCC OnLine Bom 1753] the order of conviction
by substituting its own view. This Court set aside the High Court's order holding that the High Court
exceeded its jurisdiction in substituting its views and that too without any legal basis.”
14. In the decision of the Division Bench of the Hon'ble Supreme Court held in the case of Bir Singh
Vs. Mukesh Kumar and reported in (2019) 4 Supreme Court Cases 197, the above point is reiterated
as under:
“16. It is well settled that in exercise of revisional jurisdiction under Section 482 of
the Criminal Procedure Code, the High Court does not, in the absence of perversity,
upset concurrent factual findings. It is not for the Revisional Court to re-analyse and
re-interpret the evidence on record.
17. As held by this Court in Southern Sales & Services v. Sauermilch Design and
Handels GmbH [Southern Sales & Services v. Sauermilch Design and Handels
GmbH, (2008) 14 SCC 457] , it is a well-established principle of law that the
Revisional Court will not interfere even if a wrong order is passed by a court having
jurisdiction, in the absence of a jurisdictional error. The answer to the first question
is therefore, in the negative.
.................
.................
.................
32. The proposition of law which emerges from the judgments referred to above is that the onus to
rebut the presumption under Section 139 that the cheque has been issued in discharge of a debt or
liability is on the accused and the fact that the cheque might be post-dated does not absolve the
drawer of a cheque of the penal consequences of Section 138 of the Negotiable Instruments Act.
33. A meaningful reading of the provisions of the Negotiable Instruments Act including, in
particular, Sections 20, 87 and 139, makes it amply clear that a person who signs a cheque and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/70107870/ 5
P.Sivakumar vs V.Vijayakumar on 23 December, 2021
makes it over to the payee remains liable unless he adduces evidence to rebut the presumption that
the cheque had been issued for payment of a debt or in discharge of a liability. It is immaterial that
the cheque may have been filled in by any person other than the drawer, if the cheque is duly signed
by the drawer. If the cheque is otherwise valid, the penal provisions of
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Section 138 would be attracted.
34. If a signed blank cheque is voluntarily presented to a payee, towards some payment, the payee
may fill up the amount and other particulars. This in itself would not invalidate the cheque. The
onus would still be on the accused to prove that the cheque was not in discharge of a debt or liability
by adducing evidence.
35. It is not the case of the respondent-accused that he either signed the cheque or parted with it
under any threat or coercion. Nor is it the case of the respondent-accused that the unfilled signed
cheque had been stolen. The existence of a fiduciary relationship between the payee of a cheque and
its drawer, would not disentitle the payee to the benefit of the presumption under Section 139 of the
Negotiable Instruments Act, in the absence of evidence of exercise of undue influence or coercion.
The second question is also answered in the negative.
36. Even a blank cheque leaf, voluntarily signed and handed over by the accused, which is towards
some payment, would attract presumption under Section 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, in
the absence of any cogent evidence to show that the cheque was not issued in discharge of a debt.
37. The fact that the appellant complainant might have been an Income Tax practitioner conversant
with knowledge of law does not make any difference to the law relating to the dishonour of a cheque.
The fact that the loan may not have been advanced by a cheque or demand draft or a receipt might
not have been obtained would make no difference. In this context, it would, perhaps, not be out of
context to note that the fact that the respondent-accused should have given or signed blank cheque
to the appellant complainant, as claimed by the respondent- accused, shows that initially there was
mutual trust and faith between them.
38. In the absence of any finding that the cheque in question was not signed by the
respondent-accused or not voluntarily made over to the payee and in the absence of any evidence
with regard to the circumstances in which a blank signed cheque had been given to the appellant
complainant, it may reasonably be presumed that the cheque was filled in by the appellant
complainant being the payee in the presence of the respondent-accused being the drawer, at his
request and/or with his acquiescence. The subsequent filling in of an unfilled signed cheque is not
an alteration. There was no change in the amount of the cheque, its date or the name of the payee.
The High Court ought not to have acquitted the respondent-accused of the charge under Section 138
of the Negotiable Instruments Act.”
15. It is worthwhile to refer the another judgment of the Hon'ble https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Supreme Court rendered in Kalamani Tex and others Vs. P.Balasubramanian reported in (2021) 2
CTC 357, in connection with the initial presumption under Section 118 and 138 of N.I.Act. In the
said judgment it is held as under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/70107870/ 6
P.Sivakumar vs V.Vijayakumar on 23 December, 2021
“14. Once the 2nd appellant had admitted his signatures on the cheque and the deed,
the trial court ought to have presumed that the cheque was issued as consideration
for a legally enforceable debt. The trial court fell in error when it called upon the
respondent complainant to explain the circumstances under which the appellants
were liable to pay. Such approach of the trial court was directly in the teeth of the
established legal position as discussed above, and amounts to a patent error of law.
15. No doubt, and as correctly argued by the Senior Counsel for the appellants, the
presumptions raised under Section 118 and Section 139 are rebuttable in nature. As
held in M.S. Narayana Menon v. State of Kerala [M.S. Narayana Menon v. State of
Kerala, (2006) 6 SCC 39, para 32 : (2006) 3 SCC (Cri) 30] , which was relied upon in
Basalingappa [Basalingappa v. Mudibasappa, (2019) 5 SCC 418 : (2019) 2 SCC (Cri)
571] , a probable defence needs to be raised, which must meet the standard of
“preponderance of probability”, and not mere possibility. These principles were also
affirmed in Kumar Exports [Kumar Exports v. Sharma Carpets, (2009) 2 SCC 513 :
(2009) 1 SCC (Civ) 629 : (2009) 1 SCC (Cri) 823] , wherein it was further held that a
bare denial of passing of consideration would not aid the case of the accused.
16. The appellants have banked upon the evidence of DW 1 to dispute the existence of any
recoverable debt. However, his deposition merely highlights that the respondent had an
over-extended credit facility with the bank and his failure to update his account led to debt recovery
proceedings. Such evidence does not disprove the appellants' liability and has a little bearing on the
merits of the respondent's complaint. Similarly, the appellants' mere bald denial regarding
genuineness of the deed of undertaking dated 7-11-2000, despite admitting the signatures of
Appellant 2 thereupon, does not cast any doubt on the genuineness of the said document.
17. Even if we take the arguments raised by the appellants at face value that only a blank cheque and
signed blank stamp papers were given to the respondent, yet the statutory presumption cannot be
obliterated. It is useful to cite Bir Singh v. Mukesh Kumar [Bir Singh v. Mukesh Kumar, (2019) 4
SCC 197, para 36 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis : (2019) 2 SCC (Civ) 309 : (2019) 2 SCC (Cri) 40]
, where this Court held that:
(SCC p. 209, para 36) “36. Even a blank cheque leaf, voluntarily signed and handed
over by the accused, which is towards some payment, would attract presumption
under Section 139 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, in the absence of any cogent
evidence to show that the cheque was not issued in discharge of a debt.”
18. Considering the fact that there has been an admitted business relationship between the parties,
we are of the opinion that the defence raised by the appellants does not inspire confidence or meet
the standard of “preponderance of probability”. In the absence of any other relevant material, it
appears to us that the High Court did not err in discarding the appellants' defence and upholding
the onus imposed upon them in terms of Section 118 and Section 139 of NIA.”
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/70107870/ 7
P.Sivakumar vs V.Vijayakumar on 23 December, 2021
16. When the initial presumption lies in favour of the complainant, the reverse burden is on the
shoulder of the revision petitioner. Despite the revision petitioner has stated that the respondent did
not have financial wherewithal to lend a huge sum of Rs.13,50,000/- as loan, he did not deny the
nature of the business carried out by the complainant. No reliable rebuttal proof is given by the
revision petitioner to substantiate the said point. The rest of his evidence does not have the strength
to demolish the initial presumption that was drawn in favour of the defacto complainant. In view of
the same, the initial presumption along with the materials produced by the respondent/
complainant evolves into conclusive proof. The Courts below have rightly appreciated the same in a
correct perspective. In my opinion it does not warrant any interference of this Court.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
17. At this juncture, the learned counsel for the revision petitioner submitted that some indulgence
should be shown in the quantum of sentence awarded to the petitioner. It is seen that the Courts
below have imposed a sentence of two years Simple Imprisonment and awarded a compensation of
Rs.13,50,000/-. Since the lower Court has awarded compensation, I feel that the sentence may be
reduced. Accordingly, the sentence of two years Simple Imprisonment is reduced to 6 months
Simple Imprisonment. The award of compensation stands unaltered.
18. In the result, this Criminal Revision Case is partly allowed. The judgment of the learned
Metropolitan Magistrate (Fast Track Court No.4), Chennai, which is confirmed by the learned XVI
Additional Sessions Judge, Chennai is modified to the extent that the accused is found guilty for the
offence under Section 138 of N.I.Act and he stands convicted and sentenced to undergo 6 months
Simple Imprisonment. The award of compensation stands unaltered. The period of incarceration
undergone by the accused can be set off under Section 428 Cr.P.C. The learned trial Judge is
directed to issue Non Bailable Warrant for securing the accused and send him to prison to undergo
the remaining period of sentence.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis 23.12.2021 Index: Yes/No Speaking / Non Speaking Order rpl To
1.The XVI Additional District and Sessions Judge, Chennai.
2.The Metropolitan Magistrate (Fast Track Court No.4), George Town, Chennai.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis R.N.MANJULA, J rpl 23.12.2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/70107870/ 8
