Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
Author: Biraja Prasanna Satapathy
Bench: Biraja Prasanna Satapathy
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No. 16124 of 2022
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 & 227 of the
Constitution of India.
..................
Padmanav Dash & Ors. .... Petitioners
-versus-
Vice Chancellor, Veer Surendra .... Opposite Parties
Sai University of Technology,
Burla & Ors.
For Petitioners : Mr. B. Routray, Sr. Advocate
along with
Mr. J. Biswal, Advocate
For Opp. Parties : Mr. N.K. Sahu, Advocate
(Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2)
Mr. P.K. Rath, Sr. Advocate
along with
Mr. S. Rath, Advocate
(Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6)
PRESENT:
THE HON'BLE JUSTICE BIRAJA PRASANNA SATAPATHY
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of Hearing: 16.01.2025 & Date of Judgment: 03.04.2025
---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biraja Prasanna Satapathy, J.
The present writ petition has been filed inter alia challenging the selection process adopted by
Sambalpur University (in short University) for promotion to the post of Professor under the Career
// 2 // Advancement Scheme (in short 'CAS') as per the advertisement issued on 22.07.2021 under
Annexure-5 and consequential order dtd.08.02.2022 in extending the benefit of promotion to Opp.
Party Nos. 3 to 15 under Annexure-8.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 1
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
2. Even though the present writ petition was filed initially by 14 nos. of Petitioners challenging the
promotion of Opp. Party Nos. 3 to 15 in different disciplines, but in terms of the order passed by this
Court on 07.01.2025 and 16.01.2025, the writ petition was confined in respect of Petitioner Nos. 1, 2,
3, 7 & 13 and the challenge to the promotion of Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6, so made vide the order issued
under Annexure-8.
3. Learned Sr. Counsel appearing for the Petitioners contended that Opp. Party No. 2 vide notice
dtd.27.01.2020 under Annexure-3 invited applications in the prescribed format for promotion
under Career Advancement Scheme. In the said notice it was clearly indicated that faculty members
who wish to be considered for promotion under CAS and are eligible for promotion through CAS by
04.03.2010, shall be governed as per AICTE Regulation, 2000 and those who are eligible in between
05.03.2010 to 28.02.2019, they shall be governed by AICTE Regulation issued on 08.11.2012.
// 3 // 3.1. It is also contended that notice issued on 27.01.2020 under Annexure-3 was modified
vide another notice issued on 10.02.2020 under Annexure-4. But vide notice dtd.08.07.2021 under
Annexure-5 the date of making the application was extended to 20.07.2021. Subsequently, vide
another notice issued on 22.07.2021 under Annexure-6, the last date for making the application was
extended to 23.07.2021 for promotion from Stage-I to Stage-II and Stage-II to Stage-III and last
date for such submission of form for promotion from Stage-III to Stage-IV and Stage-IV to Stage-V
was fixed to 29.07.2021.
3.2. It is contended that Petitioners made their applications for promotion through CAS from
Stage-IV to Stage-V in terms of Clause 2 of notice dtd.27.01.2020 under Annexure-3 and
accordingly they are to be governed by AICTE Regulations issued on 08.11.2012. 3.3. It is contended
that Petitioner Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7 & 13, since were appointed as Associate Professors during the year
2016, they became eligible to get the benefit of promotion under CAS to the rank of Professor, which
comes under Stage-V and as provided in the advertisement governed under AICTE Regulation
dt.08.11.2012. The // 4 // same was also indicated all through in the notice issued under
Annexure-3 as well as under Annexure-6.
3.4. Learned Sr. Counsel appearing for the Petitioners contended that in the notification issued by
AICTE on 08.11.2012 under Annexure-2, the following Regulation was made namely:- All India
Council for Technical Education (Career Advancement Scheme for the Teachers and Other
Academic Staff in Technical Institutions) (Degree) Regulations, 2012 (in short Regulation).
3.5. Regulation 5.2 of the said Regulation describes the modality and constitution of the Selection
Committee for promotion to the post of Associate Professor in the University and the same reads as
follows:-
"5.2. Associate Professor in the University :
The Selection Committee for the post of Associate Professor in the University shall
have the following composition:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 2
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
1. Vice Chancellor or Acting Vice Chancellor to be the Chariperson of the Selection
Committee.
2. An academician who is the nominee of the Visitor/Chancellor, wherever
applicable.
3. Three experts in the concerned subject/field nominated by the Vice Chancellor out
of the panel of names approved by the relevant statutory body of the University
concerned.
4. Dean of the faculty, wherever applicable.
5. Head/Chairperson of the Department/School.
// 5 //
6. And academician representing SC / ST / OBC / Minority / Women / Differently-abled categories,
if any of candidates representing these categories is the applicant, to be nominated by the Vice
Chancellor, if any of the above members of the selection committee does not belong to that category.
To constitute the quorum for the meeting, five of which at least two must be from out of the three
subject experts shall be present." 3.6. It is contended that the modality for constitution of the
Selection Committee, prescribed under Regulation 5.2 for promotion to the post of Associate
Professor is also required to be followed for promotion to the post of Professor as prescribed under
Regulation 5.3. It is contended that though in the notice dtd.22.07.2021 under Annexure-6, it was
clearly indicated that AICTE Regulation 2012 is to be followed in respect of eligible candidates
coming in between 05.03.2010 to 28.02.2019, but Opp. Party-University in violation to the
provisions contained under Regulation 5.2 r.w. Regulation 5.3, constituted a Selection Committee,
which is not in terms of the Regulation. 3.7. It is contended that in the proceeding of the Selection
Committee for the post of Professor and Associate Professor under CAS held on 11.01.2022 in the
Department of Mechanical Engineering of VSSUT, Burla, the following Selection Committee was
constituted to conduct the interview:
// 6 // Selection Committee Sl # Name & Designation Remarks 1 Prof. B. Majhi,
Vice-Chancellor, VSSUT Chairman Chancellor's 2 Prof. A.K. Darpe, Dept. of
Mechanical Engg., IIT Delhi Nominee 3 Prof. M.P. Maiya, Department of Mechanical
Engg., IIT Madras Subject Expert 4 Prof. Shubhashis Sanyal, Dept. of Mechanical
Engg., NIT Raipur Subject Expert Shri Tapan Kumar Satapathy, Addl. Secretary,
SDTE, Govt. of 5 Govt. Nominee Odisha Member 6 Ms. Upama Kalo, Registrar
VSSUT Convener 3.8. It is contended that since the Selection Committee constituted
by the University, who conducted the interview for consideration of the claim of the
Petitioners for their promotion to the rank of Professor under CAS, was not
constituted in terms of the provisions contained under Regulation 5.2 r.w. Regulation
5.3 of the AICTE guideline dtd.08.11.2012 under Annexure-2, selection and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 3
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
promotion of Private Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6 vide order dtd.08.02.2022 under
Annexure-8 basing on the recommendation of the Committee is not sustainable in
the eye of law.
3.9. It is also contended that Regulation 2012 was framed by AICTE in exercise of the
power conferred under Sub. Sec. 1 of Section 23 r.w. Section 10(i) to (v) of the All
India Council of Technical Education Act, 1987 (in short Act). Regulation 3.9 of 2012
Regulation makes entitled an Associate Professor completing 3 years of service in // 7
// Stage-IV and possessing Ph.D. degree in the relevant discipline, eligible to be
appointed and designated as Professor in the next higher grade.
3.10. It is also contended that Petitioner Nos. 1, 2, 3, 7 & 13 were not only eligible to
get the benefit of promotion in terms of the notice issued under Annexure-3 to 6, but
also they had the required qualification and experience as provided under Regulation
3.9. But since the University never conducted the selection by constituting the
Selection Committee in terms of Regulation 5.2 r.w. Regulation 5.3, process of
selection conducted by the University through such a Committee was vitiated and so
also the recommendation of the names of Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6 and their promotion
to the rank of Professor vide order under Annexure-8.
3.11. A further submission was made that the Selection Committee so constituted by
the University is not only contrary to the Regulation framed and issued by the AICTE
on 08.11.2012, but also it did not follow, the minimum APIs as provided in Table I,
more particularly the expert assessment system percentage distribution of weightage
points in the expert assessment. As provided under the Table I, the Selection
Committee out of the total weightage of 100 is required to // 8 // give 30% towards
contribution to research, 50% towards assessment of domain knowledge and
teaching practices and 20% towards interview performance. But the Selection
Committee so constituted by the University never followed the APIs in terms of the
provisions contained in the 2012 Regulation. The assessment prescribed in Table-
I for preparation of minimum APIs reads as follows:-
V Expert Screening Screening Selection Selection Expert Assessment Committee
Committee Committee Committee Committee System Percentage No No 30% 50%
50% Distribution separate separate Contribution Contribution Contribution of
points. points. to Research to Research to Research Weightage Screening Screening
50% 30% 50% Points in the Committee Committee Assessment Assessment
Performance Expert to verify to verify of domain of domain evaluation Assessment
API scores API scores knowledge knowledge and other (Total and teaching and
teaching credential by weightage practices. practices referral
100.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 4
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
procedure Minimum 20% 20% required for interview Interview promotion is performance
Performance
50) 3.12. Making all these submissions learned Sr. Counsel appearing for the Petitioners contended
that since on the face of the notice issued under Annexure- 3 and 6, the University neither
constituted the Selection Committee in terms of Regulation 5.2 r.w. Regulation 5.3 of the AICTE
2012 Regulation nor calculated the APIs in terms of the // 9 // Regulation as provided in Table-I of
the Regulation, the selection and appointment of Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6 as Professor in the
Department of Mechanical Engineering vide order under Annexure-8 basing on the
recommendation of the Selection Committee, is illegal and requires interference of this Court.
4. Mr. N.K. Sahu, learned counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 on the other hand made his
submission basing on the stand taken in the counter affidavit and further affidavits filed by the said
Opp. Parties. It is 1st contention that since Petitioners without raising any objection, participated
before the Selection Committee so held on 11.01.2022, pursuant to notice dtd.22.07.2021 under
Annexure-6, after becoming unsuccessful on the face of such selection and appointment of Opp.
Party Nos. 5 & 6 vide order dtd.08.02.2022 under Annexure- 8, the challenge made to such
selection and appointment of Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6 is not entertainable.
4.1. In support of his aforesaid submission learned counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2
relied on the following decisions of the Apex Court:-
(i) 2023 SCC OnLine SC 344 (Tajvir Singh Sodhi & Ors. Vs. State of Jammu &
Kashmir & Ors.) // 10 //
(ii) 2024 SCC OnLine Ori 1205 (Dr. Archana Kanungo Vs. State of Odisha & Ors.)
(iii) 2024 SCC OnLine Ori 1122 (Pramod Kumar Sahoo Vs. State of Odisha & Ors.)
4.2. Hon'ble Apex Court in in Para 48 & 69 of the Judgment in the case of Tajvir
Singh Sodhi has held as follows:-
"48. The learned ASG cited Rule 10 of the 1992 Rules which provides for Recruitment
and Selection to contend that there is no prescribed procedure for the appointment of
drug inspectors. Rule 10(i) states that the Board shall finalize the selections after
holding such tests or examinations as may be prescribed under rules or if there are no
such rules, as the Board may consider necessary. Thus, it is a matter of record that no
rules have been prescribed for the selection of drug inspectors and in the absence of
prescribed rules, the Selection Committee and the Board carried out the selection
process in a fair and transparent manner. That merely because the record of the case
was not traceable when it was called for by the Single Judge in February 2015, i.e., 6
years after the selection/appointments were made, cannot be a ground to set aside
the entire selection process.
xxx xxx xxx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 5
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
69. It is therefore trite that candidates, having taken part in the selection process
without any demur or protest, cannot challenge the same after having been declared
unsuccessful. The candidates cannot approbate and reprobate at the same time. In
other words, simply because the result of the selection process is not palatable to a
candidate, he cannot allege that the process of interview was unfair or that there was
some lacuna in the process. Therefore, we find that the writ petitioners in these cases,
could not have questioned before a Court of law, the rationale behind recasting the
selection criteria, as // 11 // they willingly took part in the selection process even
after the criteria had been so recast. Their candidature was not withdrawn in light of
the amended criteria. A challenge was thrown against the same only after they had
been declared unsuccessful in the selection process, at which stage, the challenge
ought not to have been entertained in light of the principle of waiver and
acquiescence."
4.3. Hon'ble Apex Court in in Para 4.2 of the Judgment in the case of Dr. Archana Kanungo has held
as follows:-
"4.2. Hon'ble Apex Court in Para 14 to 18 of the Judgment in the case of Madras
Institute has held as follows:--
"14. The question as to whether a person who consciously takes part in the process of
selection can turn around and question the method of selection is no longer res
integra.
15. In G. Sarana v. University of Lucknow [(1976) 3 SCC 585 : 1976 SCC (L&S) 474], a
similar question came up for consideration before a three-Judge Bench of this Court
where the fact was that the petitioner had applied to the post of Professor of
Anthropology in the University of Lucknow. After having appeared before the
Selection Committee but on his failure to get appointed, the petitioner rushed to the
High Court pleading bias against him of the three experts in the Selection Committee
consisting of five members. He also alleged doubt in the constitution of the
Committee. Rejecting the contention, the Court held : (SCC p. 591, para 15) "15. We
do not, however, consider it necessary in the present case to go into the question of
the reasonableness of bias or real likelihood of bias as despite the fact that the
appellant knew all the relevant facts, he did not before appearing for the interview or
at the time of the interview raise even his little finger against the constitution of the
Selection Committee. He seems to have voluntarily appeared before the Committee
and taken a chance of having a favourable recommendation from it. Having done so,
it is not now open to him to turn round and question the constitution of // 12 // the
Committee. This view gains strength from a decision of this Court in Manak Lal case
[Manak Lal v. Prem Chand Singhvi, AIR 1957 SC 425] where in more or less similar
circumstances, it was held that the failure of the appellant to take the identical plea at
the earlier stage of the proceedings created an effective bar of waiver against him. The
following observations made therein are worth quoting : (AIR p. 432, para 9) „9. ... It
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 6
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
seems clear that the appellant wanted to take a chance to secure a favourable report
from the tribunal which was constituted and when he found that he was confronted
with an unfavourable report, he adopted the device of raising the present technical
point.(cid:129)
16. In Madan Lal v. State of J&K [(1995) 3 SCC 486 : 1995 SCC (L&S) 712 : (1995) 29
ATC 603], similar view has been reiterated by the Bench which held that : (SCC p.
493, para 9) "9. Before dealing with this contention, we must keep in view the salient
fact that the petitioners as well as the contesting successful candidates being
respondents concerned herein, were all found eligible in the light of marks obtained
in the written test, to be eligible to be called for oral interview. Up to this stage there
is no dispute between the parties. The petitioners also appeared at the oral interview
conducted by the Members concerned of the Commission who interviewed the
petitioners as well as the contesting respondents concerned. Thus, the petitioners
took a chance to get themselves selected at the said oral interview. Only because they
did not find themselves to have emerged successful as a result of their combined
performance both at written test and oral interview, they have filed this petition. It is
now well settled that if a candidate takes a calculated chance and appears at the
interview, then, only because the result of the interview is not palatable to him, he
cannot turn round and subsequently contend that the process of interview was unfair
or the Selection Committee was not properly constituted. In Om Prakash Shukla v.
Akhilesh Kumar Shukla [1986 Supp SCC 285 : 1986 SCC (L&S) 644] it has been
clearly laid down by a Bench of three learned Judges of this Court that when the
petitioner appeared at the examination without // 13 // protest and when he found
that he would not succeed in examination he filed a petition challenging the said
examination, the High Court should not have granted any relief to such a petitioner."
17. In Martish Kumar Shahi v. State of Bihar [(2010) 12 SCC 576 : (2011) 1 SCC (L&S) 256], this
Court reiterated the principle laid down in the earlier judgments and observed :
(SCC p. 584, para 16) "16. We also agree with the High Court [Manish Kumar Shahi v.
State of Bihar, 2008 SCC OnLine Pat 321 : (2009) 1 AIR Jhar R 1015] that after
having taken part in the process of selection knowing fully well that more than 19%
marks have been earmarked for viva voce test, the petitioner is not entitled to
challenge the criteria or process of selection. Surely, if the petitioner's name had
appeared in the merit list, he would not have even dreamed of challenging the
selection. The petitioner invoked jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 of
the Constitution of India only after he found that his name does not figure in the
merit list prepared by the Commission. This conduct of the petitioner clearly
disentitles him from questioning the selection and the High Court did not commit
any error by refusing to entertain the writ petition."
18. In Ramesh Chandra Shah v. Anil Joshi [(2013) 11 SCC 309 : (2013) 3 SCC (L&S)
129], recently a Bench of this Court following the earlier decisions held as under :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 7
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
(SCC p. 320, para 24) "24. In view of the propositions laid down in the above noted
judgments, it must be held that by having taken part in the process of selection with
full knowledge that the recruitment was being made under the General Rules, the
respondents had waived their right to question the advertisement or the methodology
adopted by the Board for making selection and the learned Single Judge [Anil Joshi
v. State of Uttara khand, 2012 SCC OnLine Utt 521] and the Division Bench [Ravi
Shankar Joshi v. Anil Joshi, 2012 SCC OnLine Utt 766] of the High Court committed
// 14 // grave error by entertaining the grievance made by the respondents.""
4.4. Hon'ble Apex Court in in Para 23 of the Judgment in the case of Pramod Kumar
Sahoo has held as follows:-
"23. This Court has no doubt about the principle that an employee can challenge the
selection process for promotion, but once he having taken part in the selection
process without any protest cannot afterwards normally challenge the same after
having been declared unsuccessful, which is reiterated by the Apex Court in the
judgment in Tajvir Singh Sodhi (supra). It is no doubt that the petitioner has relied
upon in Ashish Kumar (supra) and the Employees State Insurance Corporation
(supra) to contend that the entire selection process adopted by DPC being contrary to
mandate of Rules is without jurisdiction and liable to be quashed, but the principle
decided in these two relied on cases being related to recruitment process and
eligibility conditions contained in advertisement has no application in the context of
consideration for promotion of the petitioner. On the other hand, the decision as
relied on by the petitioner in Krishna Rai (supra), it is held by the Apex Court that the
principle of estoppels cannot override the law and this Court is duty bound to accept
such proposition of law as laid down by the Apex Court, but in this case, the
contention of learned Additional Government Advocate is that the petitioner having
already participated in the selection process without any protest cannot challenge
such selection after becoming unsuccessful and thereby, the decision relled on by OP
Nos. 1 to 3 in Tajvir Singh Sodhi (supra) is factually different from the decision in
Krishna Rai (supra). This Court, however, believes that the decision of the DPC
should not ordinarily be Interfered with, unless it is actuated with malafides or bias.
In this regard, this Court considers is apposite to // 15 // refer to the decision in State
of Bank of India (supra), wherein it has been held as under: -
"5. xx xx If promotion has been denied arbitrarily or without any reason ordinarily
the Court can issue a direction to the management to consider the case of the Officer
concerned for promotion, but it cannot issue a direction to promote the Officer
concerned to the higher post without giving an opportunity to the management to
consider the question of promotion. There is good reason for taking this view."
4.5. With regard to non-compliance of the provisions contained under Regulation 5.2 and 5.3 of
AICTE Regulation, 2012, learned counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 contended that the
said Regulation is not mandatory in nature and to be followed by the University, as VSSUT, Burla is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 8
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
governed by its own Acts and Statutes.
4.6. It is contended that the Selection Committee who conducted the interview for promotion to the
rank of Professor Stage-V in the Department of Mechanical Engineering was constituted in terms of
the provisions contained under Statute 34 (9) of the VSSUT 1st Statute, 2010.
4.7. Statute 34 (9) of the 1st Statute provides the modality for constitution of the Selection
Committee and the said Committee shall consist of the following members:-
// 16 //
(i) Vice Chancellor : Chairman
(ii) Nominee of the Government : Member in Industries Department (Not below the
rank of Additional Secretary / DTET)
(iii) One Expert : Member (Nominated by Chancellor)
(iv) Two Subject experts : Member (nominated by the Board)
(v) Registrar : Member Convener Statute 34(10) of the said Statute provides the
quorum of the Committee for selection.
4.8. It is also contended that Selection Committee in terms of Statute 34 (9) of the Statute was
constituted in terms of the provisions contained under Sec. 34 (1) of the VSSUT Act, 2008. Sec.
34(1) of the Act reads as follows:-
"34. (1) The following shall be teacher of the University as per Section 2(r) of the Act,
namely Professor, Associate Professor, Reader/Assistant professor, Workshop
Superintendent, Lecturer or such other persons imparting instruction or conducting
or supervising research either in the Centers, Schools or in the Departments of the
University;
The Board may by notification include any other post from time to time as teacher."
4.9. Similarly, it is contended that since the Selection Committee who conducted the interview was
constituted in terms of Statute 34(9) of // 17 // the VSSUT 1st Statute and Petitioners without
raising any objection participated in the interview so conducted by the Selection Committee, after
becoming unsuccessful, such selection process cannot be challenged on the ground that the
interview was unfair or the Selection Committee was not properly constituted. 4.10. In support of
the aforesaid submission reliance was placed in the decision reported in (1976) 3 SCC 585 (Dr. G.
Sarana Vs. University of Lucknow & Ors.) and another decision reported in 2017(9) SCC 478 (D.
Sarojakumari Vs. R. Helen Thilakom & Ors.). 4.11. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Dr. G. Sarana
in Para 15 has held as follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 9
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
"15. We do not, however, consider it necessary in the present case to go into the
question of the reasonableness of bias or real likelihood of bias as despite the fact that
the appellant knew all the relevant facts, he did not before appearing for the interview
or at the time of the interview raise even his little finger against the constitution of
the Selection Committee. He seems to have voluntarily appeared before the
committee and taken a chance of having a favourable recommendation from it.
Having done so, it is not now open to him to turn round and question the
constitution of the committee. This view gains strength from a decision of this Court
in Manak Lal's case where in more or less similar circumstances, it was held that the
failure of the appellant to take the identical plea at the earlier stage of the
proceedings created an effective bar of waiver against him. The following
observations made therein are worth quoting:
"It seems clear that the appellant wanted to take a chance to secure a favourable
report from the tribunal which was constituted and when he found that he was
confronted with an unfavourable report, he adopted the device of raising the present
technical point.""
// 18 // 4.12. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of D. Sarojakumari in Para 5, 6 & 11 has held as
follows:-
"5. In G. Sarana v. University of Lucknow [G. Sarana v. University of Lucknow, (1976) 3 SCC 585 :
1976 SCC (L&S) 474] , the petitioner after appearing in the interview for the post of Professor and
having not been selected pleaded that the experts were biased. This Court did not permit the
petitioner to raise this issue and held as follows: (SCC p. 591, para 15) "15. We do not, however,
consider it necessary in the present case to go into the question of the reasonableness of bias or real
likelihood of bias as despite the fact that the appellant knew all the relevant facts, he did not before
appearing for the interview or at the time of the interview raise even his little finger against the
constitution of the Selection Committee. He seems to have voluntarily appeared before the
committee and taken a chance of having a favourable recommendation from it. Having done so, it is
not now open to him to turn round and question the constitution of the committee."
6. In Madan Lal v. State of J&K [Madan Lal v. State of J&K, (1995) 3 SCC 486 : 1995 SCC (L&S) 712]
, the petitioner laid challenge to the manner and method of conducting viva voce test after they had
appeared in the same and were unsuccessful. This Court held as follows: (SCC p. 493, para 9) "9. ...
Thus the petitioners took a chance to get themselves selected at the said oral interview. Only because
they did not find themselves to have emerged successful as a result of their combined performance
both at written test and oral interview, they have filed this petition. It is now well settled that if a
candidate takes a calculated chance and appears at the interview, then, only because the result of the
interview is not palatable to him, he cannot turn round and subsequently contend that the process of
interview was unfair or the Selection Committee was not properly constituted."
// 19 //
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 10
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
xxx xxx xxx
11. As far as the present case is concerned, an advertisement was issued by Respondent 6 inviting
applications for the post of Music Teacher in Samuel LMS High School. Respondent 1 did not raise
any objection at that stage that the post could not be filled in by direct recruitment and she should
be considered for promotion. Not only that, she in fact, applied for the post and took part in the
selection process. After having taken part in the selection process and being found lower in merit to
the appellant, she cannot at this stage be permitted to turn around and claim that the post could not
be filled in by direct recruitment. The reasoning of the learned Single Judge in rejecting the
objection is not in consonance with the law laid down by this Court. In view of this, we need not go
into the other issues raised."
4.13. It is also contended that AICTE Regulation, 2012 was framed in terms of the provisions
contained under AICTE Act, 1987. But in view of the decisions governing the field, role of AICTE
vis-à-vis the Universities is only advisory, recommendatory and a guiding factor and it is not at all
mandatory. In support of the same, reliance was placed to a decision of the Apex Court reported in
2001 (8) SCC 676 (Bharathidasan University & Anr. Vs. All-India Council For Technical Education
& Ors.) .
4.14. Hon'ble Apex Court in Para 15 of the Judgment in the case of Bharathidasan University has
held as follows:-
// 20 // "15. To put it in a nutshell, a reading of Section 10 of the AICTE Act will
make it clear that whenever the Act omits to cover a "university", the same has been
specifically provided in the provisions of the Act. For example, while under clause (k)
of Section 10 only "technical institutions" are referred to, clause (o) of Section 10
provides for the guidelines for admission of students to "technical institutions" and
"universities" imparting technical education. If we look at the definition of a
"technical institution" under Section 2(h) of the Act, it is clear that a "technical
institution" cannot include a "university". The clear intention of the legislature is not
that all institutions whether university or otherwise ought to be treated as "technical
institutions" covered by the Act. If that was the intention, there was no difficulty for
the legislature to have merely provided a definition of "technical institution" by not
excluding "university"
from the definition thereof and thereby avoided the necessity to use alongside both the words
"technical institutions" and university in several provisions in the Act. The definition of "technical
institution" excludes from its purview a "university". When by definition a "university" is excluded
from a "technical institution", to interpret that such a clause or such an expression wherever the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 11
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
expression "technical institution" occurs will include a "university" will be reading into the Act what
is not provided therein. The power to grant approval for starting new technical institutions and for
introduction of new courses or programmes in consultation with the agencies concerned is covered
by Section 10(k) which would not cover a "university" but only a "technical institution". If Section
10(k) does not cover a "university" but only a "technical institution", a regulation cannot be framed
in such a manner so as to apply the regulation framed in respect of "technical institution" to apply to
universities when the Act maintains a complete dichotomy between a "university" and a "technical
institution". Thus, we have to focus our attention mainly to the Act in question on the language
adopted in that enactment. In that view of the matter, it is, therefore, not even necessary to examine
the scope of other enactments or whether the Act prevails over the University Act or effect of
competing entries falling under Entries 63 to 65 of List I vis-à-vis Entry 25 of List III of the Seventh
Schedule to the Constitution." 4.15. It is also contended that since the Selection Committee
constituted in terms of Statute 34(9) of the 1st Statute of the University is pari materia to the
Selection Committee prescribed by AICTE under Regulation 5.2 r.w. Regulation 5.3 of 2012
Regulation, no // 21 // illegality or irregularity can be found with such formation of the Selection
Committee by the University.
4.16. It is also contended that the Selection Committee constituted in terms of Statute 34(9),
constitute members in terms of the standard prescribed by the AICTE, and it is also in a better form
than that prescribed by AICTE. It is accordingly contended that since the Selection Committee
constituted by the University is in a better form than the Selection Committee prescribed by AICTE
under Regulation 5.2 r.w. 5.3, no illegality or irregularity can be found with formation of such
Selection Committee. In support of the aforesaid submission, reliance was placed to a decision
reported in (2021) 2 SCC 564 (A.P.J. Abdul Kalam Technological University & Anr. Vs. Jai Bharath
College of Management And Engineering Technology & Ors.).
4.17. Hon'ble Apex Court in Para 46 & 47 of the Judgment in the case of A.P.J. Abdul Kalam
Technological University has held as follows:-
"46. The law is now fairly well settled that while it is not open to the universities to
dilute the norms and standards prescribed by AICTE, it is always open to the
universities to prescribe enhanced norms. As regards the role of the universities
vis-à-vis AICTE, this Court held in Bharathidasan University v. All India Council for
Technical // 22 // Education [Bharathidasan University v. All India Council for
Technical Education, (2001) 8 SCC 676 : 1 SCEC 924] , that AICTE is not a super
power with a devastating role undermining the status, authority and autonomous
functioning of the universities in areas and spheres assigned to them. This view was
followed in Assn. of Management of Private Colleges v. All India Council for
Technical Education [Assn. of Management of Private Colleges v. All India Council
for Technical Education, (2013) 8 SCC 271 : 6 SCEC 255] .
47. That even the State Government can prescribe higher standards than those
prescribed by AICTE was recognised by a three- member Bench of this Court in State
of T.N. v. S.V. Bratheep [State of T.N. v. S.V. Bratheep, (2004) 4 SCC 513 : 2 SCEC
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 12
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
547] . This principle was later applied in the case of universities in Visveswaraiah
Technological University v. Krishnendu Halder [Visveswaraiah Technological
University v. Krishnendu Halder, (2011) 4 SCC 606 : 4 SCEC 148] where this Court
considered the previous decisions and summarised the legal position emerging
therefrom as follows: (Visveswaraiah Technological University case [Visveswaraiah
Technological University v. Krishnendu Halder, (2011) 4 SCC 606 : 4 SCEC 148] ,
SCC pp. 614-15, para 14) "14. ... (i) While prescribing the eligibility criteria for
admission to institutions of higher education, the State/University cannot adversely
affect the standards laid down by the Central Body/AICTE. The term "adversely affect
the standards" refers to lowering of the norms laid down by the Central Body/AICTE.
Prescribing higher standards for admission by laying down qualifications in addition
to or higher than those prescribed by AICTE, consistent with the object of promoting
higher standards and excellence in higher education, will not be considered as
adversely affecting the standards laid down by the Central Body/AICTE.
(ii) The observation in para 41(vi) of Adhiyaman [State of T.N. v. Adhiyaman
Educational & Research Institute, (1995) 4 SCC 104] to the effect that where seats
remain unfilled, the State authorities cannot deny admission to any student satisfying
the // 23 // minimum standards laid down by AICTE, even though he is not qualified
according to its standards, is not good law.
(iii) The fact that there are unfilled seats in a particular year, does not mean that in
that year, the eligibility criteria fixed by the State/University would cease to apply or
that the minimum eligibility criteria suggested by AICTE alone would apply. Unless
and until the State or the University chooses to modify the eligibility criteria fixed by
them, they will continue to apply in spite of the fact that there are vacancies or
unfilled seats in any year. The main object of prescribing eligibility criteria is not to
ensure that all seats in colleges are filled, but to ensure that excellence in standards of
higher education is maintained.
(iv) The State/University (as also AICTE) should periodically (at such intervals as
they deem fit) review the prescription of eligibility criteria for admissions, keeping in
balance, the need to maintain excellence and high standard in higher education on
the one hand, and the need to maintain a healthy ratio between the total number of
seats available in the State and the number of students seeking admission, on the
other. If necessary, they may revise the eligibility criteria so as to continue excellence
in education and at the same time being realistic about the attainable standards of
marks in the qualifying examinations.""
4.18. With regard to the award of API score, it is contended that award of API Score is only for the
purpose of making eligible the candidates to took the interview. Since Petitioners were allowed to
take part in the interview basing on the API score awarded to them, no challenge can be made that
such marks awarded is not in conformity with the API score prescribed in Table I of AICTE
Regulation, 2012.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 13
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
// 24 // 4.19. It is also contended that after getting the benefit of promotion vide order under
Annexure-8, while Opp. Party No. 5 has retired from service in the meantime, Opp. Party No. 6 has
been transferred to another Department on availing further benefit of promotion. Since Opp. Party
Nos. 5 & 6 after getting the benefit of promotion have retired and/or have got further promotion,
any interference to their promotion at this stage will cause them prejudice and it is not in the
interest of justice. It is accordingly contended that no illegality or irregularity is there with regard to
constitution of the Selection Committee and promotion of Private Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6 to the rank
of Professor vide order under Annexure-8.
5. Mr. B. Routray, learned Sr. Counsel appearing for the Petitioners taking into account the stand
taken in the counter affidavit so filed by Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2, made further submission basing on
the stand taken in the rejoinder affidavit and further affidavits filed by the Petitioners. It is
contended that AICTE Regulation, 2012 having been framed in terms of the AICTE Act, 1987 and
the said Act being a central legislation, provisions contained in the said Regulation is required to be
followed by all the Universities and the stand taken by the University that such AICTE Regulation is
not mandatorily to be followed and it is only directory, is not true and correct.
// 25 // 5.1. In support of the aforesaid submission reliance was placed to a decision reported in
(2013) 3 SCC 385 (Parshvanath Charitable Trust & Ors. Vs. All India Council For Technical
Education & Ors.). Hon'ble Apex Court in Para 24 & 25 of the Judgment in the case of Parshvanath
Charitable Trust has held as follows:-
"24. The consistent view of this Court has been that where both Parliament and the
State Legislature have the power to legislate, the Central Act shall take precedence in
the matters which are covered by such legislation and the State enactments shall pave
way for such legislations to the extent they are in conflict or repugnant. As per the
established canons of law, primacy of the Central Act is indisputable which
necessarily implies primacy of AICTE in the field of technical education. Statutes like
the present one as well as the National Council for Teacher Education Act, 1993, the
Indian Medical Council Act, 1956, etc. fall within the ambit of this canon of law.
AICTE is the authority constituted under the Central Act with the responsibility of
maintaining operational standards and judging the infrastructure and facilities
available for imparting professional education. It shall take precedence over the
opinion of the State as well as that of the University. The department concerned of
the State and the affiliating university have a role to play, but it is limited in its
application. They cannot lay down any guidelines or policies in conflict with the
Central statute or the standards laid down by the Central body. The State can frame
its policies, but such policy again has to be in conformity with the direction issued by
the Central body. Though there is no such apparent conflict in the present case, yet it
needs to be clarified that grant of approval by the State and affiliation by the
University for increased intake of seats or commencement of new college should not
be repugnant to the conditions of approval/recommendation granted by AICTE.
These authorities have to work in tandem as all of them have the common object to
ensure maintenance of proper standards of education, // 26 // examination and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 14
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
proper infrastructure for betterment of technical educational system.
25. It is also a settled principle that the regulations framed by the Central authorities
such as AICTE have the force of law and are binding on all concerned. Once approval
is granted or declined by such expert body, the courts would normally not substitute
their view in this regard. Such expert views would normally be accepted by the court
unless the powers vested in such expert body are exercised arbitrarily, capriciously or
in a manner impermissible under the Regulations and the AICTE Act. In All India
Council for Technical Education v. Surinder Kumar Dhawan [(2009) 11 SCC 726] ,
this Court, while stating the principles that the courts may not substitute their
opinion in place of the opinion of the Council, held as under:
(SCC pp. 732-33 & 736, paras 17-18 & 32) "17. The role of statutory expert bodies on
education and the role of courts are well defined by a simple rule. If it is a question of
educational policy or an issue involving academic matter, the courts keep their hands
off. If any provision of law or principle of law has to be interpreted, applied or
enforced, with reference to or connected with education, the courts will step in. In
J.P. Kulshrestha v. Allahabad University [(1980) 3 SCC 418 : 1980 SCC (L&S) 436 :
(1980) 2 LLJ 175] this Court observed: (SCC pp. 424-
26, paras 11-17) „11. ... Judges must not rush in where even educationists fear to tread. ...
***
17. ... While there is no absolute ban, it is a rule of prudence that courts should hesitate to dislodge
decisions of academic bodies.(cid:129) (emphasis supplied)
18. In Maharashtra State Board of Secondary and Higher Secondary Education v. Paritosh
Bhupeshkumar Sheth [(1984) 4 SCC 27 : (1985) 1 SCR 29] this Court reiterated: (SCC pp. 56-57,
para 29) „29. ... the Court should be extremely reluctant to substitute its own views as to what is
wise, prudent and proper in relation to academic matters in preference to those formulated by
professional // 27 // men possessing technical expertise and rich experience of actual day-to-day
working of educational institutions and the departments controlling them.(cid:129) ***
32. This is a classic case where an educational course has been created and continued merely by the
fiat of the court, without any prior statutory or academic evaluation or assessment or acceptance.
Granting approval for a new course or programme requires examination of various
academic/technical facets which can only be done by an expert body like AICTE. This function
cannot obviously be taken over or discharged by courts. In this case, for example, by a mandamus of
the court, a bridge course was permitted for four-year advance diploma-holders who had passed the
entry-level examination of 10+2 with PCM subjects. Thereafter, by another mandamus in another
case, what was a one-time measure was extended for several years and was also extended to post
diploma- holders. Again by another mandamus, it was extended to those who had passed only 10+1
examination instead of the required minimum of 10+2 examination. Each direction was obviously
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 15
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
intended to give relief to students who wanted to better their career prospects, purely as an ad hoc
measure. But together they lead to an unintended dilution of educational standards, adversely
affecting the standards and quality of engineering degree courses. Courts should guard against such
forays in the field of education."
(emphasis in original) 5.2. Reliance was also placed to a decision of this Court in W.P.(C) No. 17515
of 2019 disposed of on 09.08.2023. This Court in Para 4, 9 and 12 to 15 has held as follows:-
"4. The Government (opposite party No.1) in its counter has however, disputed the
claim of the petitioners on the ground that the norms and standards in respect of
infrastructure, library, laboratory, teacher // 28 // student ratio, amenities and
qualification of teachers prescribed by the AICTE is applicable to the constituent
colleges of BPUT but so far as the condition of service, recruitment rules and pay
scale is concerned, the same is guided by the First Statutes, 2006 of the University
and Rules framed by the Government from time to time. It has been incidentally
stated that by notification dated 21.01.2021 of the State Government, three
Government Engineering Colleges including Parala Maharaja Engineering College
(PMEC), Berhampur have been allowed to function independently with their
respective Board of Governors as the apex body and is no longer considered a
constituent college of BPUT but is only affiliated to it. It is however, stated that the
Government in Industries Department vide notification dated 10.01.2011 notified the
revised pay scale of teachers in Engineering Colleges and University w.e.f. 01.01.2006
but it does not speak about sanction of five non-compounded advance increment in
the event of acquiring Ph.D Degree at the entry level. Subsequently, after
introduction of 7th pay (Commission), Odisha Revised Scales of Pay (for Teachers of
Engineering College/Degree Level Technical Institutions/Universities) Rules, 2019
was published vide notification dated 31.12.2019 but nothing is prescribed therein
regarding sanction of such advance increment. It is also stated that the matter was
earlier referred to the Finance Department, which clarified that advance increment
benefit allowed in case of Higher Education Department is because their recruitment
rules provide so but the Skill Development and Technical Education Department,
under which PMEC is controlled, does not have any such provision. As regards the
recommendations of the AICTE, it is stated that the same are not a part of the
recruitment rules of the petitioners. The First Statute, 2006 of BPUT also does not
prescribe grant of such advance increment and Clause-95 only provides for grant of
an advance increment to any university employee by the Board in exceptional
circumstances. As such, the petitioners are not entitled to the benefits claimed.
// 29 //
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 16
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
xxx xxx xxx
9. Mr. S. Pattnaik, learned Addl. Government Advocate would submit that the AICTE
Regulations, 2010 are not binding on the State Government or the BPUT, which is
governed by the BPUT Act and its First Statutes, 2006. The UGC and AICTE can only
make recommendations but the same cannot be applied automatically to the
constituent Colleges of BPUT.
xxx xxx xxx
12. The petitioners have heavily relied upon the above provision to stake their claim.
In view of the stand taken by the contesting opposite parties that the Regulations are
only „recommendations(cid:129), implicitly suggesting thereby that they are not binding, it
would be proper to first determine if the Regulations have any binding force. The
Regulations were made by AICTE exercising power conferred under Subsection(1) of
Section 23 read with Section 10(i) and (v) of the AICTE Act, 1987, which are quoted
hereinbelow.
"23. Power to make regulations.--(1) The Council may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and the
rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.
10. Functions of the Council.--It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such steps
as it may think fit for ensuring coordinated and integrated development of technical
education and maintenance of standards and for the purposes of performing its
functions under this Act, the Council may--
xx xx xx
(i) lay down norms and standards for courses, curricula, physical and instructional
facilities, staff pattern, staff // 30 // qualifications, quality instructions, assessment
and examinations;
xx xx xx
(v) perform such other functions as may be prescribed."
13. It goes without saying that AICTE Act, 1997 is a central legislation. Entry-66 of List-1 of Seventh
Schedule of the Constitution of India reads as follows;
"66. Co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher
education or research and scientific and technical institutions"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 17
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
14. Thus, there can be no dispute as regards the power of the Union (Central Government) to
legislate on the matters covered under Entry- 66 of the List-1. Since the regulations have been made
by virtue of the enabling provision in the AICTE Act, it must also be held to have statutory force. In
other words, being a subordinate legislation, it does have the force in law as was held by the Apex
Court in the case of Vidya Dhar Pande vs Vidyut Grih Siksha Samiti reported in (1988) 4 SCC 734.
Further the Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case of State of U.P. v. Babu Ram Upadhya,
reported in 1960 SCC OnLine SC 5: AIR 1961 SC 751 held that Rules (sub-ordinate legislation) were
for all purpose of construction or obligation, to be treated exactly as if they were in the Act.
15. Thus there can be no doubt that the AICTE Regulations, 2010 have the force of law and thereby,
have a binding nature. Clause-1 of the Regulations are relevant and are quoted hereinbelow.
1. Short Title, Application and Commencement:
1.1 These Regulations may be called the All India Council for Technical Education
(Pay Scales, Service Conditions and Qualifications for the Teachers and other
Academic Staff In Technical Institutions (Degree) Regulations, 2010.
// 31 // 1.2 They shall apply to technical institutions and Universities including deemed Universities
imparting technical education and such other courses / Programs and areas as notified by the
Council from time to time.
They shall come into force with effect from the date of their publication in the Official Gazette"
Therefore, it is not open to the Government, or for that matter any other
stakeholder/authority to contend that the regulations would not be applicable to it.
Even otherwise there are several instances discernable from the materials on record,
of the authorities acting in consonance with the AICTE Regulations. As stated earlier,
the pay scale is entirely in line with that mentioned in the regulations. Secondly,
Statute-95 of the First Statute also makes a reference to the AICTE guidelines. It is
obviously not open to any authority to abide by the Regulations (guidelines) only in
parts and ignore the rest. It is reiterated that if the AICTE Regulations, 2010 has
force of law, which this Court has already held so, it has full application to the
Institution in which the petitioners are engaged."
5.3. It is contended that since Regulation 2012 was framed in terms of the AICTE Act, 1987 and the
said Act being a central legislation, provisions contained under the said Act and Regulation will
supersede the provisions contained under the VSSUT Act, 2008 and the 1 st statute of the
University, 2010.
5.4. It is further contended that since it is not disputed that the Selection Committee was constituted
in terms of the provisions contained under Statute 34(9) of the 1st Statute of the University, the //
32 // stand taken by the Petitioners that the University has not followed the AICTE Regulation 2012
is well proved.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 18
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
5.5. It is also contended that since the guideline prescribed under Regulation 5.2 r.w. 5.3 of the 2012
Regulation has not been followed, the stand taken by the University that the Selection Committee
constituted under Statute 34(9) of the 1 st Statute has been duly constituted cannot be accepted, as it
is the settled law that if something has been prescribed to be done in a particular manner, then that
should be done in that manner or not at all.
5.6. In support of the submission, reliance was placed to the following decisions of the Hon'ble Apex
Court:-
(i) Ramchandra Keshav Adke (Dead) By LRs. & Ors. Vs. Govind Joti Chavare & Ors.
reported in (1975) 1 SCC 559
(ii) Arulmighu Nellukadai Mariamman Tirukkoil Vs. Tamirlarasi (Dead) By LRs.
reported in 2019 (6) SCC 686
(iii) M/s. A.P. Electrical Equipment Corporation Vs. The Tahsildar & Ors. reported in
2025 SCC OnLine SC 447
(iv) Krishna Rai (Dead) through LRs. & Ors. Vs. Banaras Hindu University through
Registrar & Ors. reported in (2022) 8 SCC 713 // 33 // 5.7. Hon'ble Apex Court in
Para 25 of the Judgment in the case of Ramchandra Keshav Adke has held as
follows:-
"25. A century ago, in Taylor v. Taylor [(1876) 1 Ch D 426] Jassel, M.R. adopted the
rule that where a power is given to do a certain thing in a certain way, the thing must
be done in that way or not at all and that other methods of performance are
necessarily forbidden. This rule has stood the test of time. It was applied by the Privy
Council, in Nazir Ahmed v. Emperor [AIR 1936 PC 253 : LR 63 IA 372] and later by
this Court in several cases [Shiv Bahadur Singh v. State of U.P., AIR 1954 SC 322 :
AIR 1954 SC 1098 : 1954 SCR 1098 : 1954 Cri LJ 910; Deep Chand v. State of
Rajasthan, AIR 1961 SC 1527 : (1962) 1 SCR 662 : (1961) 2 Cri LJ 705] , to a
Magistrate making a record under Sections 164 and 364 of the Code of Criminal
Procedure, 1898. This rule squarely applies "where, indeed, the whole aim and object
of the legislature would be plainly defeated if the command to do the thing in a
particular manner did not imply a prohibition to do it in any other." [ Maxwell's
Interpretation of Statutes, 11th Edn., pp. 362-63] The rule will be attracted with full
force in the present case, because non-verification of the surrender in the requisite
manner would frustrate the very purpose of this provision. Intention of the
legislature to prohibit the verification of the surrender in a manner other than the
one prescribed, is implied in these provisions. Failure to comply with these
mandatory provisions, therefore, had vitiated the surrender and rendered it non est
for the purpose of Section 5(3)(b)."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 19
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
5.8. Hon'ble Apex Court in Para 13 of the Judgment in the case of Arumighu Nellukadai Mariamman
has held as follows:-
"13. Recently, this Court had an occasion to examine this very question in Surat Singh
v. Siri Bhagwan [Surat Singh v. Siri Bhagwan, (2018) 4 SCC 562 : (2018) 3 SCC (Civ)
94] . The law is explained in paras 19 to 35 of this decision which read as under :
(SCC pp. 567-69) "19. ... Section 100 of the Code reads as under:
„100. Second appeal.--(1) Save as otherwise expressly provided in the body of this
Code or by any other law for the time being in force, an appeal shall lie to the High
Court from every decree passed in appeal by any court subordinate to the High Court,
if the High Court is satisfied that the case involves a substantial question of law.
// 34 // (2) An appeal may lie under this section from an appellate decree passed ex
parte.
(3) In an appeal under this section, the memorandum of appeal shall precisely state
the substantial question of law involved in the appeal.
(4) Where the High Court is satisfied that a substantial question of law is involved in
any case, it shall formulate that question.
(5) The appeal shall be heard on the question so formulated and the respondent shall,
at the hearing of the appeal, be allowed to argue that the case does not involve such
question:
Provided that nothing in this sub-section shall be deemed to take away or abridge the
power of the Court to hear, for reasons to be recorded, the appeal on any other
substantial question of law, not formulated by it, if it is satisfied that the case involves
such question.(cid:129)
20. Sub-section (1) of Section 100 says that the second appeal would be entertained
by the High Court only if the High Court is "satisfied" that the case involves a
"substantial question of law".
Sub-section (3) makes it obligatory upon the appellant to precisely state in memo of appeal the
"substantial question of law" involved in the appeal. Sub-section (4) provides that where the High
Court is satisfied that any substantial question of law is involved in the case, it shall formulate that
question. In other words, once the High Court is satisfied after hearing the appellant or his counsel,
as the case may be, that the appeal involves a substantial question of law, it has to formulate that
question and then direct issuance of notice to the respondent of the memo of appeal along with the
question of law framed by the High Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 20
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
21. Sub-section (5) provides that the appeal shall be heard only on the question formulated by the
High Court under sub-section (4). In other words, the jurisdiction of the High Court to decide the
second appeal is confined only to the question framed by the High Court under sub-section (4). The
respondent, however, at the time of hearing of the appeal is given a right under sub-section (5) to
raise an objection that the question framed by the High Court under sub- section (4) does not
involve in the appeal. The reason for giving this right to the respondent for raising such objection at
the time of hearing is because the High Court frames the question at the admission stage which is
prior to issuance of the notice of appeal to the respondent. In other words, the question is framed
behind the back of respondent and, therefore, sub-section (5) enables him to raise such objection at
the time of hearing that the question framed does not arise in the appeal. The proviso to sub-section
(5), however, also recognises the power of the High Court to hear the appeal on any other
substantial question of law which was not initially framed by the High Court under sub-section (4).
However, this power can be exercised by the High Court only after assigning the reasons for // 35 //
framing such additional question of law at the time of hearing of the appeal.
22. Adverting to the facts of this case at hand, we are at a loss to understand as to how the High
Court while passing a final judgment [Bhagwan v. Murti Devi, 2006 SCC OnLine P&H 2175] in its
concluding paragraph could frame the substantial question of law for the first time and
simultaneously answered the said question in appellant's favour. Obviously, the learned Judge must
have done it by taking recourse to sub-section (4) of Section 100 of the Code.
23. Here is the case where the High Court was under a legal obligation to frame the substantial
question at the time of admission of the appeal after hearing the appellant or/and his counsel under
sub-section (4) of Section 100 of the Code, but the High Court did it while passing the final
judgment in its concluding paragraph.
24. Such novel procedure adopted by the High Court, in our considered opinion, is wholly contrary
to the scheme of Section 100 of the Code and renders the impugned judgment legally unsustainable.
25. In our considered opinion, the High Court had no jurisdiction to frame the substantial question
at the time of writing of its final judgment in the appeal except to the extent permitted under
sub-section (5). The procedure adopted by the High Court, apart from it being against the scheme of
Section 100 of the Code, also resulted in causing prejudice to the respondents because the
respondents could not object to the framing of substantial question of law. Indeed, the respondents
could not come to know on which question of law, the appeal was admitted for final hearing.
26. In other words, since the High Court failed to frame any substantial question of law under
sub-section (4) of Section 100 at the time of admission of the appeal, the respondents could not
come to know on which question of law, the appeal was admitted for hearing.
27. It cannot be disputed that sub-section (5) gives the respondents a right to know on which
substantial question of law, the appeal was admitted for final hearing. Sub-section (5) enables the
respondents to raise an objection at the time of final hearing that the question of law framed at the
instance of the appellant does not really arise in the case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 21
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
28. Yet, the other reason is that the respondents are only required to reply while opposing the
second appeal to the question formulated by the High Court under sub-section (4) and not beyond
that. If the question of law is not framed under sub-section (4) at the time of admission or before the
final hearing of the appeal, there remains nothing for the respondent to oppose the second appeal at
the time of hearing. In this situation, the High Court will have no jurisdiction to decide such second
appeal finally for want of any substantial question(s) of law.
// 36 //
29. The scheme of Section 100 is that once the High Court is satisfied that the appeal involves a
substantial question of law, such question shall have to be framed under sub-section (4) of Section
100. It is the framing of the question which empowers the High Court to finally decide the appeal in
accordance with the procedure prescribed under sub-section (5). Both the requirements prescribed
in sub-sections (4) and (5) are, therefore, mandatory and have to be followed in the manner
prescribed therein. Indeed, as mentioned supra, the jurisdiction to decide the second appeal finally
arises only after the substantial question of law is framed under sub-section (4). There may be a case
and indeed there are cases where even after framing a substantial question of law, the same can be
answered against the appellant. It is, however, done only after hearing the respondents under
sub-section (5).
30. If, however, the High Court is satisfied after hearing the appellant at the time of admission that
the appeal does not involve any substantial question of law, then such appeal is liable to be
dismissed in limine without any notice to the respondents after recording a finding in the dismissal
order that the appeal does not involve any substantial question of law within the meaning of sub-
section (4). It is needless to say that for passing such order in limine, the High Court is required to
assign the reasons in support of its conclusion.
31. It is, however, of no significance, whether the respondent has appeared at the time of final
hearing of the appeal or not. The High Court, in any case, has to proceed in accordance with the
procedure prescribed under Section 100 while disposing of the appeal, whether in limine or at the
final hearing stage.
32. It is a settled principle of rule of interpretation that whenever a statute requires a particular act
to be done in a particular manner then such act has to be done in that manner only and in no other
manner. (See Interpretation of Statutes by G.P. Singh, 9th Edn., p. 347 and Baru Ram v. Prasanni
[Baru Ram v. Prasanni, AIR 1959 SC 93] .)
33. The aforesaid principle applies to the case at hand because, as discussed above, the High Court
failed to follow the procedure prescribed under Section 100 of the Code while allowing the second
appeal and thus committed a jurisdictional error calling for interference by this Court in the
impugned judgment.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 22
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
34. While construing Section 100, this Court in Santosh Hazari v. Purushottam Tiwari [Santosh
Hazari v. Purushottam Tiwari, (2001) 3 SCC 179] succinctly explained the scope, the jurisdiction and
what constitutes a substantial questions of law under Section 100 of the Code.
35. It is, therefore, the duty of the High Court to always keep in mind the law laid down in Santosh
Hazari [Santosh Hazari v. Purushottam Tiwari, (2001) 3 SCC 179] while formulating the question
and deciding the second appeal."
// 37 // (emphasis in original) 5.9. Hon'ble Apex Court in Para 24 of the Judgment in the case of
A.P. Electrical Equipment Corporation has held as follows:-
"24. This Court in the case of Bhavnagar University v. Palitana Sugar Mill (P) Ltd.,
(2003) 2 SCC 111, in the context of the Gujarat Town Planning and Urban
Development Act, 1976 held thus:--
"The statutory interdict of use and enjoyment of the property must be strictly
construed. It is well settled that when a statutory authority is required to do a thing in
a particular manner, the same must be done in that manner or not at all. The state
and other authorities while acting under the said Act are only creature of statute.
They must act within the four corners thereof."
5.10 Hon'ble Apex Court in Para 32 of the Judgment in the case of Krishna Rai has held as follows:-
"32. Further in Tata Chemicals Ltd. v. Commr. of Customs [Tata Chemicals Ltd. v.
Commr. of Customs, (2015) 11 SCC 628] , it has been laid down that there can be no
estoppel against law. If the law requires something to be done in a particular manner,
then it must be done in that manner, and if it is not done in that manner, then it
would have no existence in the eye of the law. Para 18 of the said judgment is
reproduced below : (SCC p. 636) "18. The Tribunal's judgment [Commr. of Customs
v. Tata Chemicals Ltd., 2004 SCC OnLine Cestat 270] has proceeded on the basis that
even though the samples were drawn contrary to law, the appellants would be
estopped because their representative was present when the samples were drawn and
they did not object immediately. This is a completely perverse finding both on fact
and law. On fact, it has been more than amply proved that no representative of the
appellant was, in fact, present at the time the Customs Inspector took the samples.
Shri K.M. Jani who was allegedly present not only stated that he did not represent the
clearing agent of the appellants in that he was not their employee // 38 // but also
stated that he was not present when the samples were taken. In fact, therefore, there
was no representative of the appellants when the samples were taken. In law equally
the Tribunal ought to have realised that there can be no estoppel against law. If the
law requires that something be done in a particular manner, it must be done in that
manner, and if not done in that manner has no existence in the eye of the law at all.
The Customs Authorities are not absolved from following the law depending upon the
acts of a particular assessee. Something that is illegal cannot convert itself into
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 23
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
something legal by the act of a third person."
5.11. With regard to the stand taken by the University that after participating in the selection process
and not becoming successful they can't challenge the process of selection, reliance was placed to a
decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court reported in (2019) 20 SCC 2017 (Dr. (Major) Meeta Sahai Vs.
State of Bihar & Ors.). Hon'ble Apex court in Para 19 of the said Judgment has held as follows:-
"19. The appellant has thus rightly not challenged the selection procedure but has
narrowed her claim to only against the respondents' interpretation of "work
experience" as part of merit determination. Since interpretation of a statute or rule is
the exclusive domain of courts, and given the scope of judicial review in delineating
such criteria, the appellant's challenge cannot be turned down at the threshold.
However, we are not commenting specifically on the merit of the appellant's case, and
our determination is alien to the outcome of the selection process. It is possible post
what is held hereinafter that she be selected, or not."
5.12. Making all these submissions learned Sr. Counsel appearing for the Petitioners contended that
since the Selection Committee // 39 // admittedly has not been constituted in terms of Regulation
5.2 r.w. 5.3 of the AICTE 2012 Regulation, selection and appointment of Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6 in
terms of the recommendation made by such Selection Committee is not sustainable in the eye of law
and requires interference of this Court.
6. Mr. P.K. Rath, learned Sr. Counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6 on the other hand made
his submission basing on the stand taken in the affidavit filed by Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6. Though it is
not disputed that the selection in terms of notice issued under Annexure-6 was required to be
conducted in terms of AICTE Regulation 2012, but since Petitioners without any objection
participated in the selection process before the Selection Committee so constituted by the University
in terms of Statute 34(9) of the 1st Statute, after becoming unsuccessful Petitioners are not
permitted to challenge the process of selection. It is also contended that Selection Committee
constituted by the University in terms of Statute 34(9) stands in a better footing than the Selection
Committee prescribed by the AICTE under Regulation 5.2 r.w. Regulation 5.3.
6.1. It is also contended that after getting the benefit of promotion vide order dtd.08.02.2022 under
Annexure-8 while Opp. Party No. 5 has // 40 // retired from his services w.e.f.30.06.2022 vide
order dtd.30.06.2022 under Annexure-D/5, Opp. Party No. 6 in the meantime has assumed the
charge of Principal, Govt. College of Engineering, Keonjhar, in terms of order dtd.21.09.2024 issued
by the Govt. under Annexure- D/5.
6.2. It is contended that since after getting the benefit of promotion, Opp. Party No. 5 has retired
w.e.f.30.06.2022 and Opp. Party No. 6 has got further benefit of promotion to the rank of Principal
and they got the said benefit of promotion without having any fault of their own, they will be
seriously prejudiced, if their order of promotion is interfered with by this Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 24
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
6.3. It is however contended that after becoming unsuccessful to get the benefit of promotion in
terms of further notice issued by the University on 25.08.2023 under Annexure-A/5, all the
Petitioners have made their applications once again to get the benefit of promotion to the rank of
Professor. It is accordingly contended that since in the meantime Petitioners have taken their
chance basing on subsequent notice issued on 25.08.2023 under Annexure-A/5, challenge made to
the selection process pursuant to Annexure-6 has become infructuous.
// 41 // 6.4. Learned Sr. Counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6 in support of his aforesaid
submissions relied on the following decisions over and above the decision in the case of
Parshavanath Charitable Trust & Ors and Dr. (Major) Meeta Sahai., so cited by the learned Sr.
Counsel appearing for the Petitioner:-
1. Manas Ranjan Senapati & Ors. Vs. State of Odisha & Ors.
2. Chittanjan Mallick & Ors. Vs. State of Odisha & Ors.
(W.P.(C) No. 17515 of 2019) 6.5. This Court in Para 8 & 10 of the Judgment in the case of Manas
Ranjan Senapati has held as follows:-
"8. Even though learned counsel appearing for the University vehemently contended
that the guideline framed by the University under Annexure-3 is to be followed for
recruitment of faculty under CAS in terms of the notice issued on 30.06.2023 under
Annexure-2, but in course of hearing learned counsel appearing for the University
contended that the University has no objection to follow the guideline so issued by
the AICTE in its notification dtd.01.03.2019 and notification dtd.20.05.2020. But it
is contended that in the guideline framed by the University under Annexure-3 so far
as it relates to securing a score of 60 or more mark to qualify for the position, be
allowed to be followed by the University instead of the score prescribed by the AICTE
at 50 mark.
xxx xxx xxx
10. Having heard learned counsel appearing for the Parties and after going through
the materials available on record and considering the // 42 // submissions made by
the learned counsel for the University that for recruitment of faculty under CAS, the
regulation prescribed by the AICTE under Annexure-5 will be followed in all respect,
save and except the cut-off score to be adopted by the University at 60, this Court
while disposing the writ petition, permits the University to go ahead with the
selection in terms of the notice issued on 30.06.2023 under Annexure-2 by following
the guideline issued by the AICTE under Annexure-5, 10 & 11, save and except fixing
the cut-off score at
60."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 25
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
6.6. This Court in Para 4, 9 and 12 to 15 of the Judgment in the case of Chittaranjan Mallick has held
as follows:-
"4. The Government (opposite party No.1) in its counter has however, disputed the
claim of the petitioners on the ground that the norms and standards in respect of
infrastructure, library, laboratory, teacher student ratio, amenities and qualification
of teachers prescribed by the AICTE is applicable to the constituent colleges of BPUT
but so far as the condition of service, recruitment rules and pay scale is concerned,
the same is guided by the First Statutes, 2006 of the University and Rules framed by
the Government from time to time. It has been incidentally stated that by notification
dated 21.01.2021 of the State Government, three Government Engineering Colleges
including Parala Maharaja Engineering College (PMEC), Berhampur have been
allowed to function independently with their respective Board of Governors as the
apex body and is no longer considered a constituent college of BPUT but is only
affiliated to it. It is however, stated that the Government in Industries Department
vide notification dated 10.01.2011 notified the revised pay scale of teachers in
Engineering Colleges and University w.e.f. 01.01.2006 but it does not speak about
sanction of five non-compounded advance increment in the event of acquiring Ph.D
Degree at the entry level. Subsequently, // 43 // after introduction of 7th pay
(Commission), Odisha Revised Scales of Pay (for Teachers of Engineering
College/Degree Level Technical Institutions/Universities) Rules, 2019 was published
vide notification dated 31.12.2019 but nothing is prescribed therein regarding
sanction of such advance increment. It is also stated that the matter was earlier
referred to the Finance Department, which clarified that advance increment benefit
allowed in case of Higher Education Department is because their recruitment rules
provide so but the Skill Development and Technical Education Department, under
which PMEC is controlled, does not have any such provision. As regards the
recommendations of the AICTE, it is stated that the same are not a part of the
recruitment rules of the petitioners. The First Statute, 2006 of BPUT also does not
prescribe grant of such advance increment and Clause-95 only provides for grant of
an advance increment to any university employee by the Board in exceptional
circumstances. As such, the petitioners are not entitled to the benefits claimed.
xxx xxx xxx
9. Mr. S. Pattnaik, learned Addl. Government Advocate would submit that the AICTE
Regulations, 2010 are not binding on the State Government or the BPUT, which is
governed by the BPUT Act and its First Statutes, 2006. The UGC and AICTE can only
make recommendations but the same cannot be applied automatically to the
constituent Colleges of BPUT.
xxx xxx xxx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 26
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
12. The petitioners have heavily relied upon the above provision to stake their claim.
In view of the stand taken by the contesting opposite parties that the Regulations are
only „recommendations(cid:129), implicitly suggesting thereby that they are not binding, it
would be proper to first determine if the Regulations have any binding force. The
Regulations were made by AICTE exercising power conferred under Subsection(1) //
44 // of Section 23 read with Section 10(i) and (v) of the AICTE Act, 1987, which are
quoted hereinbelow.
"23. Power to make regulations.--(1) The Council may, by notification in the Official
Gazette, make regulations not inconsistent with the provisions of this Act, and the
rules generally to carry out the purposes of this Act.
10. Functions of the Council.--It shall be the duty of the Council to take all such steps
as it may think fit for ensuring coordinated and integrated development of technical
education and maintenance of standards and for the purposes of performing its
functions under this Act, the Council may--
xx xx xx
(i) lay down norms and standards for courses, curricula, physical and instructional
facilities, staff pattern, staff qualifications, quality instructions, assessment and
examinations;
xx xx xx
(v) perform such other functions as may be prescribed."
13. It goes without saying that AICTE Act, 1997 is a central legislation. Entry-66 of List-1 of Seventh
Schedule of the Constitution of India reads as follows;
"66. Co-ordination and determination of standards in institutions for higher
education or research and scientific and technical institutions"
14. Thus, there can be no dispute as regards the power of the Union (Central Government) to
legislate on the matters covered under Entry- 66 of the List-1. Since the regulations have been made
by virtue of the enabling provision in the AICTE Act, it must also be held to have statutory force. In
other words, being a subordinate legislation, it does have the force in law as was held by the Apex
Court in the case of // 45 // Vidya Dhar Pande vs Vidyut Grih Siksha Samiti reported in (1988) 4
SCC 734. Further the Constitution Bench of the Apex Court in the case of State of U.P. v. Babu Ram
Upadhya, reported in 1960 SCC OnLine SC 5: AIR 1961 SC 751 held that Rules (sub-ordinate
legislation) were for all purpose of construction or obligation, to be treated exactly as if they were in
the Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 27
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
15. Thus there can be no doubt that the AICTE Regulations, 2010 have the force of law and thereby,
have a binding nature. Clause-1 of the Regulations are relevant and are quoted hereinbelow.
1. Short Title, Application and Commencement:
1.1 These Regulations may be called the All India Council for Technical Education
(Pay Scales, Service Conditions and Qualifications for the Teachers and other
Academic Staff In Technical Institutions (Degree) Regulations, 2010.
1.2 They shall apply to technical institutions and Universities including deemed
Universities imparting technical education and such other courses / Programs and
areas as notified by the Council from time to time.
They shall come into force with effect from the date of their publication in the Official Gazette"
Therefore, it is not open to the Government, or for that matter any other
stakeholder/authority to contend that the regulations would not be applicable to it.
Even otherwise there are several instances discernable from the materials on record,
of the authorities acting in consonance with the AICTE Regulations. As stated earlier,
the pay scale is entirely in line with that mentioned in the regulations. Secondly,
Statute-95 of the First Statute also makes a reference to the AICTE guidelines. It is
obviously not open to any authority to abide by the Regulations (guidelines) only in
parts and ignore the rest. It is reiterated that if the AICTE Regulations, 2010 has //
46 // force of law, which this Court has already held so, it has full application to the
Institution in which the petitioners are engaged."
7. I have heard Mr. B. Routray, learned Sr. Counsel appearing for the Petitioners along with Mr. J.
Biswal, learned counsel, Mr. N.K. Sahu, learned counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 and Mr.
P.K. Rath, learned Sr. Counsel appearing for Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6 along with Mr. S. Rath, learned
counsel. On the consent of the learned counsel appearing for the Parties and with due exchange of
pleadings, the matter was heard at the stage of admission and disposed of by the present order.
8. Having heard learned counsel appearing for the Parties and considering the submissions made, it
is not disputed by the Parties that pursuant to the notice issued by the University under Annexure-3
to 6, Petitioner Nos.1, 2, 3, 7 & 13 and Private Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6 made their applications to get
the benefit of promotion to the rank of Professor under Career Advancement Scheme. It is found
from the notice issued under Annexure-3 and the last notice issued under Annexure-6, that the
selection has to be made in terms of AICTE Regulation, 2012. Regulation 5.2 r.w. Regulation 5.3 of
the Regulation prescribes the modality for constitution of the Selection // 47 // Committee for
consideration of the claim of Associate Professor to get the benefit of promotion to the rank of
Professor under CAS. 8.1. It is not disputed by Opp. Party Nos. 1 & 2 that the Selection Committee
constituted by the University for the Post of Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering
was not constituted in terms of the provisions contained under Regulation 5.2 r.w. Regulation 5.3 of
AICTE Regulation, 2012.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 28
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
8.2. It is an admitted fact that the Selection Committee was constituted by the University in terms of
Statute 34(9) of the 1 st Statute of the University. AICTE Regulation 2022, which is not disputed was
framed in exercise of the power conferred under Sub-Section 1 of Section 23 r.w. Sec. 10(i) to (v) of
the All India Council for Technical Education Act, 1987. Placing reliance on the decisions in the case
of Parshavanath Charitable Trust & Ors. and the decision in the case of Chittaranjan Mallick as cited
(supra), it is the view of this Court that Regulations framed by AICTE taking recourse to the
provisions contained under the Act will prevail over the provisions contained under VSSUT Act,
2008 and the VSSUT 1st Statute, 2010. 8.3. It is found from the record that the selection process
though was conducted in terms of AICTE Regulation, 2012, but the Selection // 48 // Committee
was only constituted in terms of the provisions contained under Statute 34(9) of the 1st Statute.
Since it is the view of this Court that AICTE Regulation, 2012 will prevail over the provisions
contained under the 1st Statute and the Committee prescribed by AICTE in its 2012 Regulation so
provided under Regulation 5.2 vis-à- vis 5.3 has not been followed by the University, which is not
disputed, this Court is of the view that the process of selection undertaken by the University as
against the post of Professor in the Department of Mechanical Engineering is illegal and not
sustainable in the eye of law. The stand taken by the University that after participating in the
selection process and after becoming unsuccessful no challenge can be made to the selection process
so followed by the University is also not acceptable in view of the recent decision of the Hon'ble
Apex Court in the case of Dr. Meeta Sahai as cited (supra).
8.4. It is also the view of this Court that since Regulation 5.2 r.w. 5.3 prescribes the modality for
constitution of the Selection Committee for promotion to the post of Professor under CAS, the same
cannot be changed by the University relying on the provisions contained under Statute 34(9) of the
1st Statute. It is the settled law that anything prescribed has to be followed in that manner only or
not at all. This Court relying on the decision of the Apex Court in the case of // 49 // Ramchandra
Keshav Adke, Arulmighu Nellukadai Mariamman Tirukkoil, M/s. A.P. Electrical Equipment
Corporation and Krishna Rai as cited (supra), is of the view that the Selection Committee so
constituted is not in terms of Regulation 5.2 r.w. 5.3 of the 2012 Regulation.
8.5. Since the Selection Committee admittedly has not been constituted in terms of Regulation 5.2
r.w. Regulation 5.3, it is the view of this Court that the selection process conducted for recruitment
and promotion to the post of Professor under CAS by the University in the Department of
Mechanical Engineering is vitiated. Therefore, this Court is inclined to interfere with the selection
process so conducted by the University in respect of promotion to the rank of Professor in the
Department of Mechanical Engineering. But since Opp. Party Nos. 5 & 6 have already got the benefit
of promotion and in the meantime Opp. Party No. 5 has retired from his service, this Court without
interfering with their promotion, directs the University to constitute a fresh Selection Committee in
terms of the Regulation 5.2 r.w. Regulation 5.3 of AICTE Regulation, 2012 and after constituting
such a Selection Committee, a fresh interview be conducted by allowing the Petitioners to
participate in the same. If Petitioners come out successful, then benefit of promotion be extended,
from the date Opp.
// 50 // Party Nos. 5 & 6 got the said benefit in terms of order dtd.08.02.2022 under Annexure-8.
This Court directs the University to complete the entire exercise within a period of four (4) months
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 29
Padmanav Dash & Ors vs Vice Chancellor on 3 April, 2025
from the date of receipt of this order.
9. The writ petition accordingly stands disposed of.
(BIRAJA PRASANNA SATAPATHY) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack Dated the 3rd April,
2025/Sneha Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/74730672/ 30
