Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
Bench: Saumitra Dayal Singh, Gautam Chowdhary
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:15367-DB
Court No. - 45
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 5306 of 2008
Appellant :- Pankaj Sharma
Respondent :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Appellant :- Anil Raghav, Abhishek Mayank, Arbaz Danish,Jai Shanker Audichya, Neeharika Singh, Neelam Kumar Singh, S.P. Singh Raghav, Zia Naz Zaidi
Counsel for Respondent :- Govt. Advocate,Sunil Vashisth
Hon'ble Saumitra Dayal Singh,J.
Hon'ble Dr. Gautam Chowdhary,J.
1. Heard Shri Sandeep Kumar Dubey, learned Amicus Curiae for the appellant and Shri Patanjali
Mishra, learned A.G.A.-I for the State.
2. Present appeal has been filed against the judgement and order dated 30.07.2008 passed by Sri
S.D. Singh, Additional Sessions Judge, Court no.5, Bulandshahar, in Sessions Trial No. 895 of 2007
(State vs Pankaj Sharma), arising out of Crime No. 88 of 2007, under Sections 364, 307, 302, 301,
377 I.P.C., Police Station - Khurja Dehat, District Bulandshahar, whereby the appellant has been
convicted for offence under Section 364 I.P.C. and awarded punishment - rigorous life
imprisonment along with fine of Rs. 5,000/- and in default of fine to suffer one year further rigorous
imprisonment; Section 302 I.P.C. and awarded punishment rigorous life imprisonment along with
fine of Rs. 5,000/- and in default of fine to suffer one year further rigorous imprisonment; Section
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 1
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
377 I.P.C. and awarded punishment eight years rigorous imprisonment along with fine Rs. 5,000/-
and in default of fine to suffer one year further rigorous imprisonment, Section 201 I.P.C. and
awarded punishment five years rigorous imprisonment along with fine Rs. 1,000/- and in default of
fine to suffer one month further rigorous imprisonment.
3. According to the prosecution story, the deceased 'A' aged five years went missing on 13.4.2007
while playing with his minor sister 'R' (P.W.-1 at the trial), aged six years, along with children of
their age namely, Vineet, Mohit, Rahul and others, at a place described as the agricultural field of
Sobha Ram. The occurrence is described to have taken place at around 2:30 PM. The First
Information Report was lodged on 14.4.2007 at about 5:00 PM i.e about 26 hours after the
occurrence by the father of 'A' and 'R', namely Jaiprakash Sharma (P.W.-2 at the trial). The scribe of
the FIR Ravi Dutt Sharma son of Om Prakash Sharma was not examined at the trial. The written
report of the FIR is Ex.Ka-1 whereas the FIR itself is Ex.Ka-6. Plain perusal of the FIR discloses that
it was lodged against unknown miscreants. On 16.4.2007, the dead body of 'A' was discovered
floating in an irrigation canal. That discovery was described by the prosecution to be made at the
pointing out of the appellant, after his confessional statement came to be recorded. The recovery
memo of the dead body is Ex.Ka-3. On that, 'Panchayatnama' was drawn on 16.4.2007 itself. It is
Ex.Ka-2. After the recovery of the dead body of 'A', 'R' (P.W.-2) was subjected to medical
examination on 16.4.2007. In that, the following injury and observation was made by the Dr. Ajay
Kumar Sharma (P.W.-4 at the trial):
"Injuries - Multiple abrasions on anterior and flat surface of neck measuring 9.0 cm x
1.5 cm. Hard scab present.
Conclusion - Injury is about 2-4 days old and caused by throttling by cloth. Nature is
simple."
4. That injury report is Ex.Ka-5. The dead body of 'A' was subjected to autopsy examination on
17.4.2007 at about 2 PM, by Dr. Shiv Nath Singh (P.W.-3 at the trial). The dead body had reached an
advanced stage of decomposition. However, following ante mortem injuries injuries were noted:
"(i) A ligature mark (16 cm x 1.5 cm) around the Neck, continuous, horizontally
placed over thyroid cartilage on exploration ecchymosis present underneath. Hyiod
and larynx found fractured.
(ii) Lacerated wound (4 cm x 2 cm) vertically placed at 6'o clock position to 12'o clock
present on Anus and Anus ruptured."
5. As to the cause of death, it was recorded - 'Asphyxia as a result of strangulation'. The autopsy
report is Ex.Ka-4. In such facts, upon investigation, charge-sheet was submitted by the Investigating
Officer D.K. Tyagi (P.W.-5 at the trial). On that, five charges were framed against the appellant vide
three orders dated 28.7.2007. The charges framed read as below:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 2
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
"?? ?? ?????? 13.4.2007 ?? ??? 2.30 ??? ??? ???? ????? ???? ??? ????? ????? ???????
????-??????? ?????? ?????/ ???? ????????? ??? ?? ???? ?????? ???????? ????? ?? ?????
??? ???? 5??? ??? ????? ???? ???? ???? 6 ??? ?? ???? ??????? ????????? ??????? ? ????
???? ????? ???? ?? ???? ????? ?? ?? ???? ?? ?????? ???? ??? ????? ???? ?? ??.?.?. ?? ????
364 ?? ???????? ??????? ????? ?? ?? ?? ???????? ?? ????????? ??? ???
?? ?? ?????? 13.4.07 ?? ??? ???? 2.30 ??? ????? ???? ??? ????? ????? ???????
????-??????? ?????? ?????/ ???? ????????? ??? ???? ???? ?????? ?? ?????? ???? ?? ????
??? ??????????? ??? ?? ????? ?? ???? ?? ????? ?? ??? ????? ????? ???? ?? ?????? ????
??? ???? ?????? ?? ???? ?? ?? ????? ?? ???? ????? ?? ?????? ???? ??? ????? ???? ??
??.?.?. ?? ???? 307 ?? ???????? ??????? ????? ?? ?? ?? ???????? ?? ????????? ?? ???
?? ?? ?????? 13.4.2007 ?? ?????? 16.4.07 ?? ???? ???? ???, ???? ????? ?? ???? ????
?????? ?? ????? ??? ???? ???? 5 ???? ?? ??? ??????? ?? ???????? ?? ????? ?????????
???????? ??? ????? ?? ?????? ???? ??? ????? ???? ?? ??.?.?. ?? ???? 377 ?? ????????
??????? ????? ?? ?? ?? ???????? ?? ????????? ?? ???
?? ?? ?????? 13.4.2007 ?? ?????? 16.4.07 ?? ???? ???? ???, ???? ????? ?? ???? ????
?????? ???????? ?? ????? ??? ???? 5 ???? ?? ???? ??? ??????????? ??? ????? ????? ???
?? ?????? ???? ??? ????? ???? ?? ??.?.?. ?? ???? 302 ?? ???????? ??????? ????? ???? ??
?? ???????? ?? ????????? ?? ???
?? ?? ??????? ????, ??? ? ????? ?? ???? ?? ????? ???? ?? ?? ?????? ???? ?????? ?? ?????
?? ????? ?? ??? ?? ?? ????? ?? ???? ?? ???? ??? ??????? ?? ?????? ???? ?? ???? ??? ??
??? ?? ?????? ??? ???, ?? ????? ?? ?? ?? ??? ???? ???? ??? ???? ????? ?? ?????? ???? ???
????? ???? ?? ??.?.?. ?? ???? 201 ?? ???????? ??????? ????? ?? ?? ?? ???????? ??
????????? ?? ???"
6. The appellant pleaded not guilty and has faced trial. At the trial, besides proving the documents
noted above and certain other documents, the prosecution led oral documents of the following
persons:
"(i). 'R' (P.W.-1)
(ii). First informant Jai Prakash Sharma (P.W.-2)
(iii). Dr. Shiv Nath Singh, the doctor who conducted the autopsy (P.W.-3)
(iv). Dr. Ajay Kumar Sharma, the doctor who examined 'R' (P.W.-4)
(v) D.K. Tyagi, Investigating Officer (P.W.-5)
(vi) S.P. Tripathi, Investigating Officer who inquired into the missing person report
(P.W.-6)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 3
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
(vii) Harswaroop, Constable who prepared 'majroobi chitthi' (P.W.-7)"
7. Thereafter, the statement of the accused was recorded under Section 313 Cr.P.C.. In that, the
appellant stated - false prosecution had been lodged against him for reason of earlier disputes raised
by his mother against the first informant, his brother and other family members making allegation
of physical assault. According to the appellant, the first informant side had been convicted in that
case. Yet, it is noted, there is no evidence on record of such fact occurrence having ever taken place.
8. At the trial, the prosecution came up with a case of circumstantial evidence. The star witness for
the prosecution remained 'R' (P.W.-1). In her statement recorded in chief, she described that she
along with the deceased 'A', Amit, Ankit, Vineet, Rahul and Mohit were involved in some child play
when the accused reached that place and first started beating Amit and Vineet. Being thus scared, 'R'
along with 'A' ran to safety at a place described by her - near 'Chakki Wale Kothi'. The accused is
described to have followed and persuaded them to accompany him on promise of mangoes. At that
point, the other children ran away from that place. While 'R' claimed that she did not want to
accompany the appellant, her younger brother 'A' thought otherwise. At that, she accompanied the
appellant along with 'A', to another place described as the field of one Siyaram. There, the accused is
described to have offered two mangoes to 'A' and 'R'. Thereafter, he tried to abduct 'A' towards other
agricultural field. On being followed by 'R', the appellant is described to have throttled her (with her
'Angocha'). That left her fainted. On gaining her senses, she found herself lying in another
agricultural field of one Darshan. Critically, she described to have seen the occurrence as noted
above including the fact that after assaulting 'R', the appellant abducted 'A'. On regaining her senses,
'R' further described that she ran back home but could not narrate the occurrence as she suffered
loss of voice, due to strangulation. At the same time, she informed her father Jai Prakash Sharma
(P.W.-2) about the entire occurrence late in the night i.e. on the night intervening 13/14.4.2007.
9. During her cross-examination, she specified to have reached back home at about 5 PM. At that
time, her father (P.W.-1) was not at home. He returned late at about 2:30 AM i.e. on the night
intervening 13/14.4.2007. She specifically stated that she told everything to her father at that time.
10. As to Jai Prakash Sharma (P.W.-2), he clearly did not describe himself as an eye-witness to any
extent. He had not seen the occurrence and he did not seen the appellant abduct the deceased 'A'.
On being cross-examined, as to how he learnt about the involvement of the appellant, he stated that
he was informed by a villager Pradeep (again not examined at the trial) on 15.4.2007, that he had
last seen 'A' with the appellant.
11. Dr. Shiv Nath Singh (P.W.-3) proved the autopsy report. No doubt emerged from that
cross-examination. Dr. Ajay Kumar Sharma (P.W.-4) proved the injury report of 'R'. As to time of
occurrence, he opined that such injury may have been caused at any time between 13.4.2007 and
14.4.2007. Shri D.K. Tyagi, the Investigating Officer (P.W.-5) proved the investigation. Shri S.P.
Tripathi proved the facts and investigation conducted pertaining to the missing person report.
Similarly, Shri Harswaroop (P.W.-7) proved the letter requiring the medical examination of 'R'.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 4
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
12. Learned court below has disbelieved the prosecution story in part. It did not believe of allegation
of assault made on 'R'. It has thus acquitted the appellant of offences alleged under Section 307
I.P.C. As to the other charge of abduction, unnatural sexual act and murder committed on 'A' and
destruction of evidence, it has found the appellant guilty. Accordingly, he has been sentenced.
13. Submission is, no one saw the occurrence and in any case the occurrence was not proven as one
caused by the appellant or in the manner described. That truth is self apparent from the facts
admitted to the prosecution. Undeniably, 'A' went missing in the afternoon of 13.04.2007. That fact
was reported to the first informant by none other but his daughter 'R' in the intervening night of
13/14.04.2007. Yet, the F.I.R. was first lodged more than 12 hours thereafter, only reporting
occurrence of disappearance of 'A'. Neither any accused person was named nor any accusation was
made against the appellant of causing such disappearance nor any allegation was made of the
appellant having assaulted 'R' and other children, in any manner. Thus, the prosecution allegation
against the appellant emerged only after discovery of the dead body of the deceased 'A'. At that
stage, on 16.04.2007 injury was first claimed to have been received by 'R' as well (at the time of the
occurrence i.e. in the afternoon of 13.04.2007). That injury has been wholly doubted for reason of its
non-disclosure in the F.I.R. that was lodged belatedly. Dr. Ajay Kumar Sharma (P.W.-4) opined that
such injury may have been caused as late as on 14.04.2007. Then, wholly unexplained and unnatural
conduct of the prosecution has emerged inasmuch as neither the scribe of the F.I.R. nor the
independent eye witnesses (not less than three in numbers), were examined at the trial. Though the
F.I.R. clearly stated that 'A' along with 'R' were playing with their friends Vineet, Mohit, Rahul and
others, the prosecution made no attempt to prove that part of the occurrence through any of the
those independent witnesses. Then, though the prosecution story alleges that the appellant
assaulted the other children namely, Amit and Vineet, they were also not examined and their
injuries were not informed to the police or examined. Another doubt has been created on the
testimony of 'R' (P.W.-1) as she described, she had been left unconscious in the agricultural field of
Siyaram but discovered herself as lying in the field of one Darshan i.e. at another place. Yet, she
claimed to have seen the appellant abduct 'A'.
14. Her testimony has been further doubted for reason of her categorical statement made during her
cross-examination that she had narrated the entire occurrence to her father - the first informant Jai
Prakash Sharma (P.W.-2) on 13/14.04.2007 itself, during mid night. Absolutely, no credible or other
explanation exists why after such disclosure made to the first informant, remained from being
reported, though the F.I.R. came to be lodged at about 5.00 p.m. on the next day i.e. 14.04.2007.
That critical break in the prosecution story is described as fatal to the prosecution story. It brings
out the complete hollowness and falsity of the prosecution allegation. Considering the fact involving
the disappearance of a minor child and serious injuries suffered by 'R' - the other minor child of
P.W. -2, it can never be believed that it escaped or remained with such informant to report that
occurrence to the police that too more than 26 hours after the occurrence.
15. Insofar as the learned court below has disbelieved the prosecution story and testimony of
prosecution witness, namely, 'R' (P.W.-1) as to her injuries and, therefore, acquitted the appellant
for the offence alleged under Section 307 I.P.C., it has been strenuously urged that was wholly
impermissible for the learned court below to have then believed the other part of the story of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 5
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
same witness with respect to the murder of 'A'. Though, on first principle, the Court's do recognize
the entire testimony of a witness may not be thrown out if some part of it is false yet, here the most
vital part of the testimony of the star witness has been disbelieved i.e. as to her own injuries. Once
that conclusion had been drawn by the learned court below it did not survive with it to believe the
other aspect of the prosecution allegation, on her testimony.
16. On the other hand, learned A.G.A. would submit, the prosecution story has been proved not only
on the strength of the testimony of 'R' (P.W.-1) but also wholly supported by the recovery as also the
autopsy report. There is absolutely no doubt that the death of 'A' was caused due to asphyxia as a
result of strangulation. According to the doctor, the death was caused in the afternoon of
13.04.2007. Sexual assault was also proven. Therefore, the learned court below has not erred in
convicting the appellant and offered life sentence.
17. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and having perused the record, the status of 'R'
(P.W.-1) cannot be ignored, she being a child witness and also the sister of the deceased 'A' as also
an injured witness. Also, she was the sole eye-witness who offered account of last seen. At the same
time, it is not as if that status would lead the Court to either believe or disbelieve her deposition. The
truth in her statement made to the Court must be examined on its own.
18. As to conviction on the testimony of a single eye-witness, the rule is clear. In Vadivelu Thevar Vs
State of Madras, AIR 1957 SC 614, the Supreme Court observed as below.
"The matter thus must depend upon the circumstances of each case and the quality of
the evidence of the single witness whose testimony has to be either accepted or
rejected. If such a testimony is found by the court to be entirely reliable, there is no
legal impediment to the conviction of the accused person on such proof. Even as the
guilt of an accused person may be proved by the testimony of a single witness, the
innocence of an accused person may be established on the testimony of a single
witness, even though a considerable number of witnesses may be forthcoming to
testify to the truth of the case for the prosecution. Hence, in our opinion, it is a sound
and well-established rule of law that the court is concerned with the quality and not
with the quantity of the evidence necessary for proving or disproving a fact. Generally
speaking, oral testimony in this context may be classified into three categories,
namely:
(1) Wholly reliable.
(2) Wholly unreliable.
(3) Neither wholly reliable nor wholly unreliable.
In the first category of proof, the court should have no difficulty in coming to its conclusion either
way ? it may convict or may acquit on the testimony of a single witness, if it is found to be above
reproach or suspicion of interestedness, incompetence or subornation. In the second category, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 6
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
court equally has no difficulty in coming to its conclusion. It is in the third category of cases, that the
court has to be circumspect and has to look for corroboration in material particulars by reliable
testimony, direct or circumstantial. There is another danger in insisting on plurality of witnesses.
Irrespective of the quality of the oral evidence of a single witness, if courts were to insist on plurality
of witnesses in proof of any fact, they will be indirectly encouraging subornation of witnesses.
Situations may arise and do arise where only a single person is available to give evidence in support
of a disputed fact. The court naturally has to weigh carefully such a testimony and if it is satisfied
that the evidence is reliable and free from all taints which tend to render oral testimony open to
suspicion, it becomes its duty to act upon such testimony. The law reports contain many precedents
where the court had to depend and act upon the testimony of a single witness in support of the
prosecution. There are exceptions to this rule, for example, in cases of sexual offences or of the
testimony of an approver; both these are cases in which the oral testimony is, by its very nature,
suspect, being that of a participator in crime. But, where there are no such exceptional reasons
operating, it becomes the duty of the court to convict, if it is satisfied that the testimony of a single
witness is entirely reliable. We have therefore, no reasons to refuse to act upon the testimony of the
first witness, which is the only reliable evidence in support of the prosecution."
19. Then, in Joseph vs State of Kerala, (2003) 1 SCC 465, with respect to testimony of single
eye-witness, the Supreme Court further observed:
To our mind, it appears that the High Court did not follow the aforesaid standard but
went on to analyse evidence as if the material before them was given for the first time
and not in appeal. Section 134 of the Indian Evidence Act provides that no particular
number of witnesses shall in any case be required for the proof of any fact and,
therefore, it is permissible for a court to record and sustain a conviction on the
evidence of a solitary eyewitness. But, at the same time, such a course can be adopted
only if the evidence tendered by such witness is cogent, reliable and in tune with
probabilities and inspires implicit confidence. By this standard, when the prosecution
case rests mainly on the sole testimony of an eyewitness, it should be wholly reliable.
Even though such witness is an injured witness and his presence may not be seriously
doubted, when his evidence is in conflict with other evidence, the view taken by the
trial court that it would be unsafe to convict the accused on his sole testimony cannot
be stated to be unreasonable.
20. Again, in Bhimapa Chandappa Hosamani vs State of Karnataka, (2006) 11 SCC 323, word of
caution was added by the Supreme Court, a Court may pass the order of conviction, solely on that
testimony. It observed as below:
"We have undertaken a very close and critical scrutiny of the evidence of PW 1 and
the other evidence on record only with a view to assess whether the evidence of PW 1
is of such quality that a conviction for the offence of murder can be safely rested on
her sole testimony. This Court has repeatedly observed that on the basis of the
testimony of a single eyewitness a conviction may be recorded, but it has also
cautioned that while doing so the court must be satisfied that the testimony of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 7
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
solitary eyewitness is of such sterling quality that the court finds it safe to base a
conviction solely on the testimony of that witness. In doing so the court must test the
credibility of the witness by reference to the quality of his evidence. The evidence
must be free of any blemish or suspicion, must impress the court as wholly truthful,
must appear to be natural and so convincing that the court has no hesitation in
recording a conviction solely on the basis of the testimony of a single witness."
21. Next, as to the reliance that may be placed on the statement or deposition of child witness, in
Dattu Ramrao Sakhare vs State of Maharashtra, (1997) 5 SCC 341, it was clearly observed that
though a child witness is a competent witness and their statement may be relied even in absence of
oath administered yet, the credibility of such evidence would depend upon circumstances of each
case.
22. The Court should watch out for element of tutoring that may always arise in the case of a child
witness. The Supreme Court further recognized that there may exist no rule or practice requiring
corroboration of the statement made by a child witness. Yet, rule of prudence may always be
enforced by Courts - to seek corroboration, where required. Pertinent to our observation, it was
observed as below:
"The entire prosecution case rested upon the evidence of Sarubai (PW 2) a child
witness aged about 10 years. It is, therefore, necessary to find out as to whether her
evidence is corroborated from other evidence on record. A child witness if found
competent to depose to the facts and reliable one such evidence could be the basis of
conviction. In other words even in the absence of oath the evidence of a child witness
can be considered under Section 118 of the Evidence Act provided that such witness is
able to understand the questions and able to give rational answers thereof. The
evidence of a child witness and credibility thereof would depend upon the
circumstances of each case. The only precaution which the court should bear in mind
while assessing the evidence of a child witness is that the witness must be a reliable
one and his/her demeanour must be like any other competent witness and there is no
likelihood of being tutored. There is no rule or practice that in every case the evidence
of such a witness be corroborated before a conviction can be allowed to stand but,
however as a rule of prudence the court always finds it desirable to have the
corroboration to such evidence from other dependable evidence on record. In the
light of this well-settled principle we may proceed to consider the evidence of Sarubai
(PW 2)."
23. Then, again in Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak vs State of Gujarat, (2004) 1 SCC 64, after relying
on Dattu Ramrao Sakhare (supra), the Supreme Court further elaborated on the vulnerability of a
child witness and observed that a child witness may remain amenable to tutoring. Therefore, a more
careful scrutiny is required - of such evidence. In that regard, it was observed as below:
"The decision on the question whether the child witness has sufficient intelligence
primarily rests with the trial Judge who notices his manners, his apparent possession
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 8
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
or lack of intelligence, and the said Judge may resort to any examination which will
tend to disclose his capacity and intelligence as well as his understanding of the
obligation of an oath. The decision of the trial court may, however, be disturbed by
the higher court if from what is preserved in the records, it is clear that his conclusion
was erroneous. This precaution is necessary because child witnesses are amenable to
tutoring and often live in a world of make-believe. Though it is an established
principle that child witnesses are dangerous witnesses as they are pliable and liable to
be influenced easily, shaped and moulded, but it is also an accepted norm that if after
careful scrutiny of their evidence the court comes to the conclusion that there is an
impress of truth in it, there is no obstacle in the way of accepting the evidence of a
child witness."
24. Then, in Golla Yelugu Govindu Vs. State of A.P., (2008) 16 SCC 769, again, reliance was placed
on Dattu Ramrao Sakhare (supra). Thereafter, principle laid in Dattu Ramrao Sakhare (supra) and
Ratansinh Dalsukhbhai Nayak (supra) was reiterated. Last, in Alagupandi vs State of T.N., (2012) 10
SCC 451, again the principal laid down in Dattu Ramrao Sakhare (supra) and Ratansinh
Dalsukhbhai Nayak (supra) was reiterated.
25. Third, in the case of Padala Veera Reddy v. State of A.P., AIR (1990) SC 79, wherein the Hon'ble
Supreme Court laid down the guiding principle with regard to appreciation of circumstantial
evidence:-
"(1) the circumstances from which an inference of guilt is sought to be drawn, must
be cogently and firmly established;
(2) those circumstances should be of a definite tendency unerringly pointing towards
guilt of the accused;
(3) the circumstances, taken cumulatively, should form a chain so complete that
there is no escape from the conclusion that within all human probability the crime
was committed by the accused and none else; and (4) the circumstantial evidence in
order to sustain conviction must be complete and incapable of explanation of any
other hypothesis than that of guilt of the accused and such evidence should not only
be consistent with the guilt of the accused but should be inconsistent with his
innocence."
26. In the case of State of U.P. v. Ashok Kumar Srivastava, (1992) 1 SCR 37, the Supreme Court
pointed out, great care must be taken in evaluating circumstantial evidence and if the evidence
relied is reasonably capable of two inferences, the one in favour of the accused must be accepted. It
was also pointed out that the circumstances relied upon must be found fully established and the
cumulative effect of all the facts so established must be consistent only with the hypothesis of guilt
of the accused persons, and no other.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 9
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
27. In the case of Sanatan Naskar and Anr. v. State of West Bengal, (2010) 8 SCC 249, the Supreme
Court observed as under:-
"13. There cannot be any dispute to the fact that it is a case of circumstantial evidence
as there was no eye witness to the occurrence. It is a settled principle of law that an
accused can be punished if he is found guilty even in cases of circumstantial evidence
provided, the prosecution is able to prove beyond reasonable doubt complete chain of
events and circumstances which definitely points towards the involvement and guilt
of the suspect or accused, as the case may be. The accused will not be entitled to
acquittal merely because there is no eye witness in the case. It is also equally true that
an accused can be convicted on the basis of circumstantial evidence subject to
satisfaction of accepted principles in that regard."
28. Also, in Sharad Birdhichand Sarda Vs. State of Maharshtra, (1984) Cri. L.J. 178, Supreme Court
was pleased to observe in paras-150 to 158, as below:-
"150. It is well settled that the prosecution must stand or fall on its own legs and it
cannot derive any strength from the weakness of the defence. This is trite law and no
decision has taken a contrary view. What some cases have held is only this: where
various links in a chain are in themselves complete than a false plea or a false defence
may be called into aid only to lend assurance to the Court. In other words, before
using the additional link it must be proved that all the links in the chain are complete
and do not suffer from any infirmity. It is not the law that where is any infirmity or
lacuna in the prosecution case, the same could be cured or supplied by a false defence
or a plea which is not accepted by a Court.
151. Before discussing the cases relied upon by the High Court we would like to cite a
few decisions on the nature, character and essential proof required in a criminal case
which rests on circumstantial evidence alone. The fundamental and basic decision of
the Apex Court is Hanumant v. The State of Madhya Pradesh.(1) This case has been
uniformly followed and applied by this Court in a large number of later decisions
uptodate, for instance, the cases of Tufail (Alias) Simmi v. State of Uttar Pradesh(2)
and Ramgopal v. State of Maharashtra(3). It may be useful to extract what Mahajan,
J. has laid down in Hanumant's case (supra):
"It is well to remember that in cases where the evidence is of a circumstantial nature,
the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should in the first
instance be fully established and all the facts so established should be consistent only
with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused. Again, the circumstances should be of
a conclusive nature and tendency and they should be such as to exclude every
hypothesis but the one proposed to be proved. In other words, there must be a chain
of evidence so far complete as not to leave any reasonable ground far a conclusion
consistent with the innocence of the accused and it must be such as to show that
within all human probability the act must have been done by the accused."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 10
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
152. A close analysis of this decision would show that the following conditions must be fulfilled
before a case against an accused can be said to be fully established:
(1) the circumstances from which the conclusion of guilt is to be drawn should be
fully established.
It may be noted here that this Court indicated that the circumstances concerned 'must or should'
and not 'may be' established. There is not only a grammatical but a legal distinction between 'may be
proved' and 'must be or should be proved' as was held by this Court in Shivaji Sahabrao Bobade &
Anr. v. State of Maharashtra where the following observations were made:
"Certainly, it is a primary principle that the accused must be and not merely may be
guilty before a court can convict and the mental distance between 'may be' and 'must
be' is long and divides vague conjectures from sure conclusions."
(2) The facts so established should be consistent only with the hypothesis of the guilt of the accused,
that is to say. they should not be explainable on any other hypothesis except that the accused is
guilty, (3) the circumstances should be of a conclusive nature and tendency.
(4) they should exclude every possible hypothesis except the one to be proved, and (5) there must be
a chain of evidence so complete as not to leave any reasonable ground for the conclusion consistent
with the innocence of the accused and must show that in all human probability the act must have
been done by the accused.
153. These five golden principles, if we may say so, constitute the panchsheel of the proof of a case
based on circumstantial evidence.
154. It may be interesting to note that as regards the mode of proof in a criminal case depending on
circumstantial evidence, in the absence of a corpus deliciti, the statement of law as to proof of the
same was laid down by Gresson, J. (and concurred by 3 more Judges) in The King v. Horry,(l) thus:
"Before he can be convicted, the fact of death should be proved by such
circumstances as render the commission of the crime morally certain and leave no
ground for reasonable doubt: the circumstantial evidence should be so cogent and
compelling as to convince a jury that up on no rational hypothesis other than murder
can the facts be accounted for."
155. Lord Goddard slightly modified the expression, morally certain by 'such circumstances as
render the commission of the crime certain'.
156. This indicates the cardinal principle' of criminal jurisprudence that a case can be said to be
proved only when there is certain and explicit evidence and no person can be convicted on pure
moral conviction. Horry's case (supra) was approved by this Court in Anant Chintaman Lagu v. The
State of Bombay(2) Lagu's case as also the principles enunciated by this Court in Hanumant's case
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 11
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
(supra) have been uniformly and consistently followed in all later decisions of this Court without any
single exception. To quote a few cases Tufail's case (supra), Ramgopals case (supra), Chandrakant
Nyalchand Seth v. The State of Bombay (Criminal Appeal No. 120 of 1957 decided on 19.2.58),
Dharmbir Singh v. The State of Punjab (Criminal Appeal No. 98 of 1958 decided on 4.11.1958).
There are a number of other cases where although Hanumant's case has not been expressly noticed
but the same principles have been expounded and reiterated, as in Naseem Ahmed v. Delhi
Administration(l). Mohan Lal Pangasa v. State of U.P.,(2) Shankarlal Gyarasilal Dixit v. State of
Maharashtra(3) and M.C. Agarwal v. State of Maharashtra(4)-a five-Judge Bench decision.
157. It may be necessary here to notice a very forceful argument submitted by the Additional
Solicitor-General relying on a decision of this Court in Deonandan Mishra v. The State of Bihar(5),
to supplement this argument that if the defence case is false it would constitute an additional link so
as to fortify the prosecution case. With due respect to the learned Additional Solicitor General we
are unable to agree with the interpretation given by him of the aforesaid case, the relevant portion of
which may be extracted thus:
"But in a case like this where the various links as started above have been
satisfactorily made out and the circumstances point to the appellant as the probable
assailant, with reasonable definiteness and in proximity to the deceased as regards
time and situation-such absence of explanation of false explanation would itself be an
additional link which completes the chain."
158. It will be seen that this Court while taking into account the absence of explanation or a false
explanation did hold that it will amount to be an additional link to complete the chain but these
observations must be read in the light of what this Court said earlier, viz., before a false explanation
can be used as additional link, the following essential conditions must be satisfied:
"(1) various links in the chain of evidence led by the prosecution have been
satisfactorily proved.
(2) the said circumstance point to the guilt of the accused with reasonable
definiteness, and (3) the circumstance is in proximity to the time and situation.?
29. Here the consistent prosecution story as presented at the trial is that the disappearance occurred
on 13.04.2007 at about 2.30 p.m., while, the deceased 'A' along with 'R' (P.W.-2 - the solitary
eye-witness) was involved in some child play with his friends Vineet, Mohit, Rahul and others at the
agricultural field of Sobha Ram. Jai Prakash Sharma (P.W.-2), who is the father of 'A' and 'R' was
not an eye witness to that occurrence. While he was not obligated to disclose his source of
information narrated in the F.I.R. and no adverse inference may be drawn on that fact, it is not
denied to the prosecution that P.W.-1 gained knowledge of the occurrence from his daughter 'R'
(P.W.-2). During his cross-examination, he described that he also gained knowledge of the
occurrence involving disappearance 'A' through a villager Pradeep (claimed to have last seen 'A' with
the appellant). At the same time, the said Pradeep was never examined at the trial. As to the
disclosure made by 'R' (P.W.-1), she clearly described during her cross-examination that she had
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 12
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
told her father (in entirety), about the occurrence during the intervening night of 13/14.04.2007.
Once that disclosure had been made (as claimed) more than 26 hours before the F.I.R. came to be
lodged, it is wholly unbelievable and unproven how no narration was made in the F.I.R. of the
occurrence as narrated by 'R' (P.W.-1). It is wholly unnatural for the father-Jai Prakash Sharma
(P.W.-2) to have offered a different account of the occurrence in such/later F.I.R., when he had been
disclosed the correct facts both by his daughter 'R' and Pradeep, on 14.04.2007 itself.
30. The above fact weaken the foundation of the prosecution story. Not only none may have seen the
occurrence, it remains wholly doubtful and unbelievable that the solitary eye-witness who happens
to be a child witness, namely 'R' had seen the occurrence as narrated in the prosecution story. To
that extent, it is also remarkable that the learned court below has itself disbelieved the allegation of
'R' with respect to assault made on her by the appellant. Once that occurrence has been disbelieved
in the status of the law as it exists, it would be difficult to rely on the other part of her testimony
without any confidence that she had seen the occurrence of disappearance caused by the appellant,
in absence of any corroboration offered with any other evidence.
31. In such a case, it is notable that no evidence whatsoever was led by the prosecution, of any
natural and independent eye witnesses, namely, Vineet, Mohit and Rahul two of whom were also
described to have been assaulted by the appellant. They were neither subjected to medical
examination nor produced as witnesses of fact, at the trial. The scribe of the F.I.R. was also not
examined by the prosecution as may have offered any corroboration to the version offered by 'R' and
as may have allowed the defence an opportunity to prove the falsity of the prosecution story with
respect to the F.I.R. narration.
32. Though, there is no doubt that 'A' was done to death after being subjected to aggravated sexual
assault and was murdered, at the same time, in absence of any corroboration, more than reasonable
doubt remains in the prosecution story to establish that the appellant is the accused who caused that
occurrence both with respect to disappearance of 'A' as also the consequential murder attributed to
him, on circumstantial evidence of a solitary eye witness who is a child witness only. Such doubts
leave gaping holes in the theory proposed by the prosecution that circumstances indicate that the
appellant alone was the person who caused the occurrence and it may not have been caused by any
other.
33. We also note that though the learned court below acquitted the appellant for the offence under
Section 307 I.P.C. against 'R', it has not recorded any reason for the same. At the same time, it also
appears that there is no cross appeal arising therefrom.
34. For the reasons noted above, present appeal must succeed and is allowed. Accordingly, it is
allowed on a benefit of doubt that must be given for reasons noted above. The impugned order is set
aside. The conviction of the appellant under all the offences alleged (as above) is not sustained. The
learned court below has erred in convicting the appellant for those offences. The appellant is in jail
since 16.4.2007. He shall be released forthwith unless he is wanted in any other case, subject to his
complying with the mandatory requirements of provision of Section 437-A Cr.P.C. Let lower court
record be returned forthwith.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 13
Pankaj Sharma vs State Of U.P. on 4 February, 2025
35. Let a copy of this judgment be sent to the Jail Authorities concerned and the court concerned for
compliance.
36. Sri Sandeep Kumar Dubey, learned Amicus Curiae appearing on behalf of the appellant has
rendered his valuable assistance to the Court. He be paid as per rules towards fee for the able
assistance provided by him in hearing of the present appeal.
Order Date :- 4.2.2025/Prakhar/Anurag (Dr. Gautam Chowdhary,J.) (S.D. Singh, J.)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/170464245/ 14
