Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home ... on 2 January, 2025
Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And ... vs State Of U.P.
Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home ... on 2 January, 2025
Author: Saurabh Lavania
Bench: Saurabh Lavania
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD, LUCKNOW BENCH
Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC-LKO:110
Court No. - 12
Case :- APPLICATION U/S 482 No. - 11665 of 2024
Applicant :- Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And Another
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home Lko. And Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Avinash Mishra
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Saurabh Lavania,J.
1. Heard Sri Avinash Mishra, learned counsel for the applicants, learned AGA for the State of U.P.
and perused the record.
2. The present application has been filed for the following main reliefs:-
"For the facts, reasons and circumstances as stated in the accompanying affidavit it is
most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to set
aside/quash the charge sheet No. 06/2014 dated 27.1.2014 in Criminal Case No.
238/2014, Crime No. 175/2013 under section 174A I.P.C. P.S. Ram Janmbhumi,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127247950/ 1
Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home ... on 2 January, 2025
Adyodhya Faizabad as contained in Annexure No. 1 to the affidavit.
It is further prayed that this Hon'ble Court may kindly be pleased to direct to stay the
entire proceeding of Criminal Case No. 238/2014, Crime No. 175/2013 under section
174A I.P.C. P.S. Ram Janmbhumi, Adyodhya Faizabad pending in the court of Civil
Judge (S.D)-II, Faizabad /Ayodhya "State Vs. Pankaj Yadav, during pendency of the
petition, in the interest of justice."
3. It is stated that the proceedings under Section 174-A IPC pending before the trial Court based
upon the FIR is unsustainable in the eyes of law particularly in view of provisions as envisaged
under Section 195 IPC.
4. It is further submitted that Division Bench of this Court in Criminal Misc. Writ Petition No. 17560
of 2023 (Sumit And Another vs. State of U.P. And 2 Others) held that proceedings under Section
174-A IPC can be initiated only on the basis of written complaint of the Court and not on the basis of
Police report. Reference can be made to Para 8 to 23 of the judgment, which are extracted
hereinunder:-
"8. Before dealing with the contention of learned counsel for the petitioners that the
F.I.R. u/s 174-A I.P.C. is barred by Section 195 Cr.P.C., it will be appropriate to
discuss the legal provision, involved in the present case. Section 195 Cr.P.C. which
prohibits the Court from taking cognizance of any offence punishable u/s 172 to 188
I.P.C., is being quoted below:-
"195. Prosecution for contempt of lawful authority of public servants, for offences
against public justice and for offences relating to documents given in evidence.
(1) No Court shall take cognizance-
(a) (i) of any offence punishable under sections 172 to 188 (both inclusive) of the
Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860 ), or
(ii) of any abetment of, or attempt to commit, such offence, or
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit such offence, except on the complaint in
writing of the public servant concerned or of some other public servant to whom he is
administratively subordinate;
(b) (i) of any offence punishable under any of the following sections of the Indian
Penal Code (45 of 1860), namely, sections 193 to 196 (both inclusive), 199, 200, 205
to 211 (both inclusive) and 228, when such offence is alleged to have been committed
in, or in relation to, any proceeding in any Court, or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127247950/ 2
Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home ... on 2 January, 2025
(ii) of any offence described in section 463, or punishable under section 471, section
475 or section 476, of the said Code, when such offence is alleged to have been
committed in respect of a document produced or given in evidence in a proceeding in
any Court, or
(iii) of any criminal conspiracy to commit, or attempt to commit, or the abetment of,
any offence specified in sub- clause (i) or sub- clause (ii), except on the complaint in
writing of that Court, or of some other Court to which that Court is subordinate.
(2) Where a complaint has been made by a public servant under clause (a) of sub-
section (1) any authority to which he is administratively subordinate may order the
withdrawal of the complaint and send a copy of such order to the Court; and upon its
receipt by the Court, no further proceedings shall be taken on the complaint:
Provided that no such withdrawal shall be ordered if the trial in the Court of first
instance has been concluded.
(3) In clause (b) of sub- section (1), the term "Court" means a Civil, Revenue or
Criminal Court, and includes a tribunal constituted by or under a Central, Provincial
or State Act if declared by that Act to be a Court for the purposes of this section.
(4) For the purposes of clause (b) of sub-section (1), a Court shall be deemed to be
subordinate to the Court to which appeals ordinarily lie from the appealable decrees
or sentences of such former Court, or in the case of a Civil Court from whose decrees
no appeal ordinarily lies, to the principal Court having ordinary original civil
jurisdiction within whose local jurisdiction such Civil Court in situate: Provided that-
(a) where appeals lie to more than one Court, the Appellate Court of inferior
jurisdiction shall be the Court to which such Court shall be deemed to be
subordinate;
(b) where appeals lie to a Civil and also to a Revenue Court, such Court shall be
deemed to be subordinate to the Civil or Revenue Court according to the nature of the
case or proceeding in connection with which the offence is alleged to have been
committed."
9. From perusal of Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C., it is clear that the offences for which there is
prohibition on court to take cognizance are non-cognizable offences from Section 172 to 187 I.P.C.
while Section 188 I.P.C. is mentioned as cognizable offence under First Schedule of Cr.P.C. The
definition of "cognizable offences" is provided u/s 2(c) Cr.P.C. which is being quoted as under:
"2(c). "cognizable offence" means an offence for which, and "cognizable case" means
a case in which, a police officer may, in accordance with the First Schedule or under
any other law for the time being in force, arrest without warrant."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127247950/ 3
Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home ... on 2 January, 2025
10. Therefore, it is clear that in cognizable offences, police can arrest the accused without warrant. It
is also clear from perusal of Section 195 Cr.P.C. that offences, punishable u/s 172 to 188 I.P.C. are
cognizable by the court only when a complaint in writing is filed by public servant concerned or his
subordinate. As per Section 21 I.P.C., "public servant" includes every judge, including any person
empowered by law to discharge any adjudicatory function. Therefore, the Magistrate who issues
proceedings u/s 82 Cr.P.C. will be deemed to be public servant within the meaning of Section 195
Cr.P.C. The word "complaint" referred in Section 195 Cr.P.C. is defined u/s 2(d) Cr.P.C. which is
being quoted below:
"2(d). " complaint" means any allegation made orally or in writing to a Magistrate,
with a view to his taking action under this Code, that some person, whether known or
unknown, has committed an offence, but does not include a police report.
Explanation.- A report made by a police officer in a case which discloses, after
investigation, the commission of a non- cognizable offence shall be deemed to be a
complaint; and the police officer by whom such report is made shall be deemed to be
the complainant."
11. From perusal of Section 2(d) Cr.P.C., it is clear that though the complaint does not include police
report but the explanation of Section 2(d) Cr.P.C. also provides that if after investigation of a case a
police report is submitted by the police officer, regarding non-cognizable offence then same shall
also be deemed to be "complaint". Therefore, apart from making allegation to Magistrate for taking
action against a person who has committed an offence but also the police report/charge sheet of
non-cognizable offence will also be deemed to be "complaint". From this fact, it is clear that police
report of cognizable offence cannot be treated as a complaint by any stretch of imagination.
12. Section 174-A I.P.C. was inserted after Section 174 I.P.C. though Section 44(b) of the Code of
Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005 and by Section 42(c) of this amendment Act, Section
174-A I.P.C. was also included in the First Schedule of Cr.P.C. after the entry relating to Section 174
I.P.C. Sections 42(c) and 44(b) of the Code of Criminal Procedure (Amendment) Act, 2005 are being
quoted as under:-
"42(c). after the entries relating to section 174, the following entries shall be inserted,
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127247950/ 4
Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home ... on 2 January, 2025
6. "174A Failure to appear at specified place and specified time as required by a
proclamation published under sub-section (1) of Section 82 of this Code
Imprisonment for 3 years, or with as fine, or with both Cognizable Non-bailable
Magistrate of the first class In a case where declaration has been made under
sub-section (4) of section 82 of this Code pronouncing a person as proclaimed
offender Imprisonment for 7 years and fine Ditto Ditto Ditto."
44(b). after section 174, the following section shall be inserted, namely:-
"174A. Whoever fails to appear at the specified place and the specified time as
required by a proclamation published under sub-section (1) of section 82 of the Code
of Criminal Procedure, 1973, shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which
may extend to three years or with fine or with both, and where a declaration has been
made under sub-section (4) of that section pronouncing him as a proclaimed
offender, he shall be punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to
seven years and shall also be liable to fine."
13. After insertion of Section 174-A in I.P.C. as well as in First Schedule of Cr.P.C., further
amendment was also made in the year 2006 in Section 195(1)(b) Cr.P.C., but no amendment was
made in Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C. Therefore, at the time of inserting Section 174-A in I.P.C. as well
as in First Schedule of Cr.P.C. after Section 174, legislature was well aware about the category of
offences u/s 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C. and for this reason, while making amendment in Section 195(1)(b)
Cr.P.C. in 2006, Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C. was kept untouched knowingly by the legislature. The
above position clearly reveals that while inserting Section 174-A I.P.C., legislature was well aware
that in Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C., apart from Section 188 I.P.C., one more cognizable offence i.e.
174-A I.P.C. is being inserted for providing the bar of cognizance on the part of court for offences
mentioned in Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C., except on the complaint.
14. In the judgement of Punjab and Haryana High Court delivered in Pradeep Kumar vs. State of
Punjab and another (supra), relied upon by the counsel for the petitioners, above mentioned
analysis of this Court was also considered and it was observed in paragraph Nos. 12.12 to 12.16 as
under:-
"12.12. Be that as it may, it is unmistakably evident that the omission of Section 174A
from the purview of Section 195 of the Cr.P.C. cannot be treated as a mere
inadvertent oversight. It gets more particularly obvious, when viewed through the
lens of the deliberate simultaneous legislative action taken to amend Schedule-1. This
deliberate choice to eschew any alteration in Section 195 Cr.P.C. while making
concurrent changes elsewhere in the same Code suggests a level of intentionality that
cannot be readily discounted.
12.13. Having opined as above, I may also hasten to add here that non-inclusion of
Section 174-A of IPC into the ambit of Section 195 of Cr.P.C in its current form, does
though create some incongruity/legal inconsistency. To elucidate, let us consider an
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127247950/ 5
Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home ... on 2 January, 2025
illustrative scenario: Imagine an individual accused of an offense falling under
Section 174-A of the IPC. Being an offense classified as cognizable, the police have the
authority to arrest the accused without a warrant. However, Section 195 of the Cr.P.C.
bars any Court from taking its cognizance except on the complaint in writing made by
the Court/Public servant concerned. This creates an anomalous situation where an
individual who is accused under Section 174-A IPC could potentially be arrested
without a warrant, yet the legal requirement for his prosecution for such an offense is
by way of filing a complaint under Section 195 of the Cr.P.C.
12.14. The incongruity, if any, in the legal framework rather warrants a closer
examination of legislative intent. The statutory insistence ibid, of filing of complaint
by public servant/court concerned is in tune with fundamental right to personal
liberty as enshrined under Article 21 of the Constitution of India. The same
underscores the importance of aligning legal provisions to ensure that personal
liberty of an individual is given paramount consideration,given that an individual
who is declared as proclaimed person or offender, as the case may be, is a mere
suspect/under trial and not yet a declared culprit. He is also equally entitled to
procedural protection in exercise of his fundamental right under Article 21. Same has
to be thus safeguarded. Justice has to be administered even to a suspect/under trial
without any ambiguity or drawing inferences against him from legislative
ambiguities. Thus the incongruity ought not to result in an asymmetry of rights and
due process. Such an inconsistency underscores the critical need for clarity in
legislation and ascertaining its intent through judicial interpretation in matters
affecting personal liberty and justice.
12.15. Nevertheless, even if we were to entertain the notion that non-exclusion of
Section 174-A of IPC from the purview of Section 195 Cr.P.C. was by an inadvertent
oversight/omission in the legislation, it is crucial to recognize that any benefit arising
from such an inadvertence or oversight would accrue to the advantage of the accused,
rather than the prosecution. In the realm of criminal jurisprudence, matters
pertaining to personal liberty hold a paramount position. Such matters pertaining to
personal liberty should never be predicated upon inferences drawn against the
accused from presumed intentions and/or inadvertent omissions on the part of the
legislature. The sanctity of personal liberty demands nothing less than clear and
categorical legislative provisions ensuring that justice is not compromised by
inferences drawn against the accused from legislative ambiguity or oversights.
12.16. In conclusion, it is held that Section 195 of the Code of Criminal Procedure
(CrPC), in its present form, encompasses Section 174-A of the Indian Penal Code
(IPC) within its purview."
15. This Court is also of the view that proceedings u/s 174-A I.P.C. is initiated for providing
punishment to the person who despite initiation of proceedings u/s 82 Cr.P.C. against him, failed to
comply with the same and despite making the same as cognizable offence, it was included u/s
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127247950/ 6
Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home ... on 2 January, 2025
195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C. so as to prohibit the police from making unnecessary harassment of the accused
as the police had already been proceeding against him u/s 82 Cr.P.C. Therefore, the sole purpose of
legislature by putting Section 174-A in the category of offence mentioned in Section 195(1)(a)(i)
Cr.P.C. is to make act of accused punishable for not honouring the process u/s 82 Cr.P.C. and also to
protect the unnecessary violation of personal liberty of the accused because police is already free to
arrest and take action against the accused person under the proceeding of Section 82 Cr.P.C. as well
as pending N.B.W.
16. Though in cognizable offences police can arrest an accused without warrant but specific
exception has been carved out by inserting Section 174-A I.P.C. in Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C.,
despite being a cognizable offence.
17. So far as the judgement, relied upon by learned A.G.A., passed by the Delhi High Court in
Maneesh Goomer (supra) as well as judgement of Allahabad High Court in Moti Singh Sikarwar
(supra) are concerned, same were based on the incorrect interpretation that all the offences,
mentioned u/s 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C., are non-cognizable offences ingnoring the fact that Section 188
I.P.C. is a cognizable offence. Paragraph-9 of the judgement passed by Delhi High Court in Maneesh
Goomer (supra) is being quoted below:-
"9. As regards the next contention of the Petitioner that for a prosecution under
Section 174-A IPC no cognizance can be taken on a charge-sheet but on a complaint
under Section 195 Cr.P.C., it may be noted that Section 174-A IPC was introduced in
the Code with effect from 23rd June, 2006. Section 195(1) Cr.P.C. provides that no
Court shall take cognizance of offences punishable under Section 172 to 188 (both
inclusive) of the IPC or of the abatement, or attempt to commit the said offences,
except on the complaint in writing of the public servant concerned or of some other
public servant to whom he is administratively subordinate. Section 195 Cr.P.C. has
not been correspondingly amended so as to include Section 174-A IPC which was
brought intp the Penal Code with effect from 23rd June, 2006. The Legislature was
conscious of this fact and that is why though all other offences under chapter X of the
Criminal Procedure Code are non- cognizable, offence punishable under Section
174-A IPC is cognizable. Thus the Police officer on a complaint under Section 174-A
IPC is competent to register FIR and after investigation thereon file a charge-sheet
before the Court of Magistrate who can take cognizance thereon. Thus, I find no
merit in the contention raised by the Learned Counsel for the Petitioner."
18. Similarly, paragraph 21.1 of the judgement passed by Allahabad High Court in Moti Singh
Sikarwar (supra) is being quoted as under:-
"21.1. It is to be noted that all the offences under Section 172 to 188 I.P.C. (both
inclusive) are non-cognizable and bailable, whereas Section 174-A I.P.C. which
provides for punishment upto 7 years imprisonment and fine, in case the offender
fails to appear at the specified place and the specified time, as required by the
proclamation published under Section 82 Cr.P.C., is cognizable and non-bailable. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127247950/ 7
Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home ... on 2 January, 2025
legislature was conscious of this fact and that is why while introducing Section 174-A
in the I.P.C. in the year 2006, it made no corresponding amendment in Section
195(1)(a) Cr.P.C. so as to include Section 174- I.P.C. in between all the non-cognizable
offences and bailable from Sections 172 to 188 I.P.C."
19. From perusal of aforesaid observations of Single Benches of Allahabad High Court as well as
Delhi High Court, it is clear that the very basis of interpretation that Section 174-A I.P.C. being
cognizable offence cannot be read as a section to be included in the category of cases mentioned in
Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C. is itself incorrect and does not lay down correct law. So far as the
judgement of Apex Court in Jayant vs. State of Madhya Pradesh (supra) as well as Pradeep S.
Wodeyar (supra) are concerned, in both the judgements controversy was entirely different and the
Hon'ble Apex Court did not hold that Section 174-A I.P.C. is not part of Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C.
20. In the case of Jayant vs. State of Madhya Pradesh (supra), the issue was regarding registration of
F.I.R. under Mines and Minerals Act, 1957 as well as offence u/s 379, 414 I.P.C. As there is a bar u/s
22 of Mines and Minerals Act which provides that cognizance of the offence under Mines and
Minerals Act will not be taken by the Court except upon a complaint by an authorized person.
Therefore, Hon'ble Apex Court observed that apart from offences under Mines and Minerals Act,
offences under I.P.C. have also been invoked, therefore, bar of Section 22 of Mines and Minerals Act
will not be applicable. It was further observed that after completion of investigation the Magistrate
will take cognizance of the offence under I.P.C. but the cognizance of offence under Mines and
Minerals Act will be taken on the basis of complaint. Paragraph 13 of the of Jayant vs. State of
Madhya Pradesh (supra) is being quoted as under:-
"13. After giving our thoughtful consideration in the matter, in the light of the
relevant provisions of the MMDR Act and the Rules made thereunder vis-a-vis the
Code of Criminal Procedure and the Penal Code, and the law laid down by this Court
in the cases referred to hereinabove and for the reasons stated hereinabove, our
conclusions are as under:
i) that the learned Magistrate can in exercise of powers under Section 156(3) of the
Code order/direct the concerned In-charge/SHO of the police station to
lodge/register crime case/FIR even for the offences under the MMDR Act and the
Rules made thereunder and at this stage the bar under Section 22 of the MMDR Act
shall not be attracted;
ii) the bar under Section 22 of the MMDR Act shall be attracted only when the
learned Magistrate takes cognizance of the offences under the MMDR Act and Rules
made thereunder and orders issuance of process/summons for the offences under the
MMDR Act and Rules made thereunder;
iii) for commission of the offence under the IPC, on receipt of the police report, the
Magistrate having jurisdiction can take cognizance of the said offence without
awaiting the receipt of complaint that may be filed by the authorised officer for taking
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127247950/ 8
Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home ... on 2 January, 2025
cognizance in respect of violation of various provisions of the MMDR Act and Rules
made thereunder; and
iv) that in respect of violation of various provisions of the MMDR Act and the Rules
made thereunder, when a Magistrate passes an order under Section 156(3) of the
Code and directs the concerned In-charge/SHO of the police station to register/lodge
the crime case/FIR in respect of the violation of various provisions of the Act and
Rules made thereunder and thereafter after investigation the concerned In-charge of
the police tation/investigating officer submits a report, the same can be sent to the
concerned Magistrate as well as to the concerned authorised officer as mentioned in
Section 22 of the MMDR Act and thereafter the concerned authorised officer may file
the complaint before the learned Magistrate along with the report submitted by the
concerned investigating officer and thereafter it will be open for the learned
Magistrate to take cognizance after following due procedure, issue process/summons
in respect of the violations of the various provisions of the MMDR Act and Rules
made thereunder and at that stage it can be said that cognizance has been taken by
the learned Magistrate.
v) in a case where the violator is permitted to compound the offences on payment of
penalty as per sub-section 1 of Section 23A, considering sub-section 2 of Section 23A
of the MMDR Act, there shall not be any proceedings or further proceedings against
the offender in respect of the offences punishable under the MMDR Act or any rule
made thereunder so compounded.However, the bar under sub-section 2 of Section
23A shall not affect any proceedings for the offences under the IPC, such as, Sections
379 and 414 IPC and the same shall be proceeded with further."
21. However, in the present case the petitioners are charged for the offence u/s 174-A I.P.C. only,
cognizance of which is barred u/s 195 Cr.P.C. Therefore, the controversy in the present case is totally
different from that of the judgement relied upon by learned A.G.A. Similarly, in the judgement of
Pradeep S. Wodeyar (supra), relied upon by learned A.G.A., the controversy was regarding
irregularity of the cognizance, therefore, controversy in that case is also different from the present
one.
22. It is clearly established that Section 174-A I.P.C. was inserted by way of amendment in 2005
between Sections 172 to 188, therefore, it is clear that Section 174-A I.P.C. is part of the offences
mentioned in Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C. for which court is barred from taking cognizance except
upon a complaint by the court.
23. It is also relevant to mention here that cognizable offence itself permits the police to arrest a
person without warrant, therefore, registration of F.I.R. of cognizable offence itself will affect the
personal liberty of a person protected by Article 21 of the Constitution of India. Therefore, if
legislature had intended to invoke the provision of cognizable offence only on the basis of filing
written complaint then permitting to register F.I.R. for direct offence will definitely amount to
interfere/deprive the personal liberty of a person. Therefore, once Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127247950/ 9
Pankaj Yadav @ Prem Prakash Yadav And ... vs State Of U.P. Thru. Secy. Deptt. Of Home ... on 2 January, 2025
prohibits the taking cognizance of the offence u/s 174-A I.P.C., except on the basis of written
complaint, then permitting lodging of an F.I.R. u/s 174-A I.P.C. will amount to travesty of justice to
the person concerned as the personal liberty under Article 21 of the Constitution cannot be deprived,
except in accordance with law.
Conclusion
24. Therefore, if the court itself cannot take cognizance of the offence u/s 174-A I.P.C. on the basis of
police report, then lodging the F.I.R. u/s 174-A I.P.C. is futile, and will be against the provision of
Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C. Therefore, proceedings u/s 174-A I.P.C. can be initiated only on the basis
of written complaint of the court which had initiated proceedings u/s 82 Cr.P.c. against the accused
and F.I.R. is barred by Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C.
25. This Court also holds that judgement of Single Benches of Allahabad High Court in Moti Singh
Sikarwar (supra) as well as of Delhi High Court in Maneesh Goomer (supra) have not laid down
correct law regarding interpretation of Section 174-A I.P.C. read with Section 195(1)(a)(i) Cr.P.C."
5. Considering the settled proposition of law as also the facts of the case that on the basis of FIR No.
175 of 2013 dated 24.11.2013, lodged by Sub Inspector, P.S.-Ram Janambhumi, Faizabad/Ayodhya,
the proceedings under Section 174-A IPC were initiated against the applicants and are pending as
Criminal Case No. 238/2014 (State vs. Pankaj Yadav) in the court of Civil Judge (S.D.)-II,
Faizabad/Ayodhya, this Court finds that interference is required in the matter.
6. Accordingly, the instant application is allowed and proceedings in issue pending against the
applicants are hereby quashed.
7. Office/Registry is directed to send the copy of this order to concerned court forthwith.
Order Date :- 02.01.2025 Arun/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/127247950/ 10
