Pankaj Singh @Satyendra @Pramodsingh @ vs The State Of M.P. on 22 June, 2017
Pankaj Singh @Satyendra @Pramodsingh @ vs The State Of
M.P. on 22 June, 2017
Author: Rajeev Kumar Dubey
Bench: Rajeev Kumar Dubey
-: 1:- Cr.A.No.40 of 2003
HIGH COURT OF MADHYA PRADESH: BENCH AT
INDORE
D.B: HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE S.C.SHARMA and
HON'BLE SHRI JUSTICE RAJEEV KUMAR DUBEY
CRIMINAL APPEAL NO.40/2003
PANKAJSINGH @ SATYENDRA JEN @
PRAMOLSINGH @ PRAMOLSINGH @ PRAMODSINGH
S/O HARISINGH PANWAR
Vs.
STATE OF MP
Shri Ajay Bagadiya, Advocate
with Shri Gajendra Singh,
Advocate for the appellant.
Shri Milind Phadke, Govt.
Advocate for the
respondent/State.
J U D G M E N T
(Delivered on 22/06/2017) Per Rajeev Kumar Dubey, J:
This appeal has been filed under section 374 Cr.P.C against the judgment of
conviction dated 30.12.2002 passed by Ist Additional Sessions Judge, Indore in ST
No.515/2000 whereby the learned ASJ found the appellant Pankaj Singh guilty for
the offence punishable under section 302 IPC and under sections 25(1)(a)& 27 of the
Arms Act and sentenced him to undergo life imprisonment with fine of Rs.5000/-, in
default of payment of fine, further RI for 2 years and RI for
2 years on each count respectively.
2. Brief facts of the case are that on 21.10.1999 one session trial (State of M.P vs. Manoj Awasthy)
was fixed for hearing before Additional Sessions Judge, Indore in which Manoj Awasthy and Uma
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88956586/ 1
Pankaj Singh @Satyendra @Pramodsingh @ vs The State Of M.P. on 22 June, 2017
Shankar Mishra were accused for committing murder of one Shiv Rajawat.
In connection with hearing of the case deceased Omprakash Awasthi, his son Gajendra Awasthi
(PW/3), Subhashchandra (PW/5), Sitaram (PW/6) and Gopal Tiwari (PW/7) came to district Court,
Indore. After hearing of the case deceased Omprakash Awasthi, Subhashchandra, Gopal Tiwari,
Gajendra Awasthi and Sitaram left the Court premises at 1.15 P.M on their motorcycles and scooter.
On the way when Subhashchandra and Omprakash Awasthi reached near Lantern Chouraha
(Y.N.Road, Indore) somebody fired a gunshot towards the motorcycle on which Subhashchandra
and deceased Omprakash Awasthi were riding. Due to that gunshot motorcycle went out of control
and Subhashchandra and deceased Omprakash Awasthi fell down. At that time one motorcycle
crossed the place of incident. It was driven by co-accused Neeraj. Appellant Pankaj got down from
the motorcycle and fired two gunshots from his pistol towards Subhashchandra (PW/5) but he
escaped and did not sustain any injury. Thereafter appellant Pankaj fired two gunshots from his
pistol towards deceased Omprakash Awasthi which hit him and Omprakash Awasthi died on the
spot. Meanwhile, co- accused Trilok Rajawat, brother of Shiv Rajawat and maternal uncle of
appellant came on a motorcycle with a pistol on his hand and threatened to kill anyone who
intervened.
3. After the incident Subhashchandra (PW/5) went to Tukoganj Police Station and lodged FIR
(Ex.P/6). On that report crime No.499/99 was registered for the offences punishable under sections
302 and 307 read with section 34 of the IPC and police investigated the matter. During
investigation, Chandrapal Singh (PW/14), the then SHO, Police Station, Tukoganj, Indore reached
the spot and prepared spot map (Ex.P/7). He also seized blood stained soil, two empty and two live
cartridges and prepared seizure memo (Ex.P/9). Thereafter, he reached M.Y Hospital, Indore and
prepared inquest report (Ex.P/4) of dead body of deceased Omprakash Awasthi before the witnesses
and sent the body for autopsy along with letter (Ex.P/18). Thereafter he arrested co-accused Neeraj
on 09.03.2000 and prepared arrest memo (Ex.P/20). On 16.03.2000 he arrested appellant Pankaj
and prepared arrest memo (Ex.P/21). Soon after the arrest he interrogated appellant and on the
basis of disclosure made by them (Ex.P/16) seized one pistol and two live cartridges and prepared
seizure memo (Ex.P/17) and also seized one motorcycle and prepared seizure memo (Ex.P/23). He
also seized blood stained clothes of deceased Omprakash Awasthi received from M.Y Hospital after
autopsy of the dead body of Omprakash Awasthi and prepared seizure memo Ex.P/24. He also sent
all the seized articles to FSL, Sagar for chemical examination through S.P, Indore along with draft
Ex.P/26. He recorded the statements of Arvind Rai (PW/4), Subhashchandra (PW/5), Gopal Tiwari
(PW/7), Omar Rafiq Khan, Santosh, Sureshchand, Pawan, Gajendra Awasthi (PW/3), Sitaram
(PW/6) and Mahesh (PW/8).
4. After investigation charge sheet was filed against appellant Pankaj and other co-accused Neeraj
Pawar, Trilok and Gyan Prakash Mishra before J.M.F.C, Indore who committed the case to the
Court of Sessions. On the basis of the charge sheet, S.T. No.515/2000 was registered and charges
were framed by the Ist A.S.J., Indore against appellant for the offences under Sections 302/34 &
307/34 IPC and under sections 25(1)(a) and 27 of the Arms Act And against co accused Neeraj and
Shiv Rajawat for the offences under section 302/34 & 307/34 IPC and against other co-accused
Gyanprakash under section 212 of IPC, and tried the case. Although appellant and other co- accused
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88956586/ 2
Pankaj Singh @Satyendra @Pramodsingh @ vs The State Of M.P. on 22 June, 2017
took the defence that they are innocent and were falsely implicated in the crime, however, after trial
learned trial Court acquitted co-accused Neeraj Pawar, Trilok Rajawat and Gyanprakash Mishra
from all the aforesaid charges and also acquitted appellant from the charge under section 307/34
IPC but found him guilty for the offence under Section 302 IPC and under Sections 25(1)
(a)& 27 of the Arms Act and sentenced him as aforesaid. Being aggrieved by that judgment,
appellant filed this criminal appeal.
5. Learned counsel for the appellant submitted that Subhashchandra (PW/5) who lodged the report
of the incident at Police Station, Tukoganj, Indore and other eye witness Gopal (PW/7) did not
support the prosecution story. The trial Court found the appellant guilty for murder of Omprakash
only on the basis of the testimony of Gajendra Awasthi (PW/3), son of deceased Omprakash Awasthi
and Sitaram (PW/6), brother of accused Umashankar and Balkrishna who were facing trial for the
murder of Shiv Ranawat in which appellant was a witness and the evidence regarding seizure of
cartridges from the spot and pistol and cartridges at the instance of the appellant but the statement
of Gajendra Awasthi is not reliable. Gajendra Awasthi (PW/3) deposed in his statement before the
Court that after the incident when assailants left the place of occurrence, he went to his father and
found him dead. Thereafter he went to his residence at Manglia which is 17-18 kms away from the
place of occurrence. As a normal conduct he would have immediately gone to Police Station and
lodged a report or informed the Police because Police Station, Tukoganj is hardly 500 meters away
from the place of occurrence.
6. Apart from that, after leaving the place of occurrence and reaching his home at Manglia he did not
inform anybody about the occurrence at his residence. His uncle Ramprakash Awasthi informed
him that the dead body of his father has reached M.Y. Hospital, Indore. He also deposed that on that
information before going to MY Hospital he had gone to Police Station, Tukoganj and thereafter
went to MY Hospital along with Police. When he came to know from his uncle Ramprakash Awasthi
that the dead body is in MY Hospital, Indore then why did he go to Police Station Tukoganj instead
of going to MY Hospital. Therefore, not only the conduct of Gajendra Awasthi (PW/3) but non
disclosure about the incident to the Police at the earliest opportunity makes his statement doubtful
and no reliance can be placed on his testimony.
7. He further submitted that Sitaram (PW/6), the other eye witness is the brother of Umashankar
Mishra, the accused in the murder of Shiv Ranawat. His statement also suffers from various
infirmities. He also did not disclose anything to the police about the occurrence or that he saw the
incident at the earliest opportunity. Although in para-2 of his examination he has stated that
immediately after the incident he had gone to Police Station. He further admitted that about 2-3
policemen met him along with Subhaschandra (PW/5) on the way but he did not disclose about
witnessing the incident. He also admitted that he was at M.Y Hospital for about two and half hours.
There also Police did not record his statement nor did he disclose anything to the Police there. Apart
from this, in para-10 of his statement he has also admitted that the funeral of Omprakash Awasthi
was on the next day of the occurrence. After cremation of Omprakash Awasthi he came to Police
Station Tukoganj and next day his statement was recorded which creates doubt on his testimony.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88956586/ 3
Pankaj Singh @Satyendra @Pramodsingh @ vs The State Of M.P. on 22 June, 2017
8. Appellant Pankaj is the star witness in the trial of murder of Shiv Ranawat which led to the
conviction of Umashankar Mishra and Babulal Mishra (brother of Sitaram (PW/6) and Manoj
Awasthi (brother of Gajendra Awasthi (PW/3). On the testimony of appellant Pankaj these three
individuals were convicted and their conviction was challenged before the High Court in Criminal
Appeal No.11/01 and Criminal Appeal No.26/01 but the Hon. High Court also upheld the judgment
of conviction passed by the trial Court. Gajendra Awasthi (PW/3) and Sitaram (PW/6) gave false
statements against appellant only due to the fact that it was his testimony which brought home the
guilt of Umashankar Mishra and Manoj Awasthi. He further stated that in the case-diary statement
of Subhashchandra, Gajendra Awasthi and Sitaram it is mentioned that first Pankaj fired at
Subhashchandra twice and missed the aim and thereafter fired fatal gunshots at Omprakash
Awasthi. It is unbelievable that any shot fired by an assailant would miss the intended target at such
a short range, however, Subhashchandra changed his version in the Court and stated that no gun
shot was fired at him. The FIR is also completely silent about any eye witnesses of the incident.
9. On the contrary in the FIR Subhashchandra makes a categorical statement that he had narrated
the incident to Sitaram and Gopal. If Sitaram and Gopal were present on the spot why did he
narrated the incident to them, therefore, learned trial Court committed mistake in believing the
statement of Gajendra Awasthi (PW/3) and Sitaram (PW/6). There are many contradictions and
omissions in their statements. In this regard he also placed reliance on the Apex Court judgment
passed in the case of Jagir Singh vs. The State (Delhi Administration) reported in AIR 1975 SC 1400;
Ganesh Bhawan Patel vs. State of Maharashtra reported in AIR 1979 SC 135 and Ram Kumar
Pandey vs. State of M.P reported in AIR 1975 SC 1026. Learned counsel for the appellant further
submitted that seizure of cartridges from the place of occurrence is also doubtful because
Chandrapal Singh (PW/14) also admitted in his statement that seizure memo Ex.P/9 is not in his
hand writing. It was written by another Sub Inspector. The FSL report Ex.P/27 also cannot be relied
because it shows that the articles were received by FSL on 28.06.200 with letter dated 17.5.2000.
This shows the manipulation and on the basis of suspicion the evidence of FSL report Ex.P/27
cannot be believed and relied upon. If the articles were seized on 26.3.2000 how the same were sent
on 17.01.2000 or 17.05.2000 and this inordinate delay in sending the articles also created doubt and
there is no evidence on record as to where the pistol and cartridges kept after seizing them till
reached the FSL. In absence of such evidence the FSL report Ex.P/27 cannot be believed, therefore,
learned trial Court committed mistake in convicting the appellant for the murder of deceased
Omprakash Awasthi.
10. On the other hand, learned counsel for the respondent/State submitted that from the statement
of Gajendra Awasthi (PW/3) and Sitaram (PW/6) who were the eye-witnesses of the incident and
other circumstantial evidence it is clearly proved that appellant Pankaj committed murder of
Omprakash Awasthi, therefore, learned trial Court did not commit any mistake in convicting the
appellant for the murder of Omprakash Awasthi.
11. Point of determination in this appeal is whether the conviction and sentence awarded by the trial
Court to the appellant under Section 302 of IPC and under sections 25(1)(a)& 27 of the Arms Act are
liable to be set aside for the reasons stated in the memo of appeal and raised during argument.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88956586/ 4
Pankaj Singh @Satyendra @Pramodsingh @ vs The State Of M.P. on 22 June, 2017
12. In the case there is no dispute on the point that deceased Omprakash Awasthi died on 21.10.1999
near Lantern Chouraha (Y.N.Road, Indore) Due to gunshot injuries and his death was homicidal
which amounts to murder.In this regard Subhashchandra (PW/5), the complainant deposed that on
21.10.99 he and Omprakash went to District Court, Indore in connection with hearing of a criminal
case of Manoj Awasthy, son of Omprakash Awasthy. After hearing of the case when he returned to
his house along with Omprakash Awasthy on a motorcycle and when they reached near Starlit
talkies and the office of NTC he heard a noise of explosion from behind and they fell down from the
motorcycle. Thereafter another motorcycle which was coming from the back stopped near them and
he saw that the person sitting behind the motorcycle was having a revolver in his hand so he ran
away from the spot towards Tukoganj Police Station. While he was running, he heard the voice of
gun shots. He reached Tukoganj Police Station and informed the Police regarding the incident and
the Police came along with him at the spot and he found Omprakash was lying dead there.
Thereafter Police took the dead body of Omprakash to M.Y Hospital. Gopal (PW/7) also deposed
that on the date of the incident he came to district Court, Indore in connection with hearing of a
case. After the hearing when he was going to Manglia on a motorcycle on their way at Lantern
Chouraha he heard noise of a gun shot fire and saw Omprakash Awasthy fell down from the
motorcycle and Chandra Pal Singh (PW/14), deposed that on 21.10.99 he was posted as SHO,
Tukoganj. On that date at 02:25 pm subhash (PW-5) came to police station and from his
information he reached the spot and prepared spot map (Ex.P/7).Thereafter he reached M.Y
Hospital, Indore and prepared inquest memo (Ex.P/4) of the dead body of Omprakash Awasthy
before the witnesses and sent the body for autopsy in which it is also mentioned that Omprakash
Awasthy died due to gunshot injuries. This fact is also corroborated from the statement of
Dr.N.M.Unda (PW/10) who conducted the autopsy of dead body of Omprakash Awasthi.
13. Dr.N.M.Unda (PW/10) deposed that on 21.10.1999 he was posted as Demonstrator in the
Department of Forensic Science, MGM Medical College, M.Y Hospital, Indore. On that date on the
application of Constable Gopal, Tukoganj Police Station he conducted the postmortem of dead body
of Omprakash Awasthy along with Dr.P.S.Thakur at 4.15 P.M. According to Dr.N.M.Unda In the
postmortem beside two simple injuries he also found three gun shot injuries on the dead body of
Omprakash Awasthy of which one injury was on right side of his head behind ear and two on left
side of his back in the line of tenth 10 vertebra. He also found three pellet in these injuries. All three
injuries were caused by firearm and were sufficient in the ordinary course of nature to cause death.
In his opinion deceased died due to shock and hemorrhage as result of firearm injuries. Death was
homicidal in nature and the death had occurred within 24 hours of postmortem. His statement has
also been corroborated by the postmortem report Ex.P/13. He is an independent witness and
appellant did not challenged his testimony on his cross examination and also there in no important
contradiction in the statements of other witnesses as discussed above on that point. So there is no
reason to disbelieve their statement on that point. From their statement it is clearly proved that
Omprakash Awasthi died on 21.10.1999 near Lantern Chouraha (Y.N.Road, Indore) Due to gunshot
injuries and his death was homicidal which amounts to murder.
14. Whether murder of Omprakash Awasthy was committed by appellant or not, Gajendra Awasthy
(PW/3), the eye witness of the incident deposed that on the date of the incident, he along with
Subhash, Omprakash Awasthy, Suresh Mishra, Gopal Tiwari and Sitaram Mishra went to district
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88956586/ 5
Pankaj Singh @Satyendra @Pramodsingh @ vs The State Of M.P. on 22 June, 2017
Court, Indore where appellant Pankaj, co-accused Trilok Rajawat and other 4-5 persons also met
him. At about 1.15 P.M when they were returning home and when they reached near Lantern
Chouraha, he heard a sound of gunshot and his father Omprakash Awasthy fell down from the
motorcycle which was being driven by Subashchandra and accused Pankaj along with other
co-accused persons came there on a motorcycle and Pankaj fired two gunshots on Subhashchandra
but he escaped the gunshots and ran towards Tukoganj Police Station. Thereafter accused Pankaj
fired two gunshots on Omprakash which hit him. After the incident the accused fled away from the
scene of occurrence on the motorcycle. Thereafter, he went to his father, who was found to be dead
due to gunshot injuries. On this point, that in the incident appellant pankaj fired gunshot on his
father due to which he died, his statement is also corroborated by the statement of another
eye-witness Sitaram (PW/6).
15. Although, in the case complainant Subhashchandra (PW/5) turned hostile and denied from the
fact that he saw appellant fired gunshot at Omprakash Awasthy and he mentioned that fact in the
report (Ex.P/6) and also refused to give the case diary statement(Ex.P/8)to the police in this regard.
Other eye- witnesses Arvind Rai (PW/4),Gopal (PW/7)also did not support the prosecution story on
that point.
16. But Subhash clearly admitted in his statement that soon after the incident he went to
P.S.Tukoganj and he also admitted that he lodged the report (ExP./6) of the incident and He also
accepted that the signature on the report was his. Chandrapal Singh (PW/14) clearly deposed that
on 21.10.99 he was posted as SHO, Police Station Tukoganj.On that date at about 2.25 PM
Subhashchand lodged a report (Ex.P/6) of the incident and on that report he registered crime
No.499/99 for the offences punishable under sections 302 & 307/34 IPC against the present
appellant Pankaj. From the statement of Chandrapal Singh (PW/14) also it is clearly proved that
soon after the incident Subhash lodged the report of the incident in which it is clearly mentioned
that appellant fired gunshot on Om Prakash Awasthi. Although F.I.R. is not a substantive piece of
evidence, it can be used either for corroboration under Section 157 or for contradiction under
Section 145 of the Evidence Act of the Reporter. But It can be used to look into the conduct of
informant under Section 8 of Evidence Act also.
17. Likewise Gopal (PW/7) deposed that on the date of the incident he came to district Court, Indore
in connection with hearing of a case. When he was returning from court to Manglia along with
Gajendra Awasthi on motorcycle. Subhashchand and Om Prakash Awasthi were also going ahead of
him on a motorcycle. That motorcycle was being driven by Subhashchand. Sitram was also going on
a motorcycles and on their way at Lantern Chouraha he heard a noise of gun shot fire and saw that a
person sitting behind on a motorcycle had fired on Omprakash Awasthy and he fell down from the
motorcycle, but he did not stop there and went to Manglia. It does not seem natural that this witness
even after seeing someone firing on Om Prakash the father of Gajendra Awasthi, who was going with
him on a motorcycle, and his falling down could not stop at the spot and went towards his home,
which indicates that these two witnesses are not completely truthful and are hiding something.
18. Hon'ble apex court in the case of Brahm Swaroop & Anr. v. State of U.P. reported in (2011)6 SCC
288 held :
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88956586/ 6
Pankaj Singh @Satyendra @Pramodsingh @ vs The State Of M.P. on 22 June, 2017
Related witness - Evidentiary value of
- Held: Relationship of the witness with the deceased is not a factor which affects his
credibility - However, in such cases the court has to adopt a careful approach and
analyze the evidence so as to find out its credibility Merely because the witnesses
were close relatives of the deceased, that cannot be a ground to discard their
evidence. Their relationship to one of the parties is not a factor that affects the
credibility of a witness, more so, a relation would not conceal the actual culprit and
make allegations against an innocent person. A party has to lay down a factual
foundation and prove by leading impeccable evidence in respect of its false
implication.
Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of State Tr P.S. Lodhi Colony New Delhi v.
Sanjeev Nanda, reported in (2012). 8 SCC 450, held :
If a witness turns hostile to subvert the judicial process, the courts should not stand
as mute spectators and every effort should be made to bring home the truth -
Criminal judicial system cannot be overturned by the gullible witnesses who act
under pressure, inducement and intimidation.
19. So only on the ground that Gajendra Awasthy (PW/3) is the son of the deceased Omprakash
Awasthy and Gajendra Awasthy (PW/3)and Sitaram (PW/6)also having enmity with the appellant
and their statements are also not corroborated by the independent witnesses their statements
cannot be discarded.
20. Although Gajendra Awasthy (PW/3) deposed that after the incident when assailants left the
place of occurrence then he went to his father and found him dead. Thereafter he went to his
residence at Manglia which is 17-18 kms. Away from the place of occurrence and did not go to police
station for lodging report. But from the statement of Subhashchand (PW/5) and Chandrapal Singh
(PW/14) it appears that soon after the incident Subhashchand had gone to P.S. Tukoganj for lodging
the report because of that if Gajendra Awasthi (PW/3) did not go to police station for lodging report
and went to his home it can not be assumed that at the time of incident he was not on the spot.
Gajendra Awasthy (PW/3) clearly stated that after the incident when assailants left the place of
occurrence, he went to his father and found him dead. Thereafter Gopal took him home because he
was very scared. He did not depose that he did not disclose the incident to anybody at home and
only deposed that when his uncle informed him that dead body of his father has reached the hospital
he went to hospital and before going to hospital he went to police station. There is nothing unusual
in this behavior, on the basis of which it can be believed that he was not at the spot at the time of
incident.
21. Even Gopal(PW./7) clearly stated that when he was returning from court to Manglia along with
Gajendra Awasthi on motorcycle, at Lantern Chouraha he heard a noise of gun shot fire and saw that
a person sitting behind a motorcycle had fired on Omprakash Awasthy, and who fell down from the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88956586/ 7
Pankaj Singh @Satyendra @Pramodsingh @ vs The State Of M.P. on 22 June, 2017
motorcycle which also shows that Gajendra Awasthi was on sopot at the time of incident.
22. Likewise there is no important discrepancy in the statement of another eyewitness
Sitaram(PW/6). It is not necessary that any shot fired by an assailant in short range can not be
missed. Chandrapal Singh (PW/14) clearly stated that he recorded the case diary statement of
Gajendra Awasthy (PW/3)and Sitaram(PW/6) on the date of incident ie on 21.10.09. Only on the
ground that he did not record their statement soon after the incident, it can not be assumed that
they did not see the incident the fact of the cases Jagir Singh vs. The State (Delhi Administration)
and Ganesh Bhawan Patel vs. State of Maharashtra (supra) cited by the learned counsel in this
regard do not match with the instant case. In this case soon after the incident the FIR was lodged BY
the Subhash (PW/5) at P.S. Tukoganj and in the FIR appellant was named as assailant. So that
judgement do not help the appellant much. Although in the FIR, it is mentioned that Subhash
(PW5) narrated the incident to Gajendra Awasthy (PW/3)and Sitaram(PW/6)and this fact can be
taken into consideration to examine the veracity of prosecution case.As held by the apex court in the
case Ram Kumar Pandey vs. State of M.P (supra) But it is clear from the evidence that at the time of
incident Subhash (PW/5), Gajendra Awasthy (PW/3) and Sitaram(PW/6) were going on different
vehicles. So if after the incident Subhash (PW5)narrated the incident to Gajendra Awasthy
(PW/3)and Sitaram(PW/6)it can not be assumed that they did not see the incident.
23. Regarding incident the statement of Gajendra Awasthy (PW/3)and Sitaram (PW/6) is also
corroborated from circumstantial evidence of seizure of cartridges from the spot and revolver and
cartridges from the possession of appellant. In this regard Chandrapal Singh (PW/14) said that on
21.10.99 he was posted as SHO, Police Station Tukoganj. On that date at about 2.25 PM
Subhashchand lodged a report (Ex.P/6) of the incident. On that he registered crime No.499/99 for
the offences punishable under sections 302 & 307/34 IPC against the present appellant Pankaj.
Thereafter he reached the spot and prepared spot map Ex.P/7 and seized blood stained and simple
soil, two empty and two live cartridges from the spot and prepared seizure memo Ex.P/9. He further
stated that on 16.03.00 he also arrested accused Pankaj from Bhopal and prepared arrest memo
Ex.P/21. He took appellant from Bhopal to Indore and at Indore he interrogated the accused and on
the basis of his revelations he prepared the information memo Ex.P/22 and thereafter seized one
pistol "Article A" at the instance of the accused/appellant and two live cartridges "Article B1and B2"
"from the house of uncle of accused Pankaj and prepared seizure memo Ex.P/17. He also sent empty
cartridges, live cartridges,pistol and other sized articles blood stained cloths etc. for chemical
examination to FSL, Sagar along with the draft ExP.26.From F.S.L. Sagar report of which,ExP.27 &
28 was received.
24. In the report it was mentioned that in the examination of pistol "Article A"
was found to be factory made pistol which was in working condition and prior to the
examination cartridge had been fired from that pistol and the cartridges seized from
the spot and from the possession of appellant were also could have been fired from
that pistol.Motilal (PW11) who also examined the sized pistol and cartridges also
corroborate this fact. Which also support the prosecution story that appellant fired on
Omprakash in the incident.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88956586/ 8
Pankaj Singh @Satyendra @Pramodsingh @ vs The State Of M.P. on 22 June, 2017
25. Although it is not mentioned in the FSL report (ExP./27) that the empty cartridges seized from
the spot were fired from the pistol (Article 'A') which was seized from the possession of Pankaj. But
it is mentioned in the report that the cartridges found on the spot could have been fired from the
pistol (Article 'A') and that pistol was used for firing before examination. This fact support the fact
that Pankaj fired on deceased Om Prakash with the pistol article 'A' which was seized from his
possession.
26. Although Chandrapal Singh (PW/14) admitted in his statement that seizure memo Ex.P/9 is not
in his hand writing. It was written by another Sub Inspector Nayak on his direction. But this fact
does not make ExP9 doubtful. Apex court in the case of P.P. Fathima vs State Of Kerala (2003)8
SCC 726 held :
Seizure memo was written by police constable on the dictation of sub inspector not a
contradiction which affects merits of the case.
27. Although from FSL draft ExP.26 and report (Ex.P/27 and Ex.P/28) it appeared that the articles
which were sized on 16.03.2000 were received by FSL on 28.06.2000 with letter dated 17.5.2000,
but only on that ground the FSL reports (Ex.P/27 and Ex.P/28)can not be doubted. Because In the
reports it is clearly mentioned that the seal of packit were found intact and Motilal (PW/11) also
deposed that he examined sized Pistol (Artical"A") and cartridges (Artical"B"1 and "B"2) on
01.04.2000 and found pistol in working condition.His statement is also corroborated from his
report (Ex.P/14).
28. So there is no reason to disbelieve the statements of Gajendra Awasthy (PW/3) and Sitaram
(PW/6) which is corroborated from other evidence also.So in the considered opinion of this court
From the prosecution evidence it is clearly proved that on 21.10.1999 near Lantern Chouraha
(Y.N.Road, Indore) appellant fired on deceased Omprakash with intent to kill him and Due to that
gunshot injuries sustained by omprakash Awasthi he died and death was homicidal which amounts
to murder. So learned trial court did not commit any mistake in finding appellant guilty for the
offence punishable under section 302 of IPC and under sections 25(1)(a)& 27 of the Arms Act.
29. As far as sentence is concerned the learned trial Judge has sentenced appellant under Section
302 of IPC Life imprisonment with fine of Rs.5000/-, in default of payment of fine, further RI for 2
years and and under sections 25(1)
(a)& 27 of the Arms Act RI for 2 years on each count respectively which is quite adequate and this
Court does not find any reason to interfere in the sentence which also can not be said to be in excess
so that too is hereby affirmed.
30. In the ultimate analysis we find no merit in the appeal and consequently the same stands
dismissed. The appellant, who is in the custody, shall serve the remaining part of the sentence, in
accordance with law. Accordingly, appeal stands disposed of.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88956586/ 9
Pankaj Singh @Satyendra @Pramodsingh @ vs The State Of M.P. on 22 June, 2017
(S.C.SHARMA ) (RAJEEV KUMAR DUBEY)
JUDGE JUDGE
hk/ns/
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/88956586/ 10
