Pankaj Kumar vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
Pankaj Kumar vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
Author: Vivek Varma
Bench: Vivek Varma
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:67016
Court No. - 69
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. ANTICIPATORY BAIL APPLICATION U/S 482 BNSS No. - 3078 of 2025
Applicant :- Pankaj Kumar
Opposite Party :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Applicant :- Hemendra Kumar
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Vivek Varma,J.
1. Heard counsel for the applicant, Sri Neeraj Kumar Sharma, learned AGA for the State and perused
the material available on record.
2. The present application has been filed with the prayer to grant anticipatory bail to the applicant in
Case No. 12015 of 2024 (CNR No. UPBJ040120162024) (State vs. Harkishan and others) arising out
of Case Crime No. 217 of 2023, under Sections 308, 323, 504 of I.P.C., Police Station- Badhapur,
District- Bijnor.
3. Counsel for the applicant submits that the applicant has been falsely implicated in the present
case. As per the allegations in the first information report, the applicant along with three accused
are alleged to have assaulted the father of the informant. As per the medical report, the injuries
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57085657/ 1
Pankaj Kumar vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
sustained by the injured were simple in nature. The nature of injury shows that there was no intent
to murder. Further, during the course of investigation, the applicant was granted benefit of Section
41A of Cr.P.C. Investigation has been completed. Charge-sheet has been filed. The applicant had
cooperated in the investigation. No custodial interrogation is required. The applicant has been
summoned by the concerned court. Counsel for applicant further contends that the maximum
sentence provided for the alleged offences is upto seven years. He submits that in view of the
judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Satender Kumar Antil Vs. Central Bureau of
Investigation and another, (2021) 10 SCC 773, the applicant is entitled to be enlarged on
anticipatory bail. The applicant has no criminal antecedents. The applicant has apprehension of his
arrest in the above mentioned case. In case, the applicant is granted anticipatory bail, he will not
misuse the said liberty.
4. Learned A.G.A. has opposed the prayer for anticipatory bail but could not satisfactorily dispute
the aforesaid submissions from the record.
5. The Supreme Court in the case of Satender Kumar Antil (supra) has laid down the guidelines with
regard to enlargement of an accused on bail. The guidelines provided category/type of offences. One
of the category being Category-A are offences punishable with imprisonment of seven years or less.
The Supreme Court in paragraph-3 of the aforesaid judgment has laid down the guidelines that after
the filing of the charge sheet/cognizance ordinary the summons are required to be issued permitting
the appearance of the accused through Lawyer and the bail applications of the accused persons on
appearance are to be decided without the accused being taken into custody or by granting interim
bail. A perusal of the aforesaid guidelines would demonstrate that the liberty of an individual has
been recognized by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the aforesaid judgment in term of Article 21 of the
Constitution of India.
6. It is further to be noted that as per Section 41 of the Code of Criminal Procedure also during
investigation the liberty of an individual is protected in respect of an offence where the maximum
punishment provided is upto seven years.
7. It is not the case of the opposite party that applicant was arrested for the alleged offences during
investigation and it is also not the case of the opposite party that the applicant had not co-operated
in the investigation. Once no apprehension has been raised with regard to the conduct of the
applicant and the applicant has been charge-sheeted and summoned in respect of offence in which
punishment provided is upto seven years, then in view of the judgment of the Supreme Court in
Satender Kumar Antil (supra), the liberty of the individual is required to be protected.
8. It is not shown by learned AGA that the nature and gravity of allegations are such that the same
would dis-entitle the applicant for relief of anticipatory bail. No material, facts, circumstances or
concern been shown by learned AGA for the State that the accused may tamper with the evidence or
witnesses or accused is of such character that his mere presence at large would intimidate the
witnesses or that accused will use his liberty to subvert justice or tamper with the evidence.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57085657/ 2
Pankaj Kumar vs State Of U.P. And Another on 30 April, 2025
9. It is settled principle of law that the object of bail is to secure the attendance of the accused. No
material particulars or circumstances suggestive of the applicant fleeing from justice or thwarting
the course of justice or creating other troubles in the shape of repeating offences or intimidating
witnesses and the like have been shown by learned AGA for the State.
10. Having regard to the submissions made by counsel for the applicant, considering the nature of
accusations, antecedents of the applicant and the fact that as per the medical report, the injuries
received by the injured were simple in nature, the fact that during the course of investigation, the
applicant was granted benefit of Section 41A of Cr.P.C., the fact that the offences against the
applicant are punishable up to seven years and adhering to the guidelines provided in the judgment
of the Supreme Court in Satender Kumar Antil (supra), charge-sheet has been filed, the applicant
had cooperated in the investigation and no custodial interrogation is required, without commenting
on merits of the case, I am of the opinion that the applicant is entitled to be enlarged on anticipatory
bail.
11. In the event of arrest, the applicant Pankaj Kumar be released on anticipatory bail during
pendency of trial, on furnishing a personal bond of Rs. 50,000/- with two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) the applicant shall make himself available on each date fixed in the matter by the
court concerned;
(ii) the applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade from
disclosing such facts to the Court;
(iii) the applicant shall not leave India without the previous permission of the Court
and if he has passport the same shall be deposited by him before the concerned court.
12. In default of any of the conditions, the court concerned is at liberty to pass appropriate orders for
enforcing and compelling the same.
13. The application stands disposed of.
Order Date :- 30.4.2025 Sachin Mishra
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/57085657/ 3
