Paramananda Nayak vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... ... on 31 January, 2025
Paramananda Nayak vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... ... on 31
January, 2025
Author: Aditya Kumar Mohapatra
Bench: Aditya Kumar Mohapatra
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
WP(C) No.30418 of 2024
Paramananda Nayak ..... Petitioner
Represented By Adv.
- Prasanta Kumar
Mohanty (2)
-versus-
State Of Odisha and others ..... Opposite Parties
Mr. M.R. Mohanty, AGA
CORAM:
THE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE ADITYA KUMAR
MOHAPATRA
ORDER
31.01.2025 Order No.
01. 1. This matter is taken up through Hybrid mode.
2. Heard learned counsel for the Petitioner as well as learned Additional Government Advocate for
the State-Opposite Parties. Perused the writ application as well as the documents annexed thereto.
3. The Petitioner has filed the present writ application with the following prayer:
"The petitioner, therefore, prayed that this Hon'ble court would graciously be pleased
to issue Rule Nisi calling upon the Opp. Parties to show cause as to why the order
dated 12.05.2021 vide Annexure-11 shall not be quashed relating 'no work no pay and
as to why they shall not be directed to release the salary of the petitioner w.e.f.
01.06.2019 to 12.01.2020 within a stipulated period;
If the Opp. Parties fail to show cause or show insufficient cause, the said Rule be
made absolute;
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199958147/ 1
Paramananda Nayak vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... ... on 31 January, 2025
And/or pass any other order/orders as this Hon'ble Court deem fit and proper in the
facts and circumstances of the case;"
4. It is stated by learned counsel for the Petitioner that the Petitioner was working in WALMI under
the Opposite Party No.2 as a Heavy Vehicle Driver. He further contended that the Petitioner was
supposed to retire from service on attaining the age of superannuation, i.e. 58 years, which was the
age of retirement at the relevant point of time. However, while the Petitioner was working, the age of
retirement was enhanced to 60 years. Thereafter, the Petitioner was allowed to continue up to 60
years. On attaining the age of superannuation, i.e. on reaching the age of 60 years, the Petitioner has
retired from service. Learned counsel for the Petitioner further contended that the Petitioner has not
received the salary for the period starting from the date he was permitted to continue up to 60 years
to the date of his retirement after attaining the age of 60 years, i.e. from 01.06.2019 to 12.01.2020.
He further contended that the Opposite Parties have rejected the claim of the Petitioner by holding
that the Petitioner has not worked for the said year, therefore, by applying the principles of No Work
No Pay, the Petitioner is not entitled to get the benefit.
5. In the aforesaid context, learned counsel for the Petitioner referred to the judgment of this Court
by a Coordinate Bench in Janaki Ballav Mohanty v. Principal Secretary to Govt. and others in
W.P.(C) No.27906 of 2019 and a batch of similar other matters disposed of on 14.07.2023. By
referring to the aforesaid judgment, learned counsel for the Petitioner submitted that the
Coordinate Bench has categorically held that the principle of No Work No Pay is not applicable to
the facts of that case which is similar to the facts of the case of the present Petitioner. He also
referred to the judgment of this Court in Premalata Panda v. State of Odisha and another reported in
2015(II) OLR 214 as well as in State of Uttar Pradesh v. Dayananda Chakrabarty reported in AIR
2013 SC 3066. Learned counsel for the Petitioner further referred to another judgment of Hon'ble
Apex Court in NOIDA and others v. B.D. Singhal and others reported in AIR 2021 SC 3457. Learned
counsel for the Petitioner further contended that the Petitioner has already approached the Opposite
Parties by filing a representation dated 05.07.2021, with a prayer to pay the salary for the aforesaid
period. However, no decision on the said representation has been taken by the Opposite Party No.1.
Being aggrieved by such inaction the Petitioner has approached this Court by filing the present writ
petition.
6. Learned Additional Government Advocate on the other hand contended that the present writ
petition is not maintainable. He further contended that the Opposite Parties, by applying the
principles of No Work No Pay, have denied the salary of the Petitioner for the period during which
the Petitioner has not worked under the Opposite Party No.2. Therefore, Learned Additional
Government Advocate contended, that the Opposite Parties have not committed any illegality in
denying the salary to the present Petitioner. Additionally, it was also submitted that since the
Petitioner has already approached the Opposite Party Nos.1 & 2 by filing a representation.
Therefore, in the event the same is still pending for consideration, he shall have no objection in the
event this Court directs the Opposite Party Nos.1 & 2 consider the same in accordance with law and
within a stipulated period of time.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199958147/ 2
Paramananda Nayak vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... ... on 31 January, 2025
7. Having heard the learned counsels appearing for the respective parties, on a careful examination
of the materials on record as well as the submissions made by the learned counsels, further keeping
in view the factual backgrounds of the present case, this Court deems it proper to dispose of the
present writ application by granting liberty to the Petitioner to file a fresh and detailed
representation taking therein all the grounds, along with all relevant judgments in support of his
contention, within a period of three weeks from today, before the Opposite Party Nos.1 & 2. In such
eventuality, the Opposite Party Nos.1 & 2 shall do well to consider the representation in accordance
with law by keeping in view the principles laid down by this Court as well as the Hon'ble Supreme
Court and dispose of the representation by passing a speaking and reasoned order within eight
weeks from the date of taking such decision on the representation. The final decision so taken be
communicated to the Petitioner within two weeks thereafter.
8. With the aforesaid observations/directions, the writ application stands disposed of.
Issue urgent certified copy of this order as per Rules.
( Aditya Kumar Mohapatra ) Judge S.K. Rout Location: High Court of Orissa, Cuttack
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/199958147/ 3
