Paramjeet Singh vs Respondent(S) on 16 September, 2023
Paramjeet Singh vs Respondent(S) on 16 September, 2023
Author: Sanjeev Kumar
Bench: Sanjeev Kumar, Puneet Gupta
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
Crl A(D) No. 11/2021
Reserved on 05.09.2023
Pronounced on 16.09.2023
Paramjeet Singh, age 40 years, ..... appellants (s)
Occupation Business s/o Lachman Dass,
R/O Village Alampur Baka, Kartarpur,
Jallandhar, Punjab a/p lodged in Kot
Bhalwal, Jammu Jammu
Through :- Mr. Anmol Sharma Advocate.
V/s
.....Respondent(s)
UT of Jammu and Kashmir through Police Station, Jhajar Kotli
Through :- Mr. Amit Gupta AAG
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE SANJEEV KUMAR, JUDGE
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE PUNEET GUPTA, JUDGE
JUDGMENT
Sanjeev Kumar, J.
1 This appeal by the appellant is directed against the judgment of conviction and sentence dated
22.11.2018 passed by the learned Principal Sessions Judge, Jammu (hereinafter to be referred as the
'trial Court'), in File No. 06/Spl.Challan titled "State versus Paramjeet Singh".
2. Before we advert to the grounds of challenge urged by learned counsel appearing for the
appellant, we deem it appropriate to first take note of the prosecution case as was set out before the
trial Court. 3 On 06.02.2010, Head Constable Tilak Raj along with Sgct. Jagdev Singh, SPO Bodh
Raj and SPO Rohit Salaria were on patrolling duty near Kishanpur and were checking the vehicles at
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139104938/ 1
Paramjeet Singh vs Respondent(S) on 16 September, 2023
Tawi Pul, Kishanpur. At about 3 pm, a Truck bearing Registration No. 5683/PB09E came from
Udhampur which was being driven by its driver accompanied by an unknown person who was also
sitting beside him. The Truck was signaled to stop by the police personnel aforesaid and the driver
was asked to show the documents of the vehicle. The driver of the vehicle did stop the Truck on the
spot, but on being asked about the documents of the vehicle, ran away from the spot along with
Truck. The patrolling party boarded a private car and gave a chase to the Truck. They found the
Truck parked on the road side at Meneh Morh without there being any person present in the said
Truck. The patrolling party checked the Truck thoroughly and found a special cabin made in the
bottom of the Truck. In the said cabin, 100 packets of poppy straw weighing two kg each were found.
4. On this, In-charge Head Constable vide Rapat No. 11 Roznamcha dated 06.02.2010 entered a
report in the concerned register and sent a docket to the Police Station concerned for lodging of FIR.
Upon registration of the FIR, the investigation of the case was entrusted to S.I Satpal which was
later on conducted by Manzoor Ahmed Kohli S.I and Sh. Ashok Kumar Sharma, S.I.
5. As is the case put up by the prosecution before the trial Court, during the course of investigation,
site plan of place of recovery of the contraband was prepared, the SDPO and the concerned
Magistrate were also called on the spot and in their presence, 100 packets of poppy straw were
seized and put in 04 big bags. 250 gms contraband from one packet out of each of the 04 bags was
taken out and sealed as samples. The rest of the contraband put in 04 bags was also seized. The seal
was kept on a spurdnama of a civilian witness, namely Krishan Lal.. Upon their sealing again by the
Magistrate, the samples were sent to FSL for obtaining expert opinion as to the nature of
contraband seized. The Truck from where the contraband was recovered was also seized during the
course of investigation.
6. The investigation, conducted by three different Investigating Officers, revealed that number
'PB09E indicated on the number plate of the vehicle seized was forged, in that, PB09E 5683 was the
number of one Motor Cycle owned by Sh. Saroop Singh son of Goga Singh, resident of Lakhan Ke
Padda, District Kapurthala. On further enquiry, it was found that the real and actual number of the
seized Truck was HP2OC-0479 which was registered with RTO Una, H.P in the name of the
appellant, a resident of Dhallan, District Una, Himachal Pradesh. The investigation further revealed
that the appellant had got entered his wrong address, in that, he was actually the resident of
Alampur, Tehsil Kartarpur, District Jallandhar and was involved in trafficking of illegal drugs. It
also came to light that the appellant was involved in four different FIRs under various Sections of
NDPS Act registered in Police Station, Kartarpur, Police Station Divison No. 8, Jalandhar and that
the challans in the aforesaid cases were pending disposal in the competent Courts.
7. On the basis of aforesaid revelations, the custody of the appellant, who was already in jail in
Kapurthala, was obtained and the identification parade got conducted to identify him. The
Investigating Agency, after having found that it was the appellant/accused, who was the owner and
driver of the seized vehicle bearing registration No. HP2OC-0479 carrying a forged number plate
bearing No.PB09E/5683 and deceiving the public, police and other agencies to carry out his illegal
activity of drug trafficking and that on the date of occurrence, he had loaded two quintals of poppy
straw by manufacturing/creating a special cabin in the surface of his Truck, was, prima facie, guilty
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139104938/ 2
Paramjeet Singh vs Respondent(S) on 16 September, 2023
of commission of offences under Sections 420,471,467 RPC and 8/15 NDPS Act. The Investigating
Officer presented the challan before the competent Court. On 02.02.2015, the appellant was charged
for commission of offences aforementioned to which he pleaded not guilty and claimed trial,
8. With a view to sustain the charge against the appellant, the prosecution examined PWs Tilak Raj,
Rohit Salaria, Bodh Raj, Mohd Hanief, Jagdev Singh, Rohit Koul, Om Parkash, Mohd. Faizal
Qureshi, Ravinder Kumar, Krishan Lal alias Labu, Hans Raj, Challu Ram, Babu Ram, Chet Raj,
Satpal and Ashok Sharma as witnesses. Apart from leading oral evidence, the prosecution also relied
upon the documentary evidence in the shape of Rapat No. 8, report No.23, report No.04, the seizure
of Truck, spurdnama of seal, report of chemical analyst and Identification Parade etc.
9. After conclusion of prosecution evidence, the incriminating evidence was put to the appellant and
his statement was recorded under Section 342 Cr.P.C. He denied all the incriminating
circumstances appearing against him in the prosecution evidence, but opted not to produce any
evidence in defence.
10. The trial Court, after hearing the P.P for the State and the learned counsel for the appellant and
having perused the record on file, came to the conclusion that the prosecution had, by leading
cogent evidence brought home the charge against the appellant and that it was firmly established
and proved that the appellant was guilty of commission of offences under Sections 8/15 NDPS Act
and 465,471 RPC. The trial Court, accordingly, recorded the judgment of conviction on 22.11.2018
and simultaneously awarded sentence to the appellant for a period of 20 years and a fine of Rs.2.00
lacs under Section 8/15 NDPS Act, 2 years and a fine of Rs.1000/- under Section 465 RPC and 3
years and a fine of Rs.5000/- under Section 471 RPC. However, all the sentences were provided to
run concurrently. The judgment of conviction and sentence was pronounced by the trial Court on
22.11.2018 which is impugned by the appellant before us in this appeal.
11. Heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the material on record.
12. Indisputably, the Truck involved in trafficking of contraband was seized by the patrolling party,
headed by H/C Tilak Raj which was parked on road side at Maneh Morh. At the time of its seizure,
there was nobody in the said Truck to own it. As per the prosecution version, when the Truck was
signaled to stop by the patrolling party at Kishanpur Tawi pul, it was being driven by a person who
was accompanied by another person sitting beside him in the said Truck. It seems that the enquiry
made by the Investigating Officer to find out the driver and the owner of the seized Truck led to the
discovery of the appellant who was found to be the registered owner of the seized Truck which
carried the actual registration Number as HP2OC-0479 which the appellant had forged and
indicated on the number plate as 'PB09E-5683. It was, thus, found by the Investigating Officer that
it was the appellant who was, by forging the number plate, duping the public, police and other
agencies and carrying on his activities of illegal drug trafficking. To prove all these facts, which are
narrated by the prosecution in the challan on the basis of investigation carried by the Investigating
Officer from time to time, strong reliance was placed on the information in the shape of various
communications received from RTO Kapurthala and RTO Una, Himachal Pradesh.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139104938/ 3
Paramjeet Singh vs Respondent(S) on 16 September, 2023
13 Insofar as the seizure of the contraband and taking of samples therefrom is concerned, suffice it
to say that the procedure adopted by the I.O was not in complete conformity with law. There is no
dispute with regard to the fact that as per the prosecution, 100 small polythene packets containing 2
kg of poppy straw each were recovered from the seized Truck. These small packets containing two kg
of poppy straw each were put in 04 big bags (25 packets each) and the samples of 250 gms each
were picked up from 04 packets of two kg contraband picked up one each from the four big bags. It
is this material which was taken out as samples by the I.O that was sent to the FSL for chemical
examination. The Chemical Analyst, upon examination, found the contraband to be poppy straw. If
the prosecution evidence on this aspect is completely believed, it would mean that the total
contraband that was found in the seized Truck and recovered therefrom by the Investigating Agency
would be 08 kgs. We are saying so because we are not sure, rather nobody could be sure as to
whether other 24 packets lying in each of the four big bags were poppy straw or some other material.
14 Indisputably, no sample was taken out from rest of 24 polythene packets lying in each of the four
bags for their chemical examination by the FSL. If we were to agree with the prosecution case and
accept the evidence sufficient to prove the prosecution case, it would still be a case of commission of
offence by the appellant in relation to an intermediate quantity of the contraband for which the
maximum punishment that can be imposed could extend up to 10 years and a fine up to Rs.1.00 lac.
15. Insofar as the Test Identification Parade is concerned, we are convinced that the evidence on
record is sufficient to conclude that same has been conducted by the Investigating Agency in
consonance with law. The case against the appellant was registered in Police Station, Jajjar Kotli.
The appellant, who was, at the relevant point of time, in a jail in Kapurthala, was brought by the
Investigating Officer to the Police Station, Nagrota for conducting the Test Identification Parade in
accordance with law. The SHO P/S Nagrota requested PW Babu Ram, Naib-Tehsildar, Khour to
conduct the Test Identification Parade on 02.09.2014 under his supervision. As has come in the
evidence of PW Mohd Hanief, a milkman, who, along with 07 persons, was called to the Police
Station, Nagrota and was made to stand along with others in a group. He further states that in his
presence, PW Jagdev Singh identified the appellant from the group of 08 persons. PW Bodh Raj has
also testified the fact that he was present in the Test Identification Parade and identified the
appellant during such parade.
16 The plea of leaned counsel for the appellant, that, in the absence of the witnesses, identifying the
accused in the Test Identification Parade, already registering the special features at the time when
they saw the appellant/accused committing the offence, the Test Identification parade conducted
and the accused identified therein cannot be said to be in consonance with law, is an argument made
in despair and cannot be accepted. 17 It has amply come in the prosecution evidence that when the
police party headed by H/C signaled the Truck to stop, the driver of the Truck stopped his vehicle. It
was only when he was asked to show the documents of the vehicle, he fled away from the spot and
was chased by the patrolling party in a private car. It, therefore, cannot be said that PWs Bodh Raj
and Jagdev Singh who were part of the patrolling party had not been able to notice the special
features of the appellant sufficient to identify him later. In these circumstances, as also clear
evidence on record, we do not find any fault with the manner in which the Test Identification parade
was conducted and the appellant was identified.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139104938/ 4
Paramjeet Singh vs Respondent(S) on 16 September, 2023
18 The judgments relied upon by learned counsel for the appellant in the cases of Ram Kishan
Mithanlal Sharma vs State of Bombay, AIR 1955 SC 105 and State of Himachal Pradesh vs. Lekh Raj,
(2000) 1 SCC 247 are not of much help to the appellant. That apart, learned counsel for the
appellant could not point out any evidence on record to show that the samples picked up by the
Investigating Officer, sealed by the SDPO and the Executive Magistrate on spot were on receipt
found tampered. PW Rohit Koul Assistant Scientific Officer, FSL Jammu, who received the sealed
samples on 08.10.2010 in FSL found all the seals on the samples in tact. If that be the admitted
position, it cannot be said that the samples which were taken out from the contraband recovered
from the seized Truck and those which were examined in the FSL were different or that during their
transit, there was any tampering by any person.
19 We agree with the learned counsel for the appellant that the evidence on record is deficient with
regard to the custody of the samples after they were picked up on spot on 06.02.2010 and reached
FSL on 08.02.2010. There is no evidence on record to the effect that after taking the samples, the
remaining material was deposited in the Malkhana. We, however, could not find out from the
testimony of any of the prosecution witnesses as to how the samples after these were taken on
06.02.2010, were dealt with before these were delivered in the FSL on 08.02.2010. Having said that,
we are still of the opinion that if the seizure of the contraband from the possession of the
appellant/accused is proved; the taking out of the samples and their sealing by the I.O and the
Executive Magistrate is proved; it is also proved that the samples with the seals intact reached the
FSL where these, on examination, were found to be a contraband item, it is enough to conclude that
there was no tampering with the samples en-route from the place of recovery to the FSL. In the face
of this evidence available on record, we are convinced that the material that was tested in the FSL
and was found to be contraband item i.e poppy straw was the same as was picked up by way of
samples from the material recovered from the seized Truck abandoned on road side at Maneh Morh
by the appellant.
20 The appellant, as we are told by learned counsel for parties, has already undergone more than 09
years of the sentence and, therefore, ends of justice would meet if we let off the appellant with the
sentence already undergone by him with fine of Rs.25000/- only.
21 In view of the discussion made above, we allow this appeal partly and set aside the conviction of
the appellant under Section 8/15 NDPS Act insofar as, it relates to the 'commercial quantity' and
instead convict him for the offence under section 8/15 NDPS Act in respect of 'intermediate
quantity' and sentence him to the imprisonment already undergone with a fine of Rs.25,000/-. In
default of payment of fine, the appellant shall undergo simple imprisonment for a period of six
months. The conviction and sentence of the appellant for the offences under Sections 465 and 471
RPC is upheld. As is directed by the trial Court, all the sentences were to run concurrently and,
therefore, the appellant shall be deemed to have undergone all the sentences. Since the appellant
has already served the sentences as per the judgment passed by us, therefore, a direction is issued to
the concerned Jail authorities to set the appellant at liberty forthwith, provided he is not required in
any other case, subject to payment of fine in terms of this judgment.
Disposed of accordingly.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139104938/ 5
Paramjeet Singh vs Respondent(S) on 16 September, 2023
Trial Court record be sent back along with a copy of this judgment.
(PUNEET GUPTA) (SANJEEV KUMAR)
JUDGE JUDGE
Jammu
16 .09.2023
Sanjeev Whether order is reportable: Yes
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/139104938/ 6
