Paramjeet @ Pappu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
Paramjeet @ Pappu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March,
2025
Author: Rajeev Misra
Bench: Rajeev Misra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:29475
Court No. - 71
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 5368 of 2025
Applicant :- Paramjeet @ Pappu
Opposite Party :- State Of U.P. And 3 Others
Counsel for Applicant :- Shamsher Singh
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.
Hon'ble Rajeev Misra,J.
1. Heard Mr. Shamsher Singh, the learned counsel for applicant and the learned A.G.A. for
State-opposite paty-1.
2. Perused the record.
3. This third application for bail has been filed by applicant-Paramjeet @ Pappu seeking his
enlargement on bail in Case Crime No. 219 of 2023 under Sections 363, 376 I.P.C., Sections 3/4
POCSO Act and Section 3 (2) v SC/ST Act, Police Station-Mandawar, District-Bijnor, during the
pendency of trial i.e. Sessions Case No. 1930 of 2023 (State Vs. Nitin @ Bhola) under Sections 363,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196301135/ 1
Paramjeet @ Pappu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
376 I.P.C., Sections 3/4 POCSO Act and Section 3 (2) v SC/ST Act, Police Station-Mandawar,
District-Bijnor, now pending in the Court of Special Judge (POCSO Act), Bijnor.
4. At the very outset, the learned A.G.A. submits that notice of present third application for bail has
been served upon first informant/opposite party-4 on 15.02.2025. However, in spite of service on
notice, neither any counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of first informant/opposite party-4 nor
anyone has put in appearance on his behalf to oppose this third application for bail.
5. The first bail application of applicant was rejected by this Court by a detailed order dated
20.09.2023 passed in Criminal Misc. Bail Application No. 36672 of 2023 (Paramjeet @ Pappu Vs.
State of U.P. and 3 Others). Thereafter, applicant filed his repeat application for bail, which was
registered as Criminal Misc. Bail Application No. 1664 of 2024 (Paramjeet @ Pappu Vs. State of U.P.
and others). The aforesaid repeat application for bail filed by applicant also came to be rejected vide
order dated 02.02.2024. For ready reference, the order dated 02.02.2024 is reproduced
herein-under:
"Heard Mr. Devesh Kumar Shukla, Advocate, holding brief of Mr. Vinod Kumar
Tripathi, the learned counsel for applicant and the learned A.G.A. for State.
Perused the record.
This repeat application for bail has been filed by applicant Paramjeet @ Pappu,
seeking his enlargement on bail in Case Crime No. 219 of 2023, under Sections 363,
376 IPC and Section 3/4 The POCSO Act, and Section 3(2)(V) SC/ST Act, Police
Station- Mandawar, District- Bijnor, during pendency of trial.
The first bail application of applicant i.e. 36672 of 2023 (Paramjeet @ Pappu) was
rejected by this Court by a detailed order dated 3.10.2023. For ready reference, the
same is reproduced herein under:
"1. Heard Mr. Amit Rai, the learned counsel for applicant and the learned A.G.A. for
State.
2. Perused the record.
3. Present application for bail came up for orders on 29.08.2023 and this Court
passed the following order:-
"1. Heard Mr. Amit Rai, the learned counsel for applicant and the learned A.G.A. for
State.
2. This application for bail has been filed by applicant-Paramjeet @ Pappu seeking
his enlargement on bail in Case Crime No. 219 of 2023, under Section 363, 376 IPC,
Sections 3/4 POCSO Act and Section 3(2)(V) SC/ST Act, Police Station-Mandawar,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196301135/ 2
Paramjeet @ Pappu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
District-Bijnor during the pendency of trial.
3. At the very outset, the learned A.G.A. submits that during the course of
investigation, Investigating Officer has not collected any such document which may
be in-consonance with the provisions contained in Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice
(Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015. The only document recovered by the
Investigating Officer qua the age of the prosecutrix is the school certificate issued by
the Principal of the institution. Copy of same is on record as Annexure-2 to the
affidavit. However, the said certificate does not contain the recital that the
prosecutrix fist attended the said institution.
4. In view of above, no reliance can be placed upon the same.
5. Accordingly, the Chief Medical Officer, Bijnor is directed to conduct the
radiological test/ossification test of both the prosecutrix and determine their age
accordingly. The age determination report shall be sent to this Court in a sealed
envelope on or before 19.09.2023.
6. Similarly, the Investigating Officer shall file an application under Section 173(8)
Cr.P.C. before court below and seek the permission of the Court for conducting
further investigation and shall endevour to collect such document qua the date of
birth of the prosecutrix which may be in-consonance with the provisions contained in
Section 94 of the Juvenile Justice (Care and Protection of Children) Act, 2015. The
said exercise shall be completed by the Investigating Officer before the next date
fixed. The copy of the supplementary case diary shall also be transmitted to this
Court.
7. Matter shall, accordingly, re-appear for orders as fresh on 20.09.2023.
Order Date :- 29.8.2023"
4. Pursuant to aforesaid order, the medical examination of the prosecutrix was conducted. The
learned A.G.A. has placed the sealed envelope containing the medical determination of age of the
prosecutrix. The same is taken on record.
5. Record shows that in respect of an incident, which is alleged to have occurred on 26.06.2023, a
delayed FIR dated 27.06.2023 was lodged by first informant-Raju (father of both the prosecutrix)
and was registered as Case Crime No. 219 of 2023, under Section 363 IPC, Police
Station-Mandawar, District-Bijnor. In the aforesaid FIR, 2 persons namely (1) Nitin @ Bhola and
(2) Pappu (applicant herein) have been nominated as named accused.
6. The gravamen of the allegations made in the FIR is to the effect that named accused enticed away
the minor daughters of the first informant namely Akanksha and Nikita, who are twins and are aged
about 16 years.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196301135/ 3
Paramjeet @ Pappu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
7. After above-mentioned FIR was lodged, Investigating Officer proceeded with statutory
investigation of concerned case crime number in terms of Chapter-XII Cr.P.C. Both the prosecutrix
were recovered on 28.06.2023. Thereafter, the statement of the prosecutrix namely Akanksha was
recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. Same is on record at page 33 of the paper book. The prosecutrix
in her aforesaid statement has not supported the FIR. She has further stated that physical relations
were maintained between herself and Bhole upon her consent. Thereafter, the statement of another
prosecutrix namely Nikita was recorded under Section 161 Cr.P.C. The prosecutrix, in her aforesaid
statement has stated has she and her sister called the named accused on telephone and thereafter
accompanied the named accused on 27.06.2023. The sister of this prosecutrix namely Akansha went
with Bhole whereas this prosecutrix came home. She has further admitted that physical relations
were established in between herself and Pappu upon her consent. Subsequent to above, the
prosecutrix were requested for their internal medical examination. Both the prosecutrix, however,
refused for their internal medical examination. Ultimately, the statement of the prosecutrix
Akanksha was recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. Same is on record at page 43 of the paper book.
The prosecutrix in her aforesaid statement has clearly stated that she wants to marry with Bhole.
She has further reiterated her previous statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. Thereafter, the
statement of another prosecutrix Km. Nikita was recorded under Section 164 Cr.P.C. Her statement
is similar to that of another prosecutrix Km. Akanksha. However, the prosecutrix in her aforesaid
statements has stated that no illegal act was committed by Bhole and Pappu.
8. During course of investigation, Investigating Officer examined first informant and other
witnesses under Section 161 Cr.P.C. Witnesses so examined have supported the FIR. On the basis of
above and other material collected by Investigating Officer during course of investigation, he came
to the conclusion that complicity of named accused is established in the crime in question He,
accordingly, submitted the charge sheet dated 22.07.2023 whereby named accused i.e. Nitin @
Bhole and Pappu have been charge sheeted under Sections 363, 376 IPC, Sections 3/4 POCSO Act
and Section 3(2)(V) SC/ST Act.
9. Learned counsel for applicant contends that though the applicant is a named as well as charge
sheeted accused yet he is liable to be enlarged on bail. According to the learned counsel for
applicant, there is no medical evidence to support the charge sheet inasmuch as, the prosecutrix has
herself refused for her internal medical examination. As per the statement of prosecutrix namely
Nikita, she was in relationship with the applicant. The prosecutrix herself came and joined the
applicant. As such, the prosecutrix Nikita is a willing and consenting party. On the above premise,
he contends that no offence under Section 363 IPC can be said to have been committed by the
applicant, as the applicant has neither abducted nor kidnapped the prosecutrix. With regard to the
offence under Section 376 IPC and Sections 3/4 POCSO Act, the learned counsel for applicant
contends that since the prosecutrix is a willing and consenting party, as such, no deliberate or
forceful sexual assault was committed by the applicant upon the prosecutrix. He, therefore, submits
that no offence under Section 376 IPC and Sections 3/4 POCSO Act as alleged can be said to have
been committed by applicant.
10. Even otherwise, applicant is a man of clean antecedents inasmuch as, he has no criminal history
to his credit except the present one. Applicant is in jail since 15.07.2023. As such, he has undergone
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196301135/ 4
Paramjeet @ Pappu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
more than 4 months of incarceration. The police report in terms of Section 173(2) Cr.P.C. has
already been submitted. As such, the entire evidence sought to be relied upon by the prosecution
against applicant stands crystallized. However, up to this stage, no such circumstance has emerged
necessitating the custodial arrest of applicant during the pendency of trial. On the above premise, he
submits that applicant is liable to be enlarged on bail. In case, the applicant is enlarged on bail, he
shall not misuse the liberty of bail and shall co-operate with the trial.
11. Per contra, the learned A.G.A. has opposed the prayer for bail. He submits that subsequent to the
order dated 29.08.2023, the medical examination of the prosecutrix was conducted for determining
her age. As per medical opinion, the prosecutrix is said to be aged about 16 years. With reference to
the statement of the prosecutrix under Section 161 Cr.P.C., the learned A.G.A. contends that the
prosecutrix in her aforesaid statement has admitted that physical relations were developed in
between herself and the applicant upon the consent of the prosecutrix itself. However, according to
the learned A.G.A., since the prosecutrix is about 16 years of age, therefore, her consent, if any, is
wholly immaterial. Referring to the judgment of the Supreme Court in X (Minor) Vs. The State of
Jharkhand and Another 2022 LiveLaw (SC) 194, the learned A.G.A. contends that since the
prosecutrix is below 16 years of age, therefore, her consent, if any, is of no relevance and therefore,
the applicant does not deserve any sympathy of this Court. As such, the bail application of applicant
is liable to be rejected.
12. When confronted with above, the learned counsel for applicant could not overcome the same.
13. Having heard, the learned counsel for applicant, the learned A.G.A. for State, upon perusal of
record, evidence, nature and gravity of offence, complicity of accused, accusations made coupled
with the fact that as per the medical opinion, the prosecutrix is aged about 16 years, therefore, her
consent, if any, is wholly irrelevant, the judgment of the Supreme Court in X (Minor) (Supra),
therefore, irrespective of the varied submissions urged by the learned counsel for applicant in
support of the present application for bail, but without making any comments on the merits of the
case, this Court does not finds any good or sufficient ground to enlarge the applicant on bail.
14. As a result, present application for bail fails and is liable to be rejected.
15. It is accordingly rejected.
16. The documents placed by the learned A.G.A. regarding medical determination of age of the
prosecutrix shall be transmitted to court below after obtaining photo copies of the same to be kept
on record. "
Learned counsel for applicant submits that co-accused Nitin @ Bhola has already
been enlarged on bail vide order dated 7.12.2023, passed in Criminal Misc. Bail
Application No. 49378 of 2023 (Nitin @ Bhola Vs. State of U.P. and 3 Others). For
ready reference, the order dated 7.12.2023 is extracted herein under:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196301135/ 5
Paramjeet @ Pappu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
"1. Sri Imran Khan, learned AGA, for the State, apprised the Court that notice has
been served to the informant of the case on 16.11.2023.
2. Despite service of notice, none appeared on behalf of the informant.
3. Heard Sri Anil Kumar Bind, learned counsel for the applicant and Sri Imran Khan,
learned AGA, for the State.
4. The instant bail application has been filed on behalf of the applicant with the
prayer to release him on bail in Sessions Trial No.1930 of 2023 in Case Crime No.219
of 2023, under Sections 363 and 376 IPC, Section 3/4 POCSO Act and Section 3(2)(5)
SC/ST Act, Police Station Mandawar, District Bijnor during pendency of the trial.
5. FIR of the present case was lodged against the applicant and co-accused Pappu and
according to the FIR, applicant and co-accused Pappu enticed away the twins
daughters of the informant aged about 16 years.
6. Learned counsel for the applicant submits that entire allegation made against the
applicant is totally false and baseless and this fact is evident from the statements of
the victims recorded under Sections 161 and 164 Cr.P.C.
7. He further submits that when the statement of one of the victim was recorded
under Section 164 Cr.P.C. then she categorically stated that she herself had left her
paternal home and applicant also told her to go back but she did not return to her
home.
8. He further submits that in the statement under Section 164 Cr.P.C. victim
categorically stated that no physical relationship were ever developed between her
and applicant but in her statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. on query made by
Investigating Officer she stated that for the last one year several times physical
relationship were developed between both of them.
9. He further submits that the sister of one of the victim also stated similar story and
stated that applicant and her sister was having friendship.
10. He further submits that even as per school record the victim was more than 17
years old and during investigation her ossification test was not conducted.
11. He further submits, however applicant is having criminal history of Section 302
IPC but in that case he was implicated after the present case through the statement of
co-accused, who was brother of one of the victim and in that case he has already been
released on bail.
12. He further submits that applicant is in jail in the present matter since 20.7.2023.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196301135/ 6
Paramjeet @ Pappu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
13. Per contra, learned AGA opposed the prayer for bail but could not dispute the
argument on facts advanced by the learned counsel for the applicant.
14. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
15. From the school record of the victims, who were twins, it appears that they were
more than 17 years old and they in their statements under Section 164 Cr.P.C. did not
make any allegation of rape against the applicant.
16. However, one of the victim in her statement under Section 161 Cr.P.C. stated that
since last year several times physical relationship were developed between applicant
and her but from the statement of both the victims, it also reflects that they herself
had left their paternal home and applicant insisted them to return back.
17. However, applicant is also having a criminal history of Section 302 IPC but
criminal history of the applicant has been explained in the instant bail application
and it appears that in that case he was made accused after lodgement of FIR of the
present case through the statement of co-accused and in that case he is on bail.
18. Further, law is settled that bail application of an accused should not be dismissed
merely on the basis of his criminal history if otherwise case of bail is made out.
19. Further, applicant in the present matter is in jail since 20.7.2023.
20. Therefore, considering the facts and circumstances of the case discussed above, in
my view, applicant is entitled to be released on bail.
21. Accordingly, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the instant
bail application is allowed.
22. Let the applicant-Nitin @ Bhola be released on bail in the aforesaid case on
furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the
satisfaction of the court concerned with the following conditions:-
(i) The applicant shall appear before the trial court on the dates fixed, unless his
personal presence is exempted.
(ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make inducement, threat or promise
to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from
disclosing such facts to the Court or any police officer or tamper with the evidence.
(iii) The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal and anti-social activity.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196301135/ 7
Paramjeet @ Pappu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
23. In case of breach of any of the above condition, the prosecution will be at liberty
to move an application before this Court for cancellation of the bail of the applicant.
24. It is clarified that the observations made herein are limited to the facts brought in
by the parties pertaining to the disposal of bail application and the said observations
shall have no bearing on the merits of the case during trial."
On the above premise, it is urged by learned counsel for applicant that since co-accused has already
been enlarged on bail and the case of present applicant is similar and identical to that of co-accused,
therefore, the present applicant is liable to be enlarged on bail on the ground of parity.
Even otherwise, applicant is a man of clean antecedents inasmuch as he has no criminal history to
his credit except the present one. Applicant is in jail since 15.7.2023. As such, he has undergone
more than six months of incarceration. It is thus urged that applicant is liable to be enlarged on bail.
In case the applicant is enlarged on bail, he shall not misuse the liberty of bail and shall co-operate
with trial.
Per contra, the learned A.G.A. has opposed the prayer for bail. He submits that since applicant is a
named as well as charge sheeted accused, therefore he does not deserve any indulgence by this
Court. He submits that while deciding the bail application of co-accused Nitin @ Bhola, the order
dated 3.10.2023, passed in first bail application of applicant was not brought to the notice of the
Court. It is then contended by learned A.G.A. that in view of law laid down by Apex Court in
Pradhani Jani Vs. State of Odisha dated 15.5.2023, passed in Criminal Appeal No. 1503 of 2023
(Arising out of SLP (Crl.) No. 3241 of 2023) and Sajid Vs. State of U.P. dated 31.7.2023, passed in
Special Leave to Appeal (Crl.) No. 7203 of 2023 the bail application of co-accused Nitin @ Bhola
ought to have been placed before this Court. However, irrespective of the law laid down by Apex
Court, the bail application was decided by a co-ordinate Bench, which is prima facie is not good in
law. On the above premise, the learned A.G.A. contends that no new or good ground has emerged to
enlarge the applicant on bail. According to learned A.G.A., prosecutrix is young girl aged about 16
years, therefore, judgement of Supreme Court in X(minor) Vs. The State of Jharkhand and Another
2022 Live Law(SC) 194 is attracted in the present case. Even if there is consent of the prosecutrix,
no benefit can be derived from the same, therefore present application is liable to be rejected.
When confronted with above, the learned counsel for petitioner could not overcome the same.
Having heard the learned counsel for applicant, the learned A.G.A. for State, upon perusal of
material brought on record, evidence, nature and gravity of offence as well as complicity of
applicant, accusation made coupled with the fact that objections raised by the learned A.G.A. in
opposition to the present application for bail could not be dislodged by learned counsel for
applicant, therefore irrespective of the varied submissions urged by learned counsel for applicant in
support of the present application for bail, but without making any comment on the merits of the
case, this Court does not find any good ground to enlarge the applicant on bail.
In view of above, the application fails and is liable to be rejected.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196301135/ 8
Paramjeet @ Pappu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
It is accordingly rejected.
Order Date :- 2.2.2024 "
6. Learned counsel for applicant submits that during course of trial, the prosecutrix
has deposed before court below as P.W.-2. However, the prosecutrix in her
deposition before court below has not supported the F.I.R.. Co-accused-Nitin @
Bhola has already been enlarged on bail vide order dated 07.12.2023, as noted herein
above. On the above premise, the learned counsel for applicant submits that
applicant is liable to be enlarged on bail. According to the learned counsel for
applicant, once the statement of the prosecutrix has been recorded then in that
eventuality it cannot be said that if the applicant is enlarged on bail, he shall either
terrorize the witnesses or shall hamper the course of trial. He therefore contends that
no justifiable ground now exists to prolong the custodial arrest of applicant. He
therefore submits that since the prosecutrix has not supported the prosecution story
as unfolded in the F.I.R., therefore no useful purpose shall be served in keeping the
applicant under incarceration. It is thus urged that applicant is liable to be enlarged
on bail.
7. Even otherwise, applicant is a man of clean antecedents having no criminal history
to his credit except the present one. Applicant is in custody since 15.07.2023. As such,
he has undergone more than one year and seven months of incarceration. The police
report (charge-sheet) in terms of Section 173 (2) Cr.P.C. has already been submitted
against applicant, therefore, the entire evidence sought to be relied upon by the
prosecution against applicant stands crystallized. However, upto this stage, no such
incriminating circumstance has emerged on the record necessitating the custodial
arrest of applicant during the pendency of trial. On the above premise, it is thus
urged that applicant is liable to be enlarged on bail. In case the applicant is enlarged
on bail, he shall not misuse the liberty of bail and shall co-operate with the trial.
8. Per contra, the learned A.G.A. has vehemently opposed the present third
application for bail. He submits that since the applicant is a named and charge
sheeted accused, therefore, he does not deserve any indulgence by this Court.
However, the learned A.G.A. could not dislodge the factual and legal submissions
urged by the learned counsel for applicant with reference to the record at this stage.
9. Having heard the learned counsel for applicant, the learned A.G.A. for State, upon
consideration of material on record, evidence, nature and gravity of offence,
accusations made as well as complicity of applicant and coupled with the fact
co-accused Nitin @ Bhola has already been enlarged on bail, the case of present
applicant is on better footing than that of co-accused Nitin @ Bhola, the prosecutrix
has deposed before court below as P.W.-2, the prosecutrix in her deposition before
court below has not supported the prosecution story as unfolded in the F.I.R., once
the statement of prosecutrix has been recorded before court below then in that
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196301135/ 9
Paramjeet @ Pappu vs State Of U.P. And 3 Others on 3 March, 2025
eventuality, if the applicant is enlarged on bail then it cannot be said that applicant
shall either terrorize the witnesses or shall hamper the course of trial, once the
prosecutrix has herself not supported the F.I.R. then no useful purpose shall be
served in prolonging the judicial custody of applicant, the police report (charge sheet)
in terms of Section 173 (2) Cr.P.C. has already been submitted against applicant,
therefore, the entire evidence sought to be relied upon by the prosecution against
applicant stands crystalized, yet in spite of above, no such incriminating
circumstance could be pointed out by learned the A.G.A. from the record
necessitating the custodial arrest of applicant during the pendency of trial, the
judgement of Apex Court in Sumit Subhashchandra Gangwal Vs. State of
Maharashtra, 2023 LiveLaw (SC) 373 (Paragraph 6), the clean antecedents of
applicant, the period of incarceration undergone, therefore irrespective of the
objections raised by learned A.G.A. in opposition to present third application for bail
but without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, applicant has made out
a case for bail.
10. Accordingly, present third application for bail is allowed.
11. Let the applicant-Paramjeet @ Pappu involved in aforesaid case crime number be
released on bail on his furnishing a personal bond and two sureties each in the like
amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned with the following conditions which
are being imposed in the interest of justice:-
(i) Applicant will not tamper with prosecution evidence.
(ii) Applicant will abide the orders of court, will attend the court on every date and
will not delay the disposal of trial in any manner whatsoever.
(iii) Applicant will not indulge in any unlawful activities.
(iv) Applicant will not misuse the liberty of bail in any manner whatsoever.
12. The identity, status and residential proof of sureties will be verified by court concerned and in
case of breach of any of the conditions mentioned above, court concerned will be at liberty to cancel
the bail of applicant and send him to prison.
Order Date :- 3.3.2025 YK
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/196301135/ 10
