Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi
Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT SRINAGAR
...
RP no.96/2022
In RFA no.04/2021
Pronounced on: 13.02.2025
Parvez Ahmad Khan age 46, S/o Mohammad Mansha Khan R/o 107 Garden
Lane, Chanapora, Srinagar
.......Petitioner(s)
Through: Mr I. Sofi, Advocate
Versus
Areeb D/o Mohammad Shafi Malik R/o Lone Mohalla, Chanapora, P/A Lane
no.10 Ari Bagh Kanipora, Srinagar
......Respondent(s)
Through: None
CORAM:
HON'BLE MR JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
JUDGEMENT
1. Review of judgement dated 18th October 2022, passed by this Court in an appeal, RFA
no.04/2021, titled as Parvez Ahmad Khan v. Areeb is sought for.
2. I have learned counsel for parties and considered the matter.
3. The grounds on which review is being sought are: that while passing judgement under review,
appeal has been dismissed on merits whereas counsel for petitioner argued the case on preliminary
issue of maintainability of appeal in terms of Order dated 19th May 2022; that appeal was fixed on
30th May 2022, on which date counsel for respondent was not available and adjournment, sought
on his behalf by Page 1 proxy counsel, was granted and the matter was posted for 1st June 2022 for
continuation of arguments; that on 1st June 2022, the matter was argued on maintainability of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 1
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
appeal and case reserved and, thus, main appeal was not argued at all on merits; that this Court has
not decided the objection vis-à-vis maintainability of appeal and instead decided main appeal which
was not argued on merits at all; that appeal has been decided without arguing the matter on merits
and without hearing counsel for petitioner on merits which fact is born out from the records and
interim orders, therefore, error and mistake apparent on the record which require recalling of the
order/judgement. Reference has been made to Union of India v. Sandur Manganese and Iron Ores
Ltd to state that principles of natural justice embody the right to every person to represent his
interests to the court of justice and pronouncing of judgement which adversely affects the interests
of the party to the proceedings who was not given a change to represent his/its case is unacceptable
under principles of natural justice. It is also stated that appeal was heard and reserved on
maintainability on 1st June 2022 and while rendering the judgement, this Court has overlooked the
interim orders and instead passed the judgement on merits which has been apparently passed
without hearing the matter on merits.
4. In RFA no.04/2021, review petitioner/appellant sought setting-aside of the Order dated 26th
December 2020, passed by Principal District Judge, Srinagar, ["Trial Court" for short], deciding five
applications, four filed by review petitioner, and one by respondent. Following judgement was
passed by this Court to decide the appeal:
Page 2
1. This Appeal is directed against Order dated 26th December 2020, passed by
Principal District Judge, Srinagar (for short "court below"), disposing of as many as
five applications, four filed by petitioner and one by respondent.
2. The case set up by appellant is that appellant and respondent married; out of
which respondent gave birth to a male child, namely, Ahmad, and that marriage did
not continue and he divorced respondent. The minor child was with respondent who
did not allow him to see the child, so he filed an application under Section 25 of the
Guardian and Wards Act, which was disposed of vide order dated 19th October 2015
with a direction that respondent would produce the ward in District Mediation
Centre, Srinagar, and leave custody of the ward of appellant, who would have
interaction/interview with the Ward from 1.00 PM to 3.30 PM twice in a month on
1st and 4th Saturday. However, respondent is said to have not adhered to aforesaid
directions and continued to commit breach and violation thereof, so he filed
contempt petition on 25th April 2016, in which notice was issued to respondent.
During pendency thereof, respondent also filed application seeking modification of
order dated 19th October 2015 on the ground that she had been appointed as
Lecturer, making it difficult for her to produce the ward on two Saturdays as both the
days were working days and the time fixed for meeting was also creating a lot of
trouble in discharging her duties as she had to leave in the middle of working days.
This application was disposed of vide order dated 8th August 2017, directing
production of ward in a month on 1st and 3rd Saturdays for meeting and conveyance
charge was to be borne by appellant.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 2
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
It is also contended that appellant also filed an application in aforesaid contempt petition and
sought modification of aforesaid two orders dated 19th October 2015 and 8th August 2017, by
directing respondent to allow appellant full-fledged meeting with minor in and outside the four
walls of District Mediation Centre and during interaction of appellant, respondent be directed to
stay away from intimate zone and further his grandparents be also allowed to interact with the
minor child in the District Mediation Centre. It is also averred that despite orders and directions
passed by the court below, respondent continued to flout the same. According to appellant,
respondent did not implement the orders of the court below, so he filed second contempt petition,
but the court below is stated to have passed order impugned, of which he is aggrieved.
3. I have heard learned counsel for parties and considered the matter.
4. Learned counsel for appellant has stated that impugned order has been passed at the back of
appellant and without hearing him and that appellant was himself pleadings the case before the
court below and the said case was listed on 11th November 2020, when the court directed counsel
for respondent to file written arguments and the case was posted for 2nd December 2020. Counsel
for respondent filed written arguments on 2nd December 2020 and the matter was posted for 17th
December 2020, on which date appellant was absent and the court below heard arguments of
counsel for respondent and posted the case for appropriate orders on 26th December 2020, on
which date Page 3 impugned order came to be passed. It is also contended that impugned order is
not based on facts.
5. Aforesaid submissions of learned counsel for appellant as also those averments/grounds raised in
the memo of appeal are misconceived. The reason being that impugned order is comprehensive and
takes in its fold all aspects of the matter that were required for court below to take care of while
passing impugned order. When impugned order is looked into, it does not suffer from any infirmity
as projected in instant appeal. Last but one paragraph of impugned order is appropriate to be
reproduced, in view of the case set up by appellant, hereunder:
"However, keeping in view the interest and welfare of the minor and the right of the
petitioner, it is directed that petitioner shall be permitted to meet the child on the last
Friday of every month from 3:00 PM to 4:00 PM in the ADR Centre at Srinagar.
Secretary District Legal Services Authority shall facilitate the visit and all precautions
shall be taken to ensure prevention of COVID-19 pandemic. The petitioner shall pay
the conveyance charges of Rs.500/- to the respondent for each visit on the day of
meeting itself against proper receipt. The respondent shall facilitate the same and
shall not cause any hindrance in the interaction. The petitioner is also advised to bear
the expenses of the education and all related expenses of the child including the
tuition fee etc, so that he can contribute satisfactorily to the health and education of
the child. However, in case the petitioner ducks to bear expenses, the respondent
shall always be free to pursue the appropriate legal remedy for recovery of
maintenance."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 3
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
Perusal of above portion of impugned order would reveal that court below has given visitation rights
to petitioner to have interaction with his son and pay conveyance charges of Rs.500/- . The court
below has not only enjoined upon respondent to facilitate interaction of appellant with his son but
has also cautioned respondent not to cause any hindrance in such interaction. What else could have
the court below done and directed except the above one. In that view of matter impugned order does
not warrant any interference.
6. For the reasons discussed above, the instant appeal is dismissed with connected CM(s). Interim
direction, if any, shall stand vacated.
5. A three-Judge Bench of the High Court of Delhi in MAT. APP. (F.C.0 126/2019, 2024: DHC:
7994-FB, vide its judgement dated 16th October 2024, has held that orders passed under Section 12
of the Guardian and Wards Act would be appealable under Section 19 of the Family Courts Act.
Page 4
6. If the appeal, preferred by appellant/review petitioner, for a moment, is treated maintainable
against the order passed by the Trial Court, yet grounds taken in the appeal cannot be heard saying
from appellant/ review petitioner were noncomprehensive and required further elucidation and
elaboration as it would serve no purpose except protracting the matter, so those grounds are
reproduced one-by-one hereunder, and discussed and decided individually: -
i. First Ground:
The first ground taken by appellant/review petitioner in his appeal is that impugned order is
patently illegal and bad in law. The impugned order has been passed at the back of the appellant and
without hearing him. It is submitted that the appellant was himself pleading the case before the trial
court and the said case was listed on 11.11.2020 when the Trial Court directed the counsel for the
respondent to file written arguments. The case was posted for 02.12.2020. On 02.12.2020 the
counsel for respondent filed written arguments and the case was posted for 17.12.2020. On
17.12.2020, the appellant was absent and the trial court heard the arguments of the counsel for
respondents and posted the case for appropriate orders for 26.12.2020 and on 26.12.2020, the trial
court passed impugned judgement at the back of appellant.
(a) The above contentions of appellant/review petitioner are impregnant with
accusation against the Trial Court. Such a plea is un-condonable. Non-appearance of
parties could not be made a reason for not deciding the case(s) as generally it Page 5
has become a routine to protract matters. Adjournment culture has been deprecated
by the Supreme Court.
(b) The legal maxim 'justice delayed is justice denied' echoes loud and clear in our
overburdened judicial system. Millions of cases are pending in the Courts throughout
the India. The primary reason for huge pendency of cases is either shortage of judges,
lack of infrastructure or procedural delays and adjournments.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 4
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
(c) An adjournment refers to the judicial practice of deferring a scheduled hearing to
a later date. Order XVII of the Code of Civil Procedure envisages rules for the Courts
to follow when faced with adjournment requests. It provides that no adjournment
shall be granted at the request of a party except where circumstances are beyond
their control. Adjournment after adjournment has become a tool which leads to
strategic delays.
(d) The Supreme Court in M/s Shiv Cotex v. Tirgun Auto P. Ltd and others, (2011) 9
SCC 678, has made it clear by saying, "Is the court obliged to give adjournment after
adjournment merely because the stakes are high in the dispute? Should the court be
silent spectator and leave control of the case to a party to the case who has decided
not to take the case forward?". The Supreme Court after that proceeded to say, "It is
sad, but true, that the litigants seek - and the courts grant -
adjournments at the drop of the hat. In the cases where the Judges are little proactive and refuse to
accede to the requests Page 6 of unnecessary adjournments, the litigants deploy all sorts of methods
in protracting the litigation. It is not surprising that civil disputes drag on and on. The misplaced
sympathy and indulgence by the appellate and revisional courts compound the malady further. The
case in hand is a case of such misplaced sympathy. It is high time that courts become sensitive to
delays in justice delivery system and realise that adjournments do dent the efficacy of the judicial
process and if this menace is not controlled adequately, the litigant public may lose faith in the
system sooner than later. The courts, particularly trial courts, must ensure that on every date of
hearing, effective progress takes place in the suit." Thereafter the Supreme Court has also said that
no litigant has a right to abuse the procedure provided in the Code of Civil Procedure inasmuch as
adjournments have grown like cancer corroding the entire body of justice delivery system. A party to
the suit is not at liberty to proceed with the trial at its leisure and pleasure and has no right to
determine when the evidence would be let in by it or the matter should be heard. The parties to suit,
whether it is plaintiff or defendant, must cooperate with the Court in ensuring effective work on the
date of hearing for which the matter has been fixed. If they do not, they do so at their own peril.
(e) It has been said by the Supreme Court in Noor Mohammad v. Jetha Nand and another, (2013) 5
SCC 202, "In a democratic set up, intrinsic and embedded faith in the adjudicatory Page 7 system is
of seminal and pivotal concern. Delay gradually declines the citizenry faith in the system. It is the
faith and faith alone that keeps the system alive. It provides oxygen constantly. Fragmentation of
faith has the effect-potentiality to bring in a state of cataclysm where justice may become a casuality.
A litigant expects a reasoned verdict from a temperate Judge but does not intend to and, rightly so,
to guillotine much of time at the altar of reasons. Timely delivery of justice keeps the faith ingrained
and establishes the sustained stability. Access to speedy justice is regarded as a human right which
is deeply rooted in the foundational concept of democracy and such a right is not only the creation of
law but also a natural right. This right can be fully ripened by the requisite commitment of all
concerned with the system. It cannot be regarded as a facet of Utopianism because such a thought is
likely to make the right a mirage losing the centrality of purpose. Therefore, whoever has a role to
play in the justice dispensation system cannot be allowed to remotely conceive of a casual
approach." The Supreme court further went to say that the corrosive effect that adjournments can
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 5
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
have on a litigation and how a Lis can get entangled in the tentacles of an octopus. The philosophy of
justice, the role of a lawyer and the court, the obligation of a litigant and all legislative commands,
the nobility of the Bench and the Bar, the ability and efficiency of all concerned and ultimately the
divinity of law are likely to make way for apathy and Page 8 indifference when delay of the present
nature takes place, for procrastination on the part of anyone destroys the values of life and creates a
catastrophic turbulence in the sanctity of law. The virtues of adjudication cannot be allowed to be
paralyzed by adjournments and non-demonstration of due diligence to deal with the matter. One
cannot be oblivious to the feeling necessities of the time. No one can afford to sit in an ivory tower.
Neither a Judge nor a lawyer can ignore "the total push and pressure of the cosmos". It is
devastating to expect infinite patience. Change of attitude is the warrant and command of the day. It
has to be kept in mind that the time of leisure has to be given a decent burial. The sooner it takes
place, the better it is. It is the obligation of the present generation to march with the time and
remind oneself every moment that rule of law is the centripodal concern and delay in delineation
and disposal of cases injects an artificial virus and becomes a vitiating element. The unfortunate
characteristics of endemic delays have to be avoided at any cost. One has to bear in mind that this is
the day, this is the hour and this is the moment, when all soldiers of law fight from the path.
(f) In Gayathri v. M. Girish (2016) 14 SCC 142, the Supreme Court has highlighted that litigants pray
for adjournment as if it was their right to seek adjournment on any ground whatsoever and under
any circumstance, displaying a blatant disregard for the Court proceedings inasmuch as practice of
Page 9 allowing frequent adjournments has become so common that it has significantly contributed
to the backlog of cases. ii. Second Ground:
The second ground taken by appellant/review petitioner in his appeal is that
appellant was not present even on 26.12.2020. The appellant was also not present on
17.12.2020, when the trial court heard the arguments of the counsel for the
respondent. The trial court as such did not hear the appellant nor afforded
reasonable opportunity to make detailed submissions in the light of facts of the case
and written arguments of the parties and the oral submissions made by the counsel
for the respondent. The trial court has not heard the appellant at all and thus passed
the impugned judgment without hearing him and hearing the counsel for
respondents alone which renders the impugned judgment patently illegal and bad in
law and in violation to principles of natural justice.
(a) Again, above averments of appellant/review petitioner are misconceived and
specious. It has already been made clear herein before that the Courts are not mute
spectators and leave control of the case to a party to the case who has decided not to
take the case forward.
(b) In a democratic set up, intrinsic and embedded faith in the adjudicatory system is
of seminal and pivotal concern. Delay gradually declines the citizenry faith in the
system. It is the faith and faith alone that keeps the system alive. It provides oxygen
constantly. Fragmentation of faith has the effect-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 6
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
Page 10 potentiality to bring in a state of cataclysm where justice may become a casualty. A litigant
expects a reasoned verdict from a temperate Judge but does not intend to and, rightly so, to
guillotine much of time at the altar of reasons. Timely delivery of justice keeps the faith ingrained
and establishes the sustained stability. Access to speedy justice is regarded as a human right which
is deeply rooted in the foundational concept of democracy and such a right is not only the creation of
law but also a natural right. This right can be fully ripened by the requisite commitment of all
concerned with the system. It cannot be regarded as a facet of Utopianism because such a thought is
likely to make the right a mirage losing the centrality of purpose. Therefore, whoever has a role to
play in the justice dispensation system cannot be allowed to remotely conceive of a casual approach.
[Vide: Noor Mohammad v. Jetha Nand (supra)].
iii. Third Ground:
In this ground appellant/review petitioner states that the trial court while passing
impugned order has held that respondent has filed objections both to contempt
petition of appellant and also to parenting plan in which respondent refuted
application. Appellant also avers that respondent did not contest contempt petition
nor filed objections in contempt petition nor refuted statements and contentions of
appellant made and averred in contempt petition. Therefore, it is factually incorrect
that respondent filed objections to contempt petition. This non-
Page 11 existent fact renders impugned order bad and reflects non- application of
mind and non-perusal of record by trial court and thus impugned judgment cannot
sustain in the eye of law.
The above contentions, in view of aforesaid discussions, are absurd and deplorable. It
is mentioned in impugned order that respondent filed her objections both to
contempt petition as also to the 'parenting plan' in which she refuted the application
firstly on preliminary objections, i.e., the contents have been downloaded from the
internet as the submissions are vague and only waste of precious court time and that
applicant in order to harass, humiliate and intimidate respondent filed that
application on false and frivolous grounds. It is also mentioned therein that
applicant/appellant left no stone unturned to harm, injure, endanger the health
safety, life, wellbeing of minor and is least bothered about welfare and upbringing of
minor, more particularly when applicant/appellant contracted second marriage and
is enjoying luxurious life and never spent quality time with the minor whereas
respondent has not contracted second marriage and is continuously taking care of
minor. As regards contempt petition, it is mentioned in impugned order that petition
for initiation of contempt proceedings was basically pending disposal before the court
of 1st Additional District Judge, Srinagar, but later on was transferred from the said
court and was retained in the Trial Court for disposal on the basis of consent of
parties and during pendency of petition, the Trial Court passed order on 5th
November 2019, which had been passed with the Page 12 consent of the parties
directing permitting appellant to meet the child on 2nd and 4th Friday of every
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 7
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
month and respondent was directed to ensure that she did not intervene at the time
of meeting between appellant and the child. Thereafter parties sought
vacation/modification of order dated 5th November 2019. Appellant sought
cancellation of order dated 5th November 2019. Respondent sought modification of
the said order on the ground that appellant was harassing her in ADR Centre and
prayed instead of ADR Centre, place of such interaction be kept before the Trial
Court. It was found that no evidence was led by appellant to show wilful disobedience
by respondent. iv. Fourth Ground:
Here, appellant says that his case in contempt petition was that respondent did not
produce the ward in mediation centre as directed for interaction of appellant and was
flouting the order time and again. On request of appellant, the trial court vide order
dated 18.02.2020 also directed Incharge Mediation Centre to furnish its report
regarding interaction of appellant with the ward. The trial court did not wait for the
said report at all and passed impugned judgment. According to appellant, aforesaid
report would have clinched the issue as to whether the orders of the trial court
regarding interaction of ward with appellant are being complied with or not and this
was the evidence of the appellant coupled with the fact that the respondent did not
rebut the allegations of the appellant made by him in the contempt petition nor filed
any objections to it. The trial court ought to have waited Page 13 for the said report of
mediation centre for effective disposal of the case which the trial court did not and
passed impugned order, which is not based on the record nor does exist int eh record
of the trial court.
Above submissions are exaggerative and absurd. It is made clear here that the Trial
Court is within its powers to get its orders implemented in letter and spirit as and
when it finds non-implementation or disobedience of its orders. The Trial Court, as
pointed out herein before, has discussed all facts and circumstances of the case.
v. Fifth Ground:
In this ground taken by appellant in his appeal, he would contend that he had sought
information of attendance record of respondent and ward at his own level from
Mediation Centre under which information/material was filed by him before the trial
court and which record was filed by him as annexure with his main application and
which record was very much part of the said application and thus was available on
the records of the trial court. The said record substantiated the case of appellant that
respondent was not producing the ward on the dates fixed by the trial court and
incharge mediation centre had furnished the details of dates on which respondent
had to produce the child but she did not produce. The trial court did not take into
consideration the said information nor has considered the said record which also
renders impugned order not only bad in law but perverse.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 8
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
Page 14 The above claims of appellants, when looked into with the impugned orders
and observations made therein by the trial court, appear to be larger-than-life. It has
been found by the Trial court that respondent filed an application for maintenance of
minor which was being resisted by appellant tooth and nail and that
petitioner/appellant ought to have paid maintenance and other expenses of the child
without any legal battle and that the Trial Court also advised appellant not to engage
respondent or child in legal proceedings for recovery of maintenance as litigation
wastes the time of parties and also traps them in a battle which can be avoided. These
observations and sayings of the Trial Court cannot be said to be bad in law and
perverse. vi. Sixth Ground:
Appellant says that Trial Court passed impugned judgement on the ground that
child/ward was brought before the said court, he refused to talk to appellant, cried
and wept and demonstrated fear. Appellant with respects submits that the said
statement of the trial court is against the record. The ward was brought before the
trial court only once, i.e., on 16.02.2019 when the ward met the appellant and
interacted with him calmly and to the satisfaction of one another. Thereafter the
ward was not produced before the trial court at any point of time nor the said fact is
born out from the record. Therefore, the impugned judgement of the trial court is
patently based on non-existent facts and against the records which renders the
impugned judgment void and illegal.
Page 15 The above contentions are belligerent and baseless. Impugned judgement, on
its bare perusal, has been passed articulately by the Trial Court.
vii. Seventh Ground:
In this ground, it is submitted by appellant that while passing impugned order, the
trial court has said that appellant is not paying maintenance of the ward and is
resisting the application. The said observations of the court below are against the
record and facts and is not supported by any record and material. The application for
maintenance was filed on behalf of the ward which was allowed and an amount of
Rs.2000/- was fixed as monthly maintenance which appellant is regularly paying
without any default. The respondent later on filed an application for enhancement of
maintenance to the tune of Rs.20,000/- per month which the appellant is resisting
on the ground that eth said amount claimed is exorbitant keeping in view his status,
income, other liabilities and therefore is resisting the claim of Rs.20,000/- as
monthly maintenance for the ward. The court below has accepted the objections of
the respondent that appellant is not paying the maintenance which averment is not
supported by any material. Similarly the trial court has accepted the contention of
respondent that appellant is resisting the application for maintenance which also is
not in its true perspective. The basis for passing impugned order being without any
supporting material, render the same illegal and bad in law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 9
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
a) Above contentions of appellant are based on contradictions.
Page 16
b) At one place, appellant says that Trial court was incorrect in saying that he did not resist
maintenance and at another place, he himself admits that he resisted enhanced maintenance sought
for by respondent for minor.
viii. Eighth Ground:
The court below has rejected the prayer of parenting plan of appellant on the ground
that appellant is talking high about parenting plan but is not paying the maintenance
of the child and the parenting plan cannot be implemented in isolation. The appellant
submits that it is incorrect that the appellant is not paying the maintenance in favour
of the ward as awarded by the court of competent jurisdiction and there is no
evidence on record in support of the said finding of the trial court. Secondly the
respondent has already filed an application for enhancement of maintenance of the
ward which is pending disposal before the court. The court cannot reject the
application of parenting plan of the appellant ton the aforesaid sole non-existent
ground. The court has to see the welfare of the child and un-interfered interaction of
the child/ward with father for which the apex court has laid down the guidelines in
the form of parenting plan. The trial court has miserably failed to consider the same
and rejected the same on non-existent ground alleged by the respondent that too
without any supporting material thereto on record which render impugned order
patently illegal and against law and judgement of the apex court. The impugned order
is patently against the interests of ward and his welfare. The impugned order Page 17
in effect will alienate the ward from appellant which is the object of respondent. The
appellant has been repeatedly approaching the court to allow him to have smooth
interaction with the ward that too as directed by the court and the trial court instead
of implementing its own directions has been blaming the appellant rather than
respondent who has miserably failed to comply the direction of the court from day
one.
a) The above averments are again contradictory.
b) It is very much in terms of impugned order that the trial court has directed that
petitioner/appellant shall be permitted to meet the child on last Friday of every
month from 3.00 PM to 4.00 PM in ADR Centre at Srinagar and Secretary, District
Legal Services Authority has been asked to facilitate the visit.
In terms of impugned order, appellant has been directed to pay conveyance charges of rs.500/- to
the respondent for each visit on the day of meeting itself against proper receipt. Appellant is bound
to pay the said amount of Rs.500/- in terms of impugned order.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 10
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
ix. Nineth Ground:
The Trial Court has held that the ward does not want to see and have interaction with
appellant as he refused to do so and wept and cried and demonstrated fear when he
was brough tin the court. The finding of the trial court is without any basis and not
supported by record. The appellant has also submitted that the finding of trial court
that appellant has chosen the path of litigation instead of reconciliation and it has
affected the tender Page 18 age of child who cannot be forced to act the way the father
wants him to be, is patently arbitrary and not fair. Appellant has been before the
court to allow him to have visitation rights and interaction and meetings with his own
son and the court passed the orders from time to time and allowed appellant to have
meeting and interaction with the ward twice in a month and this order is not being
implement by respondent. The appellant has right to knock the doors of the court for
implementation of its own orders and to enforce rights to meet the son. The trial
court, it appears, wants appellant to give up his right to see child and have meetings
and interaction with the ward/son and to enforce the court direction instead of
discharging its duties to see that the court orders are implemented and interests of
the ward are also protected and he is allowed to meet his father. The court below has
failed to consider that not allowing the father to meet the child is a violation to his
rights and the rights of the father and thus has exceeded its jurisdiction by passing
impugned order. To deny the father to have meeting with the son and have regular
interactions with him, will alienate the child from the father which is the objection of
the respondent and that is why she does not produce the child on the dates fixed. The
approach of the trial court is against law and interest of the ward and appellant.
Whenever the ward was allowed to have interaction with appellant be that in the
court room on 16.02.2019 or in the mediation centre, the ward was very happy and
enjoyed the Page 19 meeting with the appellant. This fact is born out from
photographs taken while meeting the ward in the court premises.
a) Yet again, above contentions are absurd. It is by virtue of impugned order that
respondent has been directed to produce the ward before the Mediation Centre to
have meeting with appellant.
x. Tenth Ground:
The court below while passing impugned order has dismissed application for
contempt/enforcement of orders. The trial court while dismissing application has
held mere absence of respondent cannot assume wilful disobedience of the court
passed and that respondent is a working lady and the ward is a minor, of the age of
innocence, who has to be persuaded by mother to accompany her to meet appellant
whom the child is unwilling to meet and similar other observations have also been
made by the Trial Court in the said judgment. The said finding is also not supported
by record nor pleaded nor proved by respondent and non-existent and unsupported
findings makes it clear that impugned order is arbitrary, against the record and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 11
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
cannot sustain in the eye of law.
a) The contentions, in view of discussions already made hereinbefore, are hollow.
b) Impugned order reveals that the Trial Court did not heard only counsel for parties
but parties in person as well. The Trial Court had made efforts to persuade parties to
evolve consensus with regard to disposal of application as well as Page 20 visitation
rights of the child, but Trial court found that parties after falling apart as husband
and wife, post dissolution of the marriage, were still not in a position to reconcile
with regard to the issues raised in the application. The Trial Court thereafter
proceeded to point out that appellant has already married and is living with his
second wife along with his new born children and the ward in the instant case is
living with mother and is studying in a leading private school known as Delhi Public
School and at that moment expenses regarding fee, uniform, tuition fee and all other
expenses of the child were being borne by respondent and she in her objections has
stated that she will never marry and will dedicate herself to the growth and
development of the child.
c) The Trial Court also found that when the child was brought before it, he refused to
talk to his father, cried and wept and demonstrated fear. It is worthwhile to mention
here that the Trial Court has even mentioned that appellant is father of child and in
his growth and development, the role of father is very important but the child is in
the custody of mother and must be under an overwhelming influence of mother
through in terms of order dated 5th November 2019, parties were advised to ensure
that positive image of parents was created in the mind of the child including
appellant but as ill luck would have it, the child has never been in the custody of
appellant as he has chosen the path of litigation instead of reconciliation and this
situation has affected tender age of Page 21 child who cannot be forced at that stage
to act the way his father wanted him to be and that his innocence has to be preserved
and slowly and gradually the child is to be motivated towards petitioner/appellant in
his own interest.
This, according to the Trial Court, is also causing hardships in ensuring the smooth visitation rights.
xi. Eleventh Ground:
The Trial Court has self-created the finding that because of Covid-19, it might not be possible for
mother to bring the child physically in mediation centre twice or thrice in a month, and that it is not
so pleaded in the objections by the respondent and the trial court cannot carve out a different case
for respondent and justify her non-compliance of court directions.
a) The above contentions of appellant are misconceived. Impugned order itself has been passed
during contagious COVID-19. Thus, the Trial Court has rightly taken everything in view particularly
observation of COVID-19 precautions. xii. Twelfth Ground:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 12
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
The Trial Court has also modified earlier orders about meeting the child twice in a
month. The said modification is self-created by the trial court and was not prayed for
by any of the parties. The trial court has exceeded its jurisdiction that too on baseless
and self-created reasons not supported by pleadings and evidence.
a) These averments, having regard to discussion made supra, are baseless. The Trial
Court was within its powers to make Page 22 modifications or alterations of the
orders which it, having regard to case set up by the parties, thought appropriate.
xiii. Thirteenth Ground:
The Trial Court has directed that the meeting and interaction be made in mediation
centre and has not considered the submissions of the appellant that the respondent is
creating problems there while meeting the child whenever he is brought there and is
off and on interfering and making hue and cry and is not allowing the appellant to
meet the ward separately in a separate room in isolation to the respondent and again
has referred the parties to mediation centre which in the given facts and
circumstances is bad in law. The trial court on one hand holds that the parties have
levelled allegations and counter allegations against each other during meeting in
mediation centre and on the other hand has again referred the parties there who have
no separate arrangement and enforcement agency to allow the father to meet the son.
On one hand the trial court modifies the order on this reason and on the other hand
again directs the parties to the mediation centre for meeting which is contradictory
and unrealistic. Respondent also filed an application for modification with the prayer
that smooth meeting is not possible in the mediation centre and prayed that the
meeting of the ward with appellant be fixed in the court itself. This application of
respondent supported the case of the appellant that meeting with ward smoothly and
without any interference of respondent is not possible in mediation centre but still
the trial court directed the Page 23 parties for interaction of ward in mediation centre
which patently reflets non-application of mind of the trial court.
a) Above assertions are unfounded.
b) All that has been done by the Trial Court in terms of impugned order does not
warrant for any interference having regard to the fact that impugned order is
comprehensive and verbose.
c) There is nothing wrong in the observations and directions made by the Trial Court.
xiv. Fourteenth Ground:
Application of respondent to modify place of meeting supported the cause of
appellant qua parenting plan to allow meeting of appellant with ward in the school
where there will be no interference of respondent but still the trial court has rejected
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 13
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
parental plan of appellant which renders the impugned order bad in law.
a) Five applications were pending before the Trial Court. Four applications were of
appellant. One application was that of respondent. Appellant sought initiation of
contempt proceedings against respondent for disobeying the orders of the Trial
Court. Objections to the applications for contempt and parenting plan were filed by
respondent, in which she took preliminary objection, which was that contents had
been downloaded from internet as the submissions were vague and appellant in order
to harass, humiliate and intimidate respondent had filed application on false and
frivolous Page 24 grounds. It was also alleged by respondent that appellant was least
bothered about welfare and upbringing of minor child because he had never proved
to be a good father, more particularly when he contracted second marriage and is
enjoying his luxurious life and has never spent quality time with minor and he never
saw the minor child muchless paying single penny for maintenance of minor. It was
also alleged by respondent in her objections that appellant has committed mental and
physical torture and had emotionally and economically abused the minor by one way
or the other and on the other hand respondent has not contracted second marriage
and is continuously taking care of the minor. It is also alleged by respondent in her
objections that appellant has not even paid conveyance charges to minor in
mediation centre which shows the character of appellant.
b) It was found by the Trial Court that basically contempt petition as pending before
the court of 1st Additional District Judge, Srinagar, but later on it was transferred to
the Trial Court and during its pendency, the Trial Court passed an order dated 5th
November 2019, vide which it was that appellant would be permitted to meet the
child on 2nd and 4th Friday of every month from 3.00 PM to 4.30 PM and
respondent was directed that she would not intervene at the time of meeting between
appellant and child. It is worthwhile to mention here that even the Trial Court went
further to say that child was expected to love both parents as both are important for
his Page 25 growth and development and that the parties might not love each other,
but for the best interest of the child, parties should allow one another to equally
contribute to the growth and development of the child. The Trial Court expected that
the order would be complied with in letter and spirit. The modification application
was accordingly disposed of.
c) Both the parties preferred applications for vacation/ modification of Trial court
order dated 5th November 2019.
Appellant sought cancellation of the aforesaid order and sought passing of judgement according to
parenting plan. In her application, respondent prayed for modification of the order dated 5th
November 2019 on the ground that appellant was harassing her in ADR Centre and prayed that
instead of ADR Centre, place of such interaction be kept before the Trial Court.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 14
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
d) It was also found by Trial Court that the court of 1st Additional District Judge, Srinagar, vide
order dated 19th October 2015 allowed application of appellant for visitation rights, by which
respondent was directed to produce ward in District Mediation Centre, District Court, Sanatghar,
Srinagar, and leave the custody of ward to appellant, who would have interaction/ interview with the
ward from 1.00 PM to 3.30 PM twice in a month on 1st and 4th Saturday. The said order was kept in
force for a period of one year only and thereafter the as parties could have sought
alteration/amendment/ modification of the said order, if they chose so.
Page 26
e) It was also found by the Trial Court from the record that respondent sought modification of order
dated 19th October 2015, which, in view of consensual statement made at Bar by the parties, was
allowed vide order dated 8 th August 2017, with a direction that father would have
interaction/interview with the ward twice in the month on 1st and 3rd Saturday.
f) Appellant alleged disobedience of the orders of the court of 1st Additional District Judge, Srinagar,
by respondent.
g) Perusal of impugned order passed by the Trial court would reveals that Trial Court had tried its
best to persuade the parties to evolve the consensus with regard to disposal of applications, but
parties remained impassive. Thereafter the Trial Court proceeded to say that appellant has moved in
his life as he has contracted second marriage and is living with his second wife along with new born
children, whereas the ward is living with the mother and she has not contracted second marriage as
according to her she will never marry and will dedicate herself to the growth and development of
child.
h) The Trial Court has also found that petitioner has not led any evidence to show that there was any
wilful disobedience on the part of respondent to comply the orders. It had also been ascertained by
the Trial Court that as and when respondent brought child, the meeting was not smooth and that
parties have levelled allegations and counter allegations against each other during the meeting and
that it impacts upon the psyche of child which is reflected from the fact that when the Trial Page 27
Court asked the child to talk to his father and to be in his lap, he started crying, weeping and wailing
being under severe fear psychosis.
xv. Fifteenth Ground:
Order impugned as a whole is against records, facts and pleadings. The trial court has
carved out a different case in absence of pleadings and records and thereby exceeded
its jurisdiction. The trial court has also not recorded any reason that too valid one to
reject application of appellant and prayers made therein. The trial court has also not
considered the submissions of the appellant that respondent is also not allowing
smooth meeting of the ward with him and that respondent also does not comply the
directions of the court which has contained him to approach the court with one after
another applications. The trial court has also ignored that fact to save the relations of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 15
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
appellant with the ward and ensure that it become closer by allowing the appellant to
meet the ward in free and un-interfered atmosphere. Respondent herself had also
prayed that smooth meeting of ward with appellant is not possible in mediation
centre. The trial court ought to have in such circumstances allowed the appellant to
meet the ward in school or as per parenting plan which the trial court has not done.
a) These assertions of appellant are baseless.
b) I have gone through impugned order. It does not suffer from any infirmity.
Appellant's contentions in the appeal are repetitive and exaggerated. It is on the basis
of the case set up Page 28 by both the parties that the Trial court has passed order
impugned. All that has done by the Trial Court in terms of impugned order does not
call for any interference as is being hammer and tongs sought for by appellant. There
is no infirmness or illegality, as alleged by appellant, in impugned order.
xvi. Sixteenth Ground:
The Trial Court without justification and prayer of any party has enhanced the
conveyance charges of its own which is patently illegal and bad in law. Respondent at
many occasions did not accept the conveyance charges from appellant for mala fide
consideration to project that appellant is not complying the directions of the Court.
Fact of the matter is that appellant always sees that the orders of the trial court in all
respects are implemented but respondent is regular default of the same.
a) These averments are without any basis and, as such, specious.
b) The Trial Court has been right and correct in fixing Rs.500/-
as conveyance charge and same does not need to be modified at the mere asking of appellant.
c) The contention of appellant that respondent was not receiving conveyance charges, is a sham
contention.
d) It is made clear here that as and when respondent declines to receive conveyance charges,
appellant shall be at liberty to deposit conveyance charges before the Trial Court, which shall be
released by the Trial Court in favour of respondent. xvii. Seventeenth Ground:
Page 29 The Trial Court has not considered written arguments of appellant nor heard
him in person which amounts to denial of justice to appellant.
a) Again, these contentions are over-exaggerated. This ground has been fully
answered, deliberated upon and decided by this Court in Fourteenth Ground.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 16
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
b) The Trial Court, as noted above, found that learned 1st Additional District Judge,
Srinagar, by virtue of its order dated 19th October 2015, had allowed appellant's
application for visitation rights. In terms thereof, respondent was directed to produce
ward in District Mediation Centre, District Court, Sanatghar, Srinagar, and leave the
custody of ward to appellant, who would have interaction/ interview with the ward
from 1.00 PM to 3.30 PM twice in a month on 1st and 4th Saturday. However, the
said order was kept in force for a period of one year only as parties were given liberty
to seek its alteration/amendment/ modification. The Trial Court also found that
respondent was seeking modification of order dated 19th October 2015. The said
application was by virtue of order dated 8th August 2017 allowed as there was
consensus between the parties and it was directed that father would have
interaction/interview with the ward twice in the month on 1st and 3rd Saturday. It
was also found by Trial court that appellant did not lead any evidence to show
non-compliance of orders by respondent.
The Trial Court also viewed the parties disinclined to remain Page 30 calm and composed during
interactions, causing fear psychosis to the ward, and in order to address the issue keeping in view
the welfare of the child, the Trial Court found that frequent visitation rights twice or thrice in a
month at that stage was not in the best interest and welfare of the child as he was in the state of fear
coupled with strained relations between parents. However, the Trial Court immediately thereafter
said appellant being father of the child could not be deprived of visitation rights because balance
was to be struck between rights of father and welfare of child. It was in view of COVID-19 that
instead of twice or thrice in a month, the Trial Court directed respondent to bring the child on the
last Friday of every month in ADR Centre Srinagar.
c) Impugned order in clear cut terms shows that respondent has been directed to facilitate meeting
of appellant with his son and shall not cause any hindrance in the interaction.
d) There is an advice, and not a direction, given by the Trial Court to petitioner to bear the education
and all related expenses of the child including tuition fee etc. so that he can contribute satisfactorily
to the health and education of the child. This advice of the Trial Court cannot be said to be wrong,
incorrect or illegal.
7. Having regard to all that has been said above, the Trial Court while rendering impugned order has
taken note of all aspects of the matter and as a consequence of which, it is reiterated that appeal is
dismissed Page 31 as has been so done by this Court vide judgement dated 18th October 2022.
8. Based on the contexts and discussions made, review petition is also dismissed with costs of
Rs.20,000/- to be deposited by appellant/ review petitioner within one month from today. In the
event he fails to do so, Registry shall take all steps for its recovery.
9. It may not be out of place to make a mention that it appears that this Court while rendering the
judgement dated 18th October 2022 did not stare at the cause-title of the appeal styled by appellant
as Parvez Ahmad Khan v. Areeb (Divorcee). However, while perusing Review Petition, this Court has
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 17
Parvez Ahmad Khan Age 46 vs Areeb D/O Mohammad Shafi Malik R/O Lone ... on 13 February, 2025
found that the expression "Divorcee" has been attached and used by appellant/review petitioner
with the name of respondent, which is unbecoming of and reflects his mindset.
If appellant/review petitioner has used this word/expression of "Divorcee" against the name of
respondent, then he should have also used the word/expression "Divorcer" against his name. It is in
view of this fact that the aforesaid expression/word used by appellant/review petitioner against the
name of respondent has not been mentioned/ typed in cause-title of this judgement.
It is very painful to see that how a woman, even as on today, is being treated.
If a woman is being labelled and shown as "Divorcee", as if it is her Surname/Caste, then a man,
who divorces his wife, is also to be called and suffixed as "Divorcer", which, however, would be a bad
practice. Such a practice should be stopped rather crushed. And henceforth if any
motion/petition/appeal indicates and reflects in its Page 32 cause-title the word "Divorcee", against
the name of a woman, such a motion / petition/appeal should not be diarised or registered muchless
entertained.
10.To stop such a practice, a circular-instruction is required to be issued, instructing that if any
motion/petition/appeal is found to have the cause- title with the word/expression "Divorcee"
against the name of woman, such a petition/motion/appeal should not be diarized/registered. Such
instructions should also be issued/transmitted to the Subordinate Courts.
Registrar Judicial of this Court is directed to place this judgement before Hon'ble the Chief Justice
for passing of kind orders and issuance of circular instructions, in view of above.
(Vinod Chatterji Koul) Judge Srinagar 13.02.2025 Ajaz Ahmad, Secretary Whether approved for
reporting? Yes/no.
Page 33
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/30814559/ 18
