Parvaiz Ahmad Hanga vs Union Territory Of J&K And Anr on 6 June, 2025
Parvaiz Ahmad Hanga vs Union Territory Of J&K And Anr on 6
June, 2025
Author: Rahul Bharti
Bench: Rahul Bharti
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178
AT SRINAGAR
Bail App No. 155/2024
Reserved On: 25th of March, 2025.
Pronounced On: 06.06.2025
Parvaiz Ahmad Hanga
... Petitioner(s)
Through: -
Mr Sajjad Ashraf Mir, Advocate.
V/s
Union Territory of J&K and Anr.
... Respondent(s)
Through: -
Mr Rais-ud-Din Ganai, Dy. AG.
CORAM:
Hon'ble Mr Justice Rahul Bharti, Judge (JUDGMENT)
1. The petitioner-Parvaiz Ahmad Hanga, acting through his wife Tabasum Parviaz,
has come forward, as an undertrial in custody, invoking jurisdiction of this Court
under section 483 of the Bharatiya Nagarik Suraksha Sanhita (BNSS), 2023, for
seeking bail in a criminal case initiated by reference to FIR No. 23/2024 registered by
the Police Station, Lar District Ganderbal, undergoing trial before the Court of
learned Principal Sessions Judge, Ganderbal.
2. It is by reference to an incident of 21st of May, 2024 that the registration of FIR
No. 23/2024 of the Police 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 Station Lar had taken place when a
motor cycle No. JK04C 1974 upon being signalled to stop at a police naka set up at
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122177770/ 1
Parvaiz Ahmad Hanga vs Union Territory Of J&K And Anr on 6 June, 2025
Yenhama, Lar driven by a motor cyclist tried to flee but got caught resulting in search
and discovery of polythene bag containing three (03) bottles of Tusklis-T leading to
further discovery of facts in interrogation that there are other persons involved in the
illicit activities.
3. The petitioner was not the one who was allegedly caught with the alleged illicit
drug in said naka incident but came to be implicated on the basis of the alleged
statement of the culprit motor cyclist-Dawood Ahmad Rather that the alleged illicit
drug was received by him from the petitioner.
4. The petitioner, upon being arrested by the Investigating Officer (IO) of Police
Station Lar, is said to have confessed that he was dealing in the narcotic business
illegally and that is how the petitioner came to be put up for trial as one of the
co-accused.
5. The petitioner is said to be carrying a medical history at the time of his arrest and,
as such, during the course of his custody medical complications related to him came
to be observed which resulted in the petitioner being taken by the Jail/Police
Authorities 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 to medical treatment to the referral Police
Hospital, Srinagar.
6. The petitioner came to apply to the trial court of learned Principal Sessions Judge,
Ganderbal for bail on medical grounds.
7. The trial court of learned Principal Sessions Judge, Ganderbal reckoned the
compulsion and constraint of keeping the petitioner in custody on account of nature
of alleged offences slapped against him outweighing the consideration of releasing
the petitioner on bail on medical grounds as reported and related to his health.
8. In its order dated 11th of December, 2024, the court of learned Principal Sessions
Judge, Ganderbal has reproduced the extract of the health status report of the
petitioner confirmed by the medical team of doctors who attended upon the
petitioner while in the state of custody and the same is reproduced as under:
"The health status report states that on 10-07- 2024 the inmate was referred to Police
Hospital Srinagar. The X-Ray is showing normal study, and USG abdomen is
suggestive of fatty liver Grade-1, small Hyperechoic lesion seen in left lobe,
uncontrolled blood sugars. He was managed conservatively.
On 10-08-2024 the inmate was referred to Police Hospital Srinagar for follow-up. On
16-09- 2024, the inmate was referred to Police Hospital Srinagar again for follow up
and on 05-10-2024 he 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 was again referred to Police Hospital
Srinagar for follow up/check-up.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122177770/ 2
Parvaiz Ahmad Hanga vs Union Territory Of J&K And Anr on 6 June, 2025
It is further submitted in the health status report on 08-10-2024 that the inmate was
referred to Superspeciality Hospital Shireen Bagh Srinagar for
Urological/Nephrological consultation. He was examined by consultant Urogram. He
was further advised Urological consultation. He was also examined by consultant
Urologicst who after examination advised medication and CECT abdomen/pelvis and
Urogram. On 25-11-2024, the inmate was again referred to Superspeciality Hospital,
Srinagar for CECT Abdomen/Pelvis with Urogam. The consultant Radiologist in view
of raised creatinine advised Nephrological clearance for the above said investigation.
The consultant Nephrologist after examination advised medication and further
advised to wait for one week. On 09- 12-2024 CT Urogram was done and the report
reveals no residual lesion/rest unremarkable study."
9. The petitioner's medical condition is critical which fact is beyond any cavil and for that this court
needs not to go into any sort of appraisal just for the sake of doing some filling to this judgment.
10. In a case related to grant or denial of bail on medical grounds to an accused person under legal
custody, be pre-trial or pending trial, the court, be it trial court or the High Court, when approached
in the matter is invariably caught in a double bind situation.
11. The ponderable aspect in such a situation is to weigh whether to let an ailing and sick accused
person under custody to get the medical treatment as per the Prison/Jail's protocol, without being
enlarged on bail 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 for enabling him to fend for himself or herself, and thereby
let the situation become progressively aggravated then to be left later with no other option except to
let the ailing/ sick accused to be granted a duration bail to be co-timed with the medical treatment
so as to enable the ailing/ sick accused and his or her family members to act upon the self efforts
and expenses at their own disposal to get the ailing/ sick accused medically attended and
convalesced or to have a very realistic assessment of the ailing/ sick accused person's reported
medical condition while in custody state and take a timely and preemptive call to grant bail for a
duration so as to enable the ailing/ sick accused to get himself or herself medically treated as early
as possible before medical aggravations and complications set in with respect to his/her health
condition.
12. With the state of failing health of an ailing/ sick accused person under custody, his/ her
immediate family, be it parents, spouse, children or near relatives, as the case may be, are equally
and directly concerned without a miss besides the ailing/ sick accused person himself or herself
being under unceasing concern notwithstanding the medical attention being provided by the Jail
authorities.
2025:JKLHC-SGR:178
13. Drawing from practical understanding and experience, even the jail authorities may, in any given
case, in very realistic terms nurse a concern for an ailing/sick under trial person in custody and
intend his or her family members/relatives to be proactive and involved so as to get the ailing/sick
accused person not only medically but personally attended for his or her quick recovery and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122177770/ 3
Parvaiz Ahmad Hanga vs Union Territory Of J&K And Anr on 6 June, 2025
betterment.
14. Prison system and administration in India, in terms of its infrastructure and resources, is ever
over- burdened and over-stretched with shortage of space and manpower to deal with crowd of
prisoners in routine. In such like scenario to expect an ailing/sick prisoner with an aggravating
medical condition to get and receive full and timely care and attention of the jail authorities without
fail would be a utopian rather than a realistic expectation.
Case law with respect to bail on medical grounds:
15. In the case of 'Amar Sadhuram Mulchandani v.
Directorate of Enforcement & Anr. (2024 SCC Online SC 4408)', the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India came to grant indulgence by enlarging the petitioner in the said case on interim bail based
upon medical condition of the petitioner reported by the 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 medical team at Sir
JJ Group of Hospitals, Mumbai. The petitioner in that case was 67 years old sick person suffering
from diabetes, hypertension, chronic kidney disease and ischemic heart disease and his condition
becoming bad while in state of custody as an under-trial.
16. In the case of 'Satinder Kumar Jain v. Directorate of Enforcement (2023 SCC Online SC 686)',
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India relied upon the medical report of GB Pant Institute of
Post-Graduate Medical Education and Research with respect to medical condition of the petitioner
being an under- trial and showing indulgence to release on interim bail on medical grounds by
reckoning the fact that a citizen is having a right to take treatment of his choice at his own expenses
in a private hospital.
17. In the case of 'State of Uttar Pradesh v. Gayatri Prasad Prajapati', the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India in its order dated 15th of October, 2020 in disposing of Criminal Appeal No. 686/2020 has
registered a caveat which is meant for due cognizance that even in the matter of granting bail on
medical grounds, the totality of the facts and circumstances of the case are to be kept in due
perspective including 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 the satisfaction that treatment offered to an under-
trial for medical ailment while in state of custody being not adequate warranting further treatment
by any particular medical institute necessitating the release of an under-trial on interim bail on
medical grounds. The Hon'ble Supreme Court of India reiterated that there can be no two views with
regard to proposition that human treatment to all including an accused is requirement of law and a
prisoner who is suffering from an ailment has to be given due treatment and care while in prison.
18. In the case of 'Dipak Shubhashchandra Mehta v.
Central Bureau of Investigation and Anr. [2012 (4) SCC 134]', the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India
has delved on the matter of grant of bail to an under-trial on medical grounds. In this case, the
petitioner was the Joint Managing Director of Vishal Exports Overseas Limited, a Public Limited
Company, against which due to non-payment of advances availed from various Banks criminal
complaints came to be filed involving the promoters and directors and one of the FIRs was by
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122177770/ 4
Parvaiz Ahmad Hanga vs Union Territory Of J&K And Anr on 6 June, 2025
Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) for commission of offences under sections 406, 420, 467, 468
and 471 read with 120-B of the Indian Penal Code (IPC), 1860 resulting in arrest of the petitioner
2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 on 31st of March, 2010 followed by police custody and judicial custody. The
petitioner in the said case stood granted temporary bail on three occasions on medical grounds.
Upon presentation of the charge sheet by the Central Bureau of Investigation (CBI) involving the
petitioner as accused No.4, being an under-trial, an application was preferred before the trial court
seeking bail which was dismissed and an attempt on the part of the petitioner in the said case to
seek regular bail from the High Court of Gujarat had resulted in failure. The petitioner again came to
be arrested in another FIR in which a charge sheet was submitted but again the petitioner was
released on temporary bail. An attempt on the part of the said petitioner in seeking regular bail
suffered failure which resulted in the matter landing before the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
which a point for consideration came to be formulated as to whether the petitioner had made out a
case for regular bail and whether the High Court is justified in dismissing his application. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India came forward to reiterate the position of law that orders granting/
refusing bail by the High Courts are not ordinarily admissible to be interfered with save in
exceptional cases. The medical condition of the 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 petitioner was put forth to
the effect that he was having uncontrolled high blood pressure with thirty percent blindness in his
right eye and having undergone a surgery for vitreous hemorrhage which had re-occurred for which
the medical advice was to go for second surgery to save his eyes. During the period of his custody,
the petitioner in the said case is said to have suffered obstruction jaundice requiring long intensive
treatment thereby rendering the petitioner in a condition making out a case for his bail on medical
grounds. The Medical Officer of the Central Jail Dispensary Ahmedabad had also certified that the
petitioner in the said case needed treatment from Specialist/Super-Specialist/ Cardiologist/
Gastroenterologist/ Ophthalmologist for his multiple problems. In paragraphs No. 32, 33 and 34,
the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India came forward with the observations which are worth
reproducing herein as under:
"32. The court granting bail should exercise its discretion in a judicious manner and
not as a matter of course. Though at the stage of granting bail, a detailed examination
of evidence and elaborate documentation of the merits of the case need not be
undertaken, there is a need to indicate in such orders reasons for prima facie
concluding why bail was being granted, particularly, where the accused is charged of
having committed a serious offence. The court granting bail has to consider, among
other circumstances, the factors such as (a) 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 the nature of
accusation and severity of punishment in case of conviction and the nature of
supporting evidence; (b) reasonable apprehension of tampering with the witness or
apprehension of threat to the complainant; and (c) prima facie satisfaction of the
court in support of the charge. In addition to the same, the court while considering a
petition for grant of bail in a non- bailable offence, apart from the seriousness of the
offence, likelihood of the accused fleeing from justice and tampering with the
prosecution witnesses, have to be noted.
33. Considering the present scenario and that there is no possibility of
commencement of trial in the near future and also of the fact that the appellant is in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122177770/ 5
Parvaiz Ahmad Hanga vs Union Territory Of J&K And Anr on 6 June, 2025
custody from 31-3-2010, except the period of interim bail i.e. from 15-9-2011 to
30-11- 2011, we hold that it is not a fit case to fix any outer limit taking note of the
materials collected by the prosecution. This Court has repeatedly held that when the
undertrial prisoners are detained in jail custody to an indefinite period, Article 21 of
the Constitution is violated.
34. As posed in Sanjay Chandra case, we are also asking the same question i.e.
whether the speedy trial is possible in the present case for the reasons mentioned
above."
19. In the case of 'Mangilal Thakur v. State of Madhya Pradesh (2022 SCC Online SC 1066), interim
bail for a period of thirty (30) days on medical grounds came to be granted by the Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India.
20. The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi in the case of 'Nitish Kumar v. Directorate of Revenue
Intelligence (Bail Application No. 2072/2023)', in its judgment dated 29th of August, 2023, dealing
with the grant of bail on medical grounds in favour of an under-trial accused with accusation of
having made efforts to get four 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 containers cleared containing a total 34.7 kgs
of heroin, came to deal with the examination and elements of bail on medical grounds. In paragraph
No. 16 of its judgment, the Single Bench of the High Court of Delhi has observed that the health of
the petitioner has to be given primacy as it is his fundamental right to be given adequate and
effective treatment whilst in jail but in case specialized or sustained treatment and care are
necessary which are not possible whilst in jail the petitioner is entitled to the benefit of interim bail
on medical grounds.
21. In the case of 'Sameer Mahandru v. Directorate of Enforcement', the High Court of Delhi in
dealing with Bail Application No. 1343/2023 read with Crl.M.A. 10859/ 2023 came to deal with the
case of an under- trial/ arrestee having medical issues related to his health by a long deliberation on
the matter. In this case, the High Court of Delhi came to pose a question as to whether the petitioner
is entitled to interim bail as being sick or infirm in terms of proviso to section 45 (1) of the
prevention of Money Laundering Act, 2002. This issue was examined in conjunction with section
437 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, as was then in force, by identifying the nature of
sickness or infirmity envisaged for enabling grant of 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 bail in favour of an
arrestee. The Hon'ble High Court of Delhi came to refer to its previous judgment in the case of
'Kewal Krishan Kumar v. Enforcement Directorate', neutral citation No. 2023:DHC:1925, in which it
came to be held that sickness or infirmity is to be of such a nature that it is life threatening and
requires medical assistance that cannot be provided in penitentiary hospitals. The observations of
the Hon'ble High Court of Bombay in the case of 'Mahendra Manilal Shah v. Rashmikant
Mansukhlal Shah (2009 SCC Online Bom 2095)', came to be referred as to the nature of sickness to
be seen as to whether an accused as an arrestee can be treated in Government hospital in custody.
The High Court of Delhi came to hold that a cumulative consideration of the legislative intent of the
PMLA and precedents indicates that proviso to section 45 (1) is a relaxation to the sick or infirm
persons provided that sickness or infirmity is so grave that it is life threatening and cannot be
treated by jail hospitals. It has been observed by the High Court of Delhi that discretionary power of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122177770/ 6
Parvaiz Ahmad Hanga vs Union Territory Of J&K And Anr on 6 June, 2025
the court in granting bail in relation to a sick or infirm person should not be exercised at the last
breathing stage, but when adequate treatment is warranted for the accused 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178
persons with ailment. In paragraphs No. 50 and 51 of its judgment, the High Court of Delhi has
come to observe that health condition of a human being deserves utmost importance and right to
health is one of the most significant dimensions of article 21 of the Constitution of India entitling
him to a right to get himself adequately and effectively treated in which connection exercise of
discretion of grant of bail is not to be exercised only as a last resort but by reckoning that freedom is
a cherished fundamental right.
22. The High Court of Delhi again in the case of 'Sanjay Jain v. Enforcement Directorate', in its
decision dated 5th of June, 2023 in Bail Application No. 3807/2022, again came to deal with grant
of bail in favour of an under trial/ arrestee on medical grounds. In paragraphs No. 14 and 15, the
Hon'ble High Court of Delhi came to bear in perspective the position of law settled on the issue of
grant of bail on medical grounds by the judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India. In
paragraph No.22 of its decision, the High Court of Delhi came to identify Article 21 of the
Constitution of India providing for protection of life and personal liberty which right is not meant to
be curtailed, except according to procedure established by law in which regard liberty of a person
who is 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 accused or convicted of an offence can be curtailed according to
procedure established by law but right to health, also recognized as an important facet of Article 21
of the constitution of India, is meant to sub-serve a person who is an under-trial or for that matter
even a convict lodged in a jail by making it an obligation upon the State to provide adequate and
effective medical treatment to every person lodged in jail. In this judgment also, the nature of
sickness envisaged to be a ground for grant of bail to an accused/ arrestee came to be taken up to
come to a point of exposition that a sickness co-related with grant of bail on medical grounds has to
be one which is life threatening warranting specialized treatment not available in jail hospital/s.
23. Now coming to the take of our own High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh on the issue of
grant of bail on medical grounds, this Court in the case of 'Amarjeet Singh v. State of J&K and Anr.
(2019 SCC Online J&K 177)' came to examine the medical condition of the petitioner in the said case
to hold that he was not suffering from any fatal life threatening disease requiring specialized
treatment not available in the jail for enabling him to earn bail on medical grounds but reserved a
right in his favour to apply for 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178 bail before the trial court on medical grounds
if in future he would suffer any serious complication.
24. In the case of 'Sajad Ahmad Bhat v. UT of J&K through Police Station Bijbehara (2022 SCC
Online J&K 453)', the petitioner in the said case was confirmed to be suffering from serious ailment
under regular treatment of Government Medical College (GMC), Anantnag without any
improvement in the health condition of the petitioner for which immediate surgery came to be
advised. By reference to section 37 of the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic Substances (NDPS) Act,
1985 related to the grant of bail, read with section 439 of the Criminal Procedure Code, 1973, the
learned Single Bench of the High Court of Jammu & Kashmir and Ladakh came to dislodge the
observations of the learned Sessions Judge that the bail on medical grounds cannot be granted to
the petitioner of the said case as he was involved in a heinous offence. The petitioner came to be
granted bail on medical grounds by this Court by referring to the latest medical report.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122177770/ 7
Parvaiz Ahmad Hanga vs Union Territory Of J&K And Anr on 6 June, 2025
25. Keeping in view the factual aspect of the present case relatable to the medical condition of the
petitioner and the legal position relatable to grant of bail on medical 2025:JKLHC-SGR:178
grounds, this Court comes to a confirmed situation that the kidney functioning of the petitioner is
compromised and that requires not only recurring medical monitoring but also attention,
specialized medical treatment and care which in the state of petitioner, being in custody as an under
trial, may not be possible to be administered to the petitioner and, as such, may risk the health and
life of the petitioner at any given point of time and, therefore, a case is made out for indulgence of
this Court in granting bail to the petitioner.
26. The petitioner is hereby granted bail for a duration of four months subject to the furnishing of
bond, personal as well as surety, to an amount of Rs. 5 lac each to the satisfaction of the court of
Principal Sessions Judge, Ganderbal who shall also settle terms and conditions of the bail hereby
granted by this Court and then enlarge the petitioner on bail. Any further extension of bail upon
expiry of period of four months, is to be considered by the learned trial court on the basis of
assessment of medical condition and reports related to the petitioner.
2025:JKLHC-SGR:178
27. Copy of this judgment be forward by the Registrar Judicial, Srinagar to the court of Principal
Sessions Judge, Ganderbal for notice and compliance.
28. The petitioner shall also be at liberty to produce certified copy of this judgment for the notice
and compliance at the end of the court of Principal Sessions Judge, Ganderbal.
29. Disposed of.
(Rahul Bharti) Judge SRINAGAR 06.06.2025 "TAHIR"
i. Whether the Judgment is approved for reporting? Yes.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/122177770/ 8
