Patiraj vs State Of U.P. And 20 Others on 1 April, 2025
Patiraj vs State Of U.P. And 20 Others on 1 April, 2025
Author: Rohit Ranjan Agarwal
Bench: Rohit Ranjan Agarwal
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44971
Court No. - 9
Case :- MATTERS UNDER ARTICLE 227 No. - 2809 of 2025
Petitioner :- Patiraj
Respondent :- State Of U.P. And 20 Others
Counsel for Petitioner :- Gyan Prakash Mourya
Counsel for Respondent :- C.S.C.
Hon'ble Rohit Ranjan Agarwal,J.
1. This writ petition has been filed with the following prayer:-
"i) To Issue an order or direction, directing the Civil Judge Junior Division (J.D.),
Howali, Varanasi, District-Varanasi to considered and decided the Civil Suit
No.750/2002 (Ramji and Ors. vs. Patiraj and Ors.) in accordance with law which is
still pending before the Civil Judge Junior Division, within stipulated time period as
may be fixed by this Hon'ble Court."
2. From the perusal of the record, it transpires that the petitioner has prayed for early disposal of
Civil Suit No.750 of 2002, pending before the court of Civil Judge Junior Division (J.D.), Howali,
District-Varanasi.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49250400/ 1
Patiraj vs State Of U.P. And 20 Others on 1 April, 2025
3. The Division Bench of this Court in Ali Shad Usmani vs. Ali Isteba, 2015 (2) ADJ 250 (DB) has
held that no direction can be issued to the sub-ordinate courts for deciding the suit within stipulated
period. Relevant portion of the judgment is extracted hereasunder:-
"We are not inclined to issue a direction for the expeditious hearing of a Civil Suit
which is pending before the Civil Judge (Junior Division), District-Azamgarh. It
would be most inappropriate to Court to entertain a writ petition under Article 226
and/or under Article 227 of the Constitution simply for the purpose of expediting the
hearing of a suit. Such orders, if granted, place a class of litigants, who move the
court in a separate and preferential category whereas other cases which may be of
similar or greater antiquity and urgency are left to be decided in the normal channel.
Hence, any such direction may be issued with the greatest care and circumspection
by the High Court otherwise the Civil Courts will be overburdened only with requests
for expeditious disposal of suits, which have been expedited by the High Court. Most
of the litigants cannot afford the expense of moving the High court and would not,
therefore, be in a position to have the benefit of such an order.
Ultimately, it must be left to the judicious exercise of discretion of the concerned
Court to determine whether a ground for urgency has been made out. We emphasize
that there may be other cases such as involving senior citizens, those who are
differently abled or people suffering from a particular disablilty socio-economic or
otherwise which may prime cause of urgent disposal. It is for the learned Trial Judge
in each case to apply his or her mind and decide whether the hearing of the suit to be
expedited.
For these reasons, we are not inclined to entertain the petition. The petition is,
accordingly, dismissed. There shall be no order as to cost."
4. Recently, the Constitution Bench of Hon'ble Supreme Court in High Court Bar Association,
Allahabad vs. State of Uttar Pradesh and others (2024) 6 SCC 267 has held that Constitution Courts
should refrain from fixing a time-bound schedule for the disposal of cases pending before any other
courts. The Court further held that issue of prioritising the disposal of cases should be best left to the
decision of the courts concerned where the cases are pending. Relevant para 47.3 of the said
judgment is extracted hereasunder :-
"Constitutional courts, in the ordinary course, should refrain from fixing a
time-bound schedule for the disposal of cases pending before any other courts.
Constitutional courts may issue directions for the time-bound disposal of cases only
in exceptional circumstances. The issue of prioritising the disposal of cases should be
best left to the decision of the courts concerned where the cases are pending;"
5. In view of the Constitution Bench judgment of Apex Court as well as Division Bench judgments of
this Court in High Court Bar Association, Allahabad (supra) and Ali Shad Usmani (supra), this
Court declines to grant the relief, as prayed for.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49250400/ 2
Patiraj vs State Of U.P. And 20 Others on 1 April, 2025
6. The writ petition is accordingly dismissed.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 SK Goswami
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/49250400/ 3
