Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India And 8 Others on 30 April, 2025
Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India And 8 Others on 30 April, 2025
Author: Ashwani Kumar Mishra
Bench: Ashwani Kumar Mishra
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:68628-DB
Court No. - 29
Case :- SPECIAL APPEAL No. - 7 of 2025
Appellant :- Pawan Kumar
Respondent :- Union Of India And 8 Others
Counsel for Appellant :- In Person
Counsel for Respondent :- A.S.G.I.,Anoop Tiwari,Ashok Kumar Lal
Hon'ble Ashwani Kumar Mishra,J.
Hon'ble Praveen Kumar Giri,J.
1. Following orders were passed in the matter on 23.4.2025:-
"1. Heard learned Amicus Curiae for the appellant and Sri Anoop Tiwari, learned
counsel for the respondents.
2. On the previous occasion, we provided services of an Amicus Curiae to the
appellant-petitioner, who had appeared in person. The petitioner is a Class-IV
employee and apparently not well-versed with the niceties of law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67422066/ 1
Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India And 8 Others on 30 April, 2025
3. When the matter is taken up today, learned Amicus Curiae points out that the
disciplinary inquiry has been conducted in violation of principles of natural justice.
He submits that previous inquiry officer Sri M.C. Rai had superannuated without
concluding the inquiry. A new inquiry officer was appointed on 2.6.2020. He has
submitted his inquiry report on 11.9.2020. In the inquiry report it is stated that
preliminary hearing was conducted on 23.6.2020 and 26.6.2020.
4. Our attention has been invited to documents at page nos.154 and 208 in order to
show that the records relating to inquiry were actually handed over to the new
inquiry officer by the Presenting Officer on 23.6.2020 and 26.6.2020. It is, therefore,
submitted that when the inquiry officer was not having the records of inquiry the
question of affording any opportunity of hearing during the course of inquiry did not
arise. It is submitted that the inquiry proceedings are, therefore, vitiated for denial of
reasonable opportunity of hearing to the charged employee.
5. Learned counsel for the respondent states that these grounds are not taken in the
writ.
6. We have already indicated that the petitioner, who has been dismissed from the
post of sweeper was contesting the matter and it is only with the assistance of learned
Amicus Curiae that all such facts are highlighted before the Court. In such
circumstances, we are not inclined to ignore the submissions advanced on behalf of
the learned Amicus Curiae. However, in order to give an opportunity to the bank to
controvert such submissions we adjourn the matter for the day.
7. Repeat as fresh once again on 30.4.2025."
2. This Court had passed the above order after noticing the contention of amicus that the inquiry
proceedings itself were not fair and proper and that reasonable opportunity of defending the
appellant was denied to him. It was also submitted that the inquiry officer was not even having
records of the inquiry on the date when the appellant was called for hearing.
3. Since such contention was not specifically taken earlier, therefore, we adjourned the matter on the
last occasion with an intend to give opportunity to bank to examine the records and explain the
circumstances.
4. Learned counsel appearing for the respondent bank states that the inquiry was in an advanced
stage when the new inquiry officer was appointed and, therefore, he had proceeded against the
appellant as per law. It is, however, not disputed that on the date fixed for hearing the records were
not received from the previous inquiry officer.
5. Sri Ashok Kumar Lal appearing for the bank states that there were two reports of the handwriting
experts as also a report of the forensic expert, all of which clearly indicated that the signatures of the
appellant on the admit card was at variance with his admitted signatures.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67422066/ 2
Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India And 8 Others on 30 April, 2025
6. In this regard the claim of the appellant was that the examination was conducted within the
premises of the engineering college where CCTV footage was installed and that such CCTV footage
ought to have been examined. It is also submitted that the neither handwriting expert has not been
produced nor he has been allowed to cross examine him. It is further stated that forensic report is
also not specific as to which of the signatures have tallied with the disputed signatures. On these
aspects it is submitted that an opportunity of hearing otherwise was required which has not been
given to the appellant.
7. Our attention has also been invited to page 305 to 307 of the paper book by the counsel for the
appellant to state that the signatures are almost similar and since the joining otherwise had taken
place after several years, therefore, some variations in signatures would not lead to an inescapable
conclusion that it was someone else who had participated in place of the appellant during the course
of examination. The recruitment is otherwise to the post of sweeper.
8. Considering the facts and circumstances in its entirety as also the fact that we have found that
reasonable opportunity of contest has not been given to the appellant, inasmuch as none of the
witnesses are allowed to be cross-examined and even on the date of hearing the complete records
were not available with the inquiry officer, as such, it would not be appropriate to allow the findings
of disciplinary authority on the strength of such inquiry proceedings.
9. We are of the view that no prejudice would be caused to the bank if an appropriate inquiry in
terms of the above observation is allowed to be made.
10. The argument that opportunity was given at the appellate stage also does not impress us in view
of the fact that the inquiry report which was relied upon by the appellate authority for sustaining the
punishment itself was not conducted in a fair and proper manner, therefore, mere opportunity of
hearing at the stage of appeal would not cure the defect.
11. Disciplinary inquiry are quasi judicial proceedings in which a fair procedure is required to be
followed for determining the guilt of the charged employee. The date on which the charged
employee was called for hearing was the date when the inquiry officer himself was not having the
records. Although it is stated that the records were later received on the same day but we are not
impressed by the defence of the respondent, inasmuch as the records appear to have been received
after the hearing was conducted. Even otherwise the defence of the appellant that his signatures on
the admit card be verified has also not been considered. The appellant was also denied opportunity
to cross-examine the witnesses.
12. In such view of the matter, we find that the disciplinary enquiry was not conducted in a fair and
transparent manner. Once that be so, the consequential orders of punishment passed against the
appellant also cannot be sustained.
13. The special appeal, consequently, succeeds and is allowed. The order passed by the learned
Single Judge dismissing the writ petition is set aside. The order of termination passed against the
petitioner also cannot be sustained in view of conclusions drawn hereinabove. The order of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67422066/ 3
Pawan Kumar vs Union Of India And 8 Others on 30 April, 2025
disciplinary authority as affirmed in appeal are set-aside for such reasons. Such orders are
accordingly set aside. The inquiry stands restored from the state it had gone bad.
14. It shall be open for the employer to reinstate the appellant for the purposes of continuing with
the inquiry. It shall be open for the bank to place the appellant under suspension and conclude the
inquiry expeditiously. The appellant undertakes to cooperate in such inquiry.The appellant shall be
entitled to payment of subsistence allowance.
15. The question of payment of arrears of salary and other relief would remain subject to fresh
orders to be passed by the bank in disciplinary proceedings permitted to be undertaken in the
aforesaid manner.
16. We also record our appreciation for the assistance rendered to Court by Sri Vinod Kumar Singh,
learned amicus. As a good gesture Sri Singh also states that he does not expect any remuneration
from from the legal services authority.
Order Date :- 30.4.2025 Kumar Manish
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/67422066/ 4
