Pawan Singh vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
Pawan Singh vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:44973
Court No. - 66
Case :- CRIMINAL MISC. BAIL APPLICATION No. - 3268 of 2025
Applicant :- Pawan Singh
Opposite Party :- State of U.P.
Counsel for Applicant :- Prashant Kumar Singh,Pritam Das,Sanju Lata
Counsel for Opposite Party :- G.A.,Vaibhav Gupta
Hon'ble Sameer Jain,J.
1. Heard Sri Prashant Kumar Singh and Sanju Lata, learned counsels for the applicant, Sri Vaibhav
Gupta, learned counsel for the informant and Sri Brijesh Pratap Singh, learned AGA for the
State-respondent.
2. The instant application has been filed seeking release of the applicant on bail in Case Crime No.
352 of 2024, under Sections 108, 308(5), BNS, Police Station- Kabrai, District- Kanpur Mohoba,
during pendency of the trial in the court below.
3. Learned counsels for the applicant submitted that from the FIR of the present case, it reflects that
applicant along with his wife has been made accused in the present matter on the basis of suicide
note of the deceased.
4. They further submitted that from the suicide note of the deceased, which has been annexed along
with the instant bail application, it reflects that as per deceased, wife of the applicant i.e. co-accused
Nidhi Singh developed illicit relationship with him and thereafter she started blackmailing him and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89003689/ 1
Pawan Singh vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
from the suicide note of the deceased, it reflects that due to abatement of co-accused Nidhi Singh, he
committed suicide and however, allegations were also made against the applicant by the deceased
but it appears, very casually he made allegation against applicant in his suicide note.
5. They further submitted that however, from the record, it reflects that there is also one video of the
deceased, in which, he was making allegation of abatement against co-accused Nidhi Singh but in
this video also very casually he made allegation against the applicant.
6. They further submitted that neither from the suicide note of the deceased nor from his alleged
video, it could be reflected that due to abatement of the applicant, deceased committed suicide
rather it reflects that due to abatement of co-accused Nidhi Singh, he committed suicide and it
appears, only being husband of co-accused Nidhi Singh, applicant has been made accused in the
present matter.
7. He further submitted that applicant is not having any criminal history and he is in jail in the
present matter since 29.11.2024.
8. Per contra, learned AGA as well as learned counsel for the informant opposed the prayer for bail
and submitted that from the suicide note of the deceased and his video, it is apparent that applicant
also involved along with his wife in abating the deceased but could not dispute the fact that even
from both the materials, it reflects that main allegation of abatement is against co-accused Nidhi
Singh.
9. I have heard learned counsel for the parties and perused the record of the case.
10. However, as per allegation, due to abatement of the applicant and his wife, deceased committed
suicide but from the suicide note of the deceased and his video, it reflects that co-accused Nidhi
Singh is the principal accused and main allegation of abatement is against her and considering both
the evidences, the argument advanced by learned counsel for the applicant that it appears, being
husband of co-accused Nidhi Singh, applicant has been made accused in the present matter, cannot
be completely ruled out at this stage.
11. Further, applicant is not having any criminal history and he is in jail in the present matter since
29.11.2024.
12. Therefore, considering the facts and circumstances of the case discussed above, in my view
applicant is entitled to be released on bail.
13. Accordingly, without expressing any opinion on the merits of the case, the instant bail
application is allowed.
14. Let the applicant- Pawan Singh be released on bail in the aforesaid case on furnishing a personal
bond and two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned with the
following conditions:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89003689/ 2
Pawan Singh vs State Of U.P. on 1 April, 2025
(i) The applicant shall appear before the trial court on the dates fixed, unless his
personal presence is exempted.
(ii) The applicant shall not directly or indirectly, make inducement, threat or promise
to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him from
disclosing such facts to the Court or any police officer or tamper with the evidence.
(iii) The applicant shall not indulge in any criminal and anti-social activity.
15. In case of breach of any of the above condition, the prosecution will be at liberty to move an
application before this Court for cancellation of the bail of the applicant.
16. It is clarified that the observations made herein are limited to the facts brought in by the parties
pertaining to the disposal of bail application and the said observations shall have no bearing on the
merits of the case during trial.
Order Date :- 1.4.2025 KK Patel
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89003689/ 3
