Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
Author: A.D.Jagadish Chandira
Bench: A.D.Jagadish Chandira
1
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
Date : 10.12.2021.
CORAM
THE HON'BLE MR.JUSTICE A.D.JAGADISH CHANDIRA
Criminal Appeal No.542 of 2019
Periyasamy Appellant
vs.
State rep by
The Assistant Commissioner of Police,
(Law & Order)
South Range, Salem City,
(Crime No.11 of 2015) Respondent
Criminal Appeal filed under Section 374(2) Cr.P.C. against the
judgment of conviction and sentence in S.C.No.306 of 2015 dated
30.7.2019 by the Special Judge/Principal District and Sessions Judge,
Salem.
For Appellant : Mr.S.Jeyakumar
For Respondent : S.Sugendran, Govt. Advocate (Crl. Side)
JUDGMENT
The Criminal Appeal has been filed against the judgment of conviction and sentence dated
30.7.2019 passed by the Special Judge/Principal District and Sessions Judge, Salem in S.C.No.306
of 2015.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
2. By the judgment of the Trial Court, the appellant stands convicted and sentenced as under:-
Provision of conviction Sentence
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75631043/ 1
Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
Sec.417 IPC R.I. for one year with fine of
Rs.1000/- in default, R.I. for four
months
Sec.3(1)(x) of SC & ST (POA) Act, R.I. for one year with fine of 1989 Rs.1000/- in default, R.I. for
four months The substantive sentences awarded was directed to be run concurrently.
3. Brief facts of the case evinced from the complaint and the version of the prosecution witnesses are
as under:-
(i) The de facto complainant/PW1 and the accused/appellant were classmates in
Thiyagaraja Engineering College, Salem during the period from 2008 to 2011. They
started to move as friends at the inception and during the second year course, they
fell in love.
(ii) On 21.3.2010, on the birth day of the de facto complainant, they went to the
Kailasanathar Temple, Dharamangalam and when the de facto complainant was
worshipping, the appellant had tied mangal sutra to her and on the same day, he had
forcible sexual intercourse with her at her grandmother's house and thereafter, the
appellant had sexual intercourse with her on several occasion resultantly, the de
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis facto complainant was pregnant in the year 2010,
however, it was aborted.
(iii) Later, the appellant had gone to Chennai on getting a job, after completing the
course, however, they met once in fortnight and had sexual intercourse on those
occasions, as a result, she was once again pregnant in the year 2014 and the same was
also medically terminated and likewise, she got pregnant thrice and terminated her
pregnancy at the instance and instigation of the appellant.
(iv) However, when the de facto complainant had demanded the appellant to marry
her, the appellant had evaded the same initially by taking some vague reasons like his
father's illness, his mother's dislike, etc., ultimately, he had bluntly refused on the
ground that she belongs to a community which does not suit for their family and
hence, she had lodged the complaint, Ex.P1 dated 11.6.2015.
(v) PW19, Inspector of Police, All Women Police Station, Salem, on receipt of the
complaint, Ex.P1, registered a case in Crime No.11 of 2015 against the appellant for
the offence punishable under Section 417 IPC, Section 4 of Tamil Nadu Prohibition of
Harassment of Women Act, 1998 and Section 3(1)(x) of SC and ST (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 1989 and the FIR is EX.P13. PW19 had sent the original FIR and
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the complaint to the Mahila Court and copies to her
higher officials.
(vi) Subsequently, as per the proceedings of the Superintendent of Police in Ex.P19, PW20, the then
Assistant Commissioner of Police, South Range (L & O), Salem took up the investigation. He
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75631043/ 2
Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
proceeded to the scene of occurrence on 11.6.2015 at 5.30 pm and prepared observation mahazar,
Ex.P6 and rough sketch, Ex.P14 in the presence of PW7-Srinivasan and one Thangaraj. Thereafter,
he had enquired PWs.1, 5 and 6 and recorded their statements.
(vii) On 12.6.2015, having received information, PW20 had arrested the accused at Salem Old Bus
Stand in the presence of PW15- Sekar, Village Administrative Officer and his Assistant Ravi.
Thereafter, PW20 had enquired the witnesses and recorded their statements and after recording the
voluntary confession statement of the accused, remanded him to judicial custody. Thereafter, he had
issued requisition to the Tahsildar for issuance of community certificate of the accused and the de
facto complainant. The community certificate of the de facto complainant is Ex.P11 and that of the
accused is Ex.P12. On 13.6.2015, he had enquired the witnesses, P.W.8-Angammal, PW10-Gopal
and PW11-Hussain and recorded their statements. On 16.6.2015, he had once again enquired the de
facto https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis complainant and recorded her statement and thereafter, he
had enquired the witnesses PW18-Ilakkia and PW12-Manikandan and recorded their statements.
The statements given by the de facto complainant and PW18-Ilakkia were recorded in Memory
Card, M.O.1 and sent the same to the Judicial Magistrate under Form 91, Ex.P15. On 18.6.2015,
PW20 had enquired PW16-Sumathi, Head Constable and recorded her statement. On 19.6.2015, he
had enquired the witnesses PW17-Kannan, Head Constable and one Boopathy and recorded their
statements. On 20.6.2015, PW20 had enquired PW3- Dr.Revathi, who is said to have conducted
abortion to the de facto complainant and recorded her statement. On 22.6.2015, he had enquired
the Tahsildar, PW14, who had issued community certificate to the de facto complainant and the
accused and recorded his statement. On 6.7.2015, he had enquired the Assistant Director of
Forensic Sciences Department, PW9, who had conducted medical examination on the de facto
complainant and the accused and recorded his statement. He had also examined
PW2-Dr.Madheswari, Assistant Professor, Government Mohan Kumaramangalam Medical College
Hospital, Salem and recorded her statement. The requisition letters issued by PW20 for medical
examination of the accused and medical https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis treatment of the de facto
complainant are Ex.P16 and Ex.P17 respectively. He had also sent the copy of birth certificate and
transfer certificate of the de facto complainant, Ex.P18 series to the Judicial Magistrate Court. The
proceedings of the Superintendent of Police, Salem directing PW20 to conduct the investigation is
marked as Ex.P19. On 14.8.2015, after completion of investigation, PW20 had filed charge sheet
against the accused for the offence punishable under Sections 417 IPC and Section 4 of Tamil Nadu
Prohibition of Harassment of Women Act, 1998 and Section 3(1)(s) of SC and ST (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 1989 and Section 376 IPC.
(viii) On the above factual background, the Trial Court had framed charges against the accused
under Section 376(1) read with Section 3(2)(v) of SC/ST (POA) Ac,t 1989, 417 IPC, Section 3(1)(x) of
SC/ST Act and Section 4 of TNPWH Act against the accused. When questioned, the accused denied
the charges, pleaded not guilty and sought to be tried.
(ix) During trial, on the side of the prosecution, P.Ws.1 to 20 were examined and Exs.P1 to P19 were
marked and M.O.1 was produced while the defence has not examined any witness nor marked any
document.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75631043/ 3
Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(x) On conclusion of the trial, the Trial Court, found the accused guilty for the offences punishable
under Sections 417 IPC and Sec.3(1)(x) of SC & ST (POA) Act, 1989 and convicted and sentenced
him as stated above, aggrieved against which, the present Criminal Appeal has been filed by the
accused.
4. Assailing the judgment of conviction and sentence, the learned counsel for the appellant would
submit as under:-
(i) A case of consensual affair between two grown up adults of different communities
had been projected as a case of rape. Even if the allegations of the prosecution is
taken on their face value and accepted in their entirety, they do not make up a case
against the appellant. Even as per the prosecution, the prosecutrix and the appellant
were class mates in Polytechnic College during the academic year 2008-2011 and
during the year 2010, the appellant and the prosecutrix started loving each other
pursuant which, on 21.3.2010, the appellant, on the false promise of marriage, is said
to have had sexual intercourse with her and thereby she became pregnant during the
year 2011 and that it was medically terminated. It is the further case of the
prosecutrix that after completing the course in the year 2011, the appellant got
employment in Chennai, however, he used to https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis visit
Salem once in 15 days and they used to have sexual intercourse with each other, as a
consequence, she had become pregnant twice during the year 2014 which were also
aborted during April 2014 and November 2014 at the instance of the appellant. It is
her further case that even thereafter, the appellant had sexual intercourse with her on
many occasion, however, later, he had refused to marry her and that on finally on
26.4.2015, when PW1, the prosecutrix insisted him to marry her, the appellant had
insulted her by stating that he would not marry her because she belongs to Scheduled
Caste Community. It is her further case that again on 7.6.2015, the appellant had met
her at Dharmapuri while whey were returning from Dharmapuri to Salem in a bus
where the appellant is alleged to have told the prosecutrix that he had already
married one Kavitha on 29.5.2015 and that if the prosecutrix belongs to Boyar
Community, he would have married her whereas she belongs to Parayar Community.
Thereby, it is clear that even as per the prosecutrix, their the sexual relationship
continued for a period of five years and she is said to have medically terminated her
pregnancy for three times.
(ii) It is not a case where the accused had no intention to marry the prosecutrix at all.
On the first occasion during 2015, when the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
prosecutrix had asked the appellant to marry her, the appellant had informed his
mother and the mother of the appellant had refused for the marriage stating that if
the appellant marries the prosecutrix, their relatives will not visit their house and the
mother of the appellant had warned him that if marries the prosecutrix against her
wish, she would commit suicide. Therefore, there is absolutely no evidence to show
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75631043/ 4
Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
that at the relevant time, i.e., at the initial stage itself, the accused had no intention
whatsoever to keep up his promise to marry the victim. Failure to keep up the
promise made with future uncertain date due to reasons that are not very clear from
the evidence available does not amount to misconception of fact.
(iii) There is nothing on record to show that the accused/appellant, from the
beginning, had never really intended to marry her. In order to convict a person for an
offence punishable under Section 417 IPC, the promise of marriage must have been a
false promise given in bad faith with no intention of keeping up when it was given.
The false promise must be of immediate relevance or more direct nexus to the
woman's decision to engage in the sexual act. In this case, even admittedly, on several
instances the prosecutrix is said to have aborted. Though the victim is said to have
aborted thrice, the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis medical evidence does not
support the case of the prosecution in respect of abortions alleged to have been done.
(iv) The Trial Court, without there being any legal evidence and essential ingredients
of the offence being shown, had erred in convicting the appellant for offence under
Section 3 (1)(x) of the Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of
Atrocities) Act, 1989. To convict a person under Section 3 (1)(x) of the Scheduled
Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention of Atrocities) Act, 1989, the offence should
have been done in the public view and it should have been witnessed by others. In
this case, though the occurrence is said to have happened in a bus, no evidence has
been let in by the prosecution to show that it was viewed by any other person and no
witness has spoken about the same.
(v) In support of his contention, the learned counsel for the appellant has relied upon
the following judgments:-
(1) Deepak Gulati vs. State of Haryana ((2013) 7 SCC 675) (2) Promod Suryabhan
Pawar vs. State of Maharashtra and another ((2019) 9 SCC 608) (3) Dr.Dhruvaram
Muralidhar Sonar vs State of Maharashtra and another ((2019) 18 SCC 191)
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis (4) Ramesh vs. State ((2021) SCC OnLine Mad
2156)
5. Per contra, Mr.S.Sugendran, learned Government Advocate (Criminal Side) appearing for the
Respondent would submit that the appellant and de facto complainant are class mates during the
academic year 2008-2011 and the appellant had developed intimacy with the victim girl in the year
2010 and on the false promise of marrying her, he had sexual intercourse with her due to which, the
victim had become pregnant thrice and those pregnancies were aborted. He would further submit
that the prosecutrix had believed the appellant and she had been cheated and when they were
returning in a bus Dharmapuri to Salem, the appellant had abused her by calling her with her caste
name. However, he would fairly concede that no evidence had been let in by the prosecution to the
effect that it was viewed by any other person. He would also submit that though the prosecutrix, as
PW1, has spoken that she got pregnant thrice, the medical evidence does not support her case.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75631043/ 5
Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
6. Before proceeding further, this court feels that it would be apt to have an understanding on the
principles laid down by various courts on the issue.
7. In Deepak Gulati vs. State of Haryana ((2013) 7 SCC https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
675), the Apex Court has held as under:-
" 21. Consent may be express or implied, coerced or misguided, obtained willingly or
through deceit.
Consent is an act of reason, accompanied by deliberation, the mind weighing, as in a
balance, the good and evil on each side. There is a clear distinction between rape and
consensual sex and in a case like this, the court must very carefully examine whether
the accused had actually wanted to marry the victim, or had mala fide motives, and
had made a false promise to this effect only to satisfy his lust, as the latter falls within
the ambit of cheating or deception. There is a distinction between the mere breach of
a promise, and not fulfilling a false promise. Thus, the court must examine whether
there was made, at an early stage a false promise of marriage by the accused; and
whether the consent involved was given after wholly understanding the nature and
consequences of sexual indulgence. There may be a case where the prosecutrix agrees
to have sexual https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis intercourse on account of her love
and passion for the accused, and not solely on account of misrepresentation made to
her by the accused, or where an accused on account of circumstances which he could
not have foreseen, or which were beyond his control, was unable to marry her,
despite having every intention to do so. Such cases must be treated differently. An
accused can be convicted for rape only if the court reaches a conclusion that the
intention of the accused was mala fide, and that he had clandestine motives.
..... ...... .....
24. Hence, it is evident that there must be adequate evidence to show that at the
relevant time i.e. at the initial stage itself, the accused had no intention whatsoever,
of keeping his promise to marry the victim. There may, of course, be circumstances,
when a person having the best of intentions is unable to marry the victim owing to
various unavoidable circumstances. The “failure to keep a promise made
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis with respect to a future uncertain date, due to
reasons that are not very clear from the evidence available, does not always amount
to misconception of fact. In order to come within the meaning of the term
“misconception of fact”, the fact must have an immediate relevance”. Section 90 IPC
cannot be called into aid in such a situation, to pardon the act of a girl in entirety, and
fasten criminal liability on the other, unless the court is assured of the fact that from
the very beginning, the accused had never really intended to marry her."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75631043/ 6
Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
8. In Promod Suryabhan Pawar vs. State of Maharashtra and another ((2019) 9 SCC 608), the Apex
Court has held as under:-
"18. To summarise the legal position that emerges from the above cases, the
“consent” of a woman with respect to Section 375 must involve an active and
reasoned deliberation towards the proposed act. To establish whether the “consent”
was vitiated by a “misconception of fact” arising out of a promise to
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis marry, two propositions must be established. The
promise of marriage must have been a false promise, given in bad faith and with no
intention of being adhered to at the time it was given. The false promise itself must be
of immediate relevance, or bear a direct nexus to the woman's decision to engage in
the sexual act."
9. Relying on the decision in Deepak Gulati vs. State of Haryana ((2013) 7 SCC 675) and some other
decisions, it has been held by the Apex Court in Dr.Dhruvaram Muralidhar Sonar vs State of
Maharashtra and another ((2019) 18 SCC 191) as under:-
"23. Thus, there is a clear distinction between rape and consensual sex. The court, in
such cases, must very carefully examine whether the complainant had actually
wanted to marry the victim or had mala fide motives and had made a false promise to
this effect only to satisfy his lust, as the latter falls within the ambit of cheating or
deception. There is also a distinction between mere breach of a promise and
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis not fulfilling a false promise. If the accused has not
made the promise with the sole intention to seduce the prosecutrix to indulge in
sexual acts, such an act would not amount to rape. There may be a case where the
prosecutrix agrees to have sexual intercourse on account of her love and passion for
the accused and not solely on account of the misconception created by accused, or
where an accused, on account of circumstances which he could not have foreseen or
which were beyond his control, was unable to marry her despite having every
intention to do. Such cases must be treated differently. If the complainant had any
mala fide intention and if he had clandestine motives, it is a clear case of rape. The
acknowledged consensual physical relationship between the parties would not
constitute an offence under Section 376 IPC."
10. Relying the above three judgments, this court has held in Ramesh vs. State ((2021) SCC OnLine
Mad 2156), as under:-
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis "Taking into consideration the over all
circumstances in this case, the evidence do not indicate that the promise by the
appellant was false or that the prosecutrix engaged in sexual relations with the
appellant on the basis of the promise on misconception. Admittedly, there had been
love affair between the prosecutrix and the appellant for eight years and there was
physical relationship between them which was spread over a period of two years. In
between, the prosecutrix has also become pregnant twice and she had aborted it twice
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75631043/ 7
Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
and she had not disclosed it to anybody. Whereas it is the evidence of the prosecutrix
that the sexual relationship between her and the appellant was known to both the
families for about four years. Further the prosecution has not let in any evidence to
establish that the consent of the prosecutrix was obtained by misconception of fact
and the prosecution has also failed to establish that the promise of
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis marriage was false from the beginning and it was
given in bad faith and given with no intention of being adhered to at the initial stage.
Further, the alleged false promise itself has no immediate relevance and also does not
bear direct nexus to the decision of the prosecutrix to engage in the sexual act.
.... ..... ....
If the appellant had any malafide intention and if he had clandestine motives, it could
be brought into the ingredient of rape. The acknowledged consensual physical
relationship between the parties would not constitute the offence u/s.376 I.P.C.
Further as stated above no evidence has been made out for the offence u/s.417 I.P.C "
11. While dealing with the offence punishable under Section 3(1)(x) of SC and ST (POA) Act, 1989,
the Apex Court in Swaran Singh v. State (2008) 8 SCC 435 has clarified the legal position as under:-
"28. It has been alleged in the FIR that Vinod Nagar, the first informant, was insulted
by https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis appellants 2 and 3 (by calling him a `Chamar')
when he stood near the car which was parked at the gate of the premises. In our
opinion, this was certainly a place within public view, since the gate of a house is
certainly a place within public view. It could have been a different matter had the
alleged offence been committed inside a building, and also was not in the public view.
However, if the offence is committed outside the building e.g. in a lawn outside a
house, and the lawn can be seen by someone from the road or lane outside the
boundary wall, the lawn would certainly be a place within the public view. Also, even
if the remark is made inside a building, but some members of the public are there
(not merely relatives or friends) then also it would be an offence since it is in the
public view. We must, therefore, not confuse the expression `place within public
view' with the expression `public place'. A place can be a private place but yet
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis within the public view. On the other hand, a public
place would ordinarily mean a place which is owned or leased by the Government or
the municipality (or other local body) or gaon sabha or an instrumentality of the
State, and not by private persons or private bodies.
..... ..... .....
33. We have already stated above that in today's context even calling a person
`Chamar' ordinarily amounts to intentionally insulting that person with intent to
humiliate him. It is evident from a perusal of the FIR that appellant No. 1, Swaran
Singh joined his wife and daughter in insulting Vinod Nagar, and he also used the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75631043/ 8
Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
word `Chamar' in a derogatory sense. However, a perusal of the F.I.R. shows that
Swaran Singh did not use these offensive words in the public view. There is nothing
in the F.I.R. to show that any member of the public was present when Swaran Singh
uttered these words, or that the https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis place where he
uttered them was a place which ordinarily could be seen by the public. Hence in our
opinion no prima facie offence is made out against appellant no.1."
12. Having a light thrown on the subject by the ratio laid down in the above decisions and on
traversing through the factual aspects of the present case, this court finds that as rightly pointed out
by the learned counsel for the appellant, this is a case of consensual affair between two grown up
and matured adults which has been projected as a case of rape. Such a view could be derived from
the evidence of PW1, the de facto complainant herself. The evidence of PW1 reveals that herself and
the appellant were classmates in Thiyagaraja Engineering College, Salem during the period 2008 to
2011 and their relationship initially started only as friendship and then it developed as love affair
during their second year course. Though she says that the appellant had tied the mangal sutra to her
in a temple during her worship on 21.3.2010 and he had sexual relationship with her in her
grandmother's house, it is seen that their relationship with sexual intercourses continued even after
completion of their education and after the appellant had gone for his job at a different place and as
a https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis result of their relationship, she got pregnant thrice and got
aborted the same medically, however, she had not chosen to make any complaint immediately and
she woke up from deep slumber and lodged her complaint, Ex.P1 only on 11.6.2015, after more than
five years. Thus, it is clear that the consent given by the de facto complainant for the sexual
relationship with the appellant could not be by misconception of facts and it would not attract the
offence punishable under Section 376 or 417 IPC.
13. A careful analysis of the evidence of PW1 shows that there could not be any mala fide intention
on the part of the appellant to cheat the de facto complainant by making false promise to seduce her
to have sexual intercourse with her. Further, the evidence of PW2, Dr.Madheswari, who had
examined the de facto complainant has stated that the de facto complainant had reported to her that
she had sexual relationship with a person known to her for about five years and on examination of
the de facto complainant, she found that the de facto complainant must have had sexual
relationship, but, she had not found any traces to opine that she had pregnancy. Dr.Revathi, PW3
who is said to have conducted abortion to the de facto complainant had turned hostile. The direct
nexus between the promise made by https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis the appellant and the consent
given by the de facto complainant proximate to the complaint made by her has not been proved by
the prosecution.
14. There is nothing on evidence to show that at the initial stage itself the accused had no intention
whatsoever of keeping his promise to marry the victim. This could be brought within a case where
the prosecutrix agrees to have sexual intercourse on account of her love and passion for the accused
and not solely on account of the misconception created by the accused. If the appellant had any
malafide intention and if he had clandestine motives, it could be brought into the ingredient of rape.
The acknowledged consensual physical relationship between the parties would not constitute the
offence u/s.376 I.P.C. Further as stated above no evidence has been made out for the offence u/s.417
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75631043/ 9
Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
I.P.C.
15. So far as the offence punishable under Section 3(1)(x) of the SC&ST (POA) Act, 1989 is
concerned, this court finds that the case of the prosecution is that the de facto complainant was
insulted by calling her caste name in a public bus, while they were returning from Dharmapuri to
Salem when she demanded him to marry her. Of course, calling a person by his caste name in public
with an intention https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis to humiliate him is certainly an offence
punishable under Section 3(1)(x) of the SC&ST (POA) Act, 1989, but, as held in the decision in
Swaran Singh's case (supra), it should be seen as to whether there was any intent to insult or
humiliate the de facto complainant by using the caste name as it depends on the context in which it
was used. Even as per the case of the prosecution, it was uttered by the appellant as a reason for his
inability to marry her. Further, the place where the appellant is said to have uttered such a word is a
public bus, which could certainly have some public apart from the de facto complainant and the
appellant and even if there was no other public, the driver and conductor of the bus could be there
and if at all the appellant had uttered the caste name to humiliate the de facto complainant, such an
expression with some emotion, which could be a part of such intent, could certainly have been
noticed by others, but, surprisingly, none has been examined on the side of the prosecution to prove
that the appellant had humiliated the de facto complainant by calling her caste name. Therefore, this
court is of the opinion that the ingredients required to attract the offence punishable under Section
3(1)(x) of the SC&ST (POA) Act, 1989 have not been satisfied by the prosecution.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
16. In view of the above facts and discussion, this court is of the opinion that the prosecution has not
proved the charges against the appellant u/s.417 I.P.C. and Sec.3(1)(x) of SC & ST (POA) Act, 1989
and the Trial Court, on wrong appreciation of facts, evidence and law had wrongly convicted and
sentenced the appellant.
17. In the result, the Criminal Appeal stands allowed and the judgment of conviction and sentence in
S.C.No.306 of 2015 dated 30.7.2019 passed by the Special Judge/Principal District and Sessions
Judge, Salem is hereby set aside. Bail bond, if any, executed by the appellant shall stand cancelled
and fine amount paid, if any, shall be refunded.
10.12.2021.
Index: Yes Internet: Yes ssk.
To
1. The Special Judge/ Principal District and Sessions Judge, Salem.
2. The Assistant Commissioner of Police, (Law & Order) South Range, Salem City,
3. The Public Prosecutor, High Court, Madras.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75631043/ 10
Periyasamy vs State Rep By on 10 December, 2021
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis A.D.JAGADISH CHANDIRA, J.
ssk.
Criminal Appeal No.542 of 2019 10.12.2021.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/75631043/ 11
