Petitioners vs The State Of Manipur on 18 July, 2024
Petitioners vs The State Of Manipur on 18 July, 2024
Author: Ahanthembimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthembimol Singh
SHOUGRAKPAM Digitally signed by [1]
SHOUGRAKPAM DEVANANDA
DEVANANDA SINGH
Date: 2024.07.18 15:58:03
SINGH +05'30'
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
WP(C) No. 564 of 2017
1. Mr. Naorem Amar Meitei, aged about 34 years, S/o N. Shanti
Meitei of Nambol Naorem Awang Leikai, P.O. & P.S. Nambol,
Bishnupur District, Manipur, Secretary of the Bishnupur to Imphal
Tata Magic and Van Owners' and Drivers' Association being
Registration No. 41 of 2009 and
2. Mr. Thokchom Romen Singh, aged about 44 years, S/o Th.
Iboyaima Singh of Thoubal Makha Leikai, P.O. & P.S. Bishnupur,
Bishnupur District, Manipur, President of the Bishnupur to Imphal
Tata Magic and Van Owners' and Drivers' Association being
Registration No. 41 of 2009
... Petitioners
-Versus-
1. The State of Manipur, represented by the Commissioner/
Secretary (Co-operation), Government of Manipur, Imphal.
2. The Commissioner (Transport), Government of Manipur,
Imphal.
3. The Registrar of Co-operative Societies, Manipur, Imphal.
4. The District Co-operative Officer, Bishnupur District, Bishnupur,
Manipur.
5. The District Transport Officer, Bishnupur District, Bishnupur,
Manipur.
6. The Chairperson, Bishnupur Municipal Council, Bishnupur,
Bishnupur District, Manipur.
7. The Executive Officer, Bishnupur Municipal Council, Bishnupur
District, Manipur and
8. The President of Changangei Un-employed Youths Transport
Co-operative Society Limited being Registration No. 1 of 2006-
07 of Changangei, P.O. Tulihal Airport, P.S. Lamphel, Imphal
West District, Manipur.
... Respondents
WP(C) No. 564 of 2017 Contd.../-
[2]
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101622984/ 1
Petitioners vs The State Of Manipur on 18 July, 2024
B E F O R E
HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEMBIMOL SINGH
For the petitioners :: Mr. Th. Babloo, Advocate
For the respondents :: Mr. Th. Vashum, Govt. Advocate;
Mr. L. Anand, Advocate &
Mr. Kh. Santa, Advocate.
Date of hearing :: 07-03-2024
Date of judgment :: 18-07-2024
J U D G M E N T
[1] Heard Mr. Th. Babloo, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners; Mr. Th. Vashum, learned
GA appearing for the State respondents No. 1 to 5, Mr. L. Anand, learned counsel appearing for the
respondents No. 6 and 7 and Mr. Kh. Santa, learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 8.
The present writ petition has been filed challenging the order dated 25-11-2015 issued by the
Chairperson, Bishnupur Municipal Council, Manipur. By the said order, the earlier allotment of
parking site near Kha-Santipur School (Block Lamkhai) in favour of the Association represented by
the petitioners had been changed as free parking space within Bishnupur Municipal area.
[2] The case of the petitioners is that they are the President and Secretary of the Bishnupur to
Imphal Tata Magic and Van Owners' and Drivers' Association (hereinafter referred to as the
"Petitioners' Association", for short). The Petitioners' Association is registered under the Societies
Registration Act and the area of operation for business of the members of the Petitioners'
Association is Bishnupur to Imphal including the area of WP(C) No. 564 of 2017 Contd.../-
Bishnupur Municipal Council. The members of the Petitioners' Association maintained themselves
and their family from the income earned by them by running their Tata Magic vehicles within the
said area of operation. [3] Pursuant to the decision of the Bishnupur Municipal Council under
Resolution No. 4(b) of the Council's meeting held on 05-03-2013, the Executive Officer, Bishnupur
Municipal Council, issued an order dated 06-03-2013 allotting the road side space lying near
Kha-Santipur School (Block Lamkhai) as parking site for Tata Magic (passengers) in favour of the
Petitioners' Association with immediate effect and until further order. About two years after
issuance of the said order and pursuant to the decision of the Council under Resolution No. 7(A) of
its meeting held on 05-09-2015, the Chairperson, Bishnupur Municipal Council, issued an order
dated 25-11-2015 thereby converting the parking site previously allotted to the Petitioners'
Association as free dropping point within Bishnupur Municipal area in public interest.
[4] By taking advantage of the order dated 25-11-2015, the members of the respondent No. 8 viz.,
Changangei Un-employed Youths Transport Co-operative Society Limited started parking their
vehicles at the said parking site and also started picking up and dropping of passengers within the
Bishnupur Municipal area which directly affect and gave a great disturbance to the business of the
members of the Petitioners' Association. According to the petitioners, the area of operation and
route permit given to the respondent No. 8 is totally different from the area of operation and route
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101622984/ 2
Petitioners vs The State Of Manipur on 18 July, 2024
permit given to the Petitioners' Association and that the members of respondent No. 8 cannot
WP(C) No. 564 of 2017 Contd.../-
operate or carry out their business of transportation within the Bishnupur Municipal area. However,
by taking advantage of the order dated 25-11-2015 issued by the Chairperson, Bishnupur Municipal
Council, the members of the respondent No. 8 started encroaching upon the area of operation of the
Petitioners' Association and greatly affected their business. Accordingly, the petitioners submitted a
representation dated 15-03-2016 to the Chairperson and Executive Officer, Bishnupur Municipal
Council, requesting for reviewing or cancelling the said order dated 25-11-2015 and another
representation dated 15-03-2017 to the District Co-operative Officer, Bishnupur District, requesting
not to allow the members of the respondent No. 8 to operate their transport service in Bishnupur
Municipal Council area, however, without any positive result. Having been aggrieved by the issuance
of the subsequent order dated 25-11-2015, the petitioners challenged the same by filing the present
writ petition.
[5] Mr. Th. Babloo, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners submitted that under section 42 of
the Manipur Municipalities Act, 1994, the Executive Officer is entrusted to perform all the duties
and exercise all the powers conferred upon him under the Act and rules and Bye-Laws made
thereunder and he is entrusted to give effect to the decision taken by the Nagar Panchayat or
Council. According to the learned counsel, the Executive Officer is the sole authority to give effect to
the decision taken by the Bishnupur Municipal Council as provided under section 42(b) of the
Manipur Municipalities Act, 1994. However, in the present case, the impugned order dated
25-11-2015 was issued by the Chairperson of the Bishnupur Municipal Council and not by the
Executive Officer and as such, the impugned order is WP(C) No. 564 of 2017 Contd.../-
liable to be quashed and set aside as being violative of the provision of section 42(b) of the Manipur
Municipalities Act, 1994. In support of his contentions, the learned counsel cited the judgment
rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of "Bhavnagar University Vs. Palitana Sugar Mill (P)
Ltd. & ors." reported in (2003) 2 SCC 111, wherein it has been held as under:-
"40. The statutory interdict of use and enjoyment of the property must be strictly
construed. It is well settled that when a statutory authority is required to do a thing in
a particular manner, the same must be done in that manner or not at all. The State
and other authorities while acting under the said Act are only creature of statute.
They must act within the four corners thereof."
[6] Mr L. Anand, learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 6 and 7 submitted that the order
dated 25-11-2015 impugned in the present writ petition had been issued in terms of the decision
taken by the Bishnupur Municipal Council under Resolution No. 7(A) of its meeting No. 68 held on
05-09-2015 in public interest. The learned counsel also submitted that the petitioners cannot claim
as a matter of right that the parking site in question should be allotted exclusively in favour of the
Petitioners' Association and not as a free parking site. It has further been submitted that the
allocation of parking site in question has nothing to do with the area of operation or allocation of
route for plying Taxi service by the members of the Petitioners' Association and that the Bishnupur
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101622984/ 3
Petitioners vs The State Of Manipur on 18 July, 2024
Municipal Council has the power and jurisdiction to convert the said parking site previously allotted
to the Petitioners' Association as a free parking site in public interest and that the Bishnupur
Municipal Council has not committed any illegality or irrationality in issuing the impugned order.
WP(C) No. 564 of 2017 Contd.../-
[7] Mr. L. Anand, learned counsel also vehemently submitted that if
at all, the petitioners are aggrieved by the order dated 25-11-2015, they ought to have challenged the
same by filing an appeal to the State Government or an officer authorized by the Government as
provided under section 196 of the Manipur Municipalities Act, 1994. However, without availing the
opportunity of filing such a statutory appeal, the petitioners challenged the impugned order by filing
the present writ petition. According to the leaned counsel, the present writ petition is not
maintainable and liable to be rejected outright as there is an alternative and effective remedy of
filing a statutory appeal. In support of his contentions, the learned counsel cited the judgment
rendered by the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of "Nivedita Sharma Vs. Cellular Operators
Association of India & ors." reported in (2011) 14 SCC, wherein it has been held as under:-
"12. In Thansingh Nathmal v. Supdt. of Taxes this Court adverted to the rule of
self-imposed restraint that the writ petition will not be entertained if an effective
remedy is available to the aggrieved person and observed: (AIR p. 1423, para 7) "7.
..... The High Court does not therefore act as a court of appeal against the decision of
a court or tribunal, to correct errors of fact, and does not by assuming jurisdiction
under Article 226 trench upon an alternative remedy provided by statute for
obtaining relief. Where it is open to the aggrieved petitioner to move another
tribunal, or even itself in another jurisdiction for obtaining redress in the manner
provided by a statute, the High Court normally will not permit by entertaining a
petition under Article 226 of the Constitution the machinery created under the
statute to be bypassed, and will leave the party applying to it to seek resort to the
machinery so set up."
"13. In Titaghur Paper Mills Co. Ltd. v. State of Orissa this Court observed: (SCC pp.
440-41, para 11) "11 ..... It is now well recognised that where a right or liability is
created by a statute which gives a special remedy for WP(C) No. 564 of 2017
Contd.../-
enforcing it, the remedy provided by that statute only must be availed of. This rule
was stated with great clarity by Willes, J. in Wolverhampton New Waterworks Co. v.
Hawkesford in the following passage: (ER p. 495) "... There are three classes of cases
in which a liability may be established founded upon a statute.... But there is a third
class viz. where a liability not existing at common law is created by a statute which at
the same time gives a special and particular remedy for enforcing it. .... The remedy
provided by the statute must be followed, and it is not competent to the party to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101622984/ 4
Petitioners vs The State Of Manipur on 18 July, 2024
pursue the course applicable to cases of the second class. The form given by the
statute must be adopted and adhered to."
The rule laid down in this passage was approved by the House of Lords in Neville v. London Express
Newspapers Ltd. and has been reaffirmed by the Privy Council in Attorney General of Trinidad and
Tobago v. Gordon Grant and Co.
Ltd. and Secy. of State v. Mask and Co. It has also been held to be equally applicable to enforcement
of rights, and has been followed by this Court throughout. The High Court was therefore justified in
dismissing the writ petitions in limine."
"14. In Mafatlal Industries Ltd. v. Union of India B.P. Jeevan Reddy, J.
(speaking for the majority of the larger Bench) observed: (SCC p. 607, para 77) "77. ...
So far as the jurisdiction of the High Court under Article 226 or for that matter, the
jurisdiction of this Court under Article 32 - is concerned, it is obvious that the
provisions of the Act cannot bar and curtail these remedies. It is, however, equally
obvious that while exercising the power under Article 226/Article 32, the Court
would certainly take note of the legislative intent manifested in the provisions of the
Act and would exercise their jurisdiction consistent with the provisions of the
enactment."
"15. In the judgments relied upon by Shri Vaidyanathan, which, by and large,
reiterate the proposition laid down in Baburam Prakash Chandra Maheshwari v.
Antarim Zila Parishadis, it has been held that an alternative remedy is not a bar to
the entertaining of writ petition filed for the enforcement of any of the fundamental
rights or where there has been a violation of the principles of natural WP(C) No. 564
of 2017 Contd.../-
justice or where the order under challenge is wholly without jurisdiction or the vires
of the statute is under challenge."
"16. It can, thus, be said that this Court has recognised some exceptions to the rule of
alternative remedy. However, the proposition laid down in Thansingh Nathmal v.
Supt. of Taxes and other similar judgments that the High Court will not entertain a
petition under Article 226 of the Constitution if an effective alternative remedy is
available to the aggrieved person or the statute under which the action complained of
has been taken itself contains a mechanism for redressal of grievance still holds the
field."
[8] Mr. Th. Vashum, learned GA and Mr. Kh. Santa, learned counsel endorsed the submission made
by Mr. L. Anand, learned counsel appearing for the respondents No. 6 and 7. The learned GA further
submitted that area of operation is given by the registering authority as specified in the
memorandum of Association and Transport Department has the sole authority to give route permit.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101622984/ 5
Petitioners vs The State Of Manipur on 18 July, 2024
It has also been submitted that area of operation and route permit given to an Association has
nothing to do with allocation or earmarking of a parking site for use of the public by the Municipal
Council.
[9] The grievances raised by the petitioners in the present writ petition are that subsequent to the
issuance of the impugned order dated 25-11-2015 and by taking advantage of the same, the members
of the respondent No. 8 Society started parking their vehicles in the parking site in question and also
started picking up and dropping passengers within the Bishnupur Municipal Council by encroaching
in the area of operation of the Petitioners' Association. Such action by the members of the
respondent No. 8 Society not only disturb and affect the business of the members of the Petitioners'
Association but also the same is illegal inasmuch as, they WP(C) No. 564 of 2017 Contd.../-
should confine their business in the area of operation and route allocated to them and they cannot
encroach upon the area of operation and route allocated to the members of the Petitioners'
Association. [10] On hearing the rival submissions advanced by the learned counsel appearing for
the parties and on examination of the materials available on record, this court find sufficient force
and merit in the submission advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the respondents that the
allocation of the parking site in question under the impugned order dated 25-11-2015 has nothing to
do with the area of operation and route permit allocated to both the Petitioners' Association and the
respondent No. 8 Society and that the Bishnupur Municipal Council has the power and jurisdiction
to allocate or earmark such parking site as provided under the Manipur Municipalities Act and that
while issuing the impugned order, the Bishnupur Municipal Council has not committed any act of
illegality. In the absence of any valid and reasonable ground, the impugned order cannot be quash
only on the alleged ground that by taking advantage of the issuance of the impugned orders, the
members of the respondent No. 8 started encroaching upon the area of operation of the Petitioners'
Association and such action has caused disturbance and affected the business of the members of the
Petitioners' Association.
This court also found force and merit in the submission advanced by Mr. L. Anand, learned counsel
that if the petitioners are aggrieved by the impugned order dated 25-11-2015, they ought to have
availed the WP(C) No. 564 of 2017 Contd.../-
opportunity of filing a statutory appeal as provided under section 196 of the Manipur Municipalities
Act, 1994 and that they ought not to have approach this court directly by filing the present writ
petition. [11] With regard to the contentions advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the
petitioners that the Executive Officer is the sole authority to give effect to the decision taken by the
Council as provided under section 42(b) of the Manipur Municipalities Act, 1994 and that the
impugned order having been issued by the Chairperson of the Council is liable to be quash and set
aside as being violative of the provision of Section 42(b) of the Act, this court is of the considered
view that such contentions are misconceived and contrary to the provisions of Section 33 of the
Manipur Municipalities Act, 1994 which deals with the powers and functions of the Chairperson.
Under Section 33(d) of the said Act, it is provided, inter alia, that the Chairperson of a Municipal
Council has the power and function to direct, in case of emergency, the execution or stoppage of any
work or doing of any act which requires the sanction of the Council and the immediate execution or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101622984/ 6
Petitioners vs The State Of Manipur on 18 July, 2024
doing of which is, in his opinion necessary for the service or safety of the public. In view of such
provision of the Act, this court is of the considered view that the Chairperson of the Bishnupur
Municipal Council has the power to issue the impugned order in public interest and that there is no
merit and force in the submission advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the petitioners.
[12] In view of the reasons and findings given hereinabove, this court is not inclined to interfere with
the impugned order dated 25-11-2015 and WP(C) No. 564 of 2017 Contd.../-
to grant the reliefs sought for by the petitioners in the present writ petition. In the result, the writ
petition is hereby dismissed as being devoid of merit, however, without any order as to cost.
JUDGE
FR / NFR
Devananda
WP(C) No. 564 of 2017 Contd.../-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/101622984/ 7
