Ph. Seijang Mate & Anr vs The Tengnoupal Village Authority & 3 Ors on 12 October, 2022
Ph. Seijang Mate & Anr vs The Tengnoupal Village Authority & 3
Ors on 12 October, 2022
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
No. 61
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
LHAINEI Digitally
by
signed
AT IMPHAL
CHONG LHAINEICHONG
HAOKIP
HAOKIP Date: 2022.10.12
15:50:55 +05'30'
WP(C) No. 77 of 2020
Ph. Seijang Mate & Anr.
.....Petitioner/s
- Versus -
The Tengnoupal Village Authority & 3 Ors.
.... Respondent/s
BEFORE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH 12.10.2022 [1] Heard Mr.
Mayonkui Ngalung, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, Ms. S. Pamchuila Gangte, learned
counsel appearing for the respondent No. 1 and Mr. A. Vashum, learned Government Advocate
appearing for the respondents No. 2, 3 & 4.
[2] The present writ petition had been filed assailing the order and information issued by the
Tengnoupal Village Authority which had been issued on the basis of the decision taken by the Village
Authority on 13.10.2019 and with the prayer for quashing and setting aside the same. [3] It has been
submitted by Mr. Mayonkui Ngalung, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners that by the said
impugned order, certain restrictions have been imposed upon the petitioners and their family
members on the ground of their refusal to reconsider their religious conversion. The restrictions
imposed upon the petitioners and their family members are as under:-
"1. In the event of hardship, lost, and happiness, the church and the village will take
no responsibility in any courses for the welfare of Mr. Seijang Mate family and Mr.
Khaikholun Mate family.
WP(C) No. 77 of 2020 Page 1 "2. Mr. Seijang Mate and Khaikholun Mate families
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89586478/ 1
Ph. Seijang Mate & Anr vs The Tengnoupal Village Authority & 3 Ors on 12 October, 2022
have been terminated/restricted from getting access to public utility, facilities and
other provisions provided by the village authority.
3. Mr. Seijang Mate and Khaikholun Mate families have been restricted to touch and
use every natural resources/properties, i.e. wood, bamboo etc within the village
supervision."
[4] It has been submitted by Mr. Mayonkui Ngalung, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners
that the Tengnoupal Village Authority has no power, authority and jurisdictions to issue the said
impugned order thereby putting the restrictions quoted hereinabove upon the petitioners and their
family members. The learned counsel further submitted that the said impugned order had been
issued in violation of the Constitutional provisions under Art. 25 & 26 and also in violation of their
fundamental rights guaranteed under Art. 19 (1) (d) & (e) and Art. 21 of the Constitution of India. It
has also been submitted by the learned counsel for the petitioners that similar issue raised in the
present writ petition had already been decided by this Court its judgment and order dated
16.01.2018 passed in WP(C) No. 651 of 2017 and the said judgment squarely covers the issue raised
in the present writ petition. The learned counsel accordingly submitted that the impugned order is
liable to be quashed and set aside in view of the aforesaid Constitutional provisions and the
judgment and order rendered by this Court.
[5] Ms. S. Pamchuila Gangte, learned counsel appearing for the respondent No. 1 raised a
preliminary issue with regard to the maintainability of the present writ petition. It has been
submitted by the learned counsel for the respondent No. 1 that under Section 43 of the Manipur
(Village Authorities in Hill Areas) Act, 1956 there is an effective and WP(C) No. 77 of 2020 Page 2
efficacious statutory remedy for redressing the grievances of the petitioners raised in the present
writ petition. It has been submitted by the learned counsel that without exhausting the effective and
efficacious statutory remedy provided under Section 43 of the said Act, the petitioners have directly
approached this Court by filing the present writ petition thereby assailing the impugned order. In
view of the above, the present writ petition is not maintainable.
[6] In support of her contention, the learned counsel relied on the judgment rendered by the
Hon'ble Gauhati High Court in the case of "National Plywood Industries Ltd. Vs. Union of India"
reported in 2007 (1) GLT 584 wherein, it has been held as under:-
"26. This now leads us to the second issue as to whether the petitioner ought to have
availed the alternative remedy by way of preferring appeal to the Customs, Excise and
Gold Control Appellate Tribunal. The petitioner instead of exhausting alternative
remedy of appeal has invoked the writ jurisdiction. As has been observed by the Apex
Court in the decision reported in (1998) 8 SCC 01 (Whirlpool Corporation Vs.
Registrar of Trade Marks, Mumbai), the High Court exercising its power under
Article 226 of the Constitution of India, has a discretion to entertain or not to
entertain a writ petition and that the High Court has imposed upon itself certain
restrictions, one of which is that if an effective and efficacious remedy is available, the
High Court would not normally exercise its jurisdiction.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89586478/ 2
Ph. Seijang Mate & Anr vs The Tengnoupal Village Authority & 3 Ors on 12 October, 2022
"27. In the case of State of H.P. Vs. Gujarat Ambuja Cement Ltd. reported in (2005) 6
SCC 499, the Apex Court while observing that the power relating to alternative
remedy has been considered to be a rule of self imposed limitation and that it is
essentially a rule of policy, convenience and discretion and never rule of law, it is
within the discretion of jurisdiction of the High Court to grant relief under Article
226 of the Constitution. The Apex Court further observed that though the matter
relating to an alternative remedy has nothing to do with the jurisdiction of the case,
normally the High Court should not interfere, if there is an adequate efficacious
alternative remedy and that if some body approaches the High Court without availing
the alternative remedy provided, the High Court should ensure that he has made out
a strong case or that there exist good grounds to invoke the extra ordinary
jurisdiction. In the instant case, the position has been explained above. I am of the
considered opinion that to exercise the writ jurisdiction in the given facts and
circumstances of the case instead of augmenting the cause of justice, it will be a
failure of justice and the abuse in the process of the Court."
WP(C) No. 77 of 2020 Page 3
[7] The learned counsel also relied on the judgment and order passed
by the Hon'ble Gauhati High Court in the case of "Dal Thang Vs. State of Mizoram"
reported in 2004 (2) GLT 145 wherein it has been held as under:-
"19. The petitioners are aware of the confiscation proceeding and the final
adjudication orders passed on 20-12-2002. Even assuming that they were not aware
of the confiscation proceedings initiated against them before filing of the writ
petition, but there is no denial and cannot be so that the petitioners atleast could
come to know about the finality attained to the aforesaid proceedings with the filing
of the affidavit-in- opposition on 7.8.2003. They did not disown the facts disclosed in
the said affidavit till the matter was taken up for hearing. It was only during the
course of hearing. The petitioners being confronted with the plea of the respondents
as raised in the affidavit-in-opposition filed their affidavit-in- reply making a vague
and evasive statement as noticed above. They have also not chosen to do anything
relating to the said confiscation proceeding by way of preferring appeals as provided
for by the Customs Act, 1962 itself. The said Act is a self contained code and Chapter
XV of the Act, deals with the provisions relating to appeals. The petitioner has
alternative remedy by way of preferring appeals against the final Adjudication orders.
The Apex Court in the case of Union of India V. Lexus Exports as reported in (1997)
10 SCC 232 held that the proceedings of seizure and confiscation are proceedings in
rem. Reacting to the interference made by the High Court, the Apex Court held that
such interference at the particular stage was totally uncalled for. It has already been
noticed that the final Adjudication Orders have been passed on 20.12.2002 and the
petitioners have got remedy under the provisions of the Customs Act, 1962 itself. It
will be a wise discretion not to exercise the power under Article 226 of the
Constitution of India so as to interfere with the confiscation proceedings, which
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89586478/ 3
Ph. Seijang Mate & Anr vs The Tengnoupal Village Authority & 3 Ors on 12 October, 2022
culminated to the aforesaid final Adjudication Orders. There is also no challenge to
the same. The petitioners even after the disclosure made in the affidavit did not
choose to bring any amendment to the writ petition by way of making challenge to
the final Adjudication Orders. To grant the prayers made in the writ petitions would
amount to interference with the confiscation proceedings and the final Adjudication
orders. The writ petitioners have raised the plea that as per the above quoted
provisions of the Customs Act, 1962, they are entitled to get back the seized
motorcycles without, however, making any prayer for interference with the final
Adjudication orders dated 20.12.2002. I have gone through the said order dated
20.12.2002, which clearly reflects as to how the petitioners did not respond to the
show cause notice and the opportunity of personal hearing. It was under these
circumstances the said orders dated 20.12.2002 were passed."
[8] Mr. A. Vashum, learned Government Advocate appearing for the respondents No. 2, 3 & 4
submitted that the State respondents have categorically stated in Para 3 of their
affidavit-in-opposition that Tengnoupal Village Authority has no power and authority to issue the
impugned order WP(C) No. 77 of 2020 Page 4 and that the action of the Tengnoupal Village
Authority is unconstitutional and ultra-vires the mandate of Art. 19 (1) (d) & (e), Art. 21 and Art. 25
& 26 of the Constitution of India and accordingly, the impugned order is not sustainable in the eyes
of law.
[9] With regard to the contention raised by the counsel for the respondent No. 1 about the
maintainability of the present writ petition, it has been submitted by the learned counsel for the
petitioners that under Section 30 of the Manipur (Village Authorities in Hill Areas) Act, 1956, the
jurisdiction of Village Court in Civil Cases are clearly laid down. The said provisions of Section 30 is
reproduced hereunder for ready reference:-
"30. Jurisdiction of village courts in civil cases. - Notwithstanding anything contained
in the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (5 of 1908), or in any other law for the time
being in force, but subject to the provisions of section 31 and the section 32, the
village court and the ordinary civil court, within the local limits of whose jurisdiction
the village is situated, shall have concurrent jurisdiction to try the following classes of
suits, namely :-
"(a) suits for money due on contracts;
"(b) suits for the recovery of movable property or the value of such property;
"(c) suits for compensation for wrongfully taking or injuring movable property; and
"(d) suits for damages by cattle trespass;
When the value of the suit does not exceed five hundred rupees."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89586478/ 4
Ph. Seijang Mate & Anr vs The Tengnoupal Village Authority & 3 Ors on 12 October, 2022
[10] In view of the aforesaid provisions under Section 30, it has been submitted that the impugned
order cannot be said to be passed under Section 30 of the said Act and the objection raised by the
counsel for the respondent No. 1 is misconceived and not sustainable. [11] I have heard the rival
submissions advanced by the learned counsel appearing for the parties and I have also perused the
record of the present WP(C) No. 77 of 2020 Page 5 case. Except for the objection raised by the
counsel for the respondent No. 1 with regard to the maintainability of the present writ petition, no
argument has been advanced by the counsel for the respondent No. 1 with regard to the contention
raised by the counsel for the petitioners. [12] Under Section 43 of the said Manipur (Village
Authorities in Hill Areas) Act, 1956, it is provided that the decision of the Village Court in any suit
can be challenged before the District Judge on the application of any parties to the suit within 30
days from the date of decree of the Village Court. Under Section 30 of the said Act, which has been
reproduced hereinabove, the Village Court has not been empowered or given jurisdiction for the
trial of the issue raised in the present writ petition and the impugned order cannot be taken to be
one passed in exercise of the power conferred under Section 30 of the said Act. In view of the above,
this Court is of the considered view that the provisions of Section 43 of the said Act is not attracted
in the facts and circumstances of the present case. Accordingly, the Authorities relied on by the
counsel for the respondent No. 1 is not applicable in the facts and circumstances of the present case.
[13] On careful perusal of the judgment and order dated 16.01.2018, passed by this Court in WP(C)
No. 651 of 2017, it is found that the Hon'ble Court has clearly held that Village Authority is a
statutory authority constituted under the Manipur (Village Authority in Hills Areas) Act, 1956
having statutory power of Village Administration as provided under the Act and task with the
responsibility of maintaining law and order in the Village having of its power as provided under the
Act, 1956 and that if the Village Authority has directed banishment and expulsion of any villagers,
the same WP(C) No. 77 of 2020 Page 6 will be illegal and violative of the fundamental rights of the
villagers guaranteed under Art. 19 (1) (d) & (e) as well as Art. 25 & 26 of the Constitution of India.
On the basis of such finding, the Hon'ble Court held that the Act of the Village Authorities with
regard to the imposing restriction of the banishment from the village for conversion of religious acts
is illegal and violative of the Constitutional provisions and set aside such activities of the Village
authorities.
[14] On careful consideration of the rival submissions advanced by the learned counsel appearing
for the parties and on careful examination of the record of the present writ petition, this Court finds
that the Tengnoupal Village Authorities has no authority, power and jurisdiction to issue the
impugned order and that such action of the said Village Authorities is illegal and ultra-vires the
Constitutional provisions provided under Art. 19 (1) (d) &
(e), Art. 21 and Art. 25 & 26 of the Constitution of India and the same is liable to be quashed and set
aside. Accordingly, the said impugned order and information is hereby quashed and set aside.
[15] With the aforesaid directions, the present writ petition is disposed of. There will be no order as
to costs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89586478/ 5
Ph. Seijang Mate & Anr vs The Tengnoupal Village Authority & 3 Ors on 12 October, 2022
JUDGE
Lhaineichong
WP(C) No. 77 of 2020 Page 7
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/89586478/ 6
