Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
ORISSA HIGH COURT : CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.6233 of 2025
In the matter of an Application under
Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India, 1950
***
Prabir Kumar Das, Aged about 42 years Son of Bijay Das, At/P.O.: Puruna Balasore, P.S.:
Chandipur, District: Balasore. ... Petitioner
-VERSUS-
1. State of Odisha Represented though Principal Secretary Excise Department At: Lokseva Bhawan,
Odisha Bhubaneswar District: Khordha.
2. Excise Commissioner, Odisha CDA Road, Bidanasi District: Cuttack.
3. Collector-cum-District Magistrate Mayurbhanj, At/PO/P.S.: Baripada District: Mayurbhanj.
4. Authorized Officer-cum-Superintendent of Excise Mayurbhanj At/P.O./P.S.: Baripada District:
Mayurbhanj.
5. Officer-in-Charge of Excise, Deuli Excise Station, Deuli District: Mayurbhanj. ... Opposite parties
Counsel appeared for the parties:
For the Petitioner : M/s. Bibhuti Ranjan Mohanty, Bikram Keshari Raj and Bishakha
Baisali Raj, Advocates For the Opposite Parties : Mr. Bimbisar Dash, Additional
Government Advocate P R E S E N T:
HONOURABLE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. HARISH TANDON AND HONOURABLE
JUSTICE MR. MURAHARI SRI RAMAN Date of Hearing : 21.04.2025 :: Date of
Judgment : 09.05.2025 J UDGMENT MURAHARI SRI RAMAN, J.--
Assailing Order dated 08.01.2025 of the Excise Commissioner, Odisha,
Cuttack-opposite party No.2 passed in Excise Appeal Case No.18/2024--366/Ex.
(Annexure-6) affirming the Decision and Order dated 27.08.2024 of the Authorized
Officer-cum-
Superintendent of Excise, Mayurbhanj-opposite party No.4 in Excise (Con) Case No.4 of 2024
(arising out of P.R. No.31/2024-25) in connection with a proceeding under Section 71(3) of the
Odisha Excise Act, 2008, the petitioner has approached this Court by way of filing the instant writ
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 1
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
petition invoking provisions of Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India with the following
prayer(s):
"The petitioner therefore prays that in view of the submission made above the
Hon(cid:128)ble Court may be graciously pleased to admit the writ petition and issue rule
nisi to the opposite parties as to;
i) Why the order dt.27.08.2024 in Excise (Con.) Case No.4/2024 (Annexure-4) and
its confirmation vide order dt.08.01.2025 passed in Excise Appeal No.18/2024
(Annexure-6) will not be quashed.
ii) Why the seized TATA 407 truck vide Regd. No.OD-
01-AD-1005 shall not be given in Zima of the petitioner.
And if the opposite parties fail to show cause or show insufficient cause the said Rule may kindly be
made absolute.
Or pass any appropriate order/direction as would be deemed fit and proper in the interest of justice.
And for this act of kindness the petitioner as in duty bound shall ever pray."
Facts:
2. Facts leading to filing of this writ petition, as emanating from the contents of writ
petition, are narrated hereunder.
2.1. The petitioner, Registered Owner of Truck (TATA-407) bearing Registration
No.OD-01-AD-1005 (hereinafter referred to as "the vehicle"), alleged that on
18.05.2024 at about 2.00 P.M. the Officer-in-Charge of Deuli Excise Station,
detained and conducted search of said vehicle at Chaksuliapada under Chandua
Police Station in the district of Mayurbhanj and on search 200 tins (weighing 25kgs
each, in toto 5,000 Kgs.) of Molasses (Tarala Gur) were found. As the petitioner could
not produce any valid documents in support of loaded goods before the said
Officer-in-Charge, the vehicle was seized in exercise of power under Section 71 for
possession of "intoxicant" as defined under clause (t) of Section 2 read with Section
17 of the Odisha Excise Act, 2008 (for short, "the OE Act, 2008") and Rules 234 and
240 of the Odisha Excise Rules, 2017 (for brevity, "the OE Rules, 2017") and
forwarded the petitioner-owner of the vehicle and the driver of said vehicle to the
Court of the learned Judicial Magistrate, First Class-I (Cognizance Taking), Baripada
to face trial. Sample of the goods were sent for chemical analysis.
2.2. The Authorized Officer-cum-Superintendent of Excise, Mayurbhanj-opposite
party No.4 (referred to as "AO") issued show-cause notice under Section 71(4)(a) of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 2
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
the OE Act contemplating confiscation of the vehicle. Show-
cause reply being filed, on consideration of which, Order dated 27.08.2024 was passed in Excise
(Con) Case No.4 of 2024 (Arising out of P.R. No.31 of 2024-25) by the AO taking into consideration
the definitions of the commodities, namely "INTOXICANT" and "MOLASSES" contained in Clauses
(t) and (x) respectively under Section 21.
2.3. Finding that the petitioner was in possession of "molasses" comprehended within the meaning
of "intoxicant" and transporting the same without any permit granted by the Collector as required
under Section 17(1) of the OE Act, 2008 and Rules 234 and 240 of the OE Rules, 2017, the AO
returned factual finding on the basis of chemical test report that subject goods found in the vehicle
was cane molasses having probable outturn of alcohol. Since the vehicle so seized was not
accompanied by necessary documents including valid permit, the AO established the allegation of
commission of contravention of Section 17 of the OE Act, 2008 which attracted exercise of power
under Section 1 Clauses (t) and (u) of Section 2 of the OE Act stand as follows:
"(t) "Intoxicant" means any liquor, other intoxicating substance other than Narcotic
drug or a psychotropic substance regulated by the Narcotic Drugs and Psychotropic
Substances Act, 61 of 1985 which the State Government may, by notification, declare
to be an intoxicant and includes mohua flower and molasses;
***
(x) "Molasses" means the heavy dark coloured residual syrup drained away in the
final stage of the manufacture of gur or sugar containing, in solution or suspension,
sugars which can be fermented and includes any product formed by the addition to
such syrup of any ingredient which does not substantially alter the character of such
syrup, but does not include any article which the State Government may, by
notification, declare not to be molasses, for the purposes of this Act;"
71(3). Accordingly, order was passed, relevant portion of which runs as follows:
"The seized vehicle bearing registration No.OD-01AD- 1005 (TATA-407), Engine
No.4SPCR11CPY609492, Chassis No.MAT505560K8C06390 seized on 18.05.2024
vide P.R. No.31/2024-25 dated 18.05.2024 is hereby confiscated to Government
under Section 71(3) of the Odisha Excise Act, 2008 for contravention of Section 17 of
the Odisha Excise Act, 2008 read with Rule 234 & Rule 240 of the Odisha Excise
Rules, 2017.
The Investigating Officer here in the O.I.C of Excise, Deuli Excise Station,
Mayurbhanj is directed to take necessary follow-up action for auction sale of the
seized vehicle following due procedure after expiry of the appeal period and deposit
the sale proceeds into proper head of account.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 3
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
A copy of the order be sent to the Investing Officer/ registered owner of the seized
vehicle for information.
Pronounced in the open Court this the 27th day of August, 2024."
2.4. Dissatisfied with aforesaid decision and order of the AO, the petitioner carried the matter before
the Excise Commissioner, Odisha, Cuttack under Section 71(6) of the OEA, 2008 by way of
preferring an Appeal, registered as Excise Appeal Case No.18/2024-- 366/Ex. Upon hearing the
petitioner, the AO and the Investigating Officer, said Appeal came to be disposed of vide Order
dated 08.01.2025 (Annexure-6) by the Excise Commissioner, Odisha affirming Order of confiscation
under Section 71(3) of the OEA, 2008, with direction to sell the vehicle in auction with the following
observation:
"I went through the prayer petition filed by the Learned Counsel, the Seizure List,
Prosecution Report, Chemical Examination report and the order passed by the
Authorized Officer-cum-Superintendent of Excise, Mayurbhanj. A recovery of 5000
Kilograms of molasses has been made from the TATA 407 truck bearing Regd.
No.OD-01-AD-1005. The appellant was present in the said vehicle and he is also an
accused in this case. The Chemical Examination report reveals that the seized article
is molasses. The appellant has failed to produce any pass/permit for transportation of
the seized molasses. Further, ignorance of the appellant that the transported articles
is molasses and its transportation without permit/pass is an offence cannot be a
ground for setting aside the order of confiscation. Further the contention that the
appellant had produced the online bill before the I.O. on the day of detection/seizure
of molasses at the spot cannot be accepted, since officers from GST department and
Police Department were also present during the seizure, the seizure being made
during the joint checking on the eve of General Election-2024 and reportedly no
online bill was submitted before the I.O. during the detection of the case, Hence, use
of the said vehicle in carrying molasses illegally with the knowledge of the owner
makes a good ground for confiscation of the vehicle. In the instant case, the
Authorised Officer-cum-Superintendent of Excise, Mayurbhanj has rightly passed the
order on 27.08.2024 for confiscation of the vehicle in Excise C.P. Case No. 04/2024,
which is in accordance with law. Thus, I find no reason to interfere in the order of the
Authorized Officer- cum-Superintendent of Excise, Mayurbhanj.
Thus, the appeal does not hold any merit and is dismissed."
2.5. Aggrieved thereby, the instant writ petition has been filed invoking provisions of Articles 226
and 227 of the Constitution of India.
Hearing:
3. This matter came up before this Court under the heading "Fresh Admission". Contending that as
the authority did not acknowledge the online bill/ invoice sought to be produced at a later date to
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 4
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
the search, the petitioner, registered owner, is entitled to get the seized vehicle released in his
favour.
3.1. On the concession of the learned counsel for both sides, this matter is disposed of at the stage of
"Fresh Admission".
3.2. Accordingly, heard Sri Bibhuti Ranjan Mohanty, learned Advocate appearing for the petitioner
and Sri Bimbisar Dash, learned Additional Government Advocate appearing for the opposite parties.
3.3. On conclusion of hearing, the matter stood reserved for preparation and pronouncement of
Judgment/Order.
Rival contentions and submissions of counsel for the respective parties:
4. Sri Bibhuti Ranjan Mohanty, learned Advocate submitted that the petitioner, the owner of the
vehicle bearing Registration No.OD-01-AD-1005, was carrying gur, found to be "molasses" by the
authorities, on the instruction of one Sri Madhusudan Sahu of M/s. Sai Marketing Agency,
Ganeswarpur, Januganj in the district of Balasore being purchased from Shree Subham Enterprises,
Raghunathpur, Jhargram in the State of West Bengal on 18.05.2024. Due to non-functioning of the
printer, the goods in the vehicle could not be accompanied by invoice. However, there was no
predicament on the part of the Investigating Officer to consider the online invoice sought to be
produced by said Madhusudan Sahu of M/s. Sai Marketing Agency on a later date. Since the
opposite parties did not choose to cross-examine the witnesses whom the petitioner examined, the
matter should have been decided favourably and the authorities instead of proceeding to confiscate
the vehicle should have taken pragmatic view by releasing the vehicle.
5. Sri Bimbisar Dash, learned Additional Government Advocate refuting the contentions of the
counsel for the petitioner urged not to entertain this writ petition inasmuch as the vehicle was
carrying molasses without necessary documents and seeking to produce invoice subsequently is an
afterthought. Since at the stage of detention of the vehicle for search, necessary documents were not
produced before the Officer-in-Charge of the Chaksuliapada, adverse inference could be taken
against the petitioner and his ill-motive is tell-tale. Therefore, no infirmity or illegality could be
imputed against the Excise Authorities.
5.1. Per contra, Sri Bimbisar Dash, learned Additional Government Advocate contended that on the
date of search of the vehicle, the petitioner never produced online invoice nor could he produce
pass/permit indicating transportation of molasses from Shree Subham Enterprises, Raghunathpur,
Jhargram of West Bengal to Sai Marketing Agency, Balasore, Odisha.
5.2. He further submitted that the chemical examination confirmed that goods carried on in the
vehicle are "molasses".
5.3. He, therefore, fervently pressed to dismiss the writ petition inasmuch as contradictory
statement is being made by the petitioner at different times.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 5
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
Analysis and discussions:
6. On appreciation of facts on record, it is seen that in the show cause reply filed by the petitioner
before the AO vide Annexure-2 in connection with seizure of vehicle effected on 18.05.2024 it has
been stated that:
"5. *** On the date of seizure, i.e., 18.05.2024 on the request of consignee namely Sai
Marketing Agency, Balasore the goods were carried in the vehicle from Shree Subham
Enterprises, Raghunathpur to Balasore on fare basis. As per tax invoice the goods
were gur weighing 5200 kg. not molasses. Since the opposite party No.2-driver was
unaware about the route the opposite party No.1 accompanied him. On the order of
the said Marketing Agency the goods were carried under valid documents but without
any basis the Investigating Officer had seized the goods and vehicle showing the
goods to be molasses and arrested them illegally.
6. That the opposite parties have not committed any offence under the Excise Act and
it was carried under valid documents and goods were nothing but gur as per tax
invoice for which the case be dropped and vehicle is to be released in favour of
owner/opposite party No.1."
6.1. An affidavit dated 23.07.2024 sworn to by Madhusudan Sahu of M/s. Sai Marketing Agency of
Balasore claimed to have been filed before the AO reveals the following fact:
"I, Sri Madhusudan Sahu, aged 53 years, son of Late Sibanarayan Sahu, of village:
Ganeswarpur, P.O.: Januganj, P.S. I.A. District: Balasore, do hereby solemnly affirm
and state as follows:
***
4. That accordingly on the date of seizure my purchased gur was loaded in the seized
vehicle at Raghunathpur but due to sudden breakdown of printer the bill could not be
released immediately for which the consignor assured me to send the bill on online.
While the vehicle was coming the with my purchased gur the Officer-in-Charge, Deuli
Excise Station, detained the vehicle at Chaksuliapada and illegally seized the vehicle
and gur showing the same as molasses.
5. That after obtaining the online bill I had shown the same to Investigating Officer
but the Investigating Officer did not acknowledge it and filed PR against the owner
and driver of the vehicle.
*** Verification I, Sri Prabir Kumar Das, the above named deponent being present in the Kachery
Premises today 23.07.2024 do hereby declare that the statements made in the affidavit are all true
and correct to the best of my knowledge and belief.
Identified by Sd/-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 6
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
Sd/- 23.07.2024 Madhusudan Sahu
Advocate Verificant."
6.2. It is startling to notice that the Notary Public, Balasore (Sri Trayanath Bag) has certified the
petitioner (Prabir Kumar Das) to be present in the kuchery premises being signed by "Madhusudan
Sahu". The name of the advocate identifying the verificant could not be ascertained as the signature
was not legible.
6.3. It is surfaced from scrutiny of the record that an affidavit dated 18.07.2024 being sworn to by
Sri Mantu Mana (driver of the vehicle), enclosed at Annexure-3 of the writ petition, has not been
signed neither at the space meant for "Deponent" nor "Verificant", yet the Notary Public, Balasore
has certified his presence in the kuchery premises.
6.4. Cursory glance at copies of three affidavits of the petitioner, the driver and Sri Madhusudan
Sahu enclosed to the writ petitions claimed to have been furnished before the AO as evidence under
Order XVIII, Rule 4 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908, appears to be not executed by the
"deponent" or "verificant". They are simply filed to misdirect and misguide the Court or the AO.
Aforesaid affidavits enclosed at Annexure-3 do not inspire credibility.
6.5. Legal perspective of evidence on affidavit has been discussed in Ayaaubkhan Noorkhan Pathan
Vrs. State of Maharashtra, (2013) 4 SCC 465 which is as follows:
"Affidavit-- Whether "evidence" within the meaning of Section 3 of the Evidence Act,
1872
31. It is a settled legal proposition that an affidavit is not "evidence" within the
meaning of Section 3 of the Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter referred to as "the
Evidence Act"). Affidavits are, therefore, not included within the purview of the
definition of "evidence" as has been given in Section 3 of the Evidence Act, and the
same can be used as "evidence" only if, for sufficient reasons, the court passes an
order under Order 19 of the Code of Civil Procedure, 1908 (hereinafter referred to as
"CPC"). Thus, the filing of an affidavit of one's own statement, in one's own favour,
cannot be regarded as sufficient evidence for any court or tribunal, on the basis of
which it can come to a conclusion as regards a particular fact situation. (Vide, Sudha
Devi Vrs. M.P. Narayanan, (1988) 3 SCC 366 = AIR 1988 SC 1381 and Range Forest
Officer Vrs. S.T. Hadimani, (2002) 3 SCC 25 = AIR 2002 SC 1147).
32. While examining a case under the provisions of the Industrial Disputes Act, 1947,
this Court, in Bareilly Electricity Supply Co. Ltd. Vrs. Workmen, (1971) 2 SCC 617 =
AIR 1972 SC 330, considered the application of Order 19 Rules 1 and 2 CPC, and
observed as under: (SCC p. 629, para 14) „14. *** But the application of principles of
natural justice does not imply that what is not evidence, can be acted upon. On the
other hand, what it means is that no material can be relied upon to establish a
contested fact which are not spoken to by the persons who are competent to speak
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 7
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
about them and are subjected to cross-examination by the party against whom they
are sought to be used.
When a document is produced in a court or a tribunal, the questions that naturally arise are :
is it a genuine document, what are its contents and are the statements contained
therein true? ... If a letter or other document is produced to establish some fact which
is relevant to the inquiry, the writer must be produced or his affidavit in respect
thereof be filed and opportunity afforded to the opposite party who challenges this
fact. This is both in accord with the principles of natural justice as also according to
the procedure under Order 19 of the Code and the Evidence Act, both of which
incorporate the general principles.(cid:128)
33. In Needle Industries (India) Ltd. Vrs. Needle Industries Newey (India) Holding
Ltd., (1981) 3 SCC 333 = AIR 1981 SC 1298, this Court considered a case under the
Companies Act, and observed (at SCC p. 373, para 63) that, "it is generally
unsatisfactory to record a finding involving grave consequences [with respect] to a
person, on the basis of affidavits and documents [alone,] without asking that person
to submit to cross-examination."
However, the conduct of the parties may be an important factor with regard to determining whether
they showed their willingness to get the said issue determined on the basis of affidavits,
correspondence and other documents, on the basis of which proper and necessary inferences can
safely and legitimately be drawn.
34. In Ramesh Kumar Vrs. Kesho Ram, 1992 Supp (2) SCC 623 = AIR 1992 SC 700, this Court
considered the scope of application of the provisions of Order 19 Rules 1 and 2 CPC in a rent control
matter, observing as under : (SCC p. 628, para 9) „9. *** The court may also treat any affidavit filed
in support of the pleadings itself as one under the said provision and call upon the opposite side to
traverse it. The court, if it finds that having regard to the nature of the allegations, it is necessary to
record oral evidence tested by oral cross-examination, may have recourse to that procedure.(cid:128)
35. In Standard Chartered Bank Vrs. Andhra Bank Financial Services Ltd., (2006) 6 SCC 94, this
Court while dealing with a case under the provisions of the Companies Act, 1956, while considering
complex issues regarding the markets, exchanges and securities, and the procedure to be followed
by special tribunals, held as under : (SCC pp. 121-22, para 48) „48. While it may be true that the
Special Court has been given a certain amount of latitude in the matter of procedure, it surely
cannot fly away from established legal principles while deciding the cases before it. As to what
inference arises from a document, is always a matter of evidence unless the document is self-
explanatory. ... In the absence of any such explanation, it was not open to the Special Court to come
up with its own explanations and decide the fate of the suit on the basis of its inference based on
such assumed explanations.(cid:128)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 8
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
36. Therefore, affidavits in the light of the aforesaid discussion are not considered to be evidence,
within the meaning of Section 3 of the Evidence Act. However, in a case where the deponent is
available for cross-examination, and opportunity is given to the other side to cross-examine him, the
same can be relied upon. Such view, stands fully affirmed particularly, in view of the amended
provisions of Order 18 Rules 4 and 5 CPC. In certain other circumstances, in order to avoid
technicalities of procedure, the legislature, or a court/tribunal, can even lay down a procedure to
meet the requirement of compliance with the principles of natural justice, and thus, the case will be
examined in the light of those statutory rules, etc. as framed by the aforementioned authorities."
6.6. This Court, nonetheless, entertains serious doubt about the execution of the affidavits on the
dates specified therein before the aforesaid Notary Public, Balasore. The record does not contain
even the copy of online invoice purported to have been produced before the AO. Pleading falls short
of fact of waybill under the Goods and Services Tax statute or permit under the OE statute being
available with the petitioner. Hence, this Court disbelieves the assertion of the petitioner that the
Investigating Officer did not acknowledge production of the online bill/invoice later to 18.05.2024,
i.e., date of search and seizure of vehicle, and finds the fact stated in the affidavits as myth and only
to cover up the lacunae. The factual contents affirmed in such defective affidavits cannot be taken on
evidence.
7. The argument of the advocate for the petitioner proceeded on the basis that due to defect in
printer at the end of the supplier, the invoice/bill could not be generated and the vehicle carried
goods from West Bengal to Odisha. He would rather insist that the online bill was produced on a
subsequent date. But there is nothing on record to suggest that he had waybill or permit.
7.1. This Court culls out the following factual position as returned by the AO in his decision dated
27.08.2024:
"One Madhusudan Sahu son of Late Shibanarayan Sahu of Ganeswarpur (Remuna
Golei) P.S.: Silpanchal P.S.:
Balasore appearing in person submitted that Sai Marketing Agency is a registered
Farm and his wife Mira Sahu is the proprietor. It is submitted that he is looking after
the affairs of aforesaid farm. It is submitted that on the date of seizure, i.e.,
18.05.2024 their farm had purchased the aforesaid seized 5000 kgs. of Molasses
(Gur) (an jaggery) from Subham Enterprises, Raghunathpur, Jhargram (W.B.). He
booked the seized vehicle for bringing of aforesaid Gur (Molasses) on hire. It is
submitted that due to breakdown of printer, the Bill could not be obtained and the
consignor told him that, he would send the bill through online."
7.2. Further fact as settled by the AO makes it transparent that, "The Invoice exhibited by the O.Ps.
was issued by Subham Enterprises, Raghunathpur, Jhargram in favour of Sai Marketing Agency,
Balasore for transportation of 5,100 Kg of GUR in vehicle No. OD-01-AD-1005. But, the chemical
examination report of the collected samples in respect of the seized molasses communicated by the
Assistant Chemical Examiner, Excise Divisional Laboratory (CD), Cuttack vide C.E.R
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 9
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
No.1236-497/I/24-25 dated 03.07.2024 discloses that "subject samples marked as „ML-1" & "ML-2"
confirms to IS:1162:1958 for Cane Molasses having probable out turn of alcohol to be
271.43BI/tonne". Hence, it is beyond doubt that Molasses was transported in the seized vehicle
without having any valid permit/documents."
7.3. No material is brought on record to put forth that the petitioner demonstrated before the AO
and the Appellate Authority to establish that "molasses" as per such chemical report is not a fact.
But he merely stated that the goods in vehicle was nothing but gur.
7.4. It is, at this juncture, noteworthy to have reference to Section 68 of the Central Goods and
Services Act, 2017/ the Odisha Goods and Services Tax Rules, 2017, read with Rule 138 of the
Odisha Goods and Services Tax Rules, 2017, whereby documents like invoices and e- waybill while
carrying any consignment of goods in a vehicle during movement is necessary concomitant.
Nowhere the petitioner has made reference to waybill obtained under either the West Bengal Goods
and Services Tax or the Odisha Goods and Services Tax statute. The Goods and Services Tax statute
provides for goods to be accompanied by valid waybill before commencement of movement. A
registered person (here both the supplier and the recipient) is required to furnish information
relating to the goods carried in part- A of Form GST EWB-01 electronically along with other
information.
7.5. Relevant provisions of the OE Act restricting import of intoxicant/molasses read thus:
"7. Restrictions on import2.--
(1) No intoxicant shall be imported unless:
(a) the State Government have accorded permission, either by general or special
order for its import;
(b) the conditions, if any, as the State Government may impose, have been satisfied;
and
(c) the duty, if any, payable under Chapter V has been paid.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to any article which has been imported into India
and was liable, on such importation, to duty under the Customs Tariff Act, 51 of 1975
or the Customs Act, 52 of 1962.
8. Restrictions on export or transport.--
2 The term "import" is defined under Section 2(q) of the Odisha Excise Act, 2008 as:
"IMPORT means to bring into State from any other State or Country;"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 10
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
No intoxicant shall be exported or transported unless the duty, if any, payable under Chapter V has
been paid.
9. Power to prohibit import, export or transport.--
The State Government may, by notification,
(a) prohibit the import or export of any intoxicant into or from the State or any part thereof, or
(b) prohibit the transport of any intoxicant.
10. Passes for import, export and transport.--
(1) Unless otherwise provided in this Act, Collector shall be competent to grant passes for import,
export and transport of intoxicant.
(2) No intoxicant exceeding such quantity as the State Government may prescribe by notification,
either generally or for any specified local area, shall be imported, exported or transported except
under a pass granted by the Collector.
(3) Such passes may be either general for definite periods and particular kinds of intoxicant or
special for specified occasions and particular consignments only.
***
17. Possession of intoxicant generally.--
(1) No person not being licensed to manufacture, collect or sell any intoxicant shall have in his
possession any quantity of any intoxicant in excess of such quantity as the State Government has,
under Section 4, declared to be the limit of possession, except under a permit granted by the
Collector in that behalf.
(2) Sub-section (1) shall not apply to:
(a) any foreign liquor or India made foreign liquor, other than denatured spirit,
which is in the possession of any common carrier or warehouse man as such;
(b) any foreign liquor or India made foreign liquor which has been purchased by any
person for his bona fide private consumption and not for sale or for use in the
manufacture of any article for sale;
(c) tari intended to be used in the manufacture of gur; and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 11
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
(d) tari intended to be used solely for the preparation of food for domestic
consumption and not as an intoxicant, or for the preparation of any intoxicating
article.
(3) A licensed vendor shall not have in his possession at any place other than that
authorized by his licence any quantity of any intoxicant in excess of such quantity as
declared under Section 4 to be the limit of possession, except under a permit granted
by the Collector in that behalf.
(4) Notwithstanding anything contained in the foregoing sub-sections, the State
Government may, by notification, prohibit the possession by any person or class of
persons with such exceptions, if any, as may be specified in the notification, either in
the whole or any part of the State of Odisha, any intoxicant either absolutely, or
subject to such conditions as it may prescribe."
7.6. Reference to Rules 234 and 2403 of the OE Rules may be relevant. Whereas Rule 234 allows
possession, use, storage or sale of molasses subject to valid licence or permit with terms and
conditions, Rule 240 of the OE Rules restricts and/or prohibits movement of molasses from one
State to the other except "on the strength of permit" to the licensee. The modalities for making
application for permit and issue of permit is regulated under Rule 241 and Rule 242 of the OE Rules.
7.7. Conjoint reading of provisions of Sections 7, 8, 9, 10 and 17 of the OE Act manifests that
restriction is imposed on import of molasses to this State from outside. Such "molasses" which
comes within the fold of definition of "intoxicant", the same cannot be transported without valid
documents/permit. Cursory glance at provisions of said sections and rules makes it abundantly clear
that the language used therein is in the negative. The expressions "no intoxicant shall be imported"
in Section 7, "no person not being licensed ... shall have in his 3 Rules 234 and 240 of the Odisha
Excise Rules, 2017, stands thus:
"234. Possession, Storage, Sale and Use of Molasses.--
No molasses shall be possessed, used, stored or sold by any person or factory except
under a valid licence or permit and subject to the terms and conditions contained
therein.
240. Restriction on import of Molasses.--
Molasses shall not be imported except on the strength of a permit issued under these
rules from any place outside the State of Odisha and no permit shall be issued to any
person other than a licensee."
possession" in Section 17 of the OE Act, "no molasses shall be" in Rule 234 and "molasses shall not
be imported" in Rule 240 of the OE Rules negatively worded make the compliance of the
requirement of provisions mandatory. The restriction has been imposed on not only possession, use,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 12
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
storage or sale of molasses but also its movement from one State to the other.
7.8. When the word "shall" is juxtaposed with the word "no", the provision of the statute is intended
to be mandatory. The use of "shall" and "no" in one sentence in the provision indicates that the
provision is indeed mandatory. This clarifies the position that Section 7 of the OE Act read with
Rules 234 and 240 of the OE Rules imposes an obligation to refrain from a particular action or
behavior.
7.9. In Adani Gas Limited Vrs. Union of India, (2021) 13 SCR 1146 the Hon'ble Supreme Court of
India interpreted the negatively worded statutory provision in the following manner:
"73. The opening words of Section 16 are cast in negative terms ("no entity shall"). In
a series of judgments, this Court has ruled that negative words are prohibitory. As
held in M. Pentiah Vrs. Muddala Veeramallappa, (1961) 2 SCR 295, „Negative
imperative words are clearly prohibitory and are ordinarily used as a legislative
device to make a statute imperative.(cid:128)
74. In Superintendent and Legal Remembrancer of Legal Affairs to Government of
West Bengal Vrs. Abani Maity, (1979) 4 SCC 85 this Court observed as follows:
„Exposition ex visceribus actus is a long-recognised rule of construction. Words in a
statute often take their meaning from the context of the statute as a whole. They are
therefore, not to be construed in isolation. For instance, the use of the word „may(cid:128)
would normally indicate that the provision was not mandatory. But in the context of a
particular statute, this word may connote a legislative imperative, particularly when
its construction in a permissive sense would relegate it to the unenviable position, as
it were, „of an ineffectual angel beating its wings in a luminous void in vain(cid:128). „If the
choice is between two interpretations(cid:128), said Viscount Simon, L.C. In Nokes Vrs.
Doncaster Amalgamated Collieries, Ltd. (AC at p. 1022):
„The narrower of which would fail to achieve the manifest purpose of the legislation,
we should avoid a construction which would reduce the legislation to futility and
should rather accept the bolder construction based on the view that Parliament
would legislate only for the purpose of bringing about an effective result.(cid:128) ***"
7.10. It has been observed in Debasish Paul Vrs. Amal Boral, (2023) 4 SCR 511 as follows:
"15. It is relevant to note that the case of Bijay Kumar Singh Vrs. Amit Kumar
Chamariya, (2019) 10 SCC 660 in turn, referred to the observations made in
Nasiruddin and Ors Vrs. Sita Ram Agarwal, (2003) 1 SCR 634 in the following terms:
„37. *** It is well settled that the real intention of the legislation must be gathered
from the language used. It may be true that use of the expression "shall or may" is not
decisive for arriving at a finding as to whether the statute is directory or mandatory.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 13
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
But the intention of the legislature must be found out from the scheme of the Act. It is
also equally well settled that when negative words are used the courts will presume
that the intention of the legislature was that the provisions are mandatory in
character.
38. *** if an act is required to be performed by a private person within a specified
time, the same would ordinarily be mandatory but when a public functionary is
required to perform a public function within a time-frame, the same will be held to be
directory unless the consequences therefor are specified.(cid:128) ***"
7.11. In Union of India Vrs. A.K. Pandey, (2009) 10 SCC 552 the observation of Hon'ble Supreme
Court of India runs as follows:
"9. In his classic work, Principles of Statutory Interpretation (7th Edn.), Justice G.P.
Singh has quoted a passage of Lord Campbell in Liverpool Borough Bank Vrs.
Turner, (1860) 30 LJ Ch 379 that reads:
„No universal rule can be laid down as to whether mandatory enactments shall be
considered directory only or obligatory whether implied nullification for
disobedience. It is the duty of courts of justice to try to get at the real intention of the
legislature by carefully attending to the whole scope of the statute to be considered.(cid:128)
10. In Crawford(cid:128)s Statutory Construction (1989 reprint), the following excerpt from
People Vrs. Sutcliffe, 7 NYS (2) 431 is quoted:
„It is a rule of statutory construction that where a statute is framed in terms of
command, and there is no indication from the nature or wording of the act or the
surrounding circumstances that it is to receive a permissive interpretation, it will be
construed as pre- emptory(cid:128).
In his discussion on the subject, "Mandatory and Directory or Permissive Words"
Crawford in the aforenoticed treatise says:
„Ordinarily the words „shall(cid:128) and „must(cid:128) are mandatory, and the work „may(cid:128) is
directory, although they are often used inter-changeably in legislation. This use
without regard to their literal meaning generally makes it necessary for the courts to
resort to construction in order to discover the real intention of the legislature.
Nevertheless, it will always be presumed by the court that the legislature intended to
use the words in their usual and natural meaning. If such a meaning, however, leads
to absurdity, or great inconvenience, or for some other reason is clearly contrary to
the obvious intention of the legislature, then words which ordinarily are mandatory
in their nature will be construed as directory, or vice versa. In other words, if the
language of the statute, considered as a whole and with due regard to its nature and
object, reveals that the legislature intended the words „shall(cid:128) and „must(cid:128) to be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 14
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
directory, they should be given that meaning. Similarly, under the same
circumstances, the word „may(cid:128) should be given a mandatory meaning, and especially
where the statute concerns the rights and interests of the public, or where third
persons have a claim de jure that a power shall be exercised, or whenever something
is directed to be done for the sake of justice or the public good, or is necessary to
sustain the statute(cid:128)s constitutionality.
Yet the construction of mandatory words as directory and directory words as
mandatory should not be lightly adopted. The opposite meaning should be
unequivocally evidenced before it is accepted as the true meaning; otherwise, there is
considerable danger that the legislative intent will be wholly or partially defeated.(cid:128)
Crawford further says in his treatise that prohibitive or negative words can rarely, if
ever, be directory. *** Negative, prohibitory and exclusive words or terms are
indicative of the legislative intent that the statute is to be mandatory.
11. In Thompson Vrs. Stimpson, (1961) 1 QB 195 = (1960) 3 WLR 818 = (1960) 3 All
ER 500, Lord Parker, C.J. (Queen(cid:128)s Bench Division) while dealing with the wording
of Section 16 of the Rent Act, 1957 which provided that no notice by a landlord or a
tenant to quit any premises let (whether before or after the commencement of the
Act) as a dwelling shall be valid unless it is given not less than four weeks before the
date of which it is to take effect held that four weeks(cid:128) notice contemplated in Section
16 should be construed as four clear weeks. This is what Lord Parker, C.J. observed:
(QB p. 200) „Parliament here, however, has gone further and used [the] words which
... have been interpreted in the past as providing for four clear weeks. Like Bennett,
J., Hector Whaling Ltd., In re, 1936 Ch 208 = 1935 All ER Rep 302, I think that there
ought to be certainty on this matter, and I prefer the view that the word should be
construed as four clear weeks.(cid:128)
12. A Constitution Bench of this Court in M. Pentiah Vrs.
Muddala Veeramallappa, AIR 1961 SC 1107 construed the expression, "not less than two-third of the
whole number of members" in Section 77 of the Hyderabad District Municipalities Act, 1956 as
follows:
„15. *** This section confers on the Committee an express power couched in a
negative form. Negative words are clearly prohibitory and are ordinarily used as a
legislative device to make a statute imperative. If the section is recast in an
affirmative form, it reads to the effect that the Committee shall have power to
transfer any immovable property, if the conditions laid down under the section are
complied with.(cid:128)
13. In Lachmi Narain Vrs. Union of India, (1976) 2 SCC 953 this Court construed the
expression, "not less than three months(cid:128) notice" in Section 6(2) of the Delhi Laws
Act and held:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 15
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
„64. Section 6(2), as it stood immediately before the impugned notification, requires
the State Government to give by notification in the Official Gazette „not less than 3
months(cid:128) notice' of its intention to add to or omit from or otherwise amend the
Second Schedule. The primary key to the problem whether a statutory provision is
mandatory or directory, is the intention of the law- maker as expressed in the law,
itself. The reason behind the provision may be a further aid to the ascertainment of
that intention. If the legislative intent is expressed clearly and strongly in imperative
words, such as the use of „must(cid:128) instead of „shall(cid:128), that will itself be sufficient to
hold the provision to be mandatory, and it will not be necessary to pursue the enquiry
further. If the provision is couched in prohibitive or negative language, it can rarely
be directory, the use of peremptory language in a negative form is per se indicative of
the intent that the provision is to be mandatory. (Crawford, The Construction of
Statutes, pp. 523-24.) Here the language of sub-section (2) of Section 6 is
emphatically prohibitive, it commands the Government in unambiguous negative
terms that the period of the requisite notice must not be less than three months.
65. In fixing this period of notice in mandatory terms, the legislature had, it seems
taken into consideration several factors. According to the scheme of the Bengal Act,
the tax is quantified and assessed on the quarterly turnover. The period of not less
than three months(cid:128) notice conforms to that scheme and is intended to ensure that
imposition of a new burden or exemption from tax causes least dislocation and
inconvenience to the dealer in collecting the tax for the Government, keeping
accounts and filing a proper return, and to the Revenue in assessing and collecting
the same. Another object of this provision is that the public at large and the
purchasers on whom the incidence of the tax really falls, should have adequate notice
of taxable items. The third object seems to be that the dealers and others likely to be
affected by an amendment of the Second Schedule may get sufficient time and
opportunity for making representations, objections or suggestions in respect of the
intended amendment. The dealers have also been ensured adequate time to arrange
their sales, adjust their affairs and to get themselves registered or get their licences
amended and brought in accord with the new imposition or exemption.
66. Taking into consideration all these matters, the legislature has, in its judgment
solemnly incorporated in the statute, fixed the period of the requisite notice as „not
less than three months(cid:128) and willed this obligation to be absolute. The span of notice
was thus the essence of the legislative mandate. The necessity of notice and the span
of notice both are integral to the scheme of the provision. The sub-section cannot
therefore be split up into essential and non-essential components, the whole of it
being mandatory. The rule in Raza Buland Sugar Co. case, AIR 1965 SC 895 = (1965)
1 SCR 970 has therefore no application.(cid:128)
14. In Mannalal Khetan Vrs. Kedar Nath Khetan, (1977) 2 SCC 424 while dealing with
Section 108 of the Companies Act, 1956 a three-Judge Bench of this Court held:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 16
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
„17. In Raza Buland Sugar Co. Ltd. Vrs. Municipal Board, Rampur, AIR 1965 SC 895
= (1965) 1 SCR 970 this Court referred to various tests for finding out when a
provision is mandatory or directory. The purpose for which the provision has been
made, its nature, the intention of the legislature in making the provision, the general
inconvenience or injustice which may result to the person from reading the provision
one way or the other, the relation of the particular provision to other provisions
dealing with the same subject and the language of the provision are all to be
considered. Prohibition and negative words can rarely be directory. It has been aptly
stated that there is one way to obey the command and that is completely to refrain
from doing the forbidden act. Therefore, negative, prohibitory and exclusive words
are indicative of the legislative intent when the statute is mandatory. (See Maxwell on
Interpretation of Statutes, 11th Edn., pp. 362 et seq.; Crawford: Statutory
Construction, Interpretation of Laws, p. 523 and Bhikraj Jaipuria Vrs. Union of
India, AIR 1962 SC 113 = (1962) 2 SCR 880.)
18. The High Court said that the provisions contained in Section 108 of the Act are
directory because non-compliance with Section 108 of the Act is not declared an
offence. The reason given by the High Court is that when the law does not prescribe
the consequences or does not lay down penalty for non-compliance with the
provision contained in Section 108 of the Act the provision is to be considered as
directory. The High Court failed to consider the provision contained in Section 629(a)
of the Act.
Section 629(a) of the Act prescribes the penalty where no specific penalty is provided elsewhere in
the Act. It is a question of construction in each case whether the legislature intended to prohibit the
doing of the act altogether, or merely to make the person who did it liable to pay the penalty.
19. Where a contract, express or implied, is expressly or by implication forbidden by statute, no
court will lend its assistance to give it effect. (See Melliss Vrs. Shirley Local Board, (1885) 16 QBD
446). A contract is void if prohibited by a statute under a penalty, even without express declaration
that the contract is void, because such a penalty implies a prohibition. The penalty may be imposed
with intent merely to deter persons from entering into the contract or for the purposes of revenue or
that the contract shall not be entered into so as to be valid at law. A distinction is sometimes made
between contracts entered into with the object of committing an illegal act and contracts expressly
or impliedly prohibited by statute. The distinction is that in the former class one has only to look
and see what acts the statute prohibits; it does not matter whether or not it prohibits a contract: if a
contract is made to do a prohibited act, that contract will be unenforceable. In the latter class, one
has to consider not what act the statute prohibits, but what contracts it prohibits. One is not
concerned at all with the intent of the parties, if the parties enter into a prohibited contract, that
contract is unenforceable. (See St. John Shipping Corpn. Vrs. Joseph Rank Ltd., (1957) 1 QB 267 =
(1956) 3 WLR 870 = (1956) 3 All ER 683) (See also Halsbury(cid:128)s Laws of England, 3rd Edn., Vol. 8, p.
141.)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 17
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
20. It is well established that a contract which involves in its fulfilment the doing of an act
prohibited by statute is void. The legal maxim a pactis privatorum publico juri non derogatur means
that private agreements cannot alter the general law. Where a contract, express or implied, is
expressly or by implication forbidden by statute, no court can lend its assistance to give it effect.
(See Melliss Vrs. Shirley Local Board, (1885) 16 QBD 446.) What is done in contravention of the
provisions of an Act of the legislature cannot be made the subject of an action.
21. If anything is against law though it is not prohibited in the statute but only a penalty is annexed
the agreement is void. In every case where a statute inflicts a penalty for doing an act, though the act
be not prohibited, yet the thing is unlawful, because it is not intended that a statute would inflict a
penalty for a lawful act.
22. Penalties are imposed by statute for two distinct purposes:
(1) for the protection of the public against fraud, or for some other object of public
policy;
(2) for the purpose of securing certain sources of revenue either to the State or to
certain public bodies. If it is clear that a penalty is imposed by statute for the purpose
of preventing something from being done on some ground of public policy, the thing
prohibited, if done, will be treated as void, even though the penalty if imposed is not
enforceable.
23. The provisions contained in Section 108 of the Act are for the reasons indicated earlier
mandatory. The High Court erred in holding that the provisions are directory."
15. The principle seems to be fairly well settled that prohibitive or negative words are ordinarily
indicative of mandatory nature of the provision; although not conclusive. The Court has to examine
carefully the purpose of such provision and the consequences that may follow from non-observance
thereof. If the context does not show nor demands otherwise, the text of a statutory provision
couched in a negative form ordinarily has to be read in the form of command. When the word
"shall" is followed by prohibitive or negative words, the legislative intention of making the provision
absolute, peremptory and imperative becomes loud and clear and ordinarily has to be inferred as
such. There being nothing in the context otherwise, in our judgment, there has to be clear ninety-six
hours' interval between the accused being charged for which he is to be tried and his arraignment
and interval time in Rule 34 must be read as absolute. There is a purpose behind this provision: that
purpose is that before the accused is called upon for trial, he must be given adequate time to give a
cool thought to the charge or charges for which he is to be tried, decide about his defence and ask
the authorities, if necessary, to take reasonable steps in procuring the attendance of his witnesses.
He may even decide not to defend the charge(s) but before he decides his line of action, he must be
given clear ninety-six hours."
7.12. In CST Vrs. Prabhudayal Prem Narain, 1988 Supp SCC 729 in the context of claim of
exemption and fulfilment of condition for allowing exemption, it has been laid down as follows:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 18
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
"5. Under the said section, declaration forms have been prescribed by Rule 12-B. It
appears that this question stands concluded so far as the State of U.P. is concerned,
by a Bench decision of the said High Court in the case of Govind Ram Tansukh Rai &
Co. Vrs. CST, 1985 UPTC 1060. There, after considering the aforesaid two decisions
of the learned Single Judges, the Division Bench held that if the assessee had not
furnished the required declaration forms in order to be entitled for exemption, the
assessee could not file any other evidence which was required to be considered by the
Taxing Authorities.
6. In that view of the matter the decision of the Division Bench must prevail. This
also follows logically from the decision of this Court in Kedar Nath Jute Mfg. Co. Ltd.
Vrs. CTO, (1965) 3 SCR 626 = AIR 1966 SC 12 where this Court while dealing with
similar provisions under the Bengal Finance Sales Tax Act, held that the dealer could
claim exemption on the sales to the registered dealer by furnishing the declaration
form and unless such declaration forms are furnished, the dealer was not entitled to
any exemption. This Court further reiterated that the provisions of this nature should
be construed as mandatory. In that view of the matter there is no scope for taking any
contrary view. In the premises, the High Court in the impugned order was in error in
directing the Tribunal to consider the matter on other evidence. The assessee is
entitled to exemption only on furnishing declaration forms. Since the assessee did
not do so, he was not entitled to exemption."
7.13. A well settled rule of interpretation of the statutes is that the use of the word "shall" in a
statute, does not necessarily mean that in every case it is mandatory that unless the words of the
statute are literally followed, the proceeding or the outcome of the proceeding, would be invalid. It is
not always correct to say that if the word "may" has been used, the statute is only permissive or
directory in the sense that non-compliance with those provisions will not render the proceeding
invalid [State of U.P. Vrs. Manbodhan Lal Srivastava, AIR 1957 SC 912] and that when a statute uses
the word "shall", prima facie, it is mandatory, but the Court may ascertain the real intention of the
legislature by carefully attending to the whole scope of the statute [State of U.P. Vrs. Babu Ram
Upadhya, AIR 1961 SC 751]. The principle of literal construction of the statute alone in all
circumstances without examining the context and scheme of the statute may not serve the purpose
of the statute [Reserve Bank of India Vrs. Peerless General Finance and Investment Co. Ltd., (1987)
1 SCC 424]. Vide, C. Bright Vrs. Collector, (2020) 7 SCR 997.
7.14. As confirmed by chemical test that the goods carried in the vehicle in question is "molasses"
having potential of content of alcohol, non-availability of the invoice and the permit at the time of
search would lend indication that there was motive for evasion and violation of sine qua non
condition for transportation of such goods into the State of Odisha from outside.
7.15. In order to ensure that the goods entering into the State of Odisha are not possessed, stored,
used or sold within the State by adopting evasive and dubious devices the system of permit is
introduced by way of Section 7 and Section 17 read of the OE Act read with Rules famed. It is to
safeguard not only the interest of the State exchequer (taxes) but also citizens from suffering health
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 19
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
hazards.
7.16. To fortify the view that the provisions are mandatory in nature and required to be strictly
complied with can be perceived from the background material for introduction of "molasses" to be
construed as "intoxicant" with its restriction on movement from outside the State to this State.
7.17. In the case of State of West Bengal Vrs. Sujit Kumar Rana, (2004) 1 SCR 870 it has further
been observed as follows:
"7. Taking into consideration the object of the Forest Act and other relevant
considerations, this Court in the above said case of State of Karnataka Vrs. K.
Krishnan, (2000) 7 SCC 80 while allowing the said appeal held:
„The courts cannot shut their eyes and ignore their obligations indicated in the Act
enacted for the purpose of protecting and safeguarding both the forests and their
produce. The forests are not only the natural wealth of the country but also protector
of human life by providing a clean and unpolluted atmosphere. We are of the
considered view that when any vehicle is seized on the allegation that it was used for
committing a forest offence, the same shall not normally be returned to a party till
the culmination of all the proceedings in respect of such offence, including
confiscatory proceedings, if any. Nonetheless, if for any exceptional reasons a court is
inclined to release the vehicle during such pendency, furnishing a bank guarantee
should be the minimum condition. No party shall be under the impression that
release of vehicle would be possible on easier terms, when such vehicle is alleged to
have been involved in commission of a forest offence. Any such easy release would
tempt the forest offenders to repeat commission of such offences. Its casualty will be
the forests as the same cannot be replenished for years to come.(cid:128)
8. From the above dictum of this Court, we find when a vehicle is involved in a forest offence the
same is not to be released to the offender or the claimant as a matter of routine till the culmination
of the proceedings which may include confiscation of such vehicle.(cid:128) ***"
7.18. In the same breath as above in connection with vehicles used in commission of
forest offence, this Court may observe that molasses, rectified spirit, denatured spirit
or denatured spirituous preparations like French polish, varnish, thinner, etc., are
available at low price because of less or no excise duty, and therefore there is always a
propensity of its misuse by diverting it surreptitiously and using it illegally for
making potable alcohol, commonly known as illicit liquor, which many a times
account for the unfortunate hooch tragedies that result in death or blindness of the
persons consuming the adulterated spirit. The State Government therefore is faced
with an unenviable task and required to keep a constant vigil and supervise the
manufacture, import, export, transport, storage, sale, purchase, use, etc. of the
molasses, mohua flower, rectified spirit, denatured spirit or denatured spirituous
preparations through the prohibition and the Excise Authorities or staff of Police
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 20
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
establishment so as to ensure that the same are not diverted illegally and
clandestinely for potable use and also to ensure that excise duty is not evaded. It
must however be also mentioned that notwithstanding what is stated above, as well
as Article 47 of the Constitution, though in the State of Odisha there is prohibition for
all persons to manufacture, possess, use, store, sale, purchase, transport, etc., of
potable liquors, the State Government parts with this privilege and permits the same
by issuing licences/permits/passes under various Rules framed under the OE Act,
2017, in view of the extensive revenues it earns on the excise duty levied on potable
liquors.4 4 Reference may be made to Sahakar Maharshi Shankarrao Mohite Patil
Sahakari 7.19. Such regulatory measures have been put in place in the State Excise
statute by way of restriction and prohibition with "permit raj". Therefore, the
provisions containing prohibition/restriction are required to be construed strictly
and movement of molasses having potential of alcohol cannot be allowed from one
State to this State without valid permit. For obvious reasons the State Government
has put such embargo which can very well be understood from the observations made
in Uma Enterprises Vrs. State of Odisha, 2012 (II) ILR-CUT 211. This Court made
elaborate discussions with respect to inclusion of "molasses" to be treated as
"intoxicant" in the Odisha Excise Act, 2008 (repealing the Bihar and Orissa Excise
Act, 1915 in its application to the State of Orissa), which came into force with effect
from 01.04.2017. To have better conspectus of "molasses"
being so introduced in the State Excise statute has been enunciated by way of following pertinent
observations in the said case:
"7. Further, it is stated that Molasses is a by-product of sugar and it is mainly used as
raw material for manufacturing of spirit including alcohol for human consumption. It
was found that most of the molasses produced were diverted for preparation of
potable liquor as a result of which many unscrupulous liquor mafia got scope for
using molasses which are supplied for being used in industries for preparation
Sakhar Karkhana Ltd. Vrs. State of Maharashtra, 2011 SCC OnLine Bom 616.
of illicit liquor as a result of which not only State suffers huge revenue but also several
liquor tragedies are taking place.
8. Further, he placed strong reliance upon the Report of the Justice B.K. Behera,
wherein suggestion was given to amend the Excise Laws by inserting the Molasses
within the purview of „intoxicant(cid:128) as it is the principal raw material used for
manufacture of alcohol. Therefore, it is contended by the learned Government
Advocate that there is no illegality whatsoever in bringing such amendment
incorporating Section 2(12-a) of the Bihar and Orissa Excise Act. It is also contended
that Molasses has also been defined as „intoxicant(cid:128) by other States like Bihar, U.P.,
Maharastra etc. and the vires of such inclusion were challenged and have been
upheld by the Apex Court in State of Bihar Vrs. Industrial Corporation Pvt. Ltd., AIR
2004 SC 1151. He also placed reliance upon the report of Justice Behera Commission,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 21
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
wherein it is observed as follows:
„Molasses have been the main raw material for manufacture of alcohol which
traditionally has also been the source of organic chemicals in India. 60% of alcohol
goes for potable liquor manufacturer and 40% towards industrial use, resulting in
low capacity utilization of alcohol based industries. Compulsions of better revenues,
recourse crunch and its easy availability forced the existing distilleries to go in for
manufacture of potable alcohol despite specific recommendations of Expert
Committees (Swaminathan Commission in 1977) to the effect that Molasses based
alcohol be totally reserved for industrial purpose or in the alternative to freeze the
alcohol allocation to potable liquor or in the alternative freeze the alcohol allocation
to potable liquor at the pre-1977 levels but such a situation did not materialized and
the industry continued in bondage to the drinking fraternity. No sobering thoughts
prevailed upon the policy on the industries requiring alcohol. Alternative to meet the
gap of about 2000 lakh liters of alcohol had to be evolved and in the process,
appearance of cheaper intermediates like Naphtha and other Hydrocarbon
substances in the liquor world, tempted the unscrupulous traders to divert a part of
such cheaper substitutes to potable alcohol without caring for a while into the
positive harmful effects of the alternate food stock like petroleum Naphtha and gases
including methanol (based on gas) as a cheaper route for production of acetic acid.
There is also demand for utilization of alternate food stock like Mahua Flowers and
best root for manufacture of potable alcohol thereby saving alcohol from Molasses for
being used as feed stock for alcohol based industries. Such a strategy would have
saved the liquor consuming public from the dreadful tragedies that are reported in
almost every part of the country.(cid:128)
9. Therefore, learned Government Advocate requested to dismiss the writ petition.
10. In the counter affidavit at paragraph-7, it is contended that Molasses Control Order, 1961 issued
by the Government of India under Section 18(g) of the Industries (Development & Regulation) Act,
1951 was holding the field of control and regulation of Molasses. This order has been repealed by the
Government of India on 10.06.1993. While decontrolling the molasses, the Government of India
advised all the Sate Government to exercise strict vigilance on the undue diversion of molasses for
manufacture of potable alcohol. At the time of withdrawal of Molasses Control Order, 1961, the
Government of India, Ministry of Chemicals and Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petro
Chemicals have in their letter No.15021 dated 11.06.1993 advised the State Government in the
following manner:
„While taking the decision to decontrol molasses and alcohol, the need to ensure that
there is no undue diversion of molasses to the potable alcohol section has been
emphasized by the Government fears have been expressed that molasses in a
decontrolled situation may be diverted for potable alcohol production. It has also
been alleged that the potable alcohol sector, with its ability to pay higher prices for
molasses, may corner a major part of the molasses in the country. This would have a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 22
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
serious impact on the availability of molasses for industrial alcohol. It is therefore
particularly important that strict vigilance is exercise in this regard. It hardly needs to
be emphasized that even after the decontrol of molasses and alcohol the power of the
State Governments/Union Territories Administration to regulate the potable alcohol
section under their excise regulations and other laws would remain intact.
*** In Orissa Act 2 of 1999, molasses has been included as an „intoxicant(cid:128) in Section
2 (12-a) of the Bihar and Orissa Excise Act, 1915. The import, transport, storage and
use of molasses in the State is being regulated and controlled by issue of executive
instructions in order to safe guard the interest of the Govt. and public at large and to
ensure that molasses is not diverted for production of illegal potable liquor.(cid:128) ***
13. With reference to the above rival legal contentions, we have carefully examined as
to:
(i) Whether the petitioner is entitled to the relief striking out inclusion of the
Molasses as one of the intoxicants as defined under Section 2 (12-
a) of the Act?
(ii) What order ?
14. Our answer to the aforesaid points is in negative for the following reasons.
Inclusion of Molasses to the definition of „intoxicant(cid:128) is from Entry No.8 inter-related to Entry
nos.6 and 51 and in the backdrop of the said inclusion it must be considered de-controlling of the
molasses the Government of India Molasses order, 1961, which was framed under Section 18(g) of
the Industries (Development & Regulation) Act, 1951. Further, the Government of India at the time
of withdrawal of Molasses Order, 1961 the Government of India, Ministry of Chemicals and
Fertilizers, Department of Chemicals and Petro Chemicals have in their letter dated 11.6.1993
advised the State Governments in the manner stated supra. The said relevant factor was taken into
consideration and further the State Legislature keeping in view the Orissa Act 2 of 1999 has rightly
incorporated the Molasses as an intoxicant taking into consideration the suggestions given by
Justice B.K. Behera who was appointed as one-man Commission to enquire into the aforesaid liquor
Tragedy in the State. In his report, he has also referred to the percentage of the Molasses that 60%
alcohol goes for manufacture of potable liquor and 40% towards industrial use resulting in low
capacity utilization of the alcohol based industries. Further, lot of material is collected with regard to
use of Molasses manufactured liquor and selling the same is not brought under control of the Excise
Act and Rules thereby the tragedies which have taken away the lives of poor and socially and
economically backward class people by consuming the same. On account of deregulated Molasses
being used for manufacture of illicit liquor periodical tragedy are taken place in the State of Orissa is
the reason for brining the said Molasses under the definition of Section 2 (12-a) of the Act. It is also
rightly placed reliance upon the decision of the Supreme Court in State of Bihar Vrs. Industrial
Corporation Pvt. Ltd., AIR 2004 SC 1151, wherein, Molasses has been defined as „intoxicant(cid:128) in
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 23
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
other States like Bihar, U.P. and Maharashtra the vires were challenged that have been extensively
dealt with and answered in the aforesaid judgment. The aforesaid decision with all fours is
applicable to the present case.
15. In view of the aforesaid decision and the reasons which have been assigned by the State
Government in support of the inculcation of Molasses as „intoxicant(cid:128) to the definition of Section
2(12-a) of the Excise Act, we do not find any good ground to interfere with the same. The writ
petition is devoid of merit and is dismissed as such."
7.20. Noteworthy here to have regard to following observations made in Sitaram and Bros. Vrs.
State of Rajasthan, (1995) 1 SCC 257:
"4. Thereby, it would appear that the Legislature intended to regulate the import,
export, transport or possession of molasses. The question is whether the Amendment
Act is repugnant to the provisions of the Industries Development Regulation Act or
the Molasses Control Order, 1961 made by the Central Government exercising the
power under Section 18-G of the Industries (Development and Regulation) Act, 65 of
1951. Clause (17-A) inserted by the Amendment Act is in pari materia is the definition
given in clause 2(a) of the Molasses Control Order, 1961 which came into effect for
the State of Rajasthan with effect from 01.11.1975. The question, therefore, is whether
Section 4 of the Amendment Act introducing molasses in clause (d) of sub-section (2)
of Section 41 of the Rajasthan Excise Act, 1950, is repugnant to the provisions of the
Molasses Control Order or any other relevant order occupied under Act 65 of 1951.
The Molasses Control Order, 1961 regulate restriction on sale, clause (3), restriction
on removal, clause (4), storage of molasses, clause (5), grading of molasses, clause (6)
and pricing maximum for the sale regulated by clause (7). As seen the operation of
the Molasses Control Order and the operation of the Amendment Act have not
occupied the same field nor run into collision course. It is seen that the Amendment
Act was made by the State Legislature exercising the power under Entry 33(a) of the
Concurrent List read with Entry 24 of State List as molasses is a by-product of a
sugar industry covered by the Industries Development Regulation Act. The
Amendment Act does not enter into the occupied field of the Molasses Control Order.
There is no inconsistency in their operation and that therefore both the Amendment
Act and the Molasses Control Order would harmoniously co-exist and operate in their
respective fields. The State Legislature had thereby made the Amendment Act
regulating the import, export, transport or possession of molasses within the State of
Rajasthan. Thus, we find that the Amendment Act is within the legislative
competence under Article 246(3) of the Constitution. The appeals are dismissed
accordingly but without costs."
7.21. In the light of the above perspective of "molasses" being treated as "intoxicant" and by virtue of
definitions of these terms in Section 2 of the OE Act, there is no doubt in mind that the provisions
imposing restrictions on movement of molasses from one State to the other is to be strictly
construed and any sort of liberal construction may cause another tragedy which occurred in this
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 24
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
State decades ago.
7.22. Having regard to aforesaid conspectus of treatment of molasses as intoxicant, considering that
non-availability or non-production of documents like invoice and permit at the time of search of the
vehicle while moving with taral gur/"molasses" (confirmed in the chemical test) from the State of
West Bengal to the State of Odisha there can be no two opinions than that the vehicle bearing
Registration No.OD-01-AD-1005 (Tata-407) being used for commission of offence under the OE Act
and rules framed thereunder, the confiscation order of the AO has been affirmed by the Appellate
Authority with justified reason.
7.23. The application in Form XLVI (ML-5) for grant of permit requires following information to be
divulged to the authority as required under Rule 241:
"Form XLVI (ML-5) [see Rules 241, 243 and 245] Application for
import/export/transport of molasses To The Collector, District_____
1. Name of the applicant (in Block letters):
2. Father(cid:128)s Name :
3. Permanent Address :
4. Occupation :
5. Details of licence held by the Applicant (nature of licence, its No. & date):
6. Quantity of molasses required to be imported/exported/transport:
7. Place from which the import/export/ transport shall be made:
8. Place to which the import/export shall be made:
9. Mode of conveyance & route :
10. Name and address of the person from whom the import is to be made/ to whom
the export is to be made/ from whom or to whom the transport is to be made:
11. Period within which the import/export/ transport intended to be made:
Place:
Date: Signature of the Applicant"
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 25
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
7.24. Such information for grant of permit is required to be submitted before the
authority concerned in order to safeguard against possible evasion of transactions or
misuse of goods after entry into the State of Odisha, for in that event the authority
can follow up and satisfy themselves that there is no evasion in respect of goods so
transported. In the case at hand, the petitioner has neither submitted invoice at the
spot nor could he furnish the permit. As it appears in the garb of tarala gur the
petitioner was carrying molasses in the vehicle without necessary documents. The AO
is, therefore, justified in not accepting the invoice sought to be submitted at a later
date.
7.25. In the case of Aruna Sugars Limited Vrs. State of Tamil Nadu, 2002 SCC
OnLine Mad 1267 it has been made clear that, "27. In Razakbhai Issakbhai Mansuri
Vrs. State of Gujarat, 1993 Supp (2) SCC 659 the petitioners argued that even a bona
fide trader in Gur may land in the hands of unscrupulous officer who is armed with
the vague definition of "rotten gur". Similar apprehension is voiced by the petitioners
here on the ground that molasses is an industrial by-product of sugar manufacture
and the authorities do not know technical details regarding automatic combustion
etc. and therefore, the State Act will result in gagging the Sugar Industry. In the
above case, the Supreme Court answered a similar question:
„9. While considering the argument, addressed on behalf of the petitioners, it should
be kept in mind that the impugned provisions do not place absolute restriction or
prohibition either against the possession of "rotten gur" or the manufacture, use or
consumption thereof. The law requires only a permit to be taken in advance and
admittedly there is no hurdle in obtaining such a permit, which is readily available on
the payment of a nominal fee. The purpose of the permit is to make available
information to the authorities concerned as to the persons dealing in "rotten gur" to
facilitate vigilance against misuse of "rotten gur" for preparation of intoxicating
liquors. There is absolutely no difficulty in obtaining such a permit in advance which
will be a complete remedy for all the hardships highlighted on behalf of the
petitioners. The grievance of the petitioner is that the requirement to obtain permit is
violative of the freedom to carry on any trade and business of one(cid:128)s choice
guaranteed by Article 19(1)(g). We do not find any substance in the argument that the
restriction complained against can be considered to be such a hindrance as to
infringe sub-clause (g). The freedom is not uncontrolled and clause (6) of Article 19
authorises legislation which imposes reasonable restrictions on this right in the
interests of the general public. The question, therefore, is whether the restriction
placed by the impugned amendment is in the interests of the general public and can
be considered reasonable.(cid:128) ***
32. In Synthetics and Chemicals Ltd. Vrs. State of UP, (1990) 1 SCC 109, the manner
in which molasses gets transformed into alcohol was described. When mixed with
yeast, molasses ferment and alcohol is produced. Fermentation stops when the
alcohol strength reaches 10-12% since at that percentage it is toxic to yeast. For
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 26
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
higher strength, fermented alcohol is distilled and by distillation 96% strength of
alcohol is produced. This is known as ethyl alcohol and it can be used both for
consumable and industrial purposes. Therefore, to say that the Central Order would
occupy the field in a manner that the State cannot exercise its area of legislation
under Entry 8, which deals with intoxicating liquor cannot be accepted.
***
37. In Dwarka Prasad Laxmi Narain Vrs. The State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1954 SC 224 the Supreme
Court held that the power of granting or withholding licenses has to be vested in certain public
offices or bodies and they would certainly have to be left with some amount of discretion in these
matters. It was held:
„So far no exception can be taken; but the mischief arises when the power conferred
on such officers is an arbitrary power unregulated by any rule or principle and it is
left entirely to the discretion of particular persons to do anything they like without
any check or control by any higher authority. A law or order which confers arbitrary
and uncontrolled power upon the executive in the matter of regulating trade or
business in normally available commodities cannot but be held to be unreasonable.(cid:128)
38. This was referred to in Ch. Tika Ramji Vrs. State of U.P., 1956 SCC OnLine SC 9 = 1956 SCR 393
= AIR 1956 SC 676 and it was also held that it is permissible to impose reasonable restrictions in
public interest.
39. The rules, which are attacked in these writ petitions cannot be said to impose a total restriction.
As has been seen already, it is not as if there is an absolute restriction on possession, sale or
transportation of molasses, it is only that such possession, sale or transportation shall be within the
parameters of the rules. The authorities cannot exercise the power of granting, suspending,
cancelling or refusing to grant license as they please, because they have to give reasons for doing so.
Each rule specifically mentions the duty to give reasons. There was no check or control on this
power by higher authorities until 1983, when the Tamil Nadu Prohibition Appeal and Revision Rules
were enacted. Therefore, subsequent to the filing of the writ petitions, the appellate and revisional
safeguards have been introduced to check irregular exercise of power. So while the vice of
uncontrolled power may have existed at the time these petitions were filed, now the powers given to
the original authority to grant, suspend or refuse licence is subject to the check and control of the
higher authorities.
40. We are also informed that the Central Order was repealed in 1993. As far as molasses is
concerned, only the State Rules are in force today."
7.26. As it emanates from the Order dated 08.01.2025 of the Excise Commissioner it is fact that the
vehicle, of which the petitioner is the registered owner, has been seized by the Officer-in-Charge of
Deuli Excise Station, Mayurbhanj in connection with PR Case No.31/2024-25, dated 18.05.2024
and 2(a) CC No.187/2024 before the learned Judicial Magistrate First Class-I, Baripada for
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 27
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
transportation of 5000 kilograms of molasses with necessary documents-- invoice and permit.
7.27. The Appellate Authority-the Excise Commissioner, Odisha, Mayurbhanj vide Order dated
08.01.2025 has recorded the following fact:
"Shree Niranjan Sahoo, Ex-OIC of Deuli Excise Station & IO of the said case stated
that he had seized 5000 Kilograms of molasses from the said vehicle and the
appellant was present in the vehicle during the detection. The appellant had neither
produced any online bill nor any pass/permit regarding transportation of molasses
from Shree Subham Enterprise, Raghunathpur, Jhargram, West Bengal to Sai
Marketing Agency, Balasore, Odisha. He was also arrested in the said case."
7.28. Under the aforesaid premise since chemical test confirms that the goods imported from
outside the State is "molasses", transportation of the same requires permit under Section 7 and
Section 17 of the OE Act read with concerned rules framed thereunder. In absence of production of
necessary documents before the officer on demand at the time of search would entail action under
Section 71 of the OE Act, provisions of which empowers the Collector, or any officer of the Excise,
Police, Customs or Revenue Department to seize inter alia intoxicant and vehicles used for
commission of offence under the Act.
7.29. Whereas Section 62 envisages imposition of penalty for possession of intoxicant in respect of
which an offence has been committed, Section 65 contemplates treatment a person importing,
exporting, transporting, manufacturing, selling or possessing on account of another to be deemed to
have been doing the same on behalf of such other person and provisions of Section 71 of the OE Act
indicate that the power of confiscation is independent of any proceeding and confiscation envisages
a civil liability.
7.30. Provisions of Section 62, Section 65 and Section 71 stand thus:
"62. Penalty for possession of intoxicant in respect of which an offence has been
committed.--
(1) lf any person, without lawful authority, has in his possession any quantity of any
intoxicant knowing, or having reason to believe the same to have been unlawfully
imported, transported or manufactured' or knowing or having reason to believe that
the prescribed duty has not been paid thereon, he shall be liable to imprisonment for
a term which may extend to three years or to fine which may extend to ten thousand
rupees, or both.
(2) Any owner or occupant of a place, if found to have stored or caused to be stored
any intoxicant for which an offence has been committed under this Act, shall be liable
to pay fine which shall not be less than rupees ten thousand but may extend to rupees
five lakhs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 28
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
65. Import, export, transport, manufacture, sale or possession by one person on account of
another.--
(1) When any intoxicant has been imported, exported, transported, manufactured or sold or is
possessed by any person on account of any other person, and such other person knows or has reason
to believe that such import, export, transport, manufacture or sale was, or that such possession is on
his account the article shall, for the purposes of this Act, be deemed to have been imported,
exported, transported, manufactured or sold by or to be in possession of, such other person.
(2) Nothing in sub-section (1) shall absolve any person, who imports, exports, transports,
manufactures, sells or has possession of an intoxicant on account of another person, from liability to
any punishment under this Act for unlawful import, export, transport, manufacture, sale or
possession of such article.
71. Seizure of property liable to confiscation.--
(1) (a) When there is reason to believe that any offence under this Act has been committed, the
intoxicant, materials, stills, utensils, implements, apparatus, receptacles, package, coverings,
animals, carts, vessels, rafts, vehicles, or any other conveyances or articles or materials used in
committing any such offence may be seized by the Collector or any Officer of the Excise Police,
Customs or Revenue Departments.
(b) any intoxicant lawfully imported, transported, manufactured in possession or sold alongwith, or
in addition to, any intoxicant which is liable to seizure under clause (a) and the receptacles,
packages and coverings in which any such intoxicants as aforesaid, or any such materials, stills,
utensil, implement or apparatus as aforesaid, is found and the other contents, if any, of such
receptacles or packages, and the animals, carts, vessels, rafts, vehicles or other conveyances used in
carrying the same, shall likewise be liable to seizure.
(2) Every officer seizing any property under this section shall, except where the offender agrees in
writing to get the offence compounded under Section 75, produce the property seized before the
Collector, or an officer, not below the rank of a Superintendent of Excise, authorized by the State
Government in this behalf by notification (hereinafter referred to as „Authorized Officer(cid:128)).
(3) Where the Collector or the Authorized Officer seized any property under sub-section (1) or where
the property seized is produced before him under sub- section (2) and he is satisfied that an offence
under this Act has been committed in respect thereof, he shall, without prejudice to any other
punishment to which the offender is liable under this Act, order confiscation of the property so
seized or produced together with all other materials, articles, vehicles or conveyances used in
committing such offence, whether or not a prosecution is instituted for the commission of such an
offence.
(4) No order confiscating .any property shall be made under sub-section (3) unless the person from
whom the property is seized is given:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 29
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
(a) a notice in writing informing him of the grounds on which it is proposed to
confiscate such property;
(b) an opportunity of making a representation in writing within such reasonable time
as may be specified in the notice; and
(c) a reasonable opportunity of being heard in the matter.
(5) Without prejudice to the provisions of sub-section (4), no order of confiscation
under sub-section (3) of any articles, materials, vehicles or conveyances shall be
made if the owner thereof proves to the satisfaction of the Collector or the Authorized
Officer, as the, case may be, that it was used without his knowledge or connivance or
the knowledge or connivance of his agent, if any, or the person in charge of such
property, in committing the offence and that each of them had taken all reasonable
and necessary precautions against such use.
(6) Any person aggrieved by an order passed under sub-section (3) may, within thirty
days from the date of such order, appeal to the Excise Commissioner, who shall after
giving an opportunity to the parties to be heard, pass such order as he may think fit.
(7) The property seized under this Section shall be kept in the custody of the
Collector, the Authorized Officer or the other officer seizing such property or with any
third party, until the amount for compounding the offence or the sum equal to the
prevailing market value of the seized property or both are paid or until it is
confiscated as the case may be:
Provided that the seized property shall not be released during pendency of the
confiscation proceedings even on the application of the owner of the property for
such release.
(8) Whenever property seized is liable to confiscation under this section and the
offender or the person entitled to possession is not known or cannot be found, the
case shall be inquired into and determined by the Collector or the Authorized Officer,
who may order confiscation : Provided that no such order shall be made until the
expiration of one month from the date of seizing of the property to be confiscated, or
without hearing any person who may claim any right within the said period and the
evidence if any, which he produces in support of his claim.
(9) If the property seized is liable to speedy and natural decay, or if the Collector or
the Authorized Officer, as the case may be, is of the opinion that sale would be for the
benefit of its owner, such officer may, at any time, direct it to be sold and the
provisions of this section shall, as nearly may be practicable, apply to the net
proceeds of the sale.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 30
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
(10) Subject to the rules as may be made by the State Government under Section 90,
the Collector or the Authorized Officer, while making an order of confiscation, may
also order that such of the properties to which the order of confiscation relates, which
in his opinion to be recorded in writing cannot be preserved or not fit for human
consumption, may be destroyed.
(11) Where the Collector or the Authorized Officer after passing an order confiscation
under sub-section (3) is the opinion that, it is expedient in the public interest so to
do, he may order the confiscated property or any part thereof to be sold by public
auction or dispose of departmentally.
(12) The Collector or the Authorized Officer shall submit a full report of all particulars
of confiscation to the Excise Commissioner within twenty-four hours of such
confiscation.
(13) The Collector or the Authorized Officer shall, for the purposes of this Act, have
the same powers as are vested in the Civil Court under the Code of Civil Procedure, 5
of 1908, while making inquiries under this section in respect of the following matters
namely:
(a) receiving evidence on affidavit;
(b) summoning and enforcing the attendance of any person and examining him on
oath; and
(c) compelling the production of documents."
7.31. As has already been discerned from the affidavits claimed to have been furnished before the AO
to consider the online tax invoice dated 18.05.2024, which was stated to have been printed later on,
that they are not genuine, but tainted, invoice was found not furnished at the spot when search of
vehicle was undertaken before the Investigating Officer. For such non-production of any permit
and/or invoice, adverse inference could be taken that the molasses (confirmed by the chemical test)
of 5,000 kilograms was being carried in the vehicle without valid permit and necessary document.
7.32. The fiction contained in Section 65 of the OE Act envisages to treat the transporter in the same
footing as if he is the importer, who transported or sold the subject-goods. Where a statute creates a
legal fiction the Court is entitled and bound to ascertain for what purposes and between what
persons the statutory fiction is to be resorted to.
7.33. If any person wants to enjoy the benefit granted under a deeming provision he must adhere to
the conditions which are to be followed in order to bring him under the beneficial provision of the
deeming clause. When the law requires that an imaginary state of affairs should be treated as real,
then unless prohibited from doing so, one must also imagine as real the consequences and incidents
which, if the putative state of affairs had in fact existed, must inevitably have flowed from or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 31
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
accompanied it. [Regard be had to State of Travancore- Cochin Vrs. Shanmugha Vilas Cashewnut
Factory, AIR 1953 SC 333; State of Bombay Vrs. Pandurang Vinayak, AIR 1953 SC 244; Bengal
Immunity Co. Ltd. Vrs. State of Bihar, AIR 1955 SC 661; CCT Vrs. Swarn Rekha Cokes & Coals Pvt.
Ltd., (2004) 136 STC 57 (SC); Z Engineers Construction Pvt. Ltd. Vrs. BDA, 2006 (II) OLR 277
(Ori).
7.34. In Rishabh Agro Industries Ltd Vrs. P.N.B. Capital Services Ltd, (2000) 5 SCC 515, in the
context of Section 441 of the Companies Act, 1956, the following meaning is attributed to deeming
fiction:
"The word "deemed" as used in Section 441 of the Act means "supposed",
"considered", "construed", "thought", "taken to be" or "presumed"."
7.35. In Bhuwalka Steel Industries Ltd. Vrs. Union of India, (2017) 5 SCC 598 reference of St. Aubyn
Vrs. Attorney General, 1952 AC 15 = (1951 2 All ER 473 (HL) was made and the relevant portion is
quoted hereunder from said Judgment:
"The word „deemed(cid:128) is used a great deal in modern legislation. Sometimes it is used
to impose for the purposes of a statute an artificial construction of a word or phrase
that would not otherwise prevail. Sometimes it is used to put beyond doubt a
particular construction that might otherwise be uncertain. Sometimes it is used to
give a comprehensive description that includes what is obvious, what is uncertain
and what is, in the ordinary sense, impossible."
7.36. Since the documents like tax invoice and valid permit as required under Section 7 and Section
17 of the OE Act read with Rule 240 of the OE Rules being not furnished at the time of search of the
vehicle, this Court does not find any scope to interfere with the factual finding recorded by the
Appellate Authority.
8. Another significant provision which is required to be noticed is Section 53 of the OE Act, which
reads thus:
"53. Presumption as to possession of intoxicant by the accused.--
In an offence under, Section 52 of this Act, if it is established by chemical analysis or
by adducing evidence of trained Excise Officer or otherwise that the seized liquid,
materials or other things are:
(a) intoxicant; or
(b) still, utensil, implement or apparatus whatsoever for
the manufacture of any intoxicant other than tari; or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 32
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
(c) any material, which has undergone any process towards the manufacture of any
intoxicant or from which an intoxicant has been manufactured;
the Court shall presume that the seized liquid or materials or other things are recovered from the
conscious possessin of the accused unless and until the contrary is proved.
Explanation.-- TRAINED EXCISE OFFICER shall mean an Officer who has undergone distillery
training and obtained a certificate from the concerned Superintendent of Excise."
8.1. With respect to presumption and rebuttable presumption reference to the following dicta of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court of India Sodhi Transport Co. Vrs.
State of U.P., (1986) 1 SCR 939 = (1986) 62 STC 381 (SC), would suffice:
"A presumption is not in itself evidence but only makes a prima facie case for party in
whose favour it exists. It is a rule concerning evidence. It indicates the person on
whom the burden of proof lies. When presumption is conclusive, it obviates the
production of any other evidence to dislodge the conclusion to be drawn on proof of
certain facts. But when it is rebuttable it only points out the party on whom lies the
duty of going forward with evidence on the fact presumed, and when that party has
produced evidence fairly and reasonably tending to show that the real fact is not as
presumed the purpose of presumption is over. Then the evidence will determine the
true nature of the fact to be established. The rules of presumption are deduced from
enlightened human knowledge and experience and are drawn from the connection,
relation and coincidence of facts, and circumstances."
8.2. Taking cue from such provision read with the proposition of law enunciated in the above
reported decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court, when the purport of Section 71 of the OE Act is
examined, it is unequivocal that for non-availability or non-furnishing of necessary documents
including permit for carrying molasses, the vehicle and the goods could be seized by the authority.
As is apparent from Order dated 27.08.2024 of AO the vehicle, after being seized upon due notice to
the petitioner, has been confiscated to Government under Section 71(3). Such order being appealed
against got affirmed by the Excise Commissioner vide Order dated 08.01.2025. In view of
sub-section (7) of Section 71, the seized vehicle is required to be kept in the custody of the authority
until the amount of compounding the offence or sum equal to the prevailing market value of the
seized vehicle or both are paid or until it is confiscated. However, proviso appended thereto, clearly
lays down that such seized vehicle shall not be released during pendency of the confiscation
proceedings even on the application of the owner of the vehicle for such release. The petitioner has
not put forth any plea that the amount of compounding of offence or sum equal to the prevailing
market value of the vehicle or both had been paid. Therefore, the Appellate Authority having
confirmed the Order of confiscation passed by the AO, there is no warrant for this Court to show
indulgence.
Conclusion:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 33
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
9. There is no cavil about power to search the vehicle as the source of power is
envisaged under Section 79 of the OE Act, which reads thus:
"Power to search.--
(1) The Collector or Sub-Divisional Magistrate, or Judicial Magistrate of the first
class, or any Special Court constituted under this Act, having jurisdiction to try
offences punishable under this Act upon information, received and after such inquiry,
if any, as he or it thinks necessary, if he or it has reason to believe that any offence
punishable under Section 52, 54, 55, 58, 62, or 63 has been or is likely to be
committed or abetted, may by warrant authorize, any Police or Excise Officer above
the rank of a Police or Excise Constable, as the case may be, to enter, with such
assistance as may be required, any place and search, for any intoxicant, material,
stills, utensil, implement or apparatus in respect of which the alleged offence has
been, or is likely to be, committed or abetted, or any document which throws or is
likely to throw any light on the alleged offence.
(2) Whenever an Excise Officer not below such rank as the State Government may, by
notification, specify, has reason to believe that an offence punishable under Section
52, 54, 55, 58, 59, 62 or 63 has been or is being, or is likely to be, committed or
abetted, and that a search warrant cannot be obtained without affording the offender
an opportunity of escaping or of concealing evidence of the offence, he may, after
recording the grounds of his belief, at any time by day or night, enter and search any
place and may seize anything found therein which he has reason to believe to be
liable to seizure under this Act, and may detain and search and if he thinks proper,
arrest any person found in such place whom he has reason to believe to have
committed or abetted any such offence as aforesaid."
9.1. In addition thereto, conferring power to search of vehicle and seizure of vehicle along with the
subject-goods can be traced in Section 71.
9.2. With the discussed background material fact in the foregoing paragraphs that the seized goods,
"cane molasses", bearing potential of alcohol, established by the chemical analysis/test, which
remained unimpeached, and the commodity being "intoxicant" as comprehended in the definition
vide Clauses (t) and (x) of Section 2 of the OE Act, import and transportation of the said commodity
required to be accompanied by invoice and permit as envisaged under Section 7 and Section 17 read
with Rules 234 and 240, which fact on record, the petitioner could not demonstrate to be false by
proffering plausible explanation supported by evidence, for the discussion made supra and reasons
assigned, this Court does not find any flaw in arriving at the conclusion by the Appellate
Authority-Excise Commissioner, Odisha, Mayurbhanj vide Order dated 08.01.2025 sustaining the
Order dated 27.08.2024 of the Authorised Officer-cum- Superintendent of Excise, Mayurbhanj.
10. For exercise of power of judicial review as has been succinctly laid down in Sarvepalli Ramaiah
Vrs. The District Collector, Chittoor District, (2019) 5 SCR 372 is given hereunder:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 34
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
"23. Administrative decisions are subject to judicial review under Article 226 of the
Constitution, only on grounds of perversity, patent illegality, irrationality, want of
power to take the decision and procedural irregularity. Except on these grounds
administrative decisions are not interfered with, in exercise of the extra ordinary
power of judicial review.
24. In this case, the impugned decision, taken pursuant to orders of Court, was based
on some materials. It cannot be said to be perverse, to warrant interference in
exercise of the High Court(cid:128)s extra ordinary power of judicial review. A decision is
vitiated by irrationality if the decision is so outrageous, that it is in defiance of all
logic; when no person acting reasonably could possibly have taken the decision,
having regard to the materials on record. The decision in this case is not irrational.
25. A decision may sometimes be set aside and quashed under Article 226 on the
ground of illegality. This is when there is an apparent error of law on the face of the
decision, which goes to the root of the decision and/or in other words an apparent
error, but for which the decision would have been otherwise.
26. Judicial review under Article 226 is directed, not against the decision, but the
decision making process. Of course, a patent illegality and/or error apparent on the
face of the decision, which goes to the root of the decision, may vitiate the decision
making process. In this case there is no such patent illegality or apparent error. In
exercise of power under Article 226, the Court does not sit in appeal over the decision
impugned, nor does it adjudicate hotly disputed questions of fact."
10.1. Reference can be had to State of West Bengal Vrs. Sujit Kumar Rana, (2004) 1 SCR 870
wherein the following observations have been made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the context of
forest offence:
"Against an order of confiscation, an appeal is provided and only an order of the
appellate court, who is a judicial officer becomes final and binding but attaching
finality to an order of the appellate court would not preclude a person aggrieved to
move the High Court in judicial review.
Sufficient safeguards both substantive and procedural have, thus, been made against
an arbitrary exercise of power."
10.2. In the present case, the petitioner failed to substantiate its claim that the goods carried in the
vehicle were not "molasses", but gur simpliciter. By leading evidence he could not demolish the
authenticity of chemical test analysing that the goods were molasses having potential of alcohol. In
absence of necessary documents including the permit being accompanied while carrying goods like
intoxicant/molasses, in view of provisions of the OE Act and the rules framed thereunder as referred
to above and on the touchstone of ratio of the decision of the Hon'ble Supreme Court of India in
Sodhi Transport Co. Vrs. State of U.P., (1986) 1 SCR 939 = (1986) 62 STC 381 (SC), it is but
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 35
Prabir Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha on 9 May, 2025
corollary that the opposite parties were justified in directing for confiscation of vehicle used for
carrying molasses from the State of West Bengal to the State of Odisha without valid permit.
11. Ergo, the writ petition is dismissed being devoid of merit, but in the circumstances, there shall be
no order as to costs.
12. As a result of disposal of the writ petition, all pending interlocutory applications, if any, shall
stand disposed of.
I agree (HARISH TANDON) (MURAHARI SRI RAMAN) CHIEF JUSTICE JUDGE Signature Not
Verified Digitally Signed Signed by: ASWINI KUMAR SETHY Designation: Personal Assistant
(Secretary-in-Charge) Reason: Authentication Location: ORISSA HIGH COURT, CUTTACK Date:
12-May-2025 11:25:06 High Court of Orissa, Cuttack The 09th May,
2025//Aswini/Laxmikant/Suchitra
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/180428765/ 36
