Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And
Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
Author: Savitri Ratho
Bench: S. Talapatra, Savitri Ratho
AFR
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No. 15738 of 2022
An application under Articles 226 and 227 of the Constitution of India
--------------
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others ...... Petitioners
-versus-
State of Odisha and Others ...... Opposite Parties
For Petitioners : Mr. Ashok Mohanty, Senior
Advocate and Ms. Sujata Jena,
Advocate
For Opposite Parties : Mr. I. Mohanty,
Addl. Standing Counsel
(for Opp. Parties Nos. 1 and 2)
Mr. Bikash Jena, Advocate
(for Opp.Party No.3)
Mr. P.K. Mohanty, Senior
Advocate and Pranay Mohanty
Advocate ( for Opp. Party No.4)
....
W.P.(C) No. 10936 of 2023
Khitish Kumar Nayak
& Others ...... Petitioners
-versus-
State of Odisha and Others ...... Opposite Parties
For Petitioners : Mr. B. Routray, Senior Advocate
and Mr. S. Sekhar, Adv.
Digitally signed
SUKANTA by SUKANTA
KUMAR KUMAR
Date:
BEHERA
For Opposite Parties : Mr. I. Mohanty,
BEHERA 2023.05.01
18:54:05 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 1
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
Page 1 of 103
2
Addl. Standing Counsel
( For Opp. Parties No. 1 and 2 )
......
W.P. (C) No.10955 of 2023
Sai Sumiran Panda and Others ...... Petitioners
-versus -
State of Odisha and Others ...... Opposite parties
For Petitioners : Mr. Saurav Tibrewal Advocate .
For Opposite Parties : Mr. I. Mohanty,
Addl. Standing Counsel
( For Opp. Parties No. 1 and 2 )
......
W.P.(C) No. 9435 of 2023
Meerashree Suman and Others ...... Petitioners
Ms. Sujata Jena, Advocate
-versus-
State of Odisha and Others ...... Opposite Parties
......
W.P.(C) No. 9440 of 2023
Biswajit Sahoo and Others ...... Petitioners
Ms. Sujata Jena, Advocate
-versus-
W.P.(C) No. 15738 of 2022 Page 2 of 103
3
State of Odisha and Others ...... Opposite Parties
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 2
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
......
W.P.(C) No. 9443 of 2023
Nisprava Dash and Others ...... Petitioners
Ms. Sujata Jena, Advocate
-versus-
State of Odisha and Others ...... Opposite Parties
......
W.P.(C) No. 9445 of 2023
Sameer Ranjan Sahoo and Others ...... Petitioners
Ms. Sujata Jena, Advocate
-versus-
State of Odisha and Others ...... Opposite Parties
.......
W.P.(C) No. 9447 of 2023
Tarini Prasad Singh and Others ...... Petitioners
Ms. Sujata Jena, Advocate
-versus-
State of Odisha and Others ...... Opposite Parties
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
W.P.(C) No. 15738 of 2022 Page 3 of 103
4
CORAM:
HONOURABLE MR. JUSTICE S. TALAPATRA
HONOURABLE MISS JUSTICE SAVITRI RATHO
JUDGMENT
01.05.2023 Savitri Ratho, J. The common grievance of the petitioners in all these writ petitions is
the substitution of the method of selection contained in Rule 7 of the Odisha Engineering Service
(Method of Recruitment and Condition of Service) Rules, 2012 (in short "OES Rules 2012") by Rule
4 of Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment & Conditions of Service) Amendment
Rules, 2021 (in short "the Amendment Rules 2021" .Vide this amendment , marks awarded for
career marking, written test and vive voce have been substituted by the highest GATE Score
obtained in the last three years , preceding the advertisement.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 3
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
So we have to decide whether the amendment of Section 7 of the Odisha Engineering Service
(Method of Recruitment and Condition of Service) Rules, 2012 (in short "OES Rules 2012" ) by Rule
4 of Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment & Conditions of Service) Amendment
Rules, 2021 (in short "the Amendment Rules 2021") by substituting the method of selection by the
OPSC on the basis of career marking , written test and vive voce by the highest GATE Score obtained
in the last three years preceding the advertisement, is sustainable or is arbitrary, discriminatory and
ultra vires the 2012 rules and also whether the Advertisement No 20 - 2022-23 dated 18.03.2023,
published by the Orissa Public Service Commission is liable to be quashed.
PRAYERS IN THE WRIT PETITIONS
2. In W.P.(C) No.15378 of 2022, the following prayer has been made.
"In the facts and circumstances of the case the petitioners respectfully pray that the
Hon'ble Court may graciously be pleased to admit this case, issue notice to the opp.
parties to show cause to as to why the "Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of
Recruitment & Conditions of Service) Amendment Rules, 2021" shall not declared as
ultra virus to the constitution and if the opp. parties fail to show cause or show
insufficient cause, the Hon'ble Court upon hearing the parties may further be pleased
to allow this writ petition by striking down the amendment and may be further
pleased to pass such other order/orders, direction/directions as may be deemed
expedient in the interest of justice and for this act of kindness as the petitioners are
duty bound shall ever pray."
3. In W.P. (C) No.10936 of 2023, the following prayer has been made :
....." (iii) Issue RULE NISI calling upon the opposite parties more particularly Opp.
party Nos.1, 2 and 4 to show cause as to why the Rule 7 of the Odisha Engineering
Service (Methods of Recruitment and conditions of Service) Amendment Rule, 2021
under Annexure:3 shall not be declared ultra vires and the consequential
advertisement No.20 of 2022-23 under Annexure- 5 shall not be quashed.
(iv) If the opposite parties fail to show cause or show insufficient cause, issue a writ in the nature of
certiorari by declaring Rule 7 of the Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and
conditions of Service) Amendment Rule, 2021 under Annexure-3 ultra vires and the consequential
advertisement No.20 of 2022-23 issued by the Opposite Party No.4 under Annexure:5 be quashed;
(v) Issue a writ in the nature of mandamus or any other writ/writs direction / directions directing
the opposite parties to accept the applications of the petitioners for the post of Assistant Executive
Engineer (Civil) pursuant to the advertisement under Annexure-5 and their candidature be
considered in terms of Odisha Engineering Service (Method of Recruitment and Condition of
Service) Rules, 2012 without insisting for GATE within a reasonable time to be stipulated by this
Hon'ble Court."......
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 4
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
4. In W.P. (C) No.10955 of 2023, the following prayer has been made:
" (i ) To show cause as to why the Rule 7( 3) and 7(4) of the Odisha Engineering
Service (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules 2012 brought by
2021 amendment (Annexure 3)shall not be declared ultra vires and the consequential
advertisement No. 20 of 2022 for recruitment to the post of Assistant Executive
Engineer (Civil) and Assistant Executive Engineer( Mechanical) in Group A of the
Odisha Engineering Service shall not be quashed and if they fail to show cause or
show insufficient cause then the writ be made absolute.
(ii) further be pleased to direct the Opp.Parties to allow the petitioners and other
similarly situated persons to apply for the post advertisement under Annexure 8 by
issung a fresh advertisement"....
5. In W.P.(C) No.9435 of 2023, W.P.(C) No. 9440 of 2023, W.P.(C) No.9443 of 2023, W.P.(C) No.
9445 of 2023 and W.P. (C) No.9447 of 2023, prayer identical to the one made in W.P.(C) No.15738
of 2022 has been made. WRIT PETITIONS, COUNTER AFFIDAVITS And REJOINDER
AFFIDAVIT.
6. Although notice had been issued to the opposite parties in W.P.(C) No.15738 of 2022, W.P.(C) No.
10936 of 2023 and W.P.(C) No.10955 of 2023. Counter affidavits have been filed by the opposite
parties No. 1and 2 and Opposite Party No. 3 and rejoinder affidavit by the petitioners in W.P.(C)
No.15738 of 2022 only.
7. As the grievances in these three writ applications and W.P.(C) No.9435 of 2023, W.P.(C) No.9440
of 2023, W.P. (C) No.9443 of 2023, W.P.(C) No.9445 of 2023 and W.P. No.(C) No.9447 of 2023, are
more or less are same, all the writ applications were heard together.
8. In W.P.(C) No.15738 of 2022, the petitioners who claim to be qualified Engineers have challenged
the amendment made by the opposite parties in Rule 7 of the Odisha Engineering Service (Methods
of Recruitment & Conditions of Service) Rules, 2012 vide notification dated 28.01.2021 by
introducing the clause to select the candidates for appointment as Assistant Executive Engineers on
the basis of highest GATE score of preceding three years from the date of advertisement including
the year of advertisement, on the ground that it is not in accordance with the constitutional
provisions and is discriminatory in nature and liable to be struck down.
A rejoinder affidavit has been filed by the petitioners stating that Article 320 (3) of the Constitution
of India specifically provides that at the time of recruitment to the Civil Post, the State shall consult
the Public Service Commission but the impugned notification amending the rule has been made
without considering the opinion of the OPSC and this is apparent from the statement made by the
opposite party No.1 and 2 in paragraph-4 (vii) of their counter affidavit. Vide letter dated 4.3.2016
(Annexure-B/1 to the counter affidavit) suggestion had been given by the OPSC to make amendment
as per suggestion No.2 so as to get better candidate to the post, but in complete disregard to the said
suggestion, Rule 7 has been amending confining it to the GATE score which appears to be arbitrary
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 5
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
and irrational. The opp. parties have the power to prescribe the qualification of the candidates for
appointment but prescribing the GATE score as the only basis for recruitment bypassing objective
written test and viva voce test and thereby depriving the more meritorious candidates who have
never appeared in GATE is arbitrary and discriminatory. The plea of the State Government in their
counter affidavit that GATE scores have been made the sole basis of recruitment by different
Companies has been refuted by filing the advertisements published by (i) Bharat Heavy Electricals
Ltd. (in short "BHEL') in the year 2020 for recruitment of Engineers on the basis of computer base
examination and interview; and
(ii) Hindustan Aeronautics Ltd. (in short "HAL") on 9.2.2022 for appointment of Graduate
Engineers on the basis of a test of 2 and 1/2 duration consisting of MCQ on General Awareness and
100% MCQ in concerned discipline.
9. In W.P.(C) No.10936 of 2023 apart from prayer to declare Rule 7 of the OES Rules 2012 ultra
vires, prayer has been made to quash the consequential advertisement No.20 of 2022-23 under
Annexure-5 and to issue a direction to the Opposite parties to accept the applications of the
petitioners for the post of Assistant Executive Engineer (Civil) pursuant to the advertisement under
Annexure-5 and their candidature be considered in terms of Odisha Engineering Service (Method of
Recruitment and Condition of Service) Rules, 2012 without insisting for GATE within a reasonable
time .
10. In W.P. (C) No.10955 of 2023, apart from prayer to declare Rule 7(3) and 7(4) of the Odisha
Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules 2012 brought by
2021 amendment (Annexure 3 ultra vires, additional prayer has been made to quash the
consequential advertisement No. 20 of 2022 /2023 ( Annexure 8) issued by the Opposite party No 4
OPSC for recruitment to the post of Assistant Executive Engineer ( Civil) and Assistant Executive
Engineer (Mechanical) in Group A of the Odisha Engineering Service and for a direction to the Opp.
Parties to allow the petitioners and other similarly situated persons to apply for the post advertised
under Annexure 8 by issuing a fresh advertisement.
11. As stated earlier, identical averments and prayers have been made in W.P.(C) No.9435 of 2023,
W.P.(C) No. 9440 of 2023, W.P.(C) No.9443 of 2023, W.P.(C) No. 9445 of 2023 and W.P.(C)
No.9447 of 2023.
12. Opposite party No.3 -AICTE has filed a preliminary counter affidavit in W.P.(C) No. 15738 of
2022 inter alia stating that the averments in the writ petition do not pertain to them and do not call
for any reply from them and no relief has been came from them for which the writ application is
liable to be dismissed against opposite party no.3 (AICTE).
13. Opposite parties No. 1 and 2 have filed a counter affidavit inter alia stating that the opposite
party is well within its power under Article 309 of the Constitution of India to prescribe the
procedure for recruitment to Public Services and posts in connection with the affairs of the State
Government and the decisions to amend the impugned Rules has been taken after prolonged
discussion with the expert bodies and with the objective to bring more objectivity and transparency
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 6
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
to the recruitment process in order to get best candidates for the post of Assistant Executive
Engineer and the deliberations/meetings held in this regard have been described in paragraph-4 (i)
of the counter affidavit . In order to change the process of direct recruitment by amendment, the
steps which were decided to be taken in the meeting dated 12.07.2018 for filling up the vacancy in
the AEE posts till 2018, have been mentioned. A revised plan in two stages- Stage I-preliminary
examination with MCQ and negative marking ; and Stage II main examination with two papers
(descriptive type) had been suggested by the Opposite Party. But to ensure timely completion and to
ensure transparency, it was decided to adopt the maximum of valid GATE scores for the preceding
three years in lieu of the main examination for selection of posts of AEE. It was decided to amend
Rule 7 of the OES Rules 2012 alongwith restricting of the OES cadre. A detailed syllabus for the
Preliminary and Main examination was prepared as per suggestion of the OPSC and the file was
processed for obtaining approval of the Government and for vetting by the GA and PG Department
and the Law Department. After threadbare discussion with the Chief secretary, it was decided to
adpt the "GATE scpre" in lieu of "written test" and "vive voce test" in the selection". The OPSC had
been intimated vide DoWR letter No 22175 dated 2.10.2019 about the decision of the Government to
change the method of selection and its views had been requested .Vide letter No 7225 dated
11.11.2019, the OPSC sought for clarification / justification for adopting GATE scores and furnish
orders of the GA&PG and Law department. It also recommended the provision for conducting Vive
voce test as it is applicable to Group - A posts. (Annexure B/1) to the counter affidavit. The
clarification was issued to the OPSC vide DoWR letter No 28746 dated 1.12.2019 (Annexure C/1)
and the grounds have been described in paragraph 4 (v) of the counter affidavit. Vide letter No.1232
dated 19.02.2020, OPSC concurred with the proposal of amendment except the provision under
para 4 which relates to the method of recruitment of assistant engineers in the feeder cadre and gave
its suggestions for the method of a three stage selection- preliminary Examination, Written Test and
Vive Voce Test. This suggestion was examined and discussed thoroughly in the Department and was
not accepted as the OPSC had earlier pointed out in its letter No.1316 dated 04.03.2016 (Annexure
D/I) that the existing recruitment method was defective and the problems faced by the Government
during recruitment would persist if the suggestion of the OPSC to conduct a three tier test was
accepted. The problems faced on account of the prevailing examination method due to lack of
transparency could be avoided. The problem of delay in conducting examination, cases challenging
the process of recruitment and selection (73 had been filed in respect of the recruitment in 2016)
and necessity of giving conditional appointment vide DoWR notification No 4694 dated 25.02.2016
(Annexure E/I) could be avoided. The GA department opined that due care and caution may be
taken while obtaining Government orders in those cases when recommendation of the Commission
is proposed to be overruled .With a view to ensure utmost transparency in the process of selection
and entry of talented engineers to the OES cadre from a wider pool of resources in a timely manner
and to streamline the process, it was decided to deviate from the advice of the OPSC as a policy
decision to that effect has already been taken by the Government and a letter dated 17.02.2020 was
issued to OPSC informing that there was an inordinate delay on the part of OPSC to give its views on
the proposed amendment nut OPSC failed to give any opinion in reply to this letter. After approval
of the Hon'ble Chief Minister, the draft cadre rules were placed before the Cabinet and the Cabinet
in its 21st meeting held on 09.12.2020 which has approved the draft Odisha Engineering Service
(Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Amendment Rules, 2012. With the assent of his
Excellency, the Governor of Odisha, the Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 7
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
Conditions of Service) Amendment Rules, 2012, were published in Odisha Gazette vide DoWR
Notification No.2819 dtd. 28.01.2021. So it is obvious that the impugned amendments have been
introduced after detailed deliberation with the objective to ensure that the selection process is
transparent, more efficient and ensure more efficient candidates for the Post of Asst. Executive
Engineer (in short 'AEE').
14. As the grievances in these three writ applications and W.P.(C) No.9435 of 2023, W.P.(C)
No.9440 of 2023, W.P.(C) No.9443 of 2023, W.P.(C) No.9445 of 2023 and W.P.(C) No. 9447 of
2023, are more or less are same, all the writ applications were heard together and a common
judgment is passed without waiting for filing of separate counter affidavits in all the writ petitions,
as the last date of filing of applications in the impugned Advertisement is fixed to 28.04.2023.
15. We have heard Mr. Ashok Mohanty, learned Senior Counsel assisted by Ms. S. Jena, learned
counsel appearing for the petitioners, Mr. I. Mohanty, learned Additional Standing Counsel
appearing for the opposite parties No.1 and 2 in W.P.(C) No.15738 of 2022, Mr. Budhadev Routray,
learned Senior Counsel assisted by Ms. S. Sekhar, learned counsel appearing for the petitioners, Mr.
I. Mohanty, learned Additional Standing Counsel appearing for the opposite parties No.1 and 2 in
W.P.(C) No.10936 of 2023. Mr. S. Tibrewal, learned counsel has appeared for the petitioners and
Mr. I. Mohanty, learned Additional Standing Counsel has appeared for the opposite parties No.1 and
2 in W.P.(C) No.10955 of 2023.
We have gone through the note of submissions filed on behalf of the petitioners and the Opposite
parties No. 1 and 2 the decisions relied upon by them in W.P.(C) No. 15738 of 2022.
RELEVENT ARTICLES OF THE CONSTITUTION AND RULES OF BUSINESS
16. Article 309 and 320 are relevant for deciding theses writ petitions and are reproduced below :
"309. Recruitment and conditions of service of persons serving the Union or a State
Subject to the provisions of this Constitution, Acts of the appropriate Legislature may
regulate the recruitment, and conditions of service of persons appointed, to public
services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union or of any State:
Provided that it shall be competent for the President or such person as he may direct
in the case of services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union, and for
the Governor of a State or such person as he may direct in the case of services and
posts in connection with the affairs of the State, to make rules regulating the
recruitment, and the conditions of service of persons appointed, to such services and
posts until provision in that behalf is made by or under an Act of the appropriate
Legislature under this article, and any rules so made shall have effect subject to the
provisions of any such Act"
"Article-320. Functions of Public Service Commissions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 8
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
1. It shall be the duty of the Union and the State Public Service Commissions to
conduct examinations for appointments to the services of the Union and the services
of the State respectively.
2. It shall also be the duty of the Union Public Service Commission, if requested by
any two or more States so to do, to assist those States in framing and operating
schemes of joint recruitment for any services for which candidates possessing special
qualifications are required.
3. The Union Public Service Commission or the State Public Service Commission, as
the case may be, shall be consulted--
a.) on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services and for civil
posts; b.) on the principles to be followed in making appointments to civil services
and posts and in making promotions and transfers from one service to another and
on the suitability of candidates for such appointments, promotions or transfers; c.)
on all disciplinary matters affecting a person serving under the Government of India
or the Government of a State in a civil capacity, including memorials or petitions
relating to such matters; d.) on any claim by or in respect of a person who is serving
or has served under the Government of India or the Government of a State or under
the Crown in India or under the Government of an Indian State, in a civil capacity,
that any costs incurred by him in defending legal proceedings instituted against him
in respect of acts done or purporting to be done in the execution of his duty should be
paid out of the Consolidated Fund of India, or, as the case may be, out of the
Consolidated Fund of the State; e.) on any claim for the award of a pension in respect
of injuries sustained by a person while serving under the Government of India or the
Government of a State or under the Crown in India or under the Government of an
Indian State, in a civil capacity, and any question as to the amount of any such award,
and it shall be the duty of a Public Service Commission to advise on any matter so
referred to them and on any other matter which the President, or, as the case may be,
the Governor of the State, may refer to them:
Provided that the President as respects the all- India services and also as respects
other services and posts in connection with the affairs of the Union, and the
Governor, as respects other services and posts in connection with the affairs of a
State, may make regulations specifying the matters in which either generally, or in
any particular class of case or in any particular circumstances, it shall not be
necessary for a Public Service Commission to be consulted.
4. Nothing in clause (3) shall require a Public Service Commission to be consulted as
respects the manner in which any provision referred to in clause (4) of article 16 may
be made or as respects the manner in which effect may be given to the provisions of
article 335.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 9
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
5. All regulations made under the proviso to clause (3) by the President or the
Governor of a State shall be laid for not less than fourteen days before each House of
Parliament or the House or each House of the Legislature of the State, as the case
may be, as soon as possible after they are made, and shall be subject to such
modifications, whether by way of repeal or amendment, as both Houses of
Parliament or the House or both Houses of the Legislature of the State may make
during the session in which they are so laid."
"323. Reports of Public Service Commissions (1) It shall be the duty of the Union
Commission to present annually to the President a report as to the work done by the
Commission and on receipt of such report the President shall cause a copy thereof
together with a memorandum explaining, as respects the cases, if any, where the
advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reason for such non acceptance to be
laid before each House of Parliament (2) It shall be the duty of a State Commission to
present annually to the Governor of the State a report as to the work done by the
Commission, and it shall be the duty of a Joint Commission to present annually to
the Governor of each of the States the needs of which are served by the Joint
Commission a report as to the work done by the Commission in relation to that State,
and in either case the Governor shall, on receipt of such report, cause a copy thereof
together with a memorandum explaining, as respects the cases, if any, where the
advice of the Commission was not accepted, the reasons for such non acceptance to
be laid before the Legislature of the State"
In the Rules of Business, Rule 4 A provides that all matters in the Second Schedule shall ordinarily
be considered at a meeting of the Cabinet. Rule 4 A is extracted below " 4-A. There shall be a
Committee of the Council of Ministers to be called the Cabinet which shall consist of the Ministers.
Except when the Council of Ministers meets on any occasion, all matters referred to the Second
Schedule shall ordinarily be considered at a meeting of the Cabinet :
Provided that a Minister of State or a Deputy Minister may attend the meeting of the
Cabinet when requested to do so, either when a subject with which he is concerned is
under discussion or otherwise :
Provided further that a Minister of State-in-charge of a department where there is no
Minister-in-charge of that department, shall attend the meeting of a Cabinet where at
a subject with which he is concerned is fixed or taken up for consideration Rule 8 is
extracted below :
"8. (1) All cases referred to in the Second Schedule shall be brought before Cabinet by
the direction of i. the Chief Minster , or ii. the Minister-in-charge or the Minister of
State in-
charge of the case with the consent of the Chief Minister
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 10
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
2) Cases shall also be brought before the Cabinet by the Chief Minister by the direction of the
Governor under clause (c) of Article 167 :
Provided that no case in regard to which the Finance Department is required to be
consulted under rule 10 shall, save in exceptional circumstances under the direction
of the Chief Minister, be discussed by the Cabinet unless the Finance Minister has
had opportunity for its consideration.
*Provided further that the Chief Minister may anticipate approval of the Cabinet in
cases of emergency, if the meeting of the Cabinet is likely to be delayed. Such cases
shall have to be placed before the next meeting of the Cabinet as and when held"
In the Second Schedule to the Rules of Business, in Sl No 13 (c), proposals for the
making or amending of rules regulating the recruitment and the conditions of service
of persons appointed to the public services and posts in connection with the affairs of
the State has been included In the instructions regarding the Business of the
Government issued under Rule 14 of the Rules made under Article 166 of the
constitution of India., at Sl. No 14 xxxiii and Sl.21 ( 1) are the following entries :
"14 ( 1 ) The following classes of cases shall be submitted to the Chief Minister before
the issue of orders , namely :
.......
( xxxiii) All cases in which it is proposed to deviate from the advice tendered by the
State Public Service Commission ."
..........
"21. (1) When it has been decided to bring a case before the Cabinet, the department
to which the case belongs shall, unless the Chief Minister otherwise directs, prepare a
memorandum indicating with sufficient precision the salient facts of the case and the
points for decision. Such memorandum and such other papers as are necessary to
enable the case to be disposed of shall be circulated to the Chief Minister, Minister,
Minister of State-in-charge of a Department and the Secretary to the Cabinet.
(2) A memorandum prepared by any department for consideration of the Cabinet
shall be drafted after due examination and consultation with all departments
concerned including the Finance Department, wherever necessary. The
memorandum shall be submitted in draft by the Secretary of the Department
together with the papers of the related cases for consideration of the
Minister-in-charge or the Minister of State-in-charge as the case may be through the
Chief Secretary and thereafter for approval of the Chief Minister:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 11
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
Provided that in special circumstances of the case, the Minister or the Minister of
State as the case may be may call for the papers without such examination of the
Chief Secretary and place them before Chief Minister."
RELEVENT RULES
17. The "Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules,
2012" (in short " the OES Rules") was enacted by the State Government in 2012 by exercising power
under Article 309 of the Constitution of India to regulate the recruitment and service conditions of
the Assistant Executive Engineers in the State . Rules 6 and 7 of the OES Rules are relevant for
deciding this writ application.
Rule 6 contains the eligibility criteria for direct recruitment of AEEs and is extracted below:
6. Eligibility Criteria for Direct Recruitment- In order to be eligible for direct
recruitment to the posts of Assistant Executive Engineer in the service, a candidate
must satisfy the following conditions, namely :-
(a) Nationality : He must be a citizen of India
(b) Minimum Educational Qualification : He must have possessed a Degree in
Engineering or an equivalent qualification from any University or Institution
recognized by the Government or he must be an Associated Member of the
Institution of Engineers of India.
(c) Age Limits : He must have attained the age of 21 years and must not be above the
age of 32 years on the 1st day of January of the year of recruitment :
Provided that the upper age limit in respect of reserved categories of candidates
referred to in Rule 5 shall be relaxed in accordance with the provisions of the Act,
Rules, Orders or Instructions, for the time being in force, for the respective
categories.
(d) Knowledge in Odia : He must be able to read, write and speak Odia and have--
(i) passed Middle School Examination with Odia as a Language subject ; or
(ii) passed Matriculation or equivalent Examination with Odia as medium of examination in
non-language subject ; or
(iii) passed in Odia as language subject in the final examination of Class VII from a School or
Educational Institution recognized by the Government of Odisha or the Central Government ; or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 12
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
(iv) passed a test in Odia in Middle English School Standard conducted by the School and Mass
Education Department/Board of Secondary Education, Odisha.
(e) Marital Status : A candidate if married must not have more than one spouse living :
Provided that the State Government may, if satisfied that such marriage is
permissible under the personal law applicable to such person or there are other
grounds for doing so, exempt any person from the operation of this rule.
(f) Physical Fitness : A candidate must be of good mental condition and bodily health
and free from any physical defect likely to interfere with the discharge of his duties in
the service.
Rule 7 contains the method of selection . The original Rule 7 of the OES Rules 2012 is extracted
below:
7. Selection by the Commission --(1) When the Government decides to fill up the
vacancies in the post of Assistant Executive Engineers by direct recruitment,
Government will communicate the number of vacancies in the posts along with
reserved vacancies thereof proposed to be filled up.
(2) The Commission on receipt of the requisition, shall in such manner as it thinks fit, shall invite
applications from eligible candidates.
(3) The Commission after receiving all the applications shall take steps to select candidates in the
manner given below :
(a) Selection shall be based on Career Evaluation and objective type written test and
viva voce test.
(b) Weightage on Career Evaluation shall be 50% (fifty per cent) and objective type
written test 40% (forty per cent).
(c) The Career Evaluation shall be made in the following manner :--
(i) High School Certificate : 12.5% (Twelve & half per cent)
(ii) Higher Secondary School Certificate or Diploma in Engineering. :12.5% (Twelve &
half per cent)
(iii) Degree in Engineering : 25% (Twenty-five per cent)
(d) Weightage on the Viva Voce Test will be 10% (Ten per cent) (4) The Commission
shall prepare a list of selected candidates arranged in order of merit equal to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 13
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
number of advertised vacancy on the basis of the marks secured in Career Evaluation,
Objective Type Written Test and Viva Voce Test.
Explanation--The Commission shall prepare a common merit list taking into account all categories
along with separate merit list categorywise. This Rule was amended in the year 2014 .Vide Rule 2 of
the Amendment Rules , Rule 7 was amended and out of 100 marks , 90% mark was meant for
written test and 10% mark for vivo-voce. The said amendment is extracted below :
...." 2. In the Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment & Conditions of
Service) Rules, 2012, for sub-rules (3) and (4) of rule 7, the following sub rule shall be
substituted namely:-
"(3) The Commission on receipt of the requisition shall take steps to select the
candidates in the manner given below:-
(a) Selection shall be based on objective type written test and viva voce test.
(b) Weightage on objective type written test shall be 90% (ninety per cent).
(c) Weightage on the Viva Voce test shall be 10% (ten per cent).
"(4) The Commission shall prepare a list of selected candidates arranged in order of
merit equal to the number of advertised vacancy on the basis of marks secured in
objective type written test and Viva Voce test.
Explanation- The Commission shall prepare a common merit list taking into account all categories
along with separate merit list category wise." On 28.01.2021 in exercise of power under Article 309
of the Constitution of India, the Department of Water Resource issued a notification containing the
Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment & Conditions of Service) Amendment Rules,
2021 (in short "Amendment Rules 2021"). Various provisions of the OES Rules have been amended
by the Amendment Rules 2021. But for the purpose of the present writ petitions we are concerned
with Rule 4 of the Amendment rules 2021 which has amended Sub Rule 3 and Sub Rule 4 of Rule 7
by changing the method of selection and making the GATE Score to be the only sole basis of
selection of candidates who fulfil the legibility criteria laid down in Rule 6.
Rule 4 of the Amendment Rule 2021 is extracted below:
"4. In the said Rules, in rule 7",
(i) for sub-rule (3), the following sub-rule shall be substituted, namely:
"(3) The commission after receipt of the application shall take steps to select the
candidates on the basis of the highest of the valid GATE score of preceding 03 years
of the date of advertisement (including the year of advertisement).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 14
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
(ii) In sub-rule (4) the words and expression.
"marks secured in Career Evaluation, Objective type written test and Viva-voce test"
the words and expressions "valid GATE" score shall be substituted".
By Rule 4 of the Amendment Rules 2021, Rule 7 (3) and Rule 7 (4) which provided for awarding
marks for career evaluation, objective type written test and viva voce test have been done away with
and GATE scores have been made the sole method of selection by providing that the selection of
candidates shall be made on the basis of the highest of the valid GATE score of the preceding three
years from the date of advertisement (including the year of the advertisement). ADVERTISEMENT
18. Advertisement No 20 of 2022-23 dated 18.03.2023 has been published by the OPSC inviting
applications for recruitment to the posts of Asst. Executive Engineer (Civil) and Asst. Executive
Engineer (Mechanical) in Group A of Orissa Engineering Service under water resources
Department. Clause 5 which indicates the method of selection, is the exact repetition of the
impugned portion of the amended Rule and provides as follows :
"5. Method of Selection: -
a) The Commission after receipt of the applications shall take steps to select the
candidates on the basis of the highest of the valid GATE score of preceding 03 years
of the date of advertisement (including the year of advertisement.
b) The Commission, after verification of original certificates and documents, valid
GATE scores, shall select the name of suitable candidates in order of merit , as per
availability of vacancies in different categories and recommend for appointment to
the post of AEEs to the Government."
This Advertisement has been challenged in WP ( C) 10366 of 2023 and WP( C) 109355 of 2023.
SUBMISSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE PETITIONERS
19. Mr. A. Mohanty, learned Senior Counsel, assisted by Ms. S. Jena, learned counsel for the
petitioner has submitted that the petitioners who are aspirants for the post of Asst. Executive
Engineers under the State Government , confine their challenge to Rule 4 of the impugned
Amendment Rules 2021 which amends Rule 7 ( 3 ) and Rule 7 ( 4 ) of the OES Rules 2012 . On
coming to learn about this amendment they alongwith other aggrieved aspirants had approached
the Principal Secretary of Water Resources Department by filing a representation dated 23.05.2022.
But when this was not considered , they filed the writ application. Notice had been issued to the
opposite parties and they have filed counter affidavits and rejoinder affidavit has been filed by the
petitioners in reply to the counter affidavit of opposite parties No.1 and 2. But before the matter
could be finally adjudicated, the Odisha Public Service Commission, Cuttack (in short "OPSC") has
published advertisement No. 20 of 20022-23 for recruitment to the post of Assistant Executive
Engineer (Civil) and Assistant Executive Engineer (Mechanical) in Group-A of the Orissa
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 15
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
Engineering Service under the Water Resources Department on 18.03.2023 prescribing GATE
Scores to be the basis of selection and 28.04.2023 has been indicated to be the last date of
application.
Challenging the substitution of the method of Selection through GATE scores, Mr. Mohanty, learned
Senior Counsel has submitted that the syllabus of GATE is designed for higher study and entry into
the higher education institution and has nothing to do with selection of engineers for services.
Candidates who have never applied for GATE will be deprived of applying for the posts as generally
as after completion of the engineering course, candidates prepare for appointment under the State
Government and most of them do not prepare or appear in the GATE Examinations. Fresh
engineering graduates opt for appearing in the GATE Examination for the purpose of higher
education and for joining the public sector undertakings, while many engineering graduates join
Private Companies and prepare for Government service by appearing in the examination held by the
OPSC. GATE is an examination for admission into the master programme and doctorate programme
and recruitment of some public sector undertaking and it is not required for the engineers who will
serve the State Govt. The amendment has completed changed the examination / selection method
depriving the aspiring engineers who have not appeared in the GATE examinations from applying
for post under the Odisha Government which is violative of Article 14 and 21 of the Constitution of
India and therefore liable to be set aside . He has also submitted that Article 320 (3) of the
Constitution of India specifically provides that at the time of recruitment to the Civil Post, the State
shall consult the Public Service Commission but the impugned notification amending the rule has
been made without considering the opinion of the OPSC as the OPSC had specifically questioned the
substitution of the method of selection by written test and vive voce by GATE score .This is apparent
from the statement made by the opposite party No.1 and 2 in paragraph-4 (vii) of their counter
affidavit . Vide letter dated 4.3.2016 (Annexure-B/1 to the counter affidavit) suggestion had been
given by the OPSC to make amendment as per suggestion No.2 so as to get better candidate to the
post, but in complete disregard to the said suggestion, Rule 7 has been amending confining it to the
GATE score which appears to be arbitrary and irrational. He has submitted that that no doubt the
opposite parties have the power to prescribe the qualification of the candidates for appointment but
prescribing the GATE score as the only basis for recruitment bypassing objective written test and
viva voce test and thereby depriving the more meritorious candidates who have never appeared in
GATE is arbitrary and discriminatory. GATE scores have not been made the sole basis of
recruitment by all PSU s and like companies as "BHEL' and HAL are still recruiting Engineers on
the basis of computer based examination and interview and 2 and 1/2 duration test consisting of
MCQ on General Awareness and 100% MCQ in concerned discipline.
20. Mr. B. Routray, learned Senior Counsel has submitted that the introduction of evaluation by
considering the highest on the valid GATE score of preceding three years from the date of
advertisement is illegal and arbitrary as it has given the procedure of objective type, written test and
viva voce test a go by . He has submitted that the very purpose of GATE examination is for seeking
examination and Financial Assistance to Master Degrees and Doctoral programmes and the same is
used by different PUSs for getting their candidate shortlisted but introduction of such qualification
for getting a job in Group A service of the State is arbitrary and irrational. On account of the
impugned amendment, the petitioners will not get any opportunity to be considered for the post as
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 16
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
they have not passed the GATE examination and the said amendment will discriminate between the
candidates who have valid GATE score and those who have not appeared in the GATE and this
requirement is violative of Article 14 of the Constitution of India as it has no nexus with the object of
selecting the best candidate for the post of Assistant Engineer. His further contention is that this
amendment has been enacted with the objective of giving preference to a particular class of persons
thereby depriving the petitioner and other candidates from consideration and is therefore
discriminatory and fails the test of reasonableness, for which it should be struck down. This
amendment has no rationale with the object of selection of candidates for recruitment for the post of
Asst. Executive Engineer as meritorious student having brilliant academic career will be kept out of
the zone of consideration by confining the selection only to the group of person who have appeared
in the GATE Examination and therefore, discriminatory and is hit by Article 14 of the Constitution
of India by creating a class within a class. Rule 7(3) and 7(4) are therefore liable to be declared ultra
virus and struck down. He has also contended that the amended Rule also suffers from colourable
exercise of power under delegated legislation. He has also contended that under Article 320(3) of
the Constitution of India, the State is required to consult the State Public Commission in the matter
of method of recruitment to Civil Services and for all Civil Post. In this case the OPSC had given its
opinion not to proceed with the amendment which relates to requirement of appearing in GATE
Examination, but the opinion has been ignored and has not been brought to the notice of the
Cabinet before going ahead with the amendment. The OPSC in its letter dated 04.03.2016 has
recommended a two stage written examination along with viva vice to ensure meritocracy of
candidates in the dual field of theory and practical knowledge and there was no recommendation to
conduct examination on the basis of GATE. In its letter No 1232 dated 19.02.2020 addressed to the
Special Secretary to Government Water Resources Department ( Annexure 8 to the writ application
) , the OPSC has specifically objected to the amendment of rule 7 of the OES Rules 2012. The
recommendations of the OPSC are mandatory in nature as regards to amendment to recruitment
rules but the Water Resources Department has chosen to ignore its recommendation which vitiates
the amendment. There should be one uniform selection procedure so far as appointments of
Assistant Executive Engineers in different departments of the State is concerned, and other
Departments (PanchayatiRaj and Drinking Water and Agriculture Department ) have not given
GATE score as the sole criteria but the department of Water Resource has given a go bye to
maintaining the uniformity by introducing GATE as the sole eligibility criteria for being appointed
as Assistant Executive Engineers. The copies of the advertisement have been annexed as Annexure-9
Series to the writ petition. He has ultimately submitted that assuming for a moment that the
impugned amendment is not interfered with , even then the advertisement is liable to be quashed as
being premature and for not providing a level playing field to candidates who have not appeared for
the GATE examinations as the time gap between the coming into force of the Amendment Rules
2021 and the impugned Advertisement only provides candidates the opportunity to appear in two
GATE examination for a particular years starts in the previous year and the examination itself is
held in February of that year.
21. Mr. A. Mohanty, learned Senior counsel and Mr. B. Routray, learned Senior Counsel have relied
on the decisions of the High Court of Patna in the case of Ram Monohar Pandey & Others Vs. State
of Bihar & Others : CWJ Case No. 8760 of 2019 decided on 05.08.2019, where the amendment
introducing the qualification of GATE for recruitment to the post of Lecturers in Polytechnic
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 17
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
Colleges and Engineering Colleges has been struck down . They have also stated that this decision
had been challenged before the Supreme Court in SLP (Civil) Diary No. 30880 of 2019 (Smita
Kumari & Others Vs. Ram Mohan Panday), but the Supreme Court vide order dated 22.11.2019,
dismissed the special leave petition and the application for impleadment. They have also relied on
the decision of the High Court of Kerala in the case of Aishwarya Mohan vs. Union of India and
Others (W.P.(C) No. 30638 of 2021 decided on 06.06.2022) : 2022 SCC Online Kerala 3090 and in
the case of Asha Kaul & Others Vs. State of Jammu and Kashmir & Others reported in (1993) 2 SCC
573 (para-6). In the case of Duddilla Srinivasa Sharma & Others Vs. V. Chrysolite reported in (2013)
16 SCC 702.
SUBMISSSIONS ON BEHALF OF THE OPPOSITE PARTIES:
22. Mr. I. Mohanty, learned Additional Standing Counsel has submitted that :
i) The State government is competent to promulgate the 2021 amendment rules
under Article 309 of the Constitution of India. Relying on the decision of the
Supreme Court in Maharastra Public Service Commission v. Sandip Sriram Warade
and others (2019) 6 SCC 362 he has submitted that the essential qualification for
appointment to a post are for employer to decide and the employer is best suited to
decide the requirements a candidate must possess according to the needs of the
employer and the nature of the work. He also relies on the decision of Madhya
Pradeash High Court in the case of Vikas Malik v. Union of India and others reported
in (2019) ILR MP 558 where it has been held that the prescription of minimum
qualifications and the mode of appointment in the sphere of public employment is
within the domain of the appointing authority and the Courts and tribunals can
neither prescribe the qualifications nor entrench upon the power provided the same
are reasonable.
ii) The amended Rule 7(3) is not arbitrary and has not deprived the petitioners from
applying to the post of Asst.
Executive Engineer. The minimum qualification for appearing in GATE examination is "A candidate
who is currently studying in the 3rd or higher years of any undergraduate degree program OR has
already completed any government approved degree program in in Engineering / Technology /
Architecture / Science / Commerce / Arts" and the minimum eligibility for applying to the post of
AEE as per Rule 6 of the 2012 Rules is Degree in Engineering or equivalent qualification from any
University. As the minimum qualification for applying to the post of AEE and the minimum
qualification for appearing in the GATE examination is identical, the petitioners who are Degree
Engineers are eligible to appear in GATE examination and the change of the method of selection has
not excluded any of the petitioners from participating in the recruitment process. The selection
examination which was being conducted by OPSC would now be conducted by the Indian Institute
of Technology (in short "IIT"). There is no bar for appearing in GATE examination for number of
times. So, a candidate who has appeared in GATE examination about 4 years ago can again appear
in the examination to be considered for the post of AEE. The impugned amendment was published
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 18
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
in the Odisha Gazette on 28.01.2021 while the information brochure for GATE 2022 was published
on 01.08.2021 and the last date of application was 24.08.2021 and the examination was scheduled
on various dates in February, 2022. Similarly, the last date for application for GATE-2023 was
30.8.2022 and the examination was scheduled on various dates in February, 2023. The last
recruitment to the post of AEE was held in the year 2019 vide advertisement dated 29.6.2019 under
the old un-amended Rules. After about more than two years, the advertisement dated 18.3.2023 has
been published and in the meantime, the GATE examination has been conducted two times as the
petitioners had two opportunities to appear in the GATE examination and thereafter to apply to the
post of AEE. As the petitioners have chosen not to appear in GATE examination, their contention
that they have been deprived for applying for the post is liable to be rejected. The petitioners have
approached this Court by filing the writ petition in June, 2022 which is more than one and half
years after the impugned rules came into force and the rules had not been stayed by this Court.
There was no reason for the petitioners not to appear in GATE examinations which were conducted
in February, 2022 and February, 2023. He has placed reliance on
a) the judgment dated 18.10.2022 of the Madras High Court in the case of W.P. (C) Nos.11026 and
9491 of 2022 (Elambarathy S v. NLC India Limited and others) where selection on the basis of
GATE score was upheld ,
b) the decision of the Supreme Court in the case of Mohd Rashid v. The Director, Local Bodies, New
Secretariat and others (Civil Appeal No.136 of 2020) delivered on 15.01.2020 where the challenge to
method of recruitment was dismissed by the Court.
c) He has also submitted that the decision in the case of Ram Manohar Pandey (supra) is not
applicable to the present case and is clearly distinguishable as in that case the amendment with
regard to the eligibility and educational qualifications for recruitment to the post of Lecturers in
Polytechnic Colleges and Engineering Colleges were under challenge. The Rules had been amended
to remove the written test and had replaced it with the GATE score which would be given weightage
of 30 marks as the AICTE has framed the minimum qualification for appointment of teachers to
technical institutions. The High Court held that since the GATE examination is not made an
eligibility condition, the State cannot make it a basis of evaluation of work knowledge and teaching
skill and allot some weightage marks to it. In the present case, the State Government has completely
replaced the previous model of written and viva voce test and replaced it with one single criteria
which is the score in GATE examination. Therefore, it does not create any separate class is not
arbitrary or discriminatory.
iii) Article 320 (3) of the Constitution of India has not been violated while promulgating the
Amendment Rules 2021 as the decision to amend the impugned rules was taken after thorough and
prolonged discussions with the State Public Service Commission and with the objective to bring to
more objectivity and transparency in order to get best candidates for the position of Assistant
Executive Engineer. On 11.11.2019, the OPSC had requested for certain clarifications inter alia the
advantages for switching on to GATE as the method of selection to which the opposite party had
duly replied to the said letter dated 12.12.2019 wherein several advantages for switching to GATE
was indicated. In response to letter dated 17.02.2020 of the Department of Water Resources, the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 19
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
OPSC in its reply dated 19.2.2020 had concurred with all the amendments except the method of
selection to be GATE examination. This view was deliberated upon by the Departments and a
committee under the Chairmanship of Chief Secretary was constituted. Thereafter after obtaining
the views of the GA & PG Department and the Law Department, the matter was sent to the Hon'ble
Chief Minister who approved it. After the approval of the Chief Minister, the proposal for
amendment of 2012 Rules were placed before the Cabinet in its 21st meeting held on 09.12.2022
wherein the Cabinet approved the draft amendment rules and the Rules received the assent by the
Hon'ble Governor of Odisha and the rules were published in the Odisha Gazette vide DoWR
Notification No.2819 dated 28.01.2021. As the State Government has duly consulted with the OPSC
on the said matter before taking a decision to amend the rules and the process of consultation with
the Public Service Commission not always mandatory as per the decision of the Constitution Bench
of the Supreme Court in the case of State of U.P. v. Manbodhan Lal Srivastava reported in 1958 SCR
533. CITATIONS / CASE LAW
23. In Ram Monohar Pandey (supra), where the amendment introducing the qualification of GATE
for recruitment to the post of Lecturers in Polytechnic Colleges and Engineering Colleges was
challenged, the Patna High Court has held as follows :
...."There is absolutely no issues on rearrangement of weightage marks amongst the
different categories, the problem which arises by virtue of this amendment is, that in
the process of amending the scheme of evaluation on work knowledge and teaching
skill, the State has done away with the scheme of written test and in so far as the
candidates seeking appointment in the Engineering/ Technology Branch is
concerned, they are now to be assessed on the basis of percentile obtained by them in
the GATE examination subject to a maximum of 30 marks.
It is the contention of the petitioners that qualifying in GATE is a mandatory
requirement for seeking admission in Masters/ Doctoral programme in Engineering/
Technology/ Architecture and since the petitioners are already having Post Graduate
qualification they are not required to appear at such examination. According to Mr.
Singh, while the petitioners are not required to pass GATE examination because they
are already Post Graduates, this situation deprives them of the valuable 30 marks for
being evaluated on their work knowledge/ teaching skill.
We do agree with the issue canvassed and are completely at loss to appreciate this
change in the procedure of evaluation of candidates on their work knowledge/
teaching skill because while the weightage scheme as it was originally framed,
allowed equal opportunity to all the candidates for being tested on their work
knowledge/ teaching skill through a written test to be held on the pattern of GATE,
the State by waiving of such requirement has deprived the candidates who are not
even required to pass GATE examination for being evaluated on their work
knowledge and teaching skill even if they do possess such experience. Even if the
State under Article 309 has a right to frame rules in matters of public employment,
every such rule has to withstand the test of arbitrariness and rationality besides being
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 20
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
transparent on the procedure but the amendment substituting Table-2 of Appendix-I
through Memo No. 889 dated 10.4.2017 whereby it is decided to waive of the
transparent evaluation of candidates on their work knowledge/ teaching skill by way
of a written test and to simply mark candidates on the basis of marks obtained in the
GATE examination, not only hits transparency but also discriminates against such of
the candidates who are already Post Graduates and are not required to pass such
GATE examination."....
.....
....."As we have observed there can be a preferential category within a particular
category but a weightage scheme which deprives a candidate from consideration
against a particular attribute in its entirety suffers from vice of arbitrariness besides
being discriminatory and lacking on reasonableness. In fact this change in weightage
scheme has created a class within a class of candidates in so far as evaluation on work
knowledge/ teaching skill is concerned and the object is entirely missing. The basic
eligibility as present in Table-1, Appendix-I for an applicant to apply against such
post, does not prescribe passing of a GATE examination as a condition of eligibility.
In our opinion, until passing of a GATE examination is made a condition of eligibility,
the State cannot make it a basis for evaluation of a candidate on the issue of work
knowledge and teaching skill. Such is the arbitrary consequences of such form of
evaluation that despite candidates possessing work experience and teaching skill,
they are yet deprived of such consideration simply because they have not passed the
GATE examination. The case of the petitioners is even worse because being Post
Graduate they are not even required to pass such examination and yet the substituted
rule deprives them of such consideration."...
In the case of Aishwarya Mohan (supra) , the Kerala High Court has held as follows :
... "10. No doubt, the precedents cited by the learned Solicitor General lays down the
position that, fixing the eligibility of a particular post is within the domain of the
employer and cannot be the subject matter of judicial review, unless found to be
arbitrary, unreasonable or having no rational nexus to the objective sought to be
achieved. The essential difference between the facts involved in the cited precedents
and the case at hand is that, here the challenge is not against qualification or
eligibility, but focused on the selection process. The challenge is mainly on the
ground that, incorporation of the restrictive selection criteria is nothing but indirect
discrimination."...
....
......."16. The above discussion leads me to the only conclusion t.hat Ext.P3
notification insofar as it confines the selection process to only candidates who had
participated in the CLAT-2021 PG programme, violates Article 16 of the Constitution
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 21
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
of India. Having held so, rather than upsetting the whole selection process, I deem it
more appropriate to direct the second respondent to accept the petitioner's
application and conduct a selection test or interview for testing her eligibility for
appointment to the notified post. Further action with respect to the appointment
shall be taken depending on the outcome of such selection test/interview. The above
direction shall be given effect to within one month of receipt of a copy of this
judgment. The writ petition is disposed of accordingly. " ...
The case of Asha Kaul (supra) pertained to approval and publication of the select list
of District Munsifs prepared by the Jammu and Kashmir Public Service Commission .
The Supreme Court interalia held as follows :
.... "It is true that the government is the appointing authority for the munsifs but it is
misleading to assert that in the matter of selection and appointment the government
has an absolute power. Such an argument does violence to the constitutional scheme.
The Constitution has created a public service commission and assigned it the
function of Conducting examinations for appointments to the services of the Union
or to the services of the State, as the case may be. According to Article 320 clause (1)
this is the primary function of the commission. The Government is directed to
consult the public service commission on all matters relating to methods of
recruitment to civil services and to civil posts and on the principles to be followed in
making. appointment to civil services and posts and on the suitability of candidates
for such appointment, among other matters. An examination of Articles 317 to 320
makes it evident that the constitution contemplates the commission to be an
independent and effective body outside the governmental control. This is an instance
of application of the basic tenet of democratic form of government viz., diffusion of
governing power, The idea is not to allow the concentration of governing power in the
hands of one person, authority or organ."....
....." Indeed, clause (2) of Article 323 obliges the Governor of a State to lay a copy of
the annual report received from the commission before the Legislature "together with
a memorandum explaining, as respect the cases, if any, where the advice of the
commission was not accepted (and) the reasons for such non-acceptance." Evidently,
this is meant as a check upon the power of the government. This provision too
militates against the theory of absolute power in the government to disapprove or
reject the recommendations of the commission."
In the case of Duddilla Srinivasa Sharma (supra), the Supreme Court has held :
...."We fail to understand how a person who fulfils the eligibility conditions as per the
recruitment rules can be excluded even from appearing in the qualifying written
examination by fixing higher educational qualification bench mark. That would be
permissible where the post is to be filled by main written examination (with marks
obtained therein to be included in the total marks) followed by viva- voice test OR
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 22
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
where the post is to be filled by interview mode alone. Thus, having regard to the
specific provision of shortlisting, we are of the opinion that the impugned judgment
of the High Court has taken the correct view."....
". In Sandip Sriram Warade (supra), the Supreme Court has held as follows :
"9. The essential qualifications for appointment to a post are for the employer to
decide. The employer may prescribe additional or desirable qualifications, including
any grant of preference.
It is the employer who is best suited to decide the requirements a candidate must possess according
to the needs of the employer and the nature of work. The court cannot lay down the conditions of
eligibility, much less can it delve into the issue with regard to desirable qualifications being at par
with the essential eligibility by an interpretive rewriting of the advertisement. Questions of
equivalence will also fall outside the domain of judicial review. If the language of the advertisement
and the rules are clear, the Court cannot sit in judgment over the same. If there is an ambiguity in
the advertisement or it is contrary to any rules or law the matter has to go back to the appointing
authority after appropriate orders, to proceed in accordance with law. In no case can the Court, in
the garb of judicial review, sit in the chair of the appointing authority to decide what is best for the
employer and interpret the conditions of the advertisement contrary to the plain language of the
same." In the case of Elambarathy S (supra), the High Court of Madras while dealing with a
challenge to the advertisement which had prescribed GATE score as the criteria for selection to the
post of Graduation Executive Trainee held as follows:-
"8. The aspirants for the post of Graduate Executive Trainee in the first
respondent/public sector Company, do not have a vested right on the mode of
recruitment and/or qualification prescribed by the recruiting agency/employer. The
second respondent under the impugned Advertisement, has prescribed GATE score
as mandatory requirement for applying to the subject post. GATE is an examination
conducted by the agency established by the Central Government. GATE is an
examination that primarily tests the comprehensive understanding for various
under-graduate subjects in Engineering and Science for admission in the Master's
programme for recruitment by some public sector undertaking Companies like that
of the first respondent. The purpose for GATE examination is to test the students'
knowledge and undertaking of under-graduate level subjects in Engineering and
Science. GATE is utilised to measure and tehst the calibre of the Engineering
students. The requirement of GATE score under the impugned
Advertisement/Notification therefore cannot be held to be unreasonable.......
10. .....This Court is of the considered view that the petitioners' contention will have
to be rejected for the following reasons:
(a) The prescription of educational and other required qualifications for a post, is
within the domain of the recruiting agency/employer, unless and until they will have
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 23
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
to follow any statutory law/Rules prescribing a particular educational qualification
criteria for a particular post. No statutory provision/Rule prohibits the first
respondent-Company from prescribing GATE score as a mandatory qualification for
applying to the post of Graduate Executive Trainee. The first respondent has a
discretion to prescribe the required and relevant educational and other necessary
qualifications for the required post in consonance with the nature of the post. The
petitioners have no legally recognised/protected and judicial enforceable right to
compel and/or dictate the respondents to follow the same yardstick for all times in
the recruitment for the post required by the respondents. This legal position had also
been confirmed by the Honourable Supreme Court in the decision dated 03.05.2019
in Civil Appeal No.4597 of 2019 (cited supra) as well as in the judgment, dated
03.11.2020 in Civil Appeal No.3602 of 2020 (cited supra), relied upon by the learned
Additional Solicitor General appearing for the respondents."
The High Court of Madhya Pradesh (Indore Bench) in Vikas Malik (supra) has interalia held : :
..." 7. The prescription of minimum qualifications and the mode of appointment in the sphere of
public employment is within the domain of the appointing authority or the selection body. The
Courts and tribunals can neither prescribe the qualifications nor entrench upon the power of the
authority concerned so long as the qualification so prescribed reasonably relevant and do not
obliterate the equality clause (J.Ranga Swamy v. Govt., of A.R.[MANU/SC/0229/1989 : (1990) 1
SCC 288 and Chandigarh Administration Through the Director Public Instructions (Colleges),
Chandigarh [(2011) 9 SCC (645)]..."
In the case of Mohd Rashid v. The Director, Local Bodies, New Secretariat and others (Civil Appeal
No.136 of 2020) delivered on 15.01.2020, the recruitment rules had been amended on 7th June,
2013 and the advertisement was issued on 12th September, 2013. The Supreme Court interlalia held
:
..."11. From the above information placed on record, we find that the Recruitment
Rules providing 50% quota to be filled up by promotion failing which by direct
recruitment and another 50% by deputation quota failing which by direct
recruitment are being followed by the Municipal Bodies.
12. The appellants who are aspirants for direct recruitment have no right for
appointment merely because at one point of time the vacancies were advertised. The
candidates such as the appellants cannot claim any right of appointment merely for
the reason that they responded to an advertisement published on 12th September,
2013. Even after completion of the selection process, the candidates even on the
merit list do not have any vested right to seek appointment only for the reason that
their names appear on the merit list. In Shankarsan Dash v. Union of India, a
Constitution Bench of this Court held that a candidate seeking appointment to a civil
post cannot be regarded to have acquired an indefeasible right to appointment in
such post merely because of the appearance of his name in the merit list. This Court
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 24
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
held as under:-
"7. It is not correct to say that if a number of vacancies are notified for appointment
and adequate number of candidates are found fit, the successful candidates acquire
an indefeasible right to be appointed which cannot be legitimately denied. Ordinarily
the notification merely amounts to an invitation to qualified candidates to apply for
recruitment and on their selection they do not acquire any right to the post. Unless
the relevant recruitment rules so indicate, the State is under no legal duty to fill up all
or any of the vacancies. However, it does not mean that the State has the licence of
acting in an arbitrary manner. The decision not to fill up the vacancies has to be
taken bona fide for appropriate reasons. And if the vacancies or any of them are filled
up, the State is bound to respect the comparative merit of the candidates, as reflected
at the recruitment test, and no discrimination can be permitted. This correct position
has been consistently followed by this Court, and we do not find any discordant note
in the decisions in the State of Haryana v.
Subhash Chander Marwaha [(1974) 3 SCC 220 : 1973 SCC (L&S) 488 : (1974) 1 SCR
165] ; Neelima Shangla (Miss) v. State of Haryana [(1986) 4 SCC 268 : 1986 SCC
(L&S) 759] or Jitender Kumar v. State of Punjab [(1985) 1 SCC 122 : 1985 SCC (L&S)
174 : (1985) 1 SCR 899]."
13. Since the selection process has not been completed and keeping in view the mandate of the
Statutory Rules, we find that the appellants have no right to dispute the action of the Municipal
Bodies to fill up the posts either by way of promotion or by deputation as such posts are being filled
up in terms of mandate of the Rules. It is always open to the Municipal Bodies to fill up the vacant
posts by way of direct recruitment after the posts by way of promotion and/or deputation quota are
not filled up either on the basis of recruitment process already initiated or to be initiated afresh."
In the case of State of U.P. v. Manbodhan Lal Srivastava reported in 1958 SCR 533, where the
Hon'ble Supreme Court has held as follows:
..."7. Article 320 does not come under Chapter I headed "Services" of Part XIV. It
occurs in Chapter II of that part headed "Public Service Commissions." Articles 320
and 323 lay down the several duties of a Public Service Commission. Article 321
envisages such "additional functions" as may be provided for by Parliament or a State
Legislature. Articles 320 and 323 begin with the words "It shall be the
duty.................", and then proceed to prescribe the various duties and functions of
the Union or a State Public Service Commission, such as to conduct examinations for
appointments; to assist in framing and operating schemes of joint recruitment; and
of being consulted on all matters relating to methods of recruitment or principles in
making appointments to Civil Services and on all disciplinary matters affecting a civil
servant. Perhaps, because of the use of word "shall" in several parts of Art. 320, the
High Court was led to assume that the provisions of Art. 320(3)(c) were mandatory,
but in our opinion, there are several cogent reasons for holding to the contrary. In the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 25
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
first place, the proviso to Art. 320, itself, contemplates that the President or the
Governor, as the case may be, "may make regulations specifying the matters in which
either generally, or in any particular class of case or in particular circumstances, it
shall not be necessary for a Public Service Commission to be consulted." The words
quoted above give a clear indication of the intention of the Constitution makers that
they did envisage certain cases or classes of cases in which the Commission need not
be consulted. If the provisions of Art. 320 were of a mandatory character, the
Constitution would not have left it to the discretion of the Head of the Executive
Government to undo those provisions by making regulations to the contrary. If it had
been intended by the makers of the Constitution that consultation with the
Commission should be mandatory, the proviso would not have been there, or, at any
rate, in the terms in which it stands. That does not amount to saying that it is open to
the Executive Government completely to ignore the existence of the Commission or
to pick and choose cases in which it may or may not be consulted. Once, relevant
regulations have been made, they are meant to be followed in letter and in spirit and
it goes without saying that consultation with the Commission on all disciplinary
matters affecting a public servant has been specifically provided for, in order, first, to
give an assurance to the Services that a wholly independent body, not directly
concerned with the making of orders adversely affecting public servants, has
considered the action proposed to be taken against a particular public servant, with
an open mind; and, secondly, to afford the Government unbiassed advice and
opinion on matters vitally affecting the morale of public services. It is, therefore,
incumbent upon the Executive Government, where it proposes to take any
disciplinary action against a public servant, to consult the Commission as to whether
the action proposed to be taken was justified and was not in excess of the
requirements of the situation.
8. Secondly, it is clear that the requirement of the consultation with the Commission
does not extend to making the advice of the Commission on those matters, binding
on the Government. Of course, the Government, when it consults the Commission on
matters like these, does it, not by way of a mere formality, but, with a view to getting
proper assistance in assessing the guilt or otherwise of the person proceeded against
and of the suitability and adequacy of the penalty proposed to be imposed. If the
opinion of the Commission were binding on the Government, it may have been
argued with greater force that non-compliance with the rule for consultation would
have been fatal to the validity of the order proposed to be passed against a public a
servant.
In the absence of such a binding character, it is difficult to see how non-compliance with the
provisions of Art. 320(3)(c) could have the effect of nullifying the final order passed by the
Government."...
..."11. The principle laid down in this case was adopted by the Federal Court in the case of Biswanath
Khemka v. The King Emperor [[1945] F.C.R. 99]. In that case, the Federal Court had to consider the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 26
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
effect of non-compliance with the provision of s. 256 of the Government of India Act, 1935,
requiring consultation between public authorities before the conferment of magisterial powers or of
enhanced magisterial powers, etc. The Court repelled the contention that the provisions of s. 256,
aforesaid, were mandatory. It was further held that non-compliance with that section would not
render the appointment otherwise regularly and validly made, invalid or inoperative. That decision
is particularly important as the words of the section then before their Lordships the Federal Court
were very emphatic and of a prohibitory character."... ..."13. We have already indicated that Art.
320(3)(c) of the Constitution does not confer any rights on a public servant so that the absence of
consultation or any irregularity in consultation, should not afford him a cause of action in a court of
law, or entitle him to relief under the special powers of a High Court under Art. 226 of the
Constitution or of this Court under Art. 32. It is not a right which could be recognized and enforced
by a writ. On the other hand, Art. 311 of the Constitution has been construed as conferring a right on
a civil servant of the Union or a State, which he can enforce in court of law. Hence, if the provisions
of Art. 311, have been complied with in this case - and it has hot been contended at any stage that
they had not been complied with - he has no remedy against any irregularity that the State
Government may have committed. Unless, it can be held, and we are not prepared to hold, that Art.
320(3)(c) is in the nature of a rider or proviso to Art. 311, it is not possible to construe Art. 320(3)(c)
in the sense of affording a cause of action to a public servant against whom some action has been
taken by his employer.
24. As we wanted to verify if the views of the OPSC had been placed before the Chief Minister and
the cabinet before the Amendment Rules 2021 were sent to the Governor for his signature, we had
directed the learned Additional Standing Counsel to produce the original file for our perusal. File No
FE - II - AEE (C) - 10/2019 of the WR Department has been produced by him and we have perused
the same carefully.
At page 46 of the Note sheet, noting No 103 to 108 are available .Noting No 105 to 108 are extracted
below :
"Noting No 105 This was discussed with Chief Secretary. This is regarding
amendment of Cadre Rule (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of Service)
Rules, 2019 for Odisha Engineering Service.
2. The cadre restricting of IES took place following Cabinet decision of Jan 2019.
3. In order to implement the restructuring of OES Cadre it was required to finalize
the new Cadre Rule.
4. The draft cadre rule, inter-alia provided for the selection of candidates to the
service on the basis of "highest of the valid GATE score of preceding three years of the
date of advertisement (including the year of advertisement)" in lieu of objective
written test and viva-voce test for selection of candidates by OPSC in the feeder grade
of OES.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 27
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
5. This had been suggested since GATE system of examination is a national level
standardized and recognized engineering entrance examination not only for selection
of students in PG program in seven IITs, NITs, IITs & IISC but also selection of
employees in high level public sector jobs; in Group-A level posts in Central
Government i.e. Senior Field Officer (Tele), Senior Research Officer (Crypto) and
Senior Research Officer (S & T) in Cabinet Secretariat Government of India. Several
public sector undertakings (PSUs) like BHEL, GAIL, HAL, IOCL, NTPC, NPCIL,
ONGC & PGCI have used GATE score to short list the candidates for employment.
6. Government approval was taken to the draft Odisha Engineering Service (Methods
of Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Rules, 2019 duly vetted by the General
Administration Department (32206/WR/2019 GA View'Page1) and Law Department
(32204/WR/2019 Law View'Page 1)
7. The matter was then referred to the Odisha Public Service Commission (OPSC) for
their concurrence. The OPSC has concurred all the above amendments except Para-4,
relating to selection process of direct recruitment of Assistant Executive Engineer
(AEE) and the Commission has not agreed to the proposed recruitment system
through GATE score.
8. Views of GAD of Law Department were sought again. GA & PG Deparment views
that "In this respect, it may be indicated that the recommendation of the Commission
is not obligatory to be accepted unless there is sufficient justification of
non-acceptance of their advice/suggestions/ recommendations...." and Law
Department has opined that ".... this Department has noting further to say in the
matter except for reiterating the same since it is basically of policy decision, the A/D,
if so advised, may seek kind orders of the Hon'ble Chief Minister under Instruction
1(14)(1) (xxx(iii)) of Instructions issued under Government Rules of Business in case
it proposes to deviate from the advice tendered by the OPSC"
8. In view of the above opinion of GA & PG Deptt. and Law Deptt. and with a view to ensuring
utmost transparency in the process of selection; ensuring entry of talented engineers to the OES
from a wider pool of resources, timely completion of the process of selection and to streamline the
process, we may deviate from the advice of the OPSC as a policy decision to that effect has already
been taken by the Government.
9. Kind approval of the Hon'ble Chief Minister is solicited to place the matter, the draft rules, before
the Cabinet for their approval.
Smt. Anu Garg (Principal Secretary,Water Resources), 07-Nov-2020 12:48:06.
Noting 106 As Proposed.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 28
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
Asit Kumar Tripathy (Chief Secretary, Office of Chief Secretary), 09-Nov-2020 15:40:37 Noting 107
(cid:128)(cid:129)(cid:130) (cid:131)(cid:132)(cid:133) (cid:134)(cid:135)(cid:136)(cid:129)(cid:132) (cid:132)(cid:137)(cid:134)(cid:135)(cid:134) Shri Raghunandan Das (Minister of State (Independent), Water Resources),
12-Nov-2020 11:30:07 Noting 108 (cid:138)(cid:132)(cid:133) (cid:134)(cid:135)(cid:136)(cid:129)(cid:132) (cid:139)(cid:140)(cid:136)(cid:141)(cid:142)(cid:136) Shri Naveen Patnaik (Chief Minister, Office
of Chief Minister) 20-Nov-2020 13:13:00"
At Page 50 and 51 of the Note sheet, Noting No 112 to 120 are available . They are
extracted below :
"Noting No 112 PUC at (6092 Cabinet Approval Page1) may please be seen.
This is regarding approval of the cabinet to the proposed amendment to the Odisha
Engineering Service Cadre (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of Service)
Rules, 2012.
The draft Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of
Service) Amendment Rules, 2020 has been framed and sent to the GA & PG Deptt.
for vetting. The vetting of GA & PG Deptt. is at (32206/WR/2019 GA View'Page1)
Simultaneously Law Deptt. vide at (32204/WR/2019 GA View'Page1) has given their
approval. Then the draft rule was sent to Government for approval. After obtaining
Government approval at (32207/WR/2019 Governemnt Approval'Page1), the Draft
Amendment Rule was sent to OPSC for concurrence. The OPSC submitted its views /
concurrence at (20392/WR/2020 opsc reply with clarification'Page1) Accordingly the
corrected Draft of Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and
Conditions of Service) Amendment Rules, 2020 was placed before the Hon'ble Chief
Minister, Odisha for kind approval for placing the same before the Cabinet. The
approval of Hon'ble Chief Minister for placing the same before the Cabinet is at
Noting 108 (Notings : 108). The Parliamentary Affairs Department vide their Letter
No.6092 dtd. 09.12.2020 at (6092 Cabinet Approval'Page1) has intimated that, the
Cabinet in its 21st meeting held on 09.12.2020 has approved the draft Odisha
Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of Service)
Amendment Rules, 2012.
Now, if approved, the draft Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and
Conditions of Service) Amendment Rules, 2012 may be placed before the Hon'ble
Chief Minister, Odisha for obtaining the kind approval of his Excellency Governor of
Odisha. Submitted for kind orders.
Enclosures Draft 6092 Date 18-Dec-2020 16:50:19 has been added Dipak Kumar
Baral (Section Officer, Water Resources), 18-Dec-2020 20:18:54 Noting 113 Notes
above.
This is regarding approval of the cabinet to the proposed amendment to the Odisha
Engineering Service Cadre (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of Service)
Rules, 2012 (6092 Cabinet Approval;Page1).
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 29
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
The draft Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of
Service) Amendment Rules, 2020 has been framed and sent to the GA & PG Deptt.
for vetting. The vetting of GA & PG Deptt. is at (32206/WR/2019 GA View'Page1)
Simultaneously Law Deptt. vide at (32204/WR/2019 GA View'Page1) has given their
approval. Then the draft rule was sent to Government for approval. After obtaining
Government approval at (32207/WR/2019 Government Approval'Page1), the Draft
Amendment Rule was sent to OPSC for concurrence. The OPSC submitted its
views/concurrence at (20392/WR/2020 opsc reply with clarification'Page1)
Accordingly the corrected Draft of Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of
Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Amendment Rules, 2020 was placed before
the Hon'ble Chief Minister, Odisha for kind approval for placing the same before the
Cabinet. The approval of Hon'ble Chief Minister for placing the same before the
Cabinet is at Noting 108 (Notings : 108). The Parliamentary Affairs Department vide
their Letter No.6092 dtd. 09.12.2020 at (6092 Cabinet Approval'Page1) has
intimated that, the Cabinet in its 21st meeting held on 09.12.2020 has approved the
draft Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of
Service) Amendment Rules, 2012.
Now, if approved, the draft Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and
Conditions of Service) Amendment Rules, 2012 may be placed before the Hon'ble
Chief Minister, Odisha for obtaining the kind approval of his Excellency Governor of
Odisha. Submitted for kind orders.
Dhaneswar Panda (Under Secretary, Water Resources), 30-Dec-2020 17:02:27.
Noting 114 Notes above.
This is regarding approval of the cabinet to the proposed amendment to the Odisha
Engineering Service Cadre (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of Service)
Rules, 2012 (6092 Cabinet Approval;Page1). The draft Odisha Engineering Service
(Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Amendment Rules, 2020 has
been framed and sent to the GA & PG Deptt. for vetting. The vetting of GA & PG
Deptt. is at (32206/WR/2019 GA View'Page1) Simultaneously Law Deptt. vide at
(32204/WR/2019 GA View'Page1) has given their approval. Then the draft rule was
sent to Government for approval. After obtaining Government approval at
(32207/WR/2019 Government Approval'Page1), the Draft Amendment Rule was sent
to OPSC for concurrence. The OPSC submitted its views/concurrence at
(20392/WR/2020 opsc reply with clarification'Page1) Accordingly the corrected
Draft of Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of
Service) Amendment Rules, 2020 was placed before the Hon'ble Chief Minister,
Odisha for kind approval for placing the same before the Cabinet. The approval of
Hon'ble Chief Minister for placing the same before the Cabinet is at Noting 108
(Notings : 108). The Parliamentary Affairs Department vide their Letter No.6092 dtd.
09.12.2020 at (6092 Cabinet Approval'Page1) has intimated that, the Cabinet in its
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 30
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
21st meeting held on 09.12.2020 has approved the draft Odisha Engineering Service
(Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Amendment Rules, 2012. The
draft Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and Conditions of
Service) Amendment Rules, 2012 may be placed before the Hon'ble Chief Minister,
Odisha for obtaining the kind approval of his Excellency Governor of Odisha.
Submitted.
Prabhat Kumar Bhoi (Additional Secretary, Water Resources), 30-Dec-2020
18:10:40.
Noting 115 As Proposed Smt. Anu Garg (Principal Secretary, Water Resources), 31-
Dec-2020 16:06:09 Noting 116 Submitted for kind approval.
Shri Raghunandan Das (Minister of State (Independent), Water Resources),
31-Dec-2020 17:32:28. Noting 117 (cid:138)(cid:132)(cid:133) (cid:134)(cid:135)(cid:136)(cid:129)(cid:132) (cid:139)(cid:140)(cid:136)(cid:141)(cid:142)(cid:136) Shri Naveen Patnaik (Chief
Minister, Office of Chief Minister) 04-Jan-2021 16:51:22"
Noting 118 Smt. Anu Garg (Principal Secretary, Water Resources), 05- Jan-2021 10:03:17 Noting 119
Prabhat Kumar Bhoi (Additional Secretary, Water Resources), 05-Jan-2021 10:12:26.
Noting 120 Dhaneswar Panda (Under Secretary,Water Resources), 05- Jan-2021 12:45:41."
The Draft Memorandum for the Cabinet is at page 364 to 367 of the file. After the proposed
amendment, it has been stated at paragraphs 4.0 to 8.0 as follows "4.0...The proposal has been
concurred in by G.A. & P.G Department on 29th September 2020 in OSWAS File No.
PTI-WR-FE-II-Policy-0002-2019 and by Law Department vide their UOR No.5131/PSL dtd 25th
September 2020 in File No. FE-II-AEE(C)- 10/2019.
5.0 The Odisha Public Service Commission has given their concurrence to the proposal vide their
Letter No. 1232/PSC, dtd 19.02.2020.
6.0 The synopsis in respect of the above proposal has been given in the appendix to the
Memorandum as Annexure-A. 7.0 The Financial Memorandum is annexed as Annexure-B as laid
down in P.A. Department Circular No. CAB-3/2013-2047/PAD dtd.
11.04.2013.
8.0 The approval of Hon'ble Chief Minister has been obtained on 20th November 2020 in OSWAS
File No. . PTI-WR-FE-II-Policy-0002-2019 to place this memorandum before the Cabinet.
The memorandum for amendment to Odisha Engineering Service (Methods of Recruitment and
Conditions of Service) Rules, 2012 is placed before the cabinet for its kind approval.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 31
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
Sd/-
Name: Anu Garg Designation: Principal Secretary to Govt. Department of Water Resources."
Annexure A at page 363 which is the synopsis and Annexure B at page 362 the Financial
Memorandum are extracted below:
"Annexure A SYNOPSIS File No. FE-II-AEE(C) - 10/2019/WR/22561 Dt-27/11/2020
Subject:- AMENDMENT TO ODISHA ENGINEERING SERVICE (METHODS OF
RECRUITMENT AND CONDITIONS OF SERVICE RULES2012) Sl. Gist of decision
Backgrounds Benefits/Execut Remarks No. required ed outcome
1. Amendments to the As per the decisions The Odisha Engineering taken in the 70th
To streamline the amendments Service (Methods of meeting of the Odisha to the
Odisha Recruitment and Cabinet held on 26th Engineering Engineering Conditions
of Service ) February 2019 to Service Cadre by Service Rules, 2012 - to abolish
restructure the making it six tier (Methods of the post of Deputy Odisha Engineering
cadre to enhance Recruitment Executive Engineer, Service Cadre. proficiency. and
merger of the posts of Conditions of Superintending To address the issue To remove
the Service) Engineer, Level-A & of increasing asymmetry in the Rules, 2019 is
Superintending workload in various promotional hereby Engineer, Level-II and
engineering pyramid at the introduced.
to be re-designated as departments. interface between
Superintending AEE and DEE,
Engineer in the Pay To remove stagnation Superintending
Level-14 creation of the in promotion and Engineer, level -I
post of Additional Chief resultant erosion in & level-II.
Engineer in the pay productivity in the
level 16. cadre and. Better supervision
and control of field
To resolve the pay Divisions with
anomaly of this cadre higher
vis a vis other responsibility and
provincial premium administrative
cadres of the State power.
such as OMS, OAS
and OFS etc.
2 To increase the number As per the decisions To provide better
of posts of Assistant taken in the 70th promotional
Executive Engineer meeting of the avenue to the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 32
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
(AEE) to be filled up by Cabinet held on 26th engineers of
way of promotion from February, 2019 to Odisha Diploma
the posts of Assistant provide better Engineering
Engineer (AE) in the promotional avenue Services and to
Odisha Diploma to the engineers of remove stagnation
Engineering Service Odisha Diploma
from 33% to 40% Engineering Services.
3 To amend the As per requirement in To streamline the
constitution of the accordance with promotion cases of
Departmental instruction of G.A. Engineering
Promotion Committees Department O.M. No. personnel
31897 dtd. 11.11.2013
4 To bring in meritorious The Odisha Public GATE, being a
engineering students to Service Commission standardized
the Odisha Engineering (OPSC) requested the examination on
Service (OES) through Government to comprehensive
a fair and standard test review the selection understanding of
procedure within process of direct the candidates in
minimum time frame, recruitment to the various
the score in Graduate post of Assistant undergraduate
Aptitude Test in Executive Engineers subject in
Engineering (GATE) is during March, 2016 Engineering /
being considered to with a suggestion that Technology will
replace the present the system of selection provide a pool of
process of selection of to be based more on meritorious
Engineering Graduates merit than students in a
to fill up the direct elimination. timely manner.
recruitment quota in
OES.
Sd/-
Name Anu Garg
Designation :Principal Secretary to
Govt. Department of Water Resources.
Annexure - "B"
Financial Memorandum
Yes No
1. Does the proposal involves revenue loss ? 
(Put a  mark in the appropriate box)
2. In case the proposal involves revenue loss what is the estimated quantum of loss ?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 33
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
(Indicate the amount in the
appropriate box) - Non-recurring Not Applicable
- Recurring
Not Applicable
(per annum)
3. Does the proposal involve a additional budgetary expenditure ? Yes No (Put a 
mark in the appropriate box) 
4. In case the proposal involves additional budgetary expenditure what is the
estimated quantum ?
(Indicate the amount in the
Capital Not Applicable
appropriate box) - Non-Recurring
Revenue Not applicable
- Recurring
Not Applicable
(per annum)
5. Does the proposal envisage creation of new posts ? Yes No
(Put a  mark in the appropriate box) 
If Yes, what is the estimated annual salary expenditure ? Not applicable
(indicate the amount in the appropriate box)
6. Does the proposal involve imposition of any new tax Yes No or any change in the
method of assessment or the pitch  of any existing tax, land revenue or irrigation
rates ? (Put a  mark in the appropriate box) Not applicable It Yes, what is the
estimated annual revenue yield ?
(Indicate the amount in the appropriate box) Sd/-
(Anu Garg) Principal Secretary to Government. DoWR From this it is crystal clear
that the cabinet has not been intimated about the objection / reservations of the
OPSC The decision of the Department to deviate from opinion of the OPSC has not
been specifically brought to the knowledge of the cabinet. On the other hand at
Paragraph 5.0 it has been stated that "the Odisha Public Service Commission has
given their concurrence to the proposal vide their Letter No. 1232 /PSC dtd
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 34
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
19.0.2.2020' which is a palpably incorrect statement as the OPSC has specifically
stated in the letter that " In inviting a reference to the letters on the subject cited
above , the draft notification ( Amendment Rules) forwarded vide yr letter No 22175
dt 04.10.2019 is hereby concurred except Para 4" ....
Thereafter the OPSC has specifically stated in the letter that :
..."The Commission vide its letter No.1316 dt. 04-03- 2016 had recommended a two
stage written examination alongwith viva-voce test to ensure meritocracy of
candidates in the dual field of theory and practical knowledge. There was no
recommendation to conduct the examination on the basis of GATE. Notwithstanding
above, the proposal was extensively deliberated by the Commission and the
representative of the Deptt. on 31-01-2020. The Commission is of the opinion that
the syllabus or GATE designed for entry to higher education Institutions is not
suitable for selection of officers to the Group A category of the Govt. with the laid
down terms and conditions under Art. 311 of the Constitution of India.
However, if the Deptt. of Water Resources considers to ignore the recommendations
of the Commission which are mandatory in nature as regards to amendment to the
Recruitment Rules, the Supreme Court has opined and directed that such decisions of
the executive are subject to judicial review. In addition, the proposed draft
notification also needs to suppress amendments vide Notification
No.24848-FE-II-AEE(C) -83/2014/WR dt 31 Oct. 2014 and also examine
Notification No.11194-WR- FEII-POLICY-0001/2014/WR dt 19 May 2015 prior to
issue of suitable instructions.
But this letter No 1232 dated 19.02.2020 of the OPSC has not been made an
Annexure to the Draft Memorandum put up before the cabinet. This letter has been
annexed as ANNEXURE 8 in W.P.(C) No. 10936 of 2023.
ANALYSIS
25. On a conspectus of the statutory provisions , the advice of the OPSC , the manner
in which the Department has placed information before the Cabinet , we find that A.
There is no gainsaying the State Government is within its power under Article 309 of
the Constitution of India to prescribe the procedure for recruitment to the post of
Assistant Executive Engineer and consequently amend the OES Rules 2012 which
have been framed for this purpose.
But the Rules so framed have to withstand the test of arbitrariness and rationality besides being
transparent on the procedure. In this case the OPSC , which was consulted by the Government in
accordance with Article - 320 (3) of the Constitution had expressed its reservation regarding the
advantage and purpose of the proposed amendment to Rule 7 of the OES 2012 Rules.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 35
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
B. While amending the OES Rules 2012, the provisions of Article 320 (3) of the Constitution and the
Rules of Business have been given a go by. It has not been brought to our notice that the
Government has framed any Rule under Proviso to Article 320 ( 3) (e ) of the Constitution that it
would not be necessary to consult the OPSC in the matter of recruitment of members of the Orissa
Engineering Service. On the other hand, it is the admitted case that the OPSC has been consulted
and it did not agree to the part of the proposed amendment relating to Rule 7 i.e the method of
selection of the Assistant Executive Engineers on the basis of GATE scores. But this consultation
with OPSC has been made an empty formality and short shrift has been made of its advice. Although
the OPSC has consistently expressed its reservation to amendment of Section - 7 of the OES Rules
2012 by substituting Rule 7 (2) and 7 (3) i.e. the method of selection by replacing the marks awarded
for career, written examination and vive voce with GATE scores, and this had been brought to the
notice of the Law Department and GA & PG Department and the Chief Minister, but it has not been
brought to the notice of the Cabinet. The view / advice of the OPSC vide its letter dated 19.02.2020
with regard to the proposed amendment of Rule 7 has not been placed before Cabinet by making it
an Annexure to the memorandum. The Department has not even mentioned in the synopsis which
was placed before the Cabinet about its disagreement with the proposed amendment to Rule 7 of
OES Rules 2012. The Cabinet has been completely kept in the dark about the advice / opinion of the
OPSC and has in fact been misled as it has been stated in paragraph 5.0 of the memorandum that
the OPSC has given its concurrence to such amendment. This is also in contravention to the
procedure laid down in the Rules of Business and Instructions for carrying out the Rules of Business
which have been referred to earlier. This contravention amounting to suppression has vitiated the
process of consultation adopted for carrying out the proposed amendment of Rule 7. Rule 4 (i) and
Rule 4 (ii) of the Amendment Rules 2021 , amending Rule 7 (3) and 7 (4) of the OES Rules 2012 is
therefore illegal and the liable to be struck down.
C. The averment in paragraph 4 (ix ) of the counter affidavit of opposite parties No 1 and 2 that
OPSC failed to give any opinion in response to the Department Letter dated 17.02.2020 , is factually
incorrect as in response to such letter, , the OPSC vide its letter dated 19.02.2020 has replied not
agreeing to substitution of the method of written test and interview with highest valid GATE scores
for the preceding three years .
D. From a perusal of the notesheet of the file as extracted above, it is apparent that the advice /
disagreement of the OPSC to a part of the Amendment Rules 2021 has not been brought to the
notice of the cabinet . Serial No 21 of the Instructions to Rules of Business specifies that unless the
Chief Minister otherwise directs the concerned Department has to prepare a memorandum with
sufficient precision containing the salient facts and the points to be decided instruction and this
memorandum has to be drafted after consulting all departments. In this case, the memorandum
appears to have been drafted after consulting the other departments but unfortunately does not
contain the salient facts regarding advice of the OPSC and has suppressed the advice of the OPSC so
far as its disagreement with the proposed amendment of Rule 7 of the OES Rules 2012 is concerned.
At paragraph 5.0 of the draft memorandum it has been specifically stated that - "The Odisha Public
Service Commission has given their concurrence to the proposal vide their Letter No. 1232/PSC, dtd
19.02.2020" which is a palpably incorrect statement. It is shocking as to how such a wrong
memorandum could be prepared and put up for consideration of the Cabinet.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 36
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
CONCLUSION
26. In view of the fact that the advice / opinion of the OPSC has not been placed correctly before the
Cabinet and a wrong statement has been made before it that the OPSC has given its concurrence to
the proposed amendments, Rule 4 of the Amendment Rules which amends Rule 3 and 4 of the OES
Rule 2012 is liable to be struck down. Consequently, the impugned advertisement having prescribed
the highest valid GATE scores of the preceding three years to be the basis of selection is also liable to
be quashed.
27. An additional ground for quashing the impugned advertisement is that candidates have not been
provided enough time / opportunity to appear in the GATE Examinations thrice before publication
of the Advertisement dated 18.03.2023. The highest valid GATE Score for the preceding three years
(from the date of advertisement) has been provided in the method of selection in the Advertisement
, thereby depriving candidates who had not appeared for the GATE Examination in the year 2021
(the process for which admittedly began in 2020) before the publication of the Amendment Rules
2021 , which were published on 28.01.2021 while the Advertisement has been published on
18.03.2023, of a level playing field placing them at a disadvantageous position as compared to
candidates who were able to appear in the GATE examinations thrice , before publication of the
impugned advertisement and thereby discriminating against them .
28. Rule 4 (i ) and Rule 4 ( ii ) of the Orissa Engineering Service ( Recruitment and Conditions of
Service ) Amendment Rules 2021 , amending Rule 7 (2) and 7(3) of the Orissa Engineering Service (
Recruitment and Conditions of Service ) Rules OES Rules 2012 are hereby struck down and
consequently Advertisement No. 20 - 2022-23 dated 18.03.2023 published by the OPSC is quashed.
29. All the writ applications are allowed to the extent indicated above. There shall be no order as to
costs.
...............................
(Savitri Ratho, J)
S. Talapatra, J (Concurring)
30. While concurring with the well-reasoned opinion of Hon'ble Ratho, J., it is felt necessary to
emphasize on certain aspects which are in-alienable to the controversy.
31. Rule-7 of the OES Rule, 2007 provided that when the Government would decide to fill up the
vacancies in the posts of Assistant Executive Engineer by direct recruitment, the Government will
communicate the number of vacancies in the posts along with reserved vacancies thereof proposed
to be filled up and the Commission (Odisha Public Service Commission) on receipt of the requisition
should invite application in the manner chosen by it from the eligible candidates. After receipt of the
application, the candidates will be selected in the manner provided under sub-Rule (3) of Rule-7 of
the OES Rule, 2012. The said Rule-7 has been thoroughly amended by the OES (Methods of
Recruitment and Conditions of Service) Amendment Rules, 2021. The said sub- rule (3) of Rule-7
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 37
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
has been substituted by the following clause:
"(3) The Commission after receipt of the application shall take steps to select the
candidates on the basis of the highest of the varied GATE score of proceeding of the
date of the advertisement including the year of the advertisement."
Sub-Rule (4) of Rule-7 of the OES Rules has been amended by deleting "marks secured in Career
Evaluation, Objective type written and vivo-voce Test".
In that place, the words and expression valid GATE score has been substituted. Consistent with the
said amended rules, the advertisement No.20 of 2022-23 issued by the Odisha Public Service
Commission carried the following clause:
"5. METHOD OF SELECTION :
a) The Commission after receipt of the application shall take steps to select the
candidates on the basis of the highest of the valid GATE score of preceding three
years of the date of the advertisement (including the year of advertisement)
b) The Commission, after verification of the original certificate and documents, valid
GATE score shall select the names of the suitable candidates in order of merit as per
availability of the vacancies in different categories and recommends for appointment
to the post of AEEs to the Government."
32. Hon'ble Ratho, J. has elaborately dwelled upon the fall out of the said change, but where I want
to lay the emphasis is whether by incorporating the above change, as reproduced, the Constitutional
role of the Public Service Commission has been slighted or completely excluded. For this purpose,
let us revisit Article-320. The text of Article-320 has been reproduced by Hon'ble Ratho, J.
33. In unequivocal terms, Article-320 has laid down the functions of Public Service Commissions.
The Public Service Commission for the Union or for the States has a distinct status under the
Constitution apart from the Government of the Union or of the State and cannot be identified with
such Government.
34. The fundamental purpose of constituting the Public Service Commission has been discerned in
Article-320 of the Constitution. The Public Service Commission is to conduct examination to the
services of the Union and the services of the State. The Public Service Commission shall as well be
consulted on all matters relating to methods of recruitment to civil services and for civil posts. In
view of that provision, the opposite parties No.1 & 2 had commenced the consultation in respect of
the OES Amendment Rules, 2021. But as it has been revealed from the records, relevant part of
which has been extensively reproduced in the opinion of Hon'ble Ratho, J., that in the draft minutes
of the Cabinet, the opinion of the OPSC has been wrongly reflected and on that basis, the
amendment to the Rule-7(3) & Rule-7(4) of the OES Rule have been adopted by the Cabinet. As
such, the said decision is totally uninformed and contrary to the Constitutional process as provided
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 38
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
by Article- 320(3) (a) of the Constitution.
35. The said amendment has been adopted in an arbitrary manner. By such amendment, function of
the Public Service Commission has been reduced to that of a ministerial job. The Odisha Public
Service Commission had given their opinion by not accepting the proposed amendment in toto.
36. In my considered opinion, the said amendment has completely excluded the function of the
Public Service Commission as enshrined in Article-320 of the Constitution.
37. In this regard, it is pertinent to refer that proviso below sub-Article- (3) (e) of Article-20
postulates that the President as respect of public services and also as respects other services and
posts in connection with affairs of the Union, and the Governor as respect of other services and
forces in connection with affairs of the States may make regulation specifying the matters in which
either generally, or any particular class of case of or in any particular circumstances, it shall not be
necessary for a Public Service Commission to be consulted.
38. Rule-7 of the OES Rule [un-amended part] still provides that selection be made by the Public
Service Commission. But no role has been assigned to the Public Service Commission by the
amendment that has been implanted by deleting the original sub-rule (3) and sub-rule (4) of Rule-7
of OES Rules. It is a complete exclusion of consultation with the Public Service Commission.
39. This is a unique example of applying the power of subordinate legislation against the
Constitutional ethos. The opposite parties No.1 & 2 were under obligation to give due consideration
to the opinion of the Public Service Commission while adopting the amendment. As shown from the
records that the Cabinet was "misinformed" about the opinion of the Public Service Commission and
as such, there was no consultation in the eye of law. Merely sending for opinion is not enough to
draw an inference that the consultation is done. Such inference can only be drawn when the opinion
of the Public Service Commission is duly considered either by way of accepting or by way of
discarding with adequate reasons. Even the opposite parties No.1 & 2 themselves have stated, as
reproduced in the opinion of Hon'ble Ratho, J., that any opinion of the Public Service Commission
should not be ignored or discarded casually.
40. In the case in hand, there has been no consultation at all. The consultation with the Public
Service Commission in the recruitment of the civil posts is made mandatory unless exempted by the
appropriate Rules framed under proviso to Sub-Article 3(e) of Article-320 of the Constitution. No
exemption as regards the posts under reference has been adopted by the opposite parties No.1 & 2.
41. The State Government, the opposite parties No.1 & 2, has faulted in observing the Constitutional
imperatives while framing the impugned amendment Rules.
42. In Ram Manohar Pandey vs. State of Bihar (the Judgment dated 05.08.2019 delivered in Civil
Writ Jurisdiction Case No.8760 of 2019, the Patna High Court was examining vires of the
amendment of Bihar Polytechnic Education Service Rules, 2014 by which the requirement of written
test and evaluation in the teaching skill was deleted and it was provided that by evaluation of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 39
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
percentile secured by the candidate in the Graduate Aptitude Test in Engineering Examination (the
GATE, in short) selection will be made. The said amendment was challenged in a few writ petitions.
While deciding the controversy, the Patna High Court has observed that though there is no apparent
breach of Article-14 of the Constitution but for introduction of the GATE selection method, the
candidates having higher qualification or experience will not get due weightage during the viva-voce
test. It has been observed, thereafter, that there can be a preferential category within a particular
category but a scheme which deprives the candidates from consideration against a particular
attribute in its entirety, suffers from vice of arbitrariness besides being discriminatory and lacking
reasonableness. In fact the change that has been brought about has created a class within a class of
candidates. In so far as evaluation of the work knowledge is concerned, the object is entirely
missing.
43. It has been observed in Ram Manohar Pandey (supra) as under:
"Even if the State under Article-309 has a right to frame rules in matters of public
employment, every such rule has to withstand the test of arbitrariness and rationality
besides being transparent on the procedure but the amendment substituting Table-2
of Appendix-I trough Memo No.889 dated 10.04.2017 whereby it is decided to waive
of the transparent evaluation of candidates on their work knowledge/teaching skill by
way of a written test and to simply mark candidates on the basis of marks obtained in
the GATE examination, not only hits transparency but also discriminates against
such of the candidates who are already Post Graduates and are not required to pass
such GATE examination."
We are also confronted with the similar circumstances. Finally, the Patna High Court held the said
amendment as discriminatory and hence, the same was set-aside in its entirety.
44. In the said Judgment of the Patna High Court, some additional features were considered for
interference. Those are not very material in the present context. But what the Patna High Court has
significantly observed is thus:
"Since we have struck down the amendment to Table- II Appendix-I of the Rule" in
its entirety, the evaluation obviously is to be carried out as per the scheme originally
framed as present in Table-II of Appendix-I which accompanies the Service Rules,
2014".
45. The Service Rules, 2014 as referred in the Patna High Court judgment, is the un-amended rules.
When the amendment is struck down and the earlier rules are not interfered with, the earlier rules
swing back to its operation. I would further like to put on records that the said decision of the Patna
High Court was challenged in Special Leave Petition (Civil) Diary No.(s) 30880/2019, but the said
Special Leave Petition (SLP) was dismissed by the apex court by their order dated 21.11.2019.
46. A responsible Executive cannot slight the status of a Constitutional Institution like the Public
Service Commission. The State may frame the rules observing the procedure as prescribed by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 40
Pradyumna Kumar Patra & Others vs State Of Odisha And Others ...... ... on 1 May, 2023
law, not in defiance thereof.
...............................
(S. Talapatra, J) Orissa High Court, Cuttack.
The 01st day of May, 2023.
S.K. Behera, Senior Stenographer.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/90424158/ 41
