Pramod Rai Alias Pramod Kumar Singh vs State Of U.P. And Another on 2 January, 2025
Pramod Rai Alias Pramod Kumar Singh vs State Of U.P. And
Another on 2 January, 2025
HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT ALLAHABAD
?Neutral Citation No. - 2025:AHC:262
Court No. - 82
Case :- CRIMINAL APPEAL No. - 9527 of 2024
Appellant :- Pramod Rai Alias Pramod Kumar Singh
Respondent :- State of U.P. and Another
Counsel for Appellant :- Alok Kumar,Amit Daga
Counsel for Respondent :- G.A.
Hon'ble Nalin Kumar Srivastava,J.
1. This criminal appeal under Section 14-A (2) Scheduled Castes and Scheduled Tribes (Prevention
of Atrocities) Act has been preferred by the appellant with the prayer to set aside the bail rejection
order dated 5.9.2024 passed by the Special Judge (SC/ST Act), Chandauli.
2. Heard learned counsel for the appellant as well as the learned AGA and perused the entire record.
Despite service of notice, none is present for the opposite party no.2.
3. As per prosecution story, the major niece of the informant was eloped by Karan Yadav from the
house of Priya Kumari, wife of Raghuraj, a relative of the informant, and she was further
blackmailed by all the named accused persons and subsequently they took her away with them.
F.I.R. was lodged and during investigation she was recovered alongwith the main accused Karan
Yadav, who was arrested by the police.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168661222/ 1
Pramod Rai Alias Pramod Kumar Singh vs State Of U.P. And Another on 2 January, 2025
4. It is submitted by the learned counsel for the appellant that the appellant is innocent and has
been falsely implicated in this case. He has not committed the present offence. Alleged offences are
not attracted against him. It is also submitted that the appellant has been assigned no role for
committing physical or sexual assault with the victim. He happens to be the maternal uncle of the
main accused Karan Yadav and as per the entire prosecution story and evidence collected by the
Investigating Officer no role of the present appellant has come into light except one day stay of the
couple in the house of the present appellant. It is further submitted that only on account of being
maternal uncle of the main accused Karan Yadav, the appellant has been falsely implicated in this
case. The Court concerned while passing the impugned order did not take into account the facts and
evidence available on record in right perspective and erred in passing the same. Appellant is in jail
since 4.8.2024. It is lastly submitted that the impugned order rejecting the bail application of the
appellant suffers from infirmity and illegality warranting interference by this Court.
5. On the other hand, learned AGA opposing the prayer for bail submitted that the appellant
committed the present offence having knowledge that the victim belonged to scheduled caste
community. There is no infirmity or illegality in the impugned order but however, he could not
dispute this factual aspect of the matter that no sexual or physical assault has been made by the
present appellant with the victim.
6. I have considered the rival submissions made by the learned counsel for the parties and have gone
through the entire record including the impugned order carefully.
7. Having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case and keeping in view the nature of the
offence, evidence, complicity of the accused, role of the appellant, the Court is of the opinion that the
appellant has made out a case for bail. The Court concerned erred in rejecting the bail application of
the appellant. The impugned order suffers from infirmity and illegality and the same is liable to be
set-aside and the appeal is liable to be allowed.
8. Accordingly, the appeal is allowed and the impugned order rejecting the bail application of the
appellant is set-aside.
9. Let the appellant Pramod Rai Alias Pramod Kumar Singh involved in Case Crime No. 174 of 2024,
under Sections 308(2), 140(1), 64(1), 115(2), 351(3), 127(2), 61(2), 123 of B.N.S. and Section 3(2)(v)
SC/ST Act, P.S. Chandauli, District Chandauli be released on bail on furnishing a personal bond and
two sureties each in the like amount to the satisfaction of the court concerned subject to following
conditions. Further, before issuing the release order, the sureties be verified.
(i). The appellant will not tamper with the evidence during the trial.
(ii). The appellant will not pressurize/ intimidate the prosecution witness.
(iii). The appellant will appear before the trial court on the date fixed, unless personal
presence is exempted.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168661222/ 2
Pramod Rai Alias Pramod Kumar Singh vs State Of U.P. And Another on 2 January, 2025
(iv). The appellant shall not commit an offence similar to the offence of which he is
accused, or suspected, of the commission of which he is suspected.
(v). The appellant shall not directly or indirectly make any inducement, threat or
promise to any person acquainted with the facts of the case so as to dissuade him
from disclosing such facts to the Court or to any police officer or tamper with the
evidence.
10. In case of breach of any of the above conditions, the prosecution shall be at liberty to move bail
cancellation application before this Court.
Order Date :- 2.1.2025 safi
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/168661222/ 3
