Prasanta Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 February, 2024
Prasanta Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ...
on 6 February, 2024
Author: B.R.Sarangi
Bench: B.R.Sarangi
ORISSA HIGH COURT: CUTTACK
AFR W.P.(C) No. 6375 of 2023
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and
227 of the Constitution of India.
---------------
Prasanta Kumar Das ..... Petitioner
-Versus-
State of Odisha and others ..... Opp. Parties
For petitioner : M/s Sukanta Kumar Dalai and S. Mahapatra, Advocates For opp. parties : Mr. Asok
Parija, Advocate General along with Mr. Kishore Mohanty, (O.P. Nos. 1 to 13) M/s. H.S. Mishra,
Padmanav Sethy and R. Dash, Advocates (O.P. No. 17) M/s. Sanjay Das-2, Padmanav Sethy, T.K.
Sahoo, Advocates (O.P.Nos. 18 & 19) Mr. S.P. Mishra, Sr. Advocate along with M/s. Soumya Mishra,
A. Agarwal, R.K. Agarwal, M. Mishra and B. Behera, Advocates (O.P. No.20) Mr. P.K. Mohapatra,
Advocate (For Intervener) // 2 // P R E S E N T:
THE HONOURABLE ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE DR. B.R.SARANGI AND THE
HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MURAHARI SRI RAMAN Date of Hearing and
Judgment :: 06.02.2024 DR. B.R. SARANGI, ACJ. The petitioner has filed this writ
petition in the nature of public interest litigation seeking following relief(s):-
"It is most respectfully prayed that this Hon'ble Court may graciously be pleased to
issue Rule Nisi calling upon the Opposite Parties to show cause as to why appropriate
direction shall not be given to the Opposite Parties more especially Opposite Party
No. 3 to 13to take prompt action to stop illegal mining by way of mechanized manner
and to adopt guided and controlled method for transportation of sands and to cause
an independent enquiry in relates to alleged illegal practice adopted by the Opposite
Party No.3 to 13 and to declare the present auction procedure as illegal, arbitrary and
malafide and against larger public interest"
2. The factual matrix of the case, in brief, is that the State authorities, while granting sand sairats on
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167569911/ 1
Prasanta Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 February, 2024
lease to different lessees by making public auctions for different periods, are allowing the lessees to
operate the lease in violation of the terms and conditions of the lease deed executed between the
parties. Though the lease conditions stipulate that the lessee has to operate the mining manually as
far as practicable, but the lessees // 3 // are using the machinery in a mechanized manner for
extraction of sand from the sand sairats, which is a great concern in the present writ petition. There
is also unorganized movement of vehicles transporting the sand in the school and habitable areas in
day time. Similarly, uncontrolled extraction of sand from the leasehold areas in a mechanized
manner is not only causing threat to the environment but also causing threat to the river
embankment affecting larger public interest. The petitioner has received information that the
lessees, who have been allotted with sand sairats by the Tahasildars of the various Tahasils, are
utilizing the machines to extract sand in their leasehold areas. That itself contravenes the conditions
stipulated in the lease deed executed between the parties. Aggrieved by such action, though the
petitioner approached the authorities on several occasions, no action was taken, for which the
petitioner has filed this writ petition in the nature of public interest litigation alleging inaction of the
authorities and also bringing to the notice of this Court the violation of conditions stipulated in sand
sairat lease deeds by the lessees. The lessees, while extracting sand, // 4 // are violating the
conditions stipulated by the Pollution Control Board, more particularly, the provisions contained
under Section 25 of the Air (PCP) Act, 1981. Inaction on the part of the authorities has occasioned
rampant mis-utilization of the source and it so happened that the lessees are extracting more than
the quantum allotted in their favour causing huge loss to the State exchequer. Earlier, one public
interest litigation bearing WP(C) No. 35452 of 2022 had been filed and vide order dated 22.11.2022
this Court directed for consideration of the representation, but no action was taken by the opposite
parties to curb such sand mafias. As a result thereof, such sand lessees are causing pollution to the
environment and acting contrary to the provisions of law by extracting sand more than the quantity
to be extracted in a mechanized manner, by which also they are causing loss of revenue to the State.
Though sand sairats are leased out to augment revenue for the State to be utilized for the
development of the public, such sairats having been mis-utilized, the State's revenue is being
siphoned to the so called land mafias causing hardship to the general public, due to uncontrolled //
5 // extraction of sand and movement of sand carrying vehicles as per their sweet will. Hence, this
writ petition.
3. Mr. S.K. Dalai, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner vehemently contended that in the
State of Odisha auction of the sand queries, selection of lessees and extraction of sand in
mechanized manner are all being done detrimental to the interest of the public at large.
Consequentially, he prays for interference of this Court to make a uniform policy to be applicable to
all the sand sairat holders of the State so that pilferage of sand by the lessees can be prevented and
extraction of sand more than the quantity allotted can be avoided. 3.1 It is further contended that
the movement of vehicles carrying sand during the school hour as well as office hour at day time, is
causing immense difficulties for the general public. The same should be prevented and the lessees
should not be allowed to have extraction of sand and movement thereof during day time, when
traffic is in force. Apart from the same, it is further contended that there is no dispute that the State
should utilize all its larges for the public, but that should be // 6 // done in the manner it is required
to be done in accordance with law. But, without following the same, if any larges of the State is
utilized detrimental to the interest of the public, the same should be curbed down. Attention of the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167569911/ 2
Prasanta Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 February, 2024
Court has been drawn to the situation of Cuttack Town, so far as sand sairats of Kathajodi and
Mahanadi are concerned. Though some instances are placed on record, it is contended that similar
state of affairs is going on throughout the State. Therefore, stringent action has been sought for as
against the erring officials, who are indulged in such type of activities and not discharging the
responsibilities assigned to them, and also against the lessees, who are violating or exceeding the
conditions of lease, so that they can be handled with care and no further mishandling of sources can
be done by any of the lessees. It is further contended that unless those lessees are dealt with very
strong hands, the sources cannot be preserved for the future generation.
4. Mr. Ashok Parija, learned Advocate General appearing for the State-opposite parties contended
that // 7 // considering the gravity of the situation and looking at the policy framed by the Ministry
of Forest and Environment of the Union of India and the consequential guidelines issued thereof,
the Government has framed a fresh guidelines on 21.12.2023 and the same has been placed on
record for consideration. He contended that adhering to the fresh policy, if leases are granted, then
the grievance of the petitioner can be redressed. The Government is now very much serious about
the issue relating pilferage of sand by the lessees who are extracting beyond the permissible limit.
Therefore, the State has also decided to take necessary steps against the lessees, who are not
adhering to the terms and conditions of the lease deed. However, so far as protection of the
environment is concerned, it is also contended that the Environment Department will take care of
the issue and necessary statutory permission has to be obtained by the lessees. The Government will
also look into the issue, if any of the lessees contravenes the conditions of environmental clearance,
and deal him/her in accordance with law. Thereby, it is contended that since a new policy has to be
formulated for the entire // 8 // State and even though said policy will apply prospectively, but the
lessees, who are already in operation and their term has not been over, will also be intimated about
the said policy, so that they will adhere to the terms and conditions mentioned therein in addition to
the terms and conditions already existed in the lease deed.
4.1 It is also further contended that if any of the lessees contravenes any of the conditions stipulated
in the lease deed or in the policy of the Government, then, it shall be open to the petitioner to
approach the appropriate forum alleging violation of such condition(s) by the lessee, so that the law
will take its own course and the violator can be dealt with in accordance with law.
5. Mr. H.S. Mishra, learned counsel appearing for opposite party no. 17 vehemently contended that
the petitioner has no locus standi to file this writ petition making bald allegations. Learned counsel
also drew our attention to the prayer made in the writ petition and contended that the relief, which
has been sought by the // 9 // petitioner, is no more subsisting after the new policy has been
formulated, therefore, the writ petition has to be dismissed in limini by imposing cost. It is further
contended that if the petitioner has got any grievance as against any of the lessees, he has other
remedies available instead of filing the present public interest litigation before this Court. In any
case, since the Government has formulated a new policy and new guidelines, certainly the same will
be adhered to by the lessees and any contravention thereof will be taken care of by the authorities in
accordance with law.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167569911/ 3
Prasanta Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 February, 2024
6. Mr. Sanjay Das-2, learned counsel appearing for the opposite parties no. 18 and 19 also accepted
the argument advanced by Mr. H.S. Mishra, learned counsel for opposite party no.17, and contended
that whatever principle will be laid down by this Court in the present proceeding that will be
adhered to and in case of any violation that may be dealt with in accordance with law.
7. Mr. S.P. Mishra, learned Senior Counsel appearing for opposite party no.20 also accepted the
contention advanced by Mr. H.S. Mishra, learned // 10 // counsel appearing for opposite party
no.17, and contended that law provides that if there will be contravention of any of the conditions by
the lessee, the same is to be dealt with in conformity with the provisions of law. If the Government
framed a new policy, that will be adhered to by all the lessees. Meaning thereby, the lessees will
definitely adhere to such conditions and in the event of any contravention thereof, action will be
taken in accordance with law.
8. Mr. P.K. Mohapatra, learned counsel appearing for the intervener contended that the intervener
has filed an application for intervention since he is a public spirited person and supports the case of
the present petitioner. Even though intervention petition has not been allowed, learned counsel
appearing for the intervener has been given opportunity of hearing in this case.
9. This Court heard Mr. S.K. Dalai, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner; Mr. A.K. Parija,
learned Advocate General appearing along with Mr. Kishore Mohanty, learned Additional Standing
Counsel // 11 // for the State-opposite parties no. 1 to 13; Mr. H.S. Mishra, learned counsel
appearing for opposite party no. 17; Mr. Sanjay Das-2, learned counsel appearing for opposite party
nos. 18 and 19; Mr. S.P. Mishra, learned Senior Advocate appearing along with Mr. A. Agrawal,
learned counsel for opposite party no.20; and Mr. P.K. Mohapatra, learned counsel appearing for
the intervener. With the consent of learned counsel for the parties, this writ petition is being
disposed of finally at the stage of admission.
10. On being noticed, all the parties have appeared. It is made clear that since this Court raised
concern over the mechanized manner of extracting sand from the river bed, on 06.12.2023, Special
Secretary to the Government in Steel & Mines Department directed all the Collectors to be vigilant
and monitor regularly to curb illegal sand mining from river bed and see that the same shall be in
consonance with the Odisha Sand Policy, 2021, which was issued by the Revenue & Disaster
Management Department vide resolution No. 26723 dated 02.09.2021. Thereafter, a meeting
regarding // 12 // the sand mining guidelines and policy was convened, on 18.12.2023, under the
chairmanship of Chief Secretary, Government of Odisha. In the said meeting a decision was taken to
formulate revised guidelines in supersession of the existing guidelines of Revenue & Disaster
Management Department for implementation of the Odisha Sand Policy, 2021. Another meeting
was held on 19.12.2023 under the chairmanship of Addl. Chief Secretary to Government, Steel and
Mines Department to implement the decisions taken in the meeting held on 18.12.2023. Since the
amended sand policy had not been effectively implemented at various places in the State, it was
decided that revised guidelines may be issued to provide a procedural framework and modality for
the implementation of the components of Odisha Sand Policy, 2021. The said guidelines are in
accordance with the provisions of Sustainable Sand Management Guidelines, 2016; the
Enforcement and Monitoring Guidelines for Sand Mining, 2020 and directives issued by the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167569911/ 4
Prasanta Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 February, 2024
National Green Tribunal from time to time as well as the judgment of the apex Court relating to
sand mining. The said revised guidelines were put up for // 13 // approval of the Minister, Steel &
Mines Department on 21.12.2023 and the same was approved and published on 21.12.2023.
Therefore, revised guidelines has been issued on 21.12.2023 in order to implement the sand policy,
which was existing since 2021, and further to regulate sand mining activities for the betterment of
the public at large and, as such, it is in accordance with the provisions of law. The same has also
been issued by way of resolution dated 21.12.2023, wherein the entire mechanism has been
prescribed. Under Clause-4(g) thereof, it has been prescribed that quarry operation shall be carried
out strictly in accordance with the approved mining plan duly adhering to the provisions of Odisha
Minor Mineral Concession Rules, 2016 and terms and conditions of respective statutory clearances
and approvals. The mining plan shall be prepared by following the guidelines of MoEF & CC,
Government of India, formulated in the Sustainable Sand Mining Guidelines, 2016 and the said
guidelines prescribed standard environmental condition for sand mining at SI No. 19 which clearly
envisages "Depending upon the location, thickness of sand, deposition, agricultural // 14 //
land/riverbed, the method of mining may be manual, semi-mechanized or mechanized; however,
manual method of mining shall be preferred over any other method. Thereby, it is contended that
semi-mechanized and mechanized way of mining is permissible in the Sand Mining Guidelines,
2016.
11. Mr. Dalai, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner brings to the notice of this Court the
Sustainable Sand Mining Management Guidelines, 2016, more particularly, Page-51 thereof,
wherein under the heading "About river sand mining it says that" it has been provided as follows:-
"(iii) No river sand mining project, with mine lease area less than 5 ha, may be
considered for granting EC. The river sand mining projects with lease area more than
equal to 5 ha but less than 25 ha will be categorized as 'B2'. In addition to the
requirement of documents, as brought out above under sub-para (ii) above for
appraisal, such projects will be considered subject to the following stipulations:
(a) The mining activity shall be done manually. The depth of mining shall be
restricted to 3 m /water level, whichever is less.
(b) For carrying out mining in proximity to any bridge and / or embankment,
appropriate safety zone shall be worked out on case to case basis to the satisfaction of
SEAC / SEIAA, taking into account the structural parameters, locational aspects, flow
rate etc., and no mining shall be carried out in the safety zone so // 15 // worked out.
No in-stream mining shall be allowed.
According to him, since mining activities in the riverbed has been prescribed to be done manually, if
at all any river is leased out and the lessee is allowed to go for mechanized mining, then it will be in
violation of the above condition and will cause further difficulty. Therefore, the very purpose of
coming to this Court by filing this public interest litigation will become frustrated.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167569911/ 5
Prasanta Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 February, 2024
12. Taking into consideration the above clauses, it is made clear that so far as sand sources are
concerned, mining activities "shall" be done manually. By using the word "shall" the mandatory
provision has been made for river sand mining as "manually".
13. In Mohan Singh v International Airport Authority of India, (1996) 10 JT 311: (1996) 8 Scale 251,
the apex Court held that the word "shall" though prima facie gives impression of being mandatory
character, it requires to be considered in the of light the intention of the legislature by carefully
attending to the // 16 // scope of statute, its nature and design and the consequences that would
flow from the construction thereof one way or the other.
13.1. In Election Commission of India v. Subramanian Swamy, AIR 1996 SC 1810, while constructing
Article 192 (2) of the Constitution of India, the apex Court held the use of expression "shall" in the
provision indicates that the Governor is bound to take the opinion and act on such opinion of the
Election Commission.
13.2. Interpreting Section 16 (1) of the West Bengal Premises Tenancy Act (12 of 1956) and Rule-4 of
the West Bengal Tenancy Rules, in the case of Biswanath Poddar v. Archana Poddar, (2001) 8 SCC
187, the apex Court held that the use of word "shall" in Section 16 of the Act and Rules, indicates
that the legislature intended the requirement of notice under Section 16 of the Act to be mandatory.
13.3. In Hemalatha Gargya v. C.I.T. (2003) 9 SCC 510, the apex Court held that the use of word
"shall" in a // 17 // statute ordinarily means that the statutory provision is mandatory.
13.4. In State Inspector of Police v Surya Sankaram Karri, (2006) 7 SCC 172 while considering the
proviso of Section 17 of the Prevention of Corruption Act (49 of 1988), the apex Court held that the
expression "shall" in proviso of Section 17 of the Act makes the provision mandatory.
14. Taking into considering the use of word "shall" in the expression made, as discussed above, it
implies a mandatory nature for river and sand mining as been prescribed to be done "manually".
15. The purpose behind the river sand mining manually has some meaning to the extent that if the
sand mining will be done manually, then some local people will get some job and the same will
minimize the unemployment problem to some extent and further the quantum of sand which will be
extracted manually, that will have its own effect and the river bed will not be damaged. It is true that
rejuvenation of river bed may be required during the flood time, but still then the question // 18 //
of semi mechanized or mechanized mining of sand will be detrimental to the interest of the public as
well as the State Exchequer. More particularly, it will affect the future generation of the State, reason
being if the resources, which are made available at present, are consumed during this generation,
then future generation will face a lot of difficulties and that should be taken in mind while granting
lease of the sand sairats to extract the sand in mechanized manner. Therefore, the State Government
should be very careful, while permitting the lessees to go for semi-mechanized or mechanized
manner of extracting sand, and should lay emphasis to go for manual sand mining which will be in
the interest of the public at large.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167569911/ 6
Prasanta Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 February, 2024
16. Clause-19 although referred that the method of mining may be manual, semi mechanized or
mechanized, but, however, manual method of mining should be preferred over other two methods.
Therefore, exercise of the preference for operation of sand quarries in manual method will be
definitely a better method than that of semi-mechanized or mechanized manner.
// 19 //
17. An affidavit has been filed by the State Government indicating therein that in the event the
Government decided to allow the lessees to go for semi- mechanized or mechanized mining
operation, then mining plan clearance and environment clearance would be required to be obtained
by the lessees. Thereby, some restrictions have been imposed for going for semi- mechanized or
mechanized mining of sand quarries. As such, the purpose of approaching this Court by filing this
writ application by the petitioner is justified. Needless to mention here that in case of contravention
of any terms of the guidelines or any terms or conditions of the lease deed, it will be open to the
petitioner or any other person of similar status to bring to the notice of the authority concerned to
take appropriate action against the lessees indulged therein, but not in the shape of public interest
litigation, as specific forums are available, so that the violators can be taken care of in accordance
with law.
18. In view of such provision, it is made clear that to protect the livelihood of the human being as
provided // 20 // under Article 21 of the Constitution, right to life being the basic concept to be
taken care of, the State is to take necessary steps in that aspect.
19. Article 21 is the heart and soul of the Indian Constitution, which speaks of the rights to life and
personal liberty. Right to life is one of the basic fundamental rights and not even the State has the
authority to violate or take away that right. Article 21 takes all those aspects of life which go to make
a person's life meaningful. Article 21 protects the dignity of human life, one's personal autonomy,
one's right to privacy, etc. Right to dignity has been recognized to be an essential part of the right to
life and accrues to all persons on account of being humans.
19.1. In Chameli Singh v. State of Uttar Pradesh, AIR 1996 SC 1051: (1996) 2 SCC 549, the apex
Court held that "right to life" means to live like a human being and it is not ensured by meeting only
the animal needs of man. It includes the right to live in the civilized society implies the right to food,
water, decent environment, education, medical care and shelter.
// 21 // 19.2. In M.C. Mehta v. Union of India, AIR 1987 SC 965 : 1986 (1) SCJ 383, the apex Court
held that right to pollution free environment comes under Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
The same view has also been taken by the apex Court in Milkmen Colony Vikas Samiti v. State of
Rajasthan, AIR 2007 SC 1046:
(1999) 2 SCC 718.
19.3. In Subhash Kumar v State of Bihar, AIR 1991 SC 420 : (1991) 1 SCC 598, the apex Court
expanding the provisions of Article 21 of the Constitution of India, held that right to pollution free
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167569911/ 7
Prasanta Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 February, 2024
water and air comes within the purview of Article 21 of the Constitution of India.
19.4. May it be noted that basically Article 21 States the Protection of Lives and personal liberty.
That means, Article 21 mandates that no person shall be deprived of his life and personal liberty
except according to the procedure established by law.
19.5. In State of Maharashtra V. Chandrabhan, AIR 1983 SC 803, the apex Court held that Right to
Life, // 22 // enshrined in Article 21 means something more than survival or animal existence.
19.6. The same view has also been taken in Olga Tellis v. Bombay Corporation, AIR 1986 SC 180,
D.T.C. v. Mazdoor Congress Union D.T.C., AIR 1991 SC 101, Re Noise Pollution (V), (2005) 5 SCC
733 and Re Noise Pollution (VI), (2005) 8 SCC 794. 19.7. In Francis Coralie Mullin v. Union
Territory Delhi, Administrator, AIR 1981 SC 746 : (1981) 1 SCC 608, the apex Court held that the
right to life would include the right to live with human dignity. 19.8. In Maneka Gandhi v. Union of
India, AIR 1978 SC 597: 1978 1 SCC 248, the Apex Court held that the right to life would include all
those aspects of life which go to make a man's life meaningful, complete and worth living.
20. Now, coming to the question of protection of environment and checking of the movement of
vehicles during the day time, Mr. Asok Parija, learned Advocate General very fairly stated that there
should be restriction // 23 // of movement of vehicles carrying sands from 7.00 A.M. in the morning
till 9.00 P.M. in the night. That apart during the movement of vehicles carrying sand, the sand
should be properly covered. No vehicle carrying sand should be allowed during day time from 7.00
A.M. in the morning till 9.00 P.M. in the night. If at all any lessee violates any condition, he/she will
be dealt with properly in accordance with law. Apart from the same, it is the moral responsibility of
the State authorities to see that environment is being protected and it is made pollution free. While
doing so, the State authorities also take necessary steps to protect the environment and make the
environment pollution free.
21. Mr. Dalai, learned counsel appearing for the petitioner has also given some suggestions, which
are also in adherence to the guidelines issued by the Government on 21.12.2023 and the conditions
stipulated therein.
22. In view of such position, this Court disposes of the writ petition directing the State Government
to scrupulously follow the guidelines framed by them on // 24 // 21.12.2023 and also adhere to the
conditions stipulated in the lease deed executed between the lessee and the State giving priority to
the sand mining by manually. Further, the State authorities should take necessary steps with regard
to vehicular movements from 7.00 A.M. in the morning till 9.00 P.M. in the night and also protect
the environment to provide a quality life to the public at large.
23. With the above observations and directions, the writ petition stands disposed of. The interim
orders passed earlier stand vacated. But, however, there shall be no order as to costs.
(DR. B.R. SARANGI)
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167569911/ 8
Prasanta Kumar Das vs State Of Odisha And Others ..... Opp. ... on 6 February, 2024
ACTING CHIEF JUSTICE
M.S. RAMAN, J. I agree.
(M.S. RAMAN)
JUDGE
Orissa High Court, Cuttack
The 06th February, 2024, Arun
Designation: ADR-cum-Addl. Principal Secretary Location: Orissa High Court, Cuttack Date:
12-Feb-2024 11:17:48
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/167569911/ 9
