Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11
March, 2025
Author: Biraja Prasanna Satapathy
Bench: Biraja Prasanna Satapathy
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRA No.302 of 1993
This is an appeal under Sections-2 of Section 374, read
with Section-382 of Cr. P.C, 1973.
..................
Prasanna Kumar Rout & .... Appellants
Others
-versus-
State of Odisha & Others .... Respondents
For Appellant : M/s. Mr.D.P. Dhal, Sr. Adv.
For Respondents : M/s. C.K. Pradhan,
Addl. Govt. Advocate
PRESENT:
THE HONBLE JUSTICE BIRAJA PRASANNA SATAPATHY
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of Hearing: 03.12.2024 and Date of Judgment:11.03.2025
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biraja Prasanna Satapathy, J.
1. This matter is taken up through Hybrid Mode.
2. The present appeal has been filed by the Appellants challenging the order of conviction and
sentence dtd. 18.08.1991 passed in Sessions Trial No.401/1992 by the // 2 // learned 1st Addl.
Sessions Judge, Cuttack. Vide the said judgment, learned Trial Court held the appellants guilty of
the offence under Sections-304-B/34, 498-A, 201 of the I.P.C and under Section-4 of the D.P. Act.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 1
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
3. The appellants were convicted to undergo RI for 7 years each for the offence under Section 304-B,
read with Section-34 of the I.P.C, RI for 1 year for the offence under Section-498-A and RI for 1 year
each for the offence under Section- 201/34 of the I.P.C. The appellants were also convicted to
undergo for RI for six months and to pay fine of Rs.1500/- each and in default for R.I two months
for the offence under Section-4 of the D.P. Act.
3.1. Learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants contended that the prosecution case was
set into motion basing on the F.I.R lodged by P.W.3 on 11.06.1992.
3.2. The Prosecution story as revealed in the F.I.R reads as follows:-
"Prosecution case as per written report Ext-2 submitted by p.w.3 Kamalakant Rout in
Banki Police Station on 11-6-92 at 0.30 A.M. is that marriage of his sister Kantilata
with Prasanna Kumar Rout was performed in the premises of Brahmei Thakurani
about one and half months back. During marriage from the side of the bridegroom
there was demand of one THA SAJA and cash of Rs.3,000/- p.w.3 promised to give
the same within seven days. He gave the THA SAJA but he could not arrange // 3 //
money, Kantilata was abused, assaulted and tortured by her husband, husband's
elder brothers, parents-in-law and sisters-in-law (wife of the elder brothers of her
husband).
On 6-6-92 Jatadhari Swain (husband of elder sister of Kantilata) had gone to the
house of Kantilata. After returning from her house he informed p.w.3 that Kantilata
had sent information to him (p.w.3) to give the money very soon or else her, husband
and other members of / her family had threatened to kill her.
On 9-6-92 p.w.3 came to the house of Kantilata with Rs.3,000/-. He could not find
Kantilata in her husband's place. She was informed by Dhoba Rout that his sister had
gone to her house (p.w.3), P.w.3 wanted to meet his brother-in-law, Prasanna Kumar
Rout and but Dhoba Rout told that Prasanna had gone somewhere. When p.w.3 was
sitting in the outhouse and brooding over, information received from Jatadhari and
absence of Kantilata, Dhoba Rout told him to go back to his house. P.w.3 came back
to his house and / searched for Kantilata at different places. He found a portion of a
body of Kantilata inside a well of Kulamani Sahu. He informed this fact to the
Gramarakhi- Sudhakar Mallik and Radhu Rout and requested them to keep watch
near the well. He came to the Police Station and submitted the written report".
3.3. It is contended that the prosecution in order to prove its case examined as many as 14 no.s. of
P.Ws. Out of the P.Ws who were so examined, P.W.3 happens to be the // 4 // informant and
brother of the deceased Kantilata. P.W.11 is the Medical Officer, who conducted the post-mortem of
the deceased and P.Ws.12 to 14 as the I.Os, who conducted the investigation at different point of
time.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 2
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
3.4. Learned Senior Counsel further contended that in order to prove the prosecution allegation
since no independent witnesses were examined, relying on the statement of P.Ws.3, 8 and 9, who
are all interested witnesses, order of conviction and sentence could not have been passed.
3.5. It is also contended that statement of P.Ws-3, 8 and 9 are contradictory to each other.
Therefore, in view of such contradictory statement of P.Ws.3, 8 and 9, placing reliance on their
evidence, appellants could not have been held guilty of the charges for the offence under
Sections-304- B/34, 498-A, 201 of the I.P.C and under Section-4 of the D.P. Act.
3.6. It is also vehemently contended that ingredients of making out a case under Section-304-B
since was not made out, order of conviction and sentence passed under Section- 304-B is not at all
sustainable.
3.7. In support of the aforesaid submissions, learned Senior Counsel relied on the decision of this
Court in the case of Arjuna Sahu & two Ors. Vs. State of Orissa, reported in (2011) 49 OCR-634. This
Court in Para-10, 11, 15 and 20 of the said judgment has held as follows:-
// 5 // "10. For making out an offence of dowry death under Section 304(B) of the
LP.C. it is incumbent upon the prosecution to prove the following ingredients.
(i) The death of a woman is caused by any burns or bodily injury of her death must
have occurred otherwise than under normal circumstances.
(ii) Such death must have occurred within seven years of her marriage.
(iii) Soon before her death she must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by
Ther husband or any relative of her husband, and
(v) Such cruelty or harassment must be in connection with the demand of dowry.
11. While dealing with Section 304(B) of the I.P.C., the Apex Court in the case of Kamesh Panjiyar @
Kamlesh Panjiyar v. State of Bihar (2005) 2 SCC 388 held as under :-
"14. The word "dowry" in Section 304-B IPC has to be understood as it is defined in
Section 2 of the Dowry Act. Thus, there are three occasions related to dowry. One is
before the marriage, second is at the time of marriage and the third 'at any time" after
the marriage. The third occasion may appear to be unending period. But the crucial
words are "in connection with the marriage of the said parties". As was observed in
the said case "suicidal death" of a married woman within seven years of her marriage
is covered by the expression "death of a woman is caused or occurs otherwise than
under normal circumstances" as expressed in Section 304-B IPC."
xxx xxx xxx
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 3
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
15. As I have already discussed above, there is no dispute to the fact that the death of
Nini Sahu, the wife of the appellant Kabiraj Sahu took place within seven years of her
marriage and death of the deceased took place otherwise than under the normal
circumstances. Since the allegation is that the deceased was subjected to torture by
her in laws and husband on demand of dowry and since the charge // 6 // was under
Section 304-B of the Indian Penal Code, it has to be established by the prosecution
that the deceased was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any
relative of her husband in connection with any demand of dowry. In a very recent
decision as reported in (2011) 48 OCR (SC) 182 Satya Narayan Tiwari @ Jolly & Anr.
v. State of U.P., their Lordships of the Hon'ble the Apex Court have held that "There
must be existence of a proximate and live link between the effect of cruelty based on
dowry demand and the concerned death. If the alleged incident of cruelty is remote in
time and has become stale enough not to disturb the mental equilibrium of the
woman concerned, it would be of no consequence."
xxx xxx xxx
20. From the evidence of P.W.9 it is seen that the doctor who held autopsy over the
dead body of the deceased could not opine as to the probable cause of death of the
deceased. Thus when the doctor could not opine the cause of the death and
entertained doubt it cannot be conclusively held that the death of the deceased was a
homicidal or suicidal one. It is true that the death of the deceased took place other
than under normal circumstances but there is no evidence worth the name to show
that accused- Kabiraj Sahu or his family members after assaulting the deceased threw
her dead body in river Rushikulya. There is also no evidence to show that the
deceased was subjected to torture by her in-laws which drove her to commit suicide.
Therefore, the evidence of P.Ws. 1, 2 and 3 cannot be looked into for any purpose as it
has no connection with any circumstance or transaction which resulted in the death
of the deceased as the death was neither homicidal nor suicidal but was accidental
and P.W.9, the Doctor himself deposed that from the post mortem examination it is
not possible 10 opine if the death was suicidal or accidental and he has also deposed
that when a person is accidentally swept away and he tries to escape and if he dashes
accidentally against any log the injuries which they found on the person of the
deceased could have been caused. Thus, provisions of Section 32(1) of the Evidence
Act // 7 // cannot be attracted to this case and in that context reliance can be placed
on a decision of the Apex Court as reported in (2009) 43 OCR (BC) 954 in the case of
Bhairon Singh v. State of Madhya Pradesh.
I have carefully gone through the judgment rendered by the learned Asst. Sessions
Judge, but I found that the learned Court below was swayed away with surmises and
conjectures as the learned Trial Court in page 12 of the Judgment has mentioned that
"the movement of the deceased in that odd hour 10 be unnatural and when she did
not give any reply to the query of P.W.6 that shows her state of mind at the relevant
time and she must have been engrossed with anguish and grief and wanted to end her
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 4
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
life." I have no hesitation to hold that those are purely surmises and conjectures on
the part of the Court. While appreciating evidence, it is to be borne in mind that the
Court must not be swayed away by the horror of the crime or the character of the
accused. Foul crime imposes a greater caution on the Court which must resist the
tendency to look beyond the file. The Apex Court in a decision reported in (2011) 48
OCR (SC) 263 in the case of Rathinam @ Rathinan v. State of Tamilnadu & Anr. and
also in another decision as reported in (2002) 7 SCC 317 in the case of Ashish Batham
v. State of Madhya Pradesh, have observed as follows :-
Realities or truth apart, the fundamental and basic presumption in the
administration of criminal law and justice delivery system is the innocence of the
alleged accused and till the charges are proved beyond reasonable doubt on the basis
of clear, cogent, credible or unimpeachable evidence, the question of indicting or
punishing an accused does not arise, merely, carried away by the heinous nature of
the crime or the gruesorio manner in which it was found to have been committed.
Mere suspicion, however, strong or probable it may be is no effective substitute for
the legal proof required to substantiate the charge of commission of a crime and
graver the charge is greater should be the standard of proof required. Courts dealing
with criminal cases at least should constantly remember that there is a long mental
distance between "may be true" and "must be true"
// 8 // and this basic and golden rule only helps to maintain the vital distinction between
"conjectures" and "sure conclusions" to be arrived at on the touchstone of a dispassionate Judicial
scrutiny based upon a complete and comprehensive appreciation of all features of the case as well as
quality and credibility of the evidence brought on record."
3.8. Reliance was also placed to a decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Sham Lal vs.
State of Haryana, reported in AIR 1997 SC-1873. Hon'ble Apex Court in Para-12 & 13 of the said
judgment has held as follows:-
"12. In the absence of any such evidence it is not permissible to take recourse to the
legal presumption envisaged in Section 113-B of the Evidence Act. That rule of
evidence is prescribed in law to obviate the prosecution of the difficulty to further
prove that the offence was perpetrated by the husband, as then it would be the
burden of the accused to rebut the presumption.
13. The corollary of the aforesaid finding is that the appellant cannot be convicted of
the offence under Section 304-B IPC. But this would not save him from the offence
under Section 498-A of the IPC for which there is overwhelming evidence,
particularly of PW 3, Bhagwan Dass, who heard from his daughter, which evidence is
admissible under Section 32 of the Evidence Act, besides his own direct dialogue with
the appellant and his father. As the trial court and the High Court found his evidence
reliable, we hold that the prosecution has succeeded in proving the offence under
Section 498-A of IPC".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 5
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
3.9. Reliance was also placed to a decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Sher Singh @
Partapa vs. State of Haryana, reported in (2015) 3 SCC-724. Hon'ble Apex Court in Para- 8 and 16 of
the said judgment has held as follows:-
// 9 // "8. Within the short span of three years, Parliament realised the necessity to
make the law more stringent and effective by introducing amendments to the Dowry
Act, as well as IPC by enacting Act 43 of 1986.
These amendments, inter alia, made the offences dealt with in the Dowry Act cognizable for certain
purposes and also made them non-bailable as well as non-compoundable. By the introduction of
Section 8-A of the Dowry Act the burden of proof was reversed in respect of prosecutions for taking
or abetting the taking or demanding of any dowry by making the person concerned responsible for
proving that he had not committed any such offence. Contemporaneously, Section 304-B was
inserted into IPC. The newly added section stipulates that:
"304-B. Dowry death.--(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or
bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven
years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to
cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in
connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called „dowry death(cid:129),
and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death."
(emphasis supplied) Sub-section (2) makes this offence punishable with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years and which may extend to imprisonment for life. Section
113-B was further incorporated into the Evidence Act; (yet again ignoring the futility, if not
ignominy, of retaining the withered appendage in the form of the existing Section 113, and further
perpetuating an anachronism). Be that as may be, the newly introduced Section 113-B states that
when the question is whether a person has committed the death of a married woman and it is shown
that soon before her death such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment
or in connection with any demand for dowry, the court shall presume that such person has caused
dowry death. The Explanation harks back to the simultaneously added Section 304-B IPC for the
definition of dowry death, clarifying thereby that the person alluded to in this section is her husband
or any relative of her // 10 // husband. It is noteworthy that whilst Section 113-A of the Evidence Act
reposes discretion in the court to draw a presumption so far as the husband's abetment in his wife's
suicide, Parliament has mandated the court to draw at least an adverse inference under Section
113-B in the event of a dowry death. It seems to us that where a wife is driven to the extreme step of
suicide it would be reasonable to assume an active role of her husband, rather than leaving it to the
discretion of the court.
xxx xxx xxx
16. As is already noted above, Section 113-B of the Evidence Act and Section 304-B IPC were
introduced into their respective statutes simultaneously and, therefore, it must ordinarily be
assumed that Parliament intentionally used the word "deemed" in Section 304-B to distinguish this
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 6
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
provision from the others. In actuality, however, it is well-nigh impossible to give a sensible and
legally acceptable meaning to these provisions, unless the word "shown" is used as synonymous to
"prove" and the word "presume" as freely interchangeable with the word "deemed". In the realm of
civil and fiscal law, it is not difficult to import the ordinary meaning of the word "deem" to denote a
set of circumstances which call to be construed contrary to what they actually are. In criminal
legislation, however, it is unpalatable to adopt this approach by rote. We have the high authority of
the Constitution Bench of this Court both in State of Travancore-Cochin v. Shanmugha Vilas
Cashewnut Factory [(1953) 1 SCC 826 : AIR 1953 SC 333] and State of T.N. v. Arooran Sugars Ltd.
[(1997) 1 SCC 326] , requiring the Court to ascertain the purpose behind the statutory fiction
brought about by the use of the word "deemed" so as to give full effect to the legislation and carry it
to its logical conclusion. We may add that it is generally posited that there are rebuttable as well as
irrebuttable presumptions, the latter oftentimes assuming an artificiality as actuality by means of a
deeming provision. It is abhorrent to criminal jurisprudence to adjudicate a person guilty of an
offence even though he had neither intention to commit it nor active participation in its
commission. It is after deep cogitation that we consider it imperative to construe the word "shown"
in Section 304-B IPC as // 11 // to, in fact, connote "prove". In other words, it is for the prosecution
to prove that a "dowry death" has occurred, namely,
(i) that the death of a woman has been caused in abnormal circumstances by her having been
burned or having been bodily injured,
(ii) within seven years of her marriage,
(iii) and that she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her
husband,
(iv) in connection with any demand for dowry, and
(v) that the cruelty or harassment meted out to her continued to have a causal connection or a live
link with the demand of dowry.
We are aware that the word "soon" finds place in Section 304-B; but we would prefer to interpret its
use not in terms of days or months or years, but as necessarily indicating that the demand for dowry
should not be stale or an aberration of the past, but should be the continuing cause for the death
under Section 304-B or the suicide under Section 306 IPC. Once the presence of these concomitants
is established or shown or proved by the prosecution, even by preponderance of possibility, the
initial presumption of innocence is replaced by an assumption of guilt of the accused, thereupon
transferring the heavy burden of proof upon him and requiring him to produce evidence dislodging
his guilt, beyond reasonable doubt. It seems to us that what Parliament intended by using the word
"deemed" was that only preponderance of evidence would be insufficient to discharge the husband
or his family members of their guilt. This interpretation provides the accused a chance of proving
their innocence. This is also the postulation of Section 101 of the Evidence Act. The purpose of
Section 113-B of the Evidence Act and Section 304-B IPC, in our opinion, is to counter what is
commonly encountered--the lack or the absence of evidence in the case of suicide or death of a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 7
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
woman within seven years of marriage. If the word // 12 // "shown" has to be given its ordinary
meaning then it would only require the prosecution to merely present its evidence in court, not
necessarily through oral deposition, and thereupon make the accused lead detailed evidence to be
followed by that of the prosecution. This procedure is unknown to common law systems, and beyond
the contemplation of Cr.PC".
3.10. Similarly, reliance was also placed to a decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of
Trimukh Maroti Kirkan vs. State of Maharashtra, reported in (2006) 10 SCC-681. Hon'ble Apex
Court in Para-13 and 14 of the said judgment has held as follows:-
"13. The demand for dowry or money from the parents of the bride has shown a
phenomenal increase in the last few years. Cases are frequently coming before the
courts, where the husband or in- laws have gone to the extent of killing the bride if
the demand is not met. These crimes are generally committed in complete secrecy
inside the house and it becomes very difficult for the prosecution to lead evidence. No
member of the family, even if he is a witness of the crime, would come forward to
depose against another family member. The neighbours, whose evidence may be of
some assistance, are generally reluctant to depose in court as they want to keep aloof
and do not want to antagonise a neighbourhood family. The parents or other family
members of the bride being away from the scene of commission of crime are not in a
position to give direct evidence which may inculpate the real accused except
regarding the demand of money or dowry and harassment caused to the bride. But, it
does not mean that a crime committed in secrecy or inside the house should go
unpunished.
14. If an offence takes place inside the privacy of a house and in such circumstances
where the assailants have all the opportunity to plan and commit the offence at the
time and in circumstances of // 13 // their choice, it will be extremely difficult for the
prosecution to lead evidence to establish the guilt of the accused if the strict principle
of circumstantial evidence, as noticed above, is insisted upon by the courts. A judge
does not preside over a criminal trial merely to see that no innocent man is punished.
A judge also presides to see that a guilty man does not escape. Both are public duties.
(See Stirland v. Director of Public Prosecutions quoted with approval by Arijit
Pasayat, J. in State of Punjab v. Karnail Singh [(2003) 11 SCC 271 : 2004 SCC (Cri)
135] .) The law does not enjoin a duty on the prosecution to lead evidence of such
character which is almost impossible to be led or at any rate extremely difficult to be
led. The duty on the prosecution is to lead such evidence which it is capable of
leading, having regard to the facts and circumstances of the case. Here it is necessary
to keep in mind Section 106 of the Evidence Act which says that when any fact is
especially within the knowledge of any person, the burden of proving that fact is upon
him. Illustration (b) appended to this section throws some light on the content and
scope of this provision and it reads:
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 8
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
"(b) A is charged with travelling on a railway without ticket. The burden of proving
that he had a ticket is on him."
3.11. Similarly, reliance was also placed to a decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of
Joshinder Yadav vs. State of Bihar, reported in (2014) 4 SCC-42. Hon'ble Apex Court in Para-2 to 6
of the said judgment has held as follows:-
"2. Bindula Devi was married to Accused 1, Jaiprakash Yadav. The appellant and
Accused 3, Shakun Devo Yadav are the brothers of Accused 1 Jaiprakash Yadav.
Accused 4, Dani Dutta Yadav is their father and Accused 5, Satya Bhama Devi is their
mother. Accused 6, Fudai Yadav is the brother-in-law of Accused 1 Jaiprakash Yadav.
// 14 //
3. The prosecution story is reflected in the evidence of complainant PW 9, Debu
Yadav, the father of Bindula Devi. He stated that his daughter Bindula Devi was
married to Accused 1 Jaiprakash Yadav. He further stated that in the marriage one
buffalo, one cow and one bullock were given as dowry to the accused as per their
demand. However, the accused were not satisfied with that. They demanded a
wristwatch and a cycle which were given to them. Even then they continued to harass
and assault Bindula Devi. She gave birth to a male child. The accused kept Bindula
Devi in their house and sent the child to his house so that he would rear the child. PW
9 Debu Yadav further stated that when in Ashwin month he brought Bindula Devi to
his house she told him about the ill- treatment meted out to her at her matrimonial
home. She did not want to go back. He tried to pacify her. He transferred two kathas
of land in her name. She then went to her matrimonial home. The accused insisted
that she should sell the land. As she did not agree to selling of the land, they
subjected her to further torture.
4. PW 9 Debu Yadav further stated that on a Monday at about 4.00 p.m. Accused 6
Fudai Yadav came to his house and enquired whether Bindula Devi had come there
and told him that she had run away from the house. He told Accused 6 Fudai Yadav
that Bindula Devi would not run away from her house. He then proceeded to the
house of the accused situated in Village Kolhua along with his son, Sachindra Yadav
and his brother-in-law. Accused 6 Fudai Yadav accompanied them for some distance
and then left for some other place. They reached Kolhua Village and found the house
of the accused to be empty. All the accused had left the house with their belongings.
Bindula Devi was also not present. On enquiry the neighbours told him that because
Bindula Devi had refused to transfer the land in the accused's name they had
administered poison to her and murdered her. He met the Sub-Inspector of Police by
the riverside who recorded his statement. A search was conducted. The dead body of
Bindula Devi was recovered from the riverbed. The formal FIR of PW 9 Debu Yadav
was registered on 31-1-1989 and the // 15 // investigation was started. The appellant,
Accused 1 Jaiprakash Yadav and Accused 3 Shakun Devo Yadav surrendered before
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 9
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
the court on 6-3-1989. Accused 4 Dani Dutta Yadav surrendered before the court on
26-8-1989.
5. At the trial, though the prosecution examined 13 witnesses, its case rested on the
evidence of PW 9 Debu Yadav, father of the deceased and PW 10, Sachindra Yadav,
brother of the deceased. PWs 2 to 7 turned hostile. The accused pleaded not guilty to
the charge. They contended that when Bindula Devi went to take bath, she slipped in
the water, got drowned and died.
6. The trial court convicted the accused under Section 302 read with Section 149 IPC
and sentenced each of them to suffer life imprisonment. They were also convicted
under Section 498-A IPC and sentenced to undergo rigorous imprisonment for three
years each. They were further convicted and sentenced to undergo rigorous
imprisonment for seven years each under Section 201 IPC. All the substantive
sentences were ordered to run concurrently. The High Court dismissed their appeal.
Hence, this appeal, by special leave, by Accused 2".
4. Placing reliance on the above noted decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court as well as of this Court so
cited (supra), learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants contended that since ingredients
in making out a case under Section-304-B of the I.P.C was never made out, and no such allegation is
there by the prosecution that the deceased was subjected to cruelty and torture on the ground of
demand of dowry prior to her death, conviction of the appellants for the offences under
Section-304-B cannot sustain legal scrutiny.
// 16 // 4.1. It is also contended that since the prosecution miserably failed to prove that the
deceased was subjected to cruelty because of demand of dowry just prior to her death, the order of
conviction and sentence passed under Section- 304-B read with Section-498-A and Section-4 of the
D.P. Act are not sustainable in the eye of law.
5. Mr. C.K. Pradhan, learned Addl. Government Advocate for the State on the other while
supporting the impugned order of conviction and sentence contended that in view of the evidence
laid by P.Ws.3, 8 and 9, since the death of the deceased happened under unnatural circumstances
and there was demand of dowry by the appellants prior to such death of the deceased, no illegality or
irregularity can be found with regard to the order of conviction and sentence passed against the
appellants.
5.1. It is also contended that since the deceased died under unnatural circumstances and that too
within one & half months of her marriage with appellant No.2, taking into account the allegation
made in the F.I.R and the evidence of P.Ws.3, 8 and 9, learned Trial Court has rightly held the
appellants guilty of the offence under Section-304- B/34, and 498-A, 201 of the IPC and Section-4 of
the D.P. Act.
5.2. Learned Addl. Government Advocate for the State placed reliance on the evidence of P.W.3.
P.W.3 in Para-1 of the Examination-in-Chief has stated as follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 10
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
// 17 // "1. I know the accused persons. Deceased Kantilata is my younger sister. We
are three brothers and four sisters.
Kantilata married to accused Prasanna Rout of village Ostapur about 10 months back. The marriage
function was held at Brahmei Thakurani temple at Banki. Usually marriages 'are held in that temple.
There is one register which is called marriage register where the marriages are written down in that
temple. Before marriage, accused Prasannä wás in love and Kantilata was pregnant by Prasanna we
came to know and asked Prasanna Rout and he told that he made Kantilata pregnant. Thereafter a
meeting was called in the village in which' Prasanna and his father attended the meeting. In the
meeting the father of Prasanna accused Dhoba Rout told that if the marriage between Prasanna and
Kantilata will be held he demanded Rs.3000/- and other articles. In the meeting I VID present and
agreed to pay .3000/- and other articles and the marriage was settles. My father is working at
Calcutta and he never comes to my house. I am the karta of the family. Thereafter marriage we
function was performed in Brahmbei Thakureni. The witness Rathu Raut, Rushi Raut, Kukishyam
Naharana, Bhajaman bahu were PERsent. The persons from their site was Nimai Rout, Suresh
Swain and some others were also present. We gave THA SAJA at the place of marriage. I could not
pay the cash of R.3000/- and took time for 7 days. After marriage, Kanti went with the accused
prasanna and never come to our house thereafter. After some Jays (8 to 10 days) after the marriage,
my Vinoi Jatathari Swain in had been to the house of Kantilata. Jatadhari told me that Kanti told
him that all the accused persons including his husband and father-in-law were demanding P.3000/-
from Kanti and were threatening that if I would not pay that R.3000/- they will kill Kanti. 1. Then I
arranged R.3000/- within 2 to 3 days and went to the house of accused persons with the money. I
met Dhoba Raut and told him that I have brought with me Re.3000/- which was their demand and
told that I shall give that money, but he told that my sister is not in their house and has gone
somewhere in the early morning of that day. I told Dhoba Raut that I went to talk to Prasanna but
the then be Dhoba Raut told that he was not at home and had gone some where before two days.
Then I went back and searched in the houses of my relations at Bade Mantri sahi, Indumati Petne
and other villages, in search of my sister Kanti. But I could not find her in my relative's house. Again
on the next // 18 // day I went to the house of the accused, and called Nimai Rout and took him to
the house of the accused persons. Then I we entered inside the house of Dhoba Raut and searched
for my sister. Dhoba kout allowed to show us all the rooms but 319 not show us the room where
Kanti was residing. Then I came back to my house Naresh and sent my younger brother Rout to
search for my sister. He went for search and 1 remained at home. At about evening time while I was
standing in the village found rood, there was a halla that something was taning in the well of
Kulamani Sahu of Ostapur. Then I went to me well of Kulamani Sahu and saw a dead body was
floating in the well. As the saree which was given by us was worn by that dead body I could ascertain
that the dead body is of my sister Kantilata. Then I came back and told the fact to our gram Rakhi
Sushakar Mallik. Then I, Suihakar Mellik and some persons of our village went to the well in the
night. The Gram Rakhi remained near the well and I went to the house of Advocate Braja babu of
Banki and there I toli Bijaya Mohanty to write a written report for me. Then the Advocate told the
Moharir Bijaya Mohanty to write the F.I.R. I dictated and the Moharir Bijaya Mohanty wrote the
report. Thereafter, he read over that to me and knowing the contents to be correct as per my
dictation I signed on it. Ext.2 is the F.I.R. and Ext 2/2 is my signature. I went alone to the P.S. and
lodged the F.I.R. Bijaya Mohanty never went with me to the PS".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 11
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
5.3. P.W.3 in his Cross-Examination at Para-5 has stated as follows:-
"5. I had been to Ostapur village before marriage of Kanti and after the marriage of
Kanti. I was going to village ostapur before marriage of Kanti in connection with
labour work. After marriage I had not gone for labour work. After marriage I went to
Ostapur for the first time by taking money to give it to Dhoba Raut. Before marriage
of Kantilata I had never gone inside the house of Dhoba Raut. My mother is dead 10
to 12 years back. My father is at Calcutta for about 30 years and never comes to our
village. We were also staying at Calcutta. I was born at Calcutta".
// 19 // 5.4. Similarly, P.W.3 in Para-8, 9 and 10 of his cross- examination has stated as follows:-
"8. Jatadhar i told me what he heard from Kanti on the day he heard that from Kanti
and that was at 5 P.M. I. was at home then. It is not a fact that Jatädhari 315 not tell
me anything and I am de posing falsely the fact that Kanti told Jatahari and he told
me about that. After hearing from Jatadhari I intimate the fact to Choukidar and
ward member and no other person of our locality. I did not tell that fact to Police,
Sarpanch, Panchayat Samiti Chairman. I have not told the Choukidar to intimate the
police about the fact.
9. After Kantilata was made pregnant by the accused Prasanna and it was known, I
asked him and he admitted and I gave him the proposal of marriage and he also
agreed. The marriage proposal was given by me in the CHOUPADHI in between the
village Bilipada-and Ostapur and he agreed. The Bhadralogs gave the proposal that
the marriage should be held in the Brahmai Thakuran i premises. The Bhairalogs sat
in a meeting in & and asking Prasanna, for marriage in the Ostapur Danda.
Bhadralogs sat in the meeting in the day of marriage. That was the only meeting.
10. The talk of demand of dowry was held in that meeting and that was the only day
on which demand of Jowry was made for the first time. The meeting was held at
about 3 to 3.30 PM. The marriage was held at about 9 P.M in the night after the
Bhadralogs finaliaws the matter. Prasanna agreed for marriage one day prior to the
marriage. Dhoba Raut first demanded the amount of Rs.3000/-as dowry in the
marriage, in the meeting. About 10 to 20 persons were present in the meeting. Those
persons were bhadralogs of our village and Ostapur. In the meeting I and my brother
Naresh were present on behalf of our family and nobody else from our site. when
Dhoba Raut demanded cash of 8.3000/- and the bhadralogs asked me as to what was
my opinion I told that had there been regular marriage I would have given some
dowry but as the marriage is to be held after an unhappy incident of pregnancy if the
bridegroom so wants he can go for Court marriage and I shall give whatever required
in the Court. Though I was not willing to pay Rs.3000/- and Tha saja, // 20 // as the
persons in the meeting told that I should give, I ultimately agreed to pay Rs.3000/-
and Tha Saja. It is not a fact that Dhoba Raut did not demand anything and only
because the villagers told me that I was in hurry and it was not possible to purchase
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 12
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
ornaments and any others articles as given ordinarily in the marriage I should give
Rs.5000/- in cash and give some utensils and I agrees for .3000/-. The utensils for
Tha Saja were had in my house which I have purchased on different occasion for
marriage of Kanti".
5.5. Learned Addl. Government Advocate for the State also placed reliance on the evidence of P.W.11
who happens to be the Medical Officer, who conducted the post-mortem.
It is contended that P.W.11 found the injury to be ante-mortem in nature and the cause of death was
held due to head injury and submersion of body in water. Evidence of P.W.11 reads as follows:-
"1. On 11.6.92 I was L.T.R.M.O attached to Sub- divisional hospital, Banki. On that
day at 4.10 P.M. I received the dead body of Smt.Kantilata Rout being identified by
C/1075 G.C.Singh and the brother of the deceased Kamalakant Rout. Dr Sudhansu
Sekhar Mishra was along with me. As per the direction of the S.D.M.O. I and Dr
Sudhansu Mishra conducted post-mortem examination at 4.15 PM. The deceased was
in advance decomposition, the body greatly swollen, skin peeled from all over the
body except leg where blebs present, right eye closed, left eye open and eye ball
protruded, tongue protruded out of teeth, hairs easily peeled, nails detached, breasts
are greatly swollen. I found a bruise 8 cm x 3 cm on the right frontal eminence which
is anti- mortem in nature, and blood under the galea aponeurosis. A linear fracture of
5 cm on the frontal bone towards right side. Collection of blood between skull and
dura.
2. The cause of death was due to head injury, submersion of body in water is after
death. The time since death 2 to 5 days from the time of post-mortem // 21 //
examination. When I received the dead body her neck was tied with slip knot by a
thick rope. Ext.13 is my post- mortem report and Ext.13/1 is my signature. Ext.13/2 is
the signature of Dr Sudhansu Sekhar Mishra/ with whose signature I am acquainted.
3. On 29.8.92 the Circle Inspector of Police, Banki sent one lathi and cross-bar for my
opinion. I gave my opinion as per Ext.14 and Ext.14/1 is my signature. I gave my
opinion in my report that the head injury is possible by the lathi and the cross-bar
produced before me."
5.6. Reliance was also placed to the evidence of P.W.13. In Para-3 of the evidence, P.W.13 has stated
as follows:-
"3. On the same day at about 11.30 AM. I seized three pieces of stones which were
tied with the dead body. M-Os I, II and Ill are the said stones. Ext.12 is the seizure
list. Ext. 12/2 is my signature. Then I sent the dead body of the deceased to the Banki
hospital for Post-mortem examination through the Constable No.1075 G.C. Singh
vide Command certificate Ext.15. Ext.15/2 is my endorsement with my signature. I
examined the witnesses Srikant Sahu, (P.W.1) Radhu Rout (P.W.10), Rushi Rout,
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 13
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
Lokanath Parida, Panchu Rout, Trilochan Rout (P.W.4) and panche i Rout and
others. On the same day at 6 P.M. I seized the wearing apparels of the deceased and
the rope, command certificate, bangles, earrings (imitation) and prepared seizure list
Ext.5 on production by C/1075 G.C. Singh at the PS. Ext.5/2 is my signature".
5.7. Learned Addl. Government Advocate for the State also relied on the evidence of P.W.9. P.W.9 in
Para-1 of his deposition has held as follows:-
"1. I know the accused persons in the dock. The deceased Kanti is my sister-in-law.
Kanti was married to accused Prasanna 10 months back. After 20 to 25 days of the
marriage of Kanti, I had been to the house of the accused persons. There Kanti told
me that all the accused persons were demanding the unpaid amount of Rs.3000/-
which was agreed to be paid as dowry and also told that Prasanna was assaulting her
and all the // 22 // accused persons were threatening to kill her unless the amount is
paid. After I return from the house of Kanti, I went to the house of Kamalakant
(P.W.3) and I told the above fact to P.W.3 Kamalakänt. After some days the accused
persons murdered Kanti. That information was given to me by P.W.3 who told that
the accused persons murdered Kanti and put her in a well. I went to the well which is
situated in village Ostapur. I saw the dead body of Kanti in the well. Then I saw the
Police with the help of others lifted the dead body from the well. Then I came back to
my house".
5.8. Learned Addl. Government Advocate for the State placing reliance on the evidence of P.Ws.3, 8
and 9 coupled with the evidence of P.W.11 and P.W.13 contended that since the deceased died under
unnatural circumstances just within one and half month of her marriage and demand of dowry
having been well-proved just before the alleged incident, the appellants have been rightly convicted
vide the impugned judgment dtd. 18.08.1991, which requires no interference.
5.9. However, it is contended that during pendency of the appeal since appellant no.1 has died,
appeal filed by the appellant No.1 stands abated as per the order dtd.24.02.2023. But appellant
No.2, being the husband of the deceased, he has been rightly convicted for the alleged offence.
In support of his submission learned State Counsel relied on the following decisions:-
1) 2017(1) SCC 101 (Baijnath & Others) Para 24 to 28 and 32.
// 23 //
2) CRL Appeal No.249 of 2013 (Shoor Singh & Anr. Vrs. State of Uttarkhand decided on
20.09.2024) Para 12 & 13.
3) CRL Appeal No. 1076 of 2014 (Karan Singh vs. State of Haryana) decided on 31.01.2025) Para 6
to 8.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 14
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
5.10. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Baijnath in Para- 24 to 28 and 32 of the said judgment has
held as follows:-
"24. The evidence on record and the competing arguments have received our
required attention. As the prosecution is on the charge of the offences envisaged in
Sections 304-B and 498-A of the Code, the provisions for reference are extracted
hereunder:
"304-B. Dowry death.--(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or
bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven
years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to
cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in
connection with, any demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry death",
and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.
Explanation.--For the purpose of this sub-section, "dowry" shall have the same
meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life.
498-A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.--Whoever, being the
husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to
fine.
// 24 // Explanation.--For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" means--
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or
to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person
related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of
failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand."
25. Whereas in the offence of dowry death defined by Section 304-B of the Code, the ingredients
thereof are:
(i) death of the woman concerned is by any burns or bodily injury or by any cause
other than in normal circumstances, and
(ii) is within seven years of her marriage, and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 15
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
(iii) that soon before her death, she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her
husband or any relative of the husband for, or in connection with, any demand for
dowry.
The offence under Section 498-A of the Code is attracted qua the husband or his relative if she is
subjected to cruelty. The Explanation to this Section exposits "cruelty" as:
(i) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to
commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether
mental or physical), or
(ii) harassment of the woman, where such harassment is with a view to coercing her
or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to
meet such demand.
// 25 //
26. Patently thus, cruelty or harassment of the lady by her husband or his relative for or in
connection with any demand for any property or valuable security as a demand for dowry or in
connection therewith is the common constituent of both the offences.
27. The expression "dowry" is ordained to have the same meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act, 1961. The expression "cruelty", as explained, contains in its expanse, apart from the
conduct of the tormentor, the consequences precipitated thereby qua the lady subjected thereto. Be
that as it may, cruelty or harassment by the husband or any relative of his for or in connection with
any demand of dowry, to reiterate, is the gravamen of the two offences.
28. Section 113-B of the Act enjoins a statutory presumption as to dowry death in the following
terms:
"113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.--When the question is whether a person has
committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death
such woman has been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in
connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person
had caused the dowry death.
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same
meaning as in Section 304-B of the Penal Code, 1860."
xxx xxx xxx
32. This Court while often dwelling on the scope and purport of Section 304-B of the
Code and Section 113- B of the Act have propounded that the presumption is
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 16
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
contingent on the fact that the prosecution first spell out the ingredients of the
offence of Section 304-B as in Shindo v. State of Punjab [Shindo v. State of Punjab,
(2011) 11 SCC 517 : (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 394] and echoed in Rajeev Kumar v. State of
Haryana [Rajeev Kumar v. State of Haryana, (2013) 16 SCC 640 : (2014) 6 SCC (Cri)
346] . In the latter // 26 // pronouncement, this Court propounded that one of the
essential ingredients of dowry death under Section 304-B of the Code is that the
accused must have subjected the woman to cruelty in connection with demand for
dowry soon before her death and that this ingredient has to be proved by the
prosecution beyond reasonable doubt and only then the Court will presume that the
accused has committed the offence of dowry death under Section 113-B of the Act. It
referred to with approval, the earlier decision of this Court in K. Prema S. Rao v.
Yadla Srinivasa Rao [K. Prema S. Rao v. Yadla Srinivasa Rao, (2003) 1 SCC 217 :
2003 SCC (Cri) 271] to the effect that to attract the provision of Section 304-B of the
Code, one of the main ingredients of the offence which is required to be established is
that "soon before her death" she was subjected to cruelty and harassment "in
connection with the demand for dowry".
5.11. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Shoor Singh in Para- 12 & 13 of the said judgment has held as
follows:-
"12. To constitute a „dowry death(cid:129), punishable under Section 304-B7 IPC, following
ingredients must be satisfied:
i. death of a woman must have been caused by any burns or bodily injury or it must
have occurred otherwise than under normal circumstances; ii. such death must have
occurred within seven years of her marriage;
iii. soon before such death, she must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by
her husband or any relative of her husband; and iv. such cruelty or harassment must
be in connection with any demand for dowry.The phrase „otherwise than under
normal circumstances(cid:129) is wide enough to encompass a suicidal death.
13. When all the above ingredients of „dowry death(cid:129) are proved, the presumption
under Section 113-B8 of the Evidence Act is to be raised against the accused that he
has committed the offence of „dowry death(cid:129). What is important is that the
presumption under Section 113-B // 27 // is not in respect of commission of an act of
cruelty, or harassment, in connection with any demand for dowry, which is one of the
essential ingredients of the offence of „dowry death(cid:129). The presumption, of offence of
„dowry death(cid:129) by the accused when all the essential ingredients of „dowry death(cid:129) are
proved beyond reasonable doubt by ordinary rule of evidence, which means that to
prove the essential ingredients of an offence of „dowry death(cid:129) the burden is on the
prosecution".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 17
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
5.12. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Karan Singh in Para- 6 to 8 of the said judgment has held as
follows:-
"6. The following are the essential ingredients of Section 304-B:
a) The death of a woman must have been caused by any burns or bodily injury, or
must have occurred otherwise than under normal circumstances;
b) The death must have been caused within seven years of her marriage;
c) Soon before her death, she must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by
the husband or any relative of her husband; and
d) Cruelty or harassment must be for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry.
7. If the aforesaid four ingredients are established, the death can be called a dowry death, and the
husband and/or husband's relative, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have caused the dowry
death. Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 provides that dowry means any property or
valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly or indirectly by one party to a marriage
Criminal Appeal No. 1076 of 2014 parents of either party to a marriage or by any other person, to
the other party to the marriage or to any other person. The dowry must be given or agreed to be
given at or before or any time after the marriage in connection with the marriage of the said parties.
The term valuable security used in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 has the same
meaning as in // 28 // Section 30 of IPC.
8. In this case, there is no dispute that the death of the appellant's wife occurred within seven years
of the marriage. Section 113-B of the Evidence Act reads thus:
"113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.-When the question is whether a person has
committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death
such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in
connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person
had caused the dowry death.
Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same
meaning as in Section 304-B of Indian Penal Code (45 of 1860)." The presumption
under Section 113-B will apply when it is established that soon before her death, the
woman has been subjected by the accused to cruelty or harassment for, or in
connection with, any demand for dowry. Therefore, even for attracting Section 113-B,
the prosecution must establish that the deceased was subjected by the appellant to
cruelty or harassment for or in connection with any demand of dowry soon before
death. Unless these facts are proved, the presumptions under Section 113-B of the
Evidence Act cannot be invoked".
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 18
Prasanna Kumar Rout & vs State Of Odisha & Others on 11 March, 2025
7. I have heard Mr. D.P. Dhal, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the appellants and Mr. C.K.
Pradhan, learned Addl. Govt. Advocate for the State.
8. Perused the materials available on record. In the case in hand, the prosecution case was set into
motion taking into account the FIR lodged by P.W.3 on 11.06.1992. The appellants were charged for
the offence under Sections- 304-B, 498-A, 201/34 of the I.P.C and Section-4 of the D.P. Act.
// 29 // 8.1. All the four accused persons though faced the trial, but accused person Sudarsan Rout
and Bikram Rout were not held guilty and they were accordingly acquitted by the learned Trial
Court. But accused No.1 and 4 / appellant No.1 and 2 herein were held guilty for the offence under
Sections-304-B/34, 498-A, 201 of the I.P.C and Section-4 of the D.P. Act. This Court finds that the
deceased got married to appellant No.2 on 08.05.1992. Prior to such marriage of the deceased with
appellant No.2, in the meeting held where P.W.3 was also present, appellant No.1 demanded dowry
of Rs.3,000/- along with other household articles. However, since the demand of Rs.3,000/- was
not fulfilled, the deceased was subjected to torture time and again. On 08.06.1992, P.W.3 when
went to the house of the appellants, appellant No.1 indicated that the deceased is not in their house
and has gone somewhere else. Subsequently dead body of the deceased was found in the well of a
co-villager.
8.2. It is found that the dead body was tied with three pieces of stones i.e. M.Os. I, II and III. Taking
into account the evidence of P.W.3, 8 and 9 coupled with the evidence of P.W.11 and 13 and the fact
that the deceased under unnatural circumstances died within one and half month of her marriage,
because of demand of dowry, this Court is of the view that demand of dowry just prior to the death
of the deceased is well proved. Accordingly, this Court finds no illegality or irregularity with the
impugned order of conviction and sentence passed against appellant no.2.
// 30 // Since the deceased has died under unnatural circumstances within one and half month of
her marriage and demand of dowry just before the death was well-proved and the deceased was
subjected to torture for non- fulfillment of such demand, this Court placing reliance on the decisions
cited by the learned State Counsel is also of the view that ingredients of Section-304-B has been
made out by the prosecution.
8.3. Therefore, this Court is not inclined to interfere with the impugned order of conviction and
sentence and accordingly dismiss the appeal. Appellant No.2 is directed to surrender before the
Court below to serve the remaining part of the sentence.
9. Accordingly, the appeal stands disposed of.
(Biraja Prasanna Satapathy) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack Dated the 11th of March,
2025/Subrat Location: HIGH COURT OF ORISSA, CUTTACK
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/186714223/ 19
