Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
Author: Biraja Prasanna Satapathy
Bench: Biraja Prasanna Satapathy
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
CRA NO.291 of 1995
In the matter of an application under Section 374(2) of
Cr.P.C.,1973
..................
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & .... Appellants
Another
-versus-
State of Odisha .... Respondent
For Appellant : M/s. M.K. Mohapatra,
Amicus Curiae
For Respondent : M/s. P.K. Panda,
Addl. Standing Counsel
PRESENT:
THE HONBLE JUSTICE BIRAJA PRASANNA SATAPATHY
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
Date of Hearing:07.03.2025 and Date of Judgment: 07.03.2025
-----------------------------------------------------------------------------
Biraja Prasanna Satapathy, J.
1. This matter is taken up through Hybrid Mode.
2. Heard learned counsel for the parties.
3. The present appeal has been filed inter alia challenging the order of conviction and sentence
passed against the appellants by the learned Sessions Judge, Puri vide judgment // 2 //
dt.21.09.1995 in Sessions Case No.46 of 1994 arising out of G.R. Case No.130 of 1992 in the file of
learned J.M.F.C, Daspalla.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 1
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
4. The Prosecution story as narrated in the F.I.R reads as follows:
2. Prosecution came, in brief, is that Manasi Sahu (hereinafter referred to as the
deceased) is the youngest daughter of Khetrabasi Sahu and sister-in-
law of the informant Baikunthanath Sahu. The deceased was given in marriage to accused Prasanna
Kumar Sahu in the year 1989. Within two years of the marriage, there was repeated quarrel and
difference of opinion between accused Prasanna and his wife Manasi relating to some landed
property and about the house. It is alleged that every new and then, the deceased was asked to bring
the land from her father which he promised to give at the time of marriage and she was also being
beaten by accused Prasanna. It is averred in the F.I.R that on 6.11.1992 morning, the informant got
information about the death of Manasi on the previous night and the inmates of the house of Manasi
cremated the dead body without informing Khetrabasi Sahu or any other relation. It is stated in the
F.I.R. that the informant went to the village of the father-in-law house at Jagannath Prasad and got
the information that Manasi committed suicide by hanging. Information was lodged at the police
station and the police, after completion of investigation, submitted the charge-sheet.
5. Learned Amicus Curiae appearing on behalf of the appellants contended that even though the
present appeal was filed by Appellant Nos.1 & 2, but appeal filed by Appellant No.1 was abated vide
order dt.27.01.2023 and the present appeal be confined to Appellant No.2.
// 3 // 5.1. It is contended that Appellant No.2 married the deceased in the year 1989. Basing on the
F.I.R lodged by the informant Baikuntha Sahu, P.W.1 on 06.11.1992, Kaniha P.S. Case No.34 of 1992
was registered against four (4) nos. of accused persons for the offence under Sections 498-A, 304-B,
201,342/34 of the Indian Penal Code. After submission of the charge-sheet and commitment of the
matter, the appellants faced the trial along with two (2) other accused persons, for the offence under
Sections 498-A/34 of the I.P.C, 304-B/34 of the I.P.C and 201/34 of the I.P.C.
5.2. It is contended that while accused Gopinath and Benudhar Sahu were acquitted vide order
dt.22.08.1995 in terms of the provisions contained under Section 232 of the Cr.P.C, but both the
appellants were held guilty of the charges for the offence under Sections 304-B, 201,498-A of the
Indian Penal Code. Both the appellants were sentenced to undergo R.I for 10 years for the offence
under Section 304-B of the I.P.C and R.I for one year with fine of Rs.1,000/- in default, R.I for one
month for the offence under Section 201 of the Indian Penal Code. But Appellant No.2 was
sentenced in addition to the sentence under Sections 304-B and 201 of the Indian Penal Code for the
offence under Section 498-A of the Indian // 4 // Penal Code. Appellant No.2 accordingly was
sentenced to undergo R.I for two years for the offence under Section 498-A of the Indian Penal
Code. It was also directed that all the sentences are to run concurrently.
5.3. It is contended that prosecution in order to establish the case examined as many as 9 P.Ws and
out of those 9 P.Ws, P.W.1 is the Informant and P.W.8 is the father of the deceased.
P.W.9 was the I.O who registered the case in Gania P.S. Case No.34 of 1992 and P.W.7 is the
subsequent I.O who took over the investigation and filed the charge-sheet. Learned Amicus Curiae
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 2
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
contended that as per the statement of P.W.8 who happens to be father of the victim, there is no
allegation of demand of dowry and that the deceased was subjected to cruelty & harassment by the
Appellant No.2 or any of his relative, in connection with, any demand of dowry.
5.4. It is also contended that the deceased died due to suicidal hanging and in spite of due notice to
the family members of the victim about such death of the deceased because of suicidal hanging,
when no one came, appellant's family was compelled to do the last rite of the deceased.
5.5. It is contended that since from the evidence of the prosecution, no incriminating material is
there that the // 5 // deceased soon before her death was subjected to cruelty or harassment by
appellant No.2 or any of his relative, in connection with any demand of dowry, causing her death,
ingredients of the offence under Section 304-B and Section 498-A is not at all made out.
In support of the aforesaid submission, learned Amicus Curiae relied on the following decisions:
1) 2017(1) SCC 101 (Baijnath & Others) Para 24 to 28 and 32.
2) CRL Appeal No.249 of 2013 (Shoor Singh & Anr. Vrs. State of Uttarkhand decided
on 20.09.2024) Para 12 & 13.
3) CRL Appeal No. 1076 of 2014 (Karan Singh vs. State of Haryana) decided on 31.01.2025) Para 6
to 8.
5.6. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Baijnath in Para- 24 to 28 and 32 of the said judgment has
held as follows:-
"24. The evidence on record and the competing arguments have received our
required attention. As the prosecution is on the charge of the offences envisaged in
Sections 304-B and 498-A of the Code, the provisions for reference are extracted
hereunder:
"304-B. Dowry death.--(1) Where the death of a woman is caused by any burns or
bodily injury or occurs otherwise than under normal circumstances within seven
years of her marriage and it is shown that soon before her death she was subjected to
cruelty or harassment by her husband or any relative of her husband for, or in
connection with, any // 6 // demand for dowry, such death shall be called "dowry
death", and such husband or relative shall be deemed to have caused her death.
Explanation.--For the purpose of this sub- section, "dowry" shall have the same
meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 (28 of 1961).
(2) Whoever commits dowry death shall be punished with imprisonment for a term
which shall not be less than seven years but which may extend to imprisonment for
life.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 3
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
498-A. Husband or relative of husband of a woman subjecting her to cruelty.--Whoever, being the
husband or the relative of the husband of a woman, subjects such woman to cruelty shall be
punished with imprisonment for a term which may extend to three years and shall also be liable to
fine.
Explanation.--For the purposes of this section, "cruelty" means--
(a) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to commit suicide or
to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether mental or physical) of the woman; or
(b) harassment of the woman where such harassment is with a view to coercing her or any person
related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or valuable security or is on account of
failure by her or any person related to her to meet such demand."
25. Whereas in the offence of dowry death defined by Section 304-B of the Code, the ingredients
thereof are:
(i) death of the woman concerned is by any burns or bodily injury or by any cause
other than in normal circumstances, and
(ii) is within seven years of her marriage, and // 7 //
(iii) that soon before her death, she was subjected to cruelty or harassment by her
husband or any relative of the husband for, or in connection with, any demand for
dowry.
The offence under Section 498-A of the Code is attracted qua the husband or his relative if she is
subjected to cruelty. The Explanation to this Section exposits "cruelty" as:
(i) any wilful conduct which is of such a nature as is likely to drive the woman to
commit suicide or to cause grave injury or danger to life, limb or health (whether
mental or physical), or
(ii) harassment of the woman, where such harassment is with a view to coercing her
or any person related to her to meet any unlawful demand for any property or
valuable security or is on account of failure by her or any person related to her to
meet such demand.
26. Patently thus, cruelty or harassment of the lady by her husband or his relative for or in
connection with any demand for any property or valuable security as a demand for dowry or in
connection therewith is the common constituent of both the offences.
27. The expression "dowry" is ordained to have the same meaning as in Section 2 of the Dowry
Prohibition Act, 1961. The expression "cruelty", as explained, contains in its expanse, apart from the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 4
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
conduct of the tormentor, the consequences precipitated thereby qua the lady subjected thereto. Be
that as it may, cruelty or harassment by the husband or any relative of his for or in connection with
any demand of dowry, to reiterate, is the gravamen of the two offences.
28. Section 113-B of the Act enjoins a statutory presumption as to dowry death in the following
terms:
"113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.--When the question is whether a person has
committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death
such woman has // 8 // been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for,
or in connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such
person had caused the dowry death.
Explanation.-- For the purposes of this section, "dowry death" shall have the same
meaning as in Section 304-B of the Penal Code, 1860."
xxx xxx
xxx
32. This Court while often dwelling on the scope and purport of Section 304-B of the
Code and Section 113-B of the Act have propounded that the presumption is
contingent on the fact that the prosecution first spell out the ingredients of the
offence of Section 304-B as in Shindo v. State of Punjab [Shindo v. State of Punjab,
(2011) 11 SCC 517 : (2011) 3 SCC (Cri) 394] and echoed in Rajeev Kumar v. State of
Haryana [Rajeev Kumar v. State of Haryana, (2013) 16 SCC 640 :
(2014) 6 SCC (Cri) 346] . In the latter pronouncement, this Court propounded that
one of the essential ingredients of dowry death under Section 304-B of the Code is
that the accused must have subjected the woman to cruelty in connection with
demand for dowry soon before her death and that this ingredient has to be proved by
the prosecution beyond reasonable doubt and only then the Court will presume that
the accused has committed the offence of dowry death under Section 113-B of the Act.
It referred to with approval, the earlier decision of this Court in K. Prema S. Rao v.
Yadla Srinivasa Rao [K. Prema S. Rao v. Yadla Srinivasa Rao, (2003) 1 SCC 217 :
2003 SCC (Cri) 271] to the effect that to attract the provision of Section 304-B of the
Code, one of the main ingredients of the offence which is required to be established is
that "soon before her death" she was subjected to cruelty and harassment "in
connection with the demand for dowry".
5.7. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Shoor Singh in Para-
12 & 13 of the said judgment has held as follows:-
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 5
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
// 9 // "12. To constitute a 'dowry death', punishable under Section 304-B7 IPC,
following ingredients must be satisfied:
i. death of a woman must have been caused by any burns or bodily injury or it must
have occurred otherwise than under normal circumstances;
ii. such death must have occurred within seven years of her marriage;
iii. soon before such death, she must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by
her husband or any relative of her husband; and iv. such cruelty or harassment must
be in connection with any demand for dowry.The phrase 'otherwise than under
normal circumstances' is wide enough to encompass a suicidal death.
13. When all the above ingredients of 'dowry death' are proved, the presumption under Section
113-B8 of the Evidence Act is to be raised against the accused that he has committed the offence of
'dowry death'. What is important is that the presumption under Section 113-B is not in respect of
commission of an act of cruelty, or harassment, in connection with any demand for dowry, which is
one of the essential ingredients of the offence of 'dowry death'. The presumption, of offence of
'dowry death' by the accused when all the essential ingredients of 'dowry death' are proved beyond
reasonable doubt by ordinary rule of evidence, which means that to prove the essential ingredients
of an offence of 'dowry death' the burden is on the prosecution".
5.8. Hon'ble Apex Court in the case of Karan Singh in Para- 6 to 8 of the said judgment has held as
follows:-
"6. The following are the essential ingredients of Section 304-B:
a) The death of a woman must have been caused by any burns or bodily injury, or
must have occurred otherwise than under normal circumstances;
// 10 //
b) The death must have been caused within seven years of her marriage;
c) Soon before her death, she must have been subjected to cruelty or harassment by the husband or
any relative of her husband; and
d) Cruelty or harassment must be for, or in connection with, any demand for dowry.
7. If the aforesaid four ingredients are established, the death can be called a dowry death, and the
husband and/or husband's relative, as the case may be, shall be deemed to have caused the dowry
death. Section 2 of the Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 provides that dowry means any property or
valuable security given or agreed to be given either directly or indirectly by one party to a marriage
Criminal Appeal No. 1076 of 2014 Page 5 of 11 to the other party to the marriage or by the parents of
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 6
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
either party to a marriage or by any other person, to the other party to the marriage or to any other
person. The dowry must be given or agreed to be given at or before or any time after the marriage in
connection with the marriage of the said parties. The term valuable security used in Section 2 of the
Dowry Prohibition Act, 1961 has the same meaning as in Section 30 of IPC.
8. In this case, there is no dispute that the death of the appellant's wife occurred within seven years
of the marriage. Section 113-B of the Evidence Act reads thus:
"113-B. Presumption as to dowry death.-When the question is whether a person has
committed the dowry death of a woman and it is shown that soon before her death
such woman had been subjected by such person to cruelty or harassment for, or in
connection with, any demand for dowry, the Court shall presume that such person
had caused the dowry death. Explanation.-For the purposes of this section, "dowry
death" shall have the same meaning as in Section 304-B of Indian Penal Code (45 of
1860)."
The presumption under Section 113-B will apply when it is established that soon before her death,
the woman has been subjected by the accused to // 11 // cruelty or harassment for, or in connection
with, any demand for dowry. Therefore, even for attracting Section 113-B, the prosecution must
establish that the deceased was subjected by the appellant to cruelty or harassment for or in
connection with any demand of dowry soon before death. Unless these facts are proved, the
presumptions under Section 113-B of the Evidence Act cannot be invoked".
5.9. It is contended that in view of the decision of the Hon'ble Apex Court as cited supra and taking
into account the evidence laid by the P.Ws, there is no material that the deceased was subjected to
cruelty and harassment on the ground of demand of dowry just prior to her death. It is accordingly
contended that since ingredient of Section 304-B has not been made out, order of conviction and
sentence passed against the appellant for the offence under Section 304-B and 498-A is not at all
maintainable.
5.10. Learned Amicus Curiea brought to the notice of this Court, the evidence of P.Ws.1 & 8 to prove
his point that the deceased was never subjected to cruelty or harassment on the ground of demand
of dowry just prior to her death.
P.W.1 in his evidence has stated as follows:
" I know the accused persons. I am brother- in-law of the deceased Manasi. She
married accused Prasanna. Manasi died 2 to 2 ½ hears back. She married 4 to 5
years. They pulled on well for year as husband and wife. But thereafter, Manasi told
me that she was being beaten by the accused Prasanna. My // 12 // home is 4 to 5
miles from the house of Prasanna.
2. I am informant of this case. I verbally reported at the P.S. One writer (scribe) was
called. A report was written according my instruction, in my presence marked Ext.1.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 7
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
She is my signature marked Ext.1/1.
3. Cross-Examination:
Accused Biswanath Has been adopted by my grandfather (maternal). So he is
enjoying all his properties. Had he not been adopted, I would have got the property of
anybody selected by my grandfather. It is not a fact that I am inimical to accused
Biswanath as I am deprived of my grandfather's properties.
4. I am married to the eldest daughter of my father-in-law. Manasi is the youngest
daughter. The other two daughters are married at distant places. I do not remember
that actual date of marriage of Manasi.
It was an arranged marriage. Manasi was blessed with a daughter. It is not a fact that Manasi was
not married 4 to 5 years back only.
5. Manasi had complained to me on 2 to 3 occasions about assault by the accused Prasanna on her. I
cannot give its details. Kasinath Sahu, who is the brother of Biswanath Sahu informed about the
death of Manasi to my father-in-law. Jagannath Prasad will come on the way to Gania from my
village. It is not a fac that Manasi had never complained to me about her being assaulted by the
accused.
6. My mother-in-law expired prior to Manasi's marriage. My father-in-law has no son. My
father-in-law at times lives in the home at Prasanna. I cannot say if accused Prasanna looked after
the Siba puja of deity in behest of my father-in-law after his marriage. Accused Prasanna cultivated
his land. It is not a fact that I became inimical to Prasanna as he cultivated the land of my
father-in-law. I cannot say if my father-in- law got married to another lady within 35 days of
Manasí's death. It is not a fact // 13 // Manasi was opposing the second marriage of my father in law
. It is not a fact that I supported my father-in-law in his second marriage. It is not a fact that I have
filed the case falsely to wreak vengeance against Prasanna.
P.W.8 in his evidence has held as follows:
I am the father of the deceased Manasi. About 6 years back, late Manasi was married
to accused Prasanna Kumar Sahu. I know all the accused persons. Manasi died about
three years back. At the time of death, Manasi was staying with her husband accused
Prasanna in his house. Prasanna and his brother were staying jointly with their
parents.
2. Manasi and her husband lived in happily for about one year. A daughter was born
out of their wedlock. After one year the relationship became strained late Manasi
used to tell me the reason as to why I am not executing a sale deed for the land for
which she was being tortured by her husband.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 8
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
When Manasi was not treated well by the accused Biswanath and his son Prasanna I promised to
Manasi that I would execute a sale within two months.
3. I executed a sale deed in the name of my daughter Manasi for 34 decimals of land without taking
any consideration. I executed a sale deed in the office of the Sub-Registrar, Dalpalla. Ext.4 is the sale
deed and Ext.4/1 is my signature.
4. As I had no sufficient fund, I took two months time to execute another sale deed in respect of
balance seven Gunths of land in the name of my daughter. I could not execute the sale deed in
respect of 7 gunths of land as promised by me as Manasi died. Regarding the ill-treatment and
torture made to my daughter Manasi, I submitted a written report before Sarat Sahu President of
our Community.
5. The Committee decided that Prasanna and his father accused Biswanath would relinquish two
decimals of land out of 34 decimals of land covered under Ext.4 and I would execute a sale deed in
respect of 7 gunths of land as promised by me earlier.
6. Despite the decision of the caste meeting relationship of deceased Manasi was strained with her
husband Prasanna and her father in law Biswanath.
// 14 //
7. At the time of death of Manasi, in her in laws house I was at Daspalla. The brother of accused
Biswanath informed me about the death of my daughter Manasi. When I was going to Gania P.S to
lodge a report about the death of my daughter Manasi, Kasinath Sahu dissuaded me not to lodge
report in Gania P.S and promised for a settlement. When I reached the house of Biswanath Sahu,
the cremation of my daughter had already been over.
8. When I enquired from Kasinath Sahu about the reason and circumstance of the death of my
daughter, the latter informed me that Manasi committed suicide by hanging herself.
Cross-examination behalf of the accused person:-
9. I am staying at Daspalla for last three years. I am not staying with my elder son in law
Baikunthanath Sahu.
10. I have got four daughters and deceased Manasi was the youngest one. My wife died just about
7byears before the marriage of Manasi. I have got no son. As my wife was dead, long before the
marriage of Manasi, I decided that after the marriage of Manasi, I would bring the son in law to my
house so that he would look after the property of myself.
11. At the time of marriage, I was decided that accused Prasanna will remain in my house as illatum
son. P.W.5, Madhaba Sahu were present during the itme of the aforesaid talk. Since my house was
broken and unfit for my occupation, Prasanna and Manasi stayed in the house of Biswnath after the
marriage. After the marriage, I also stayed for about one year in the house of Biswanath. During my
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 9
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
stay in the house of Biswanath, Prasanna and Manasi used to look after me.
12. It is not a fact that I insisted to bring a second wife. It is not a fact that I lef the house of accused
persons and Manasi when they did not agree to my proposal of taking a second wife.
It is not a fact that when I decide to take divorcy as my second wife, deceased Manasi became angree
on me. I have contracted a second marriage to take a divorce after the death of Manasi.
13. Ext.4 was executed after one year after the marriage of Manasi, and at that time I was staying in
the house of accused Prasanna. My relationship between accused Prasanna and // 15 // Manasi was
good at the time of execution of sale deed Ext.4. The relationship between the accused Prasanna and
Manasi was good at the time of execution of the sale deed. The contents of the sale deed Ext.4 was
written by Jugala Behera as per my instruction. I have mentioned in the sale deed Ext.4 about the
passing of consideration of Rs.5000/- intentionally lest other daughters would demand share from
my property. I have sold the land under Ext.4 to my daughter my Manasi. It is not a fac that I have
taken Rs.5000/- towards the consideration of Ext.4 from my daughter Manasi.
14. I left the house of Manasi to my own house of the same village within one month of the execution
of the sale deed Ext.4. When Prasanna and Manasi did not keep contact or look after the affairs of
three daughters, I left the house of Prasanna. After I left the house of accused Prasanna after
execution of the sale deed Ext.4, they did not look after my affairs. Other three daughters used to
look after me when I was staying in my own house. During my stay in my house after execution of
sale deed, my relationship with Manasi and Prasanna was not good.
15. Deceased Manasi informed me about one month prior to her death about the ill- treatment
meted to her by Prasanna and his father Biswanath. I lodged a written report before Sarat Sahu,
President of our Community regarding ill-treatment meted to my daughter by her husband and his
father Biswanath. The Committee held its meeting at Dasapalla.
16. It is not a fact that I have not informed Sarat Sahu, President of our Community about the
ill-treatment meted to Manasi by her in- laws. I returned to my village 15 days after the caste
meeting.
17. It is not a fact that there was no ill- feeling or strained relationship between accused Prasanna
and Manasi. I did not inform my eldest daughter or her husband about the death of Manasi.
18. I lodged the report in the Gania P.S two days after the death of my daughter. After lodging the
report in the P.S., I went to Daspalla. It is not a fac that I have sworn an affidavit before the
Executive Magistrate, Kendrapara. My signature in a paper was taken by Kailash, one of my
c-villager. It is not a fact that I have sworn an affidavit on 21.12.1992 // 16 // before the Executive
Magistrate, Khandapara. It is not a fact that bail was moved on behalf of accused Prasanna before
the Executive Magistrate, Khandapara. It is not a fact that bail was moved on behalf of accused
Prasanna before the Hon'ble Court at my behest on 21.12.1993. It is not a fact that I have attached
the copy of the affidavit sworn by me before the Executive Magistrate, Khandapara in the bail
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 10
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
application. Since my signature were taken on a blank paper, I do not know the contents of the
paper. It is not a fact that I have mentioned in the affidavit that the relationship of accused Prasanna
and Manasi was cordial and good and my daughter died due to suffering from fever. It is not a fact
that I have mentioned in the affidavit that my eldest son in law Baikuntha at the instance of inimical
persons lodged the F.I.R much less stated in the affidavit that Baikuntha was inimically disposed of
towards accused Prasanna.
19. It is not a fact that I have been maintained by eldest son in law Baikuntha P.W.1. It is not a fact
that Manasi died on account of suffering from fever. It is not a fac that I am deposing falsely at the
instance of eldest son in law about the strained relationship of Manasi with accused Prasanna. It is
not a fact that I did not enquire from accused Biswanath about the reason of the death of Manasi. It
is not a fact that accused Biswanath did not inform me that Manasi Committed suicide by hanging.
5.11. It is also contended that since in spite of due notice to the victim's family about the death of the
deceased since nobody came forward, the appellants had no other option than to do the last rite of
the victim in their village.
Accordingly, no offence under Section 201 of the Indian Penal Code can also be attracted against the
appellants.
// 17 // 5.12. In support of the aforesaid submission, reliance was placed to the statement of P.W.5.
Statement of P.W.5 reads as follows:
P.W.5. I know all the accused persons. I know Khetrabasi father of Manaswi. They are
all my co- villagers. Khetrabasi Sahu has four daughters and had no son.
Khetrabasi had given 12 Gunthas of land to Manasi at the time of her marriage. Since
Khetrabasi did not execute any document in respect of the land given in the name of
Manasi at the time of marriage. Prasanna submitted an application before Sarat,
gudia by caste a President of our community. I am the Behera of my hamlet. As
requested by this President. I enquired from Khetrabasi the reasons as to why he has
not executed the document in respect of the land to Manasi as promised at the time
of marriage. Khetrabasi had also executed document in respect of the land and
homestead land. Khetrabasi ujsed to stay in the house of Prasanna as Manasi was the
youngest to other. I sued to visit the house of Prasanna very frequently. There was
cordial relationship between Manasi and her in-laws.
2. Khetrabasi brought a divorce from village Bhumula and stayed at Daspalla for
about 10 to 15 days. I cannot say how and under what circumstances Manasi died. On
the next day of the death of Manasi, I had been to the house of accrued Biswanath, on
his request. When I enquired from Biswanath the reason of death, the later informed
that Manasi was suffering. ON being asked by the police I had been to the burial
ground where from the police seized ashes. Police prepared a seizure list and I had
signed on it. Ext.2 is my signature in the seizure list.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 11
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
Cross examined by the defence:-
3. I am the cousin of Khetrabasi. Khetrabasi was widower. Wife of Khetrabasi was not
there at the time of marriage of Manasi. Before the marriage it was decided that
accused Prasanna and Manasi would look after the affairs of Khetrabasi. After the
marriage, Manasi stayed in the house of her father in law. Khetrabasi stayed in the
house of his in-law for about 3 years after the marriage. Both Prasanna and Manasi
used to look after the welfare of Khetrabasi during his stay in their house. There // 18
// was ill feeling between Manasi and her father as the later brought a divorce from
the village Dhuamula.
Ketrabasi cancelled the deed in respect of the house which he had executed in favor of Manasi and
stayed in that house. The village punch decided that Manasi would surrender the house in favour of
her father and father would give 12 gunth of land to Manasi.
4. Mai Sahu and Kailash went to Daspalla to inform Khetrabasi about the death of Manasi.
Khetrabasi did not come to the house of Biswanath despite information given to him. Our guida
caste excommunicated Khetrabasi due to his marriage. It is not a fact that I am deposing falsely that
Manasi surrendered the homestead in favour of the father and Khetrabasi had executed 12 gunthas
of land in favour of Manasi.
5.13. It is accordingly contended that order of conviction and sentence passed against the appellants
for the offence under Sections 304-B,498-A of the Indian Penal Code and so also under Section 201
of the I.P.C is not at all made out and the impugned judgment is liable to be set aside by this Court.
6. Mr. Pravat Kumar Panda, learned Addl. Standing Counsel while supporting the judgment
contended that since the deceased died within 3 years of her marriage with appellant No.2 under
unnatural circumstances and the appellants in order to disown their liability, disposed of the
dead-body of the victim, the order of conviction and sentence has been rightly passed.
6.1. It is also contended that in view of the statement of P.W.8, demand of dowry and harassment
caused to the victim // 19 // just prior to her death is well proved. It is accordingly contended that in
view of the evidence laid by the prosecution through P.W.8 and so also P.W.1, order of conviction
and sentence passed against the appellant for the offence under Section 304-B, 498-A /201 of the
I.P.C is well made out and it requires no interference.
7. Having heard learned counsel for the parties and considering the materials available on record,
this Court finds that Appellant No.2 got married to the victim in the year 1989.
For the unnatural death of the victim, Gania P.S. Case No.34 of 1992 was registered, basing on the
F.I.R lodged by P.W.1, who happens to be the brother-in-law of the deceased.
Appellants along with 2 other accused persons were charged for the offence under Sections
304-B,498-A,201/34 of the I.P.C. But as found, two of the accused persons were acquitted vide
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 12
Prasanna Kumar Sahoo & vs State Of Odisha on 7 March, 2025
order dt.22.08.1995. But Appellant Nos.1 & 2 were found guilty of the charges for the offence under
Section 304-B and 201 of the Indian Penal Code and Appellant No.2 in addition thereto, for the
Offence under Section 498-A of the I.P.C.
7.1. Since during pendency of the appeal, Appellant No.1 died, the appeal filed by appellant No.1 was
abated vide order dt.27.01.2023.
// 20 // 7.2. This Court after going through the materials available on record and more particularly,
the evidence of P.Ws.1 & 8, finds that no evidence has been laid by the prosecution that the deceased
was subjected to cruelty and harassment on the ground of demand of dowry just prior to her death.
Therefore, placing reliance on the decisions of the Hon'ble Apex Court as cited (supra), this Court is
of the view that the ingredients of the offence under Section 304-B of the I.P.C is not at all made out
against the appellants.
7.3. Since there is no allegation of demand of dowry just prior to the death of the deceased, nor there
is any allegation of demand of dowry after marriage of the deceased with Appellant no.2, this Court
is also of the view that offence under Section 498-A of the I.P.C is not made out. It is also found
from the record that in spite of due notice when the members of the victim's family did not come to
attend the last rites of the deceased, such rites were performed by the appellants' family.
Therefore, it is the view of this Court that offence under Section 201 of the Indian Penal Code is not
made out.
7.4. Taking into account the materials available on record, this Court is of the view that prosecution
has failed miserably in bringing out any material against the Appellants for the // 21 // offence
under Section 304-B, 498-A and 201 of the Indian Penal Code. Therefore, this Court is inclined to
set aside the impugned order of conviction and sentence passed vide judgment dt.21.09.1995. While
setting aside the same, this Court allows the appeal. Appellant No.2 be discharged from the
bail-bond so furnished by him.
The CRA accordingly stands disposed of. This Court while fixing the professional fees of the learned
Amicus Curiae at Rs.5000/-, direct the Registry to pay the same.
(Biraja Prasanna Satapathy) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack Dated the 7th March, 2025/sangita
Reason: authentication of order Location: high court of orissa, cuttack Date: 27-Mar-2025 12:06:01
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/53842120/ 13
