Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ...
Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
Author: A.K. Mohapatra
Bench: A.K. Mohapatra
HIGH COURT OF ORISSA: CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.35746 of 2023
In the matter of an application under Articles 226 and 227 of the
Constitution of India.
-----------
Prasant Kumar Patnaik ... Petitioner
- Versus -
State of Odisha and another ... Opposite parties
For Petitioner ... Mr. Subir Palit,
Senior Advocate
M/s. Venugopal Mohapatra,
S. Sahoo & A. Tripathy.
For Opposite Parties ... Mr. Saswat Das
Additional Government Advocate
--------------
PRESENT:
THE HONOURABLE SHRI JUSTICE A.K. MOHAPATRA Date of hearing : 19.02.2024 : Date of
judgment : 01.03.2024 A.K. Mohapatra, J. The above named Petitioner, who is a retired
Government employee, has filed the present writ petition questioning the validity and propriety of
order dated // 2 // 13.10.2023 passed by the Opposite Party No.1 thereby rejecting the
representation of the Petitioner dated 18.05.2023 and 03.08.2023 filed with a prayer for sanction
and disbursement of final pension, gratuity and unutilized leave salary along with interest @ 18%
from the date of retirement of the Petitioner. The Petitioner while praying for quashing of order
dated 13.10.2023 under Annexure-8 to the writ petition has also prayed for issuance of a writ of
mandamus thereby directing the Opposite Party No.1 to sanction and disburse the final pension and
gratuity as is due and admissible to the Petitioner along with interest @ 18%.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28811987/ 1
Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
2. The present writ petition was filed on 31.10.2023. While taking up this matter for admission and
while issuing notice vide order dated 07.11.2023, this Court, vide interim order dated 07.11.2023
passed in I.A. No.17282 of 2023, disposed of the said I.A. by directing the Opposite Party to disburse
the unutilized leave salary to the Petitioner along with interest @ 18% as claimed by the Petitioner
within a // 3 // period of six weeks from the date of communication of such order. Therefore, the
prayer made in the writ petition with regard to payment of unutilized leave salary no more survives.
3. The factual background leading to filing of the present writ petition by the above named
Petitioner, in short, is that the Petitioner initially joined as Assistant Town Planner under the
department of Housing and Urban Development, Government of Odisha, in the year 1987 on being
duly selected. Thereafter, the Petitioner continued to work under the said department and
discharged his duties to the satisfaction of the authorities. While the Petitioner was in service, an
F.I.R. bearing Cuttack Vigilance P.S. Case No.84 of 2012 was registered on 28.12.2012 for
commission of offence under Section 13(2) read with 13(1)(b) of the Prevention of Corruption Act,
1988 and Section 420/120(B) of I.P.C. In the vigilance case, the Petitioner has been implicated as an
accused. While the vigilance case was // 4 // continuing, the Petitioner has retired from service
w.e.f. 31.05.2013 on attaining the age of superannuation.
4. The averments made in the writ petition further reveals that on the date of retirement of the
Petitioner from service on 31.05.2013, no disciplinary proceeding, as well as any judicial/criminal
proceeding were pending against the Petitioner. However, the authorities did not sanction and
disburse the financial benefits as well as the pensionary benefits as is due and admissible to the
Petitioner on his retirement. Being aggrieved by such conduct of the Opposite Parties, the Petitioner
wrote an e-mail on 01.07.2020 to the Opposite Party No.1 with a specific request to sanction his
final pension along with gratuity and other retirement benefits.
5. The writ petition further reveals that the F.I.R. in Cuttack Vigilance P.S. Case No.84 of 2012
implicating the present Petitioner as an accused was challenged by the Petitioner before this Court
by filing an application under // 5 // Section 482 of the Cr.P.C. which was registered as CRLMC
No.704 of 2019. After hearing the counsels appearing for the parties, a coordinate Bench, vide a
detailed judgment dated 13.04.2022 under Annexue-2, to the writ petition allowed the CRLMC
application. Accordingly, the F.I.R. in Cuttack Vigilance P.S. Case along with consequential
proceeding in VGR P.S. Case No.84 of 2012 pending in the Court of Special Judge, Cuttack, qua the
present Petitioner was quashed. Therefore, the judicial/criminal proceeding, which was pending
against the present Petitioner, has come to an end by virtue of the judgment dated 13.04.2022 under
Annexure-2 to the writ petition.
6. Being aggrieved by the non-consideration of his representation, the Petitioner approached this
Court by filing W.P.(C) No.14462 of 2023 with a prayer for a direction to the Opposite Party No.1 to
consider his representation dated 01.07.2020. This Court disposed the said writ petition with a
direction to the Opposite Party No.1 to dispose of the // 6 // representation of the Petitioner dated
01.07.2020 by passing a reasoned order and to pay the retirement benefits to the Petitioner along
with interest vide order dated 09.05.2023 under Annexure-4 to the writ petition. While disposing of
the said writ petition, this Court has categorically directed that in the event the Opposite Parties
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28811987/ 2
Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
come to a conclusion that the Petitioner is entitled to the dues as has been claimed by him, the same
shall be sanctioned in favour of the Petitioner within a period of four weeks along with interest at
such rate as has been directed by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of D.D. Tiwari (D) through
LRs v. Uttar Haryana Bijli Bitaran Nigam, reported in (2014) 8 SCC 894.
7. After disposal of the above noted writ petition, the Petitioner had approached the Opposite Party
No.1 by filing a fresh representation dated 18.05.2023 under Annexure-5 to the writ petition along
with a copy of the order passed by this Court on 09.05.2023. The Opposite Party No.1 pursuant to
the order passed in the previous writ petition on 09.05.2023 // 7 // considered the case of the
Petitioner and, accordingly, the representation of the Petitioner dated 18.05.2023 has been disposed
of by a detailed and speaking order dated 13.10.2023 under Annexure-8 to the writ petition. While
disposing of the representation of the Petitioner as directed by this Court, the Opposite Party No.1 in
his order dated 13.10.2023 has stated that on the basis of the local fund audit report, a sum of
R.7,97,817/- is required to be recovered from the Petitioner as per the observation made in the audit
report. Moreover, since the amount which has been shown recoverable exceeds the amount due
towards gratuity, therefore, the Opposite Party No.1 has not sanctioned the final pension and other
retiral benefits as is due and admissible to the Petitioner. Furthermore, since the matter involves
recovery of public money, the Finance Department, in the meantime, has been requested to expedite
final decisions on the Audit paras and suggested audit recoveries to enable the Opposite Party No.1
to sanction the final // 8 // pension and retirement benefits in favour of the Petitioner. With such
observation, the representation of the Petitioner was disposed of.
8. While the matter stood thus, on 18.10.2023, a surcharge order was passed by the Examiner of
Local Accounts under Odisha Local Fund Audit Act, 1948 whereunder the Petitioner has been asked
to deposit a sum of Rs.6,54,104/- within a period of fourteen days from the date of that order under
Annexure-12 to the writ petition.
9. Learned Senior Counsel appearing on behalf of the Petitioner submitted that the aforesaid order
dated 18.10.2023 under Annexure-12 has been assailed by the Petitioner by filing an appeal under
Section 11 of the Odisha Local Fund Audit Act, 1948, which is still pending for final consideration.
10. A counter affidavit has been filed on behalf of the Opposite Party No.1 wherein it has been stated
that the // 9 // Petitioner has retired from service on attaining the age of superannuation on
31.05.2013. Thereafter, provisional pension has been sanctioned vide order dated 19.06.2013 in
favour of the Petitioner, which was subsequently revised vide order dated 17.09.2019. Further, it has
been stated that the representation of the Petitioner which was directed to be considered by this
Court vide order dated 09.05.2023 in W.P.(C) No.14462 of 2023 has been duly considered on the
basis of the documents available on record and, accordingly, the same has been disposed of by
passing a speaking and reasoned order on 13.10.2023 under Annexure-8 to the writ petition. The
Opposite Parties have also admitted that the Vigilance F.I.R. lodged against the Petitioner has been
quashed by this Court in CRLMC No.740 of 2019 on 13.04.2022.
11. The counter affidavit of Opposite Party No.1 further reveals the Examiner of Local Accounts,
Directorate of Local Fund Audit, Odisha has intimated the Opposite Party No.1 // 10 // for recovery
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28811987/ 3
Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
of R.7,97,817/- from the Petitioner in respect of observation made in Audit Report No.42/07/08 and
No.61/10-12 pertaining to Puri-Konark Development Authority. Accordingly, the aforesaid issue has
been referred to the Finance Department with a request to finalize the Audit Report expeditiously. It
has also been stated in the counter affidavit that claim of the Petitioner has not been totally rejected,
however, steps have been taken to finalize the retiral benefit of the Petitioner at the earliest. On such
ground, it has been stated in the counter affidavit that such order under Annexure-8 does not cause
any prejudice to the Petitioner.
12. The counter affidavit further reveals that the delay in sanction and disbursal of the retiral
benefits as well as final pension is due to the pendency of the Vigilance Case against the Petitioner,
although the same was quashed subsequently by this Court vide order dated 13.04.2022. Moreover,
Bhubaneswar Vigilance P.S. Case No.7 dated 08.03.2009 was initiated against the Petitioner for
demand of an illegal // 11 // gratification of Rs.3,000/-. Despite several communications being sent
to the G.A. (Vigilance) Department, no reply was received. However, the G.A. (Vigilance)
Department, vide letter dated 29.08.2023, intimated the Opposite Party No.1 that Bhubaneswar
Vigilance P.S. Case No.7 of 2009 may be treated as closed. A copy of the letter containing the
aforesaid intimation dated 29.08.2023 has also been annexed to the counter affidavit.
13. Finally, the Joint Director, Directorate of Local Fund Audit vide his letter dated 02.11.2023
intimated that a sum of Rs.6,54,104/- was surcharged against the Petitioner under Section 9(3) of
OLFA Act, 1948 relating to the observation in the Audit Report. Although they have specifically
admitted that such order has been appealed against by the Petitioner. Since the aforesaid surcharge
amount is public money, therefore, the Opposite Party No.1 has assumed that the money due to the
development authority is Government money as the development authorities are autonomous
bodies // 12 // created by the Government under a special statute. Finally, a stand has been taken in
the counter affidavit that the pension amount of the Petitioner has been sanctioned and his pension
papers have been forwarded to Accountant General (A&E), Odisha, Bhubaneswar vide letter dated
28.11.2023 and that the unutilized leave salary of the Petitioner has already been sanctioned by the
Opposite Party No.1 vide order dated 06.12.2023 with an intimation to withhold the surcharged
amount of Rs.6,54,104/- till finalization of Audit Report.
14. Heard Mr. S. Palit, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Petitioner along with Mr.
Venugopal Mahapatra, learned counsel, appearing for the Petitioner; and Mr. Saswat Das, learned
Additional Government Advocate appearing for the State-Opposite Parties. Perused the pleadings of
the respective parties and the materials on record.
15. Mr. S. Palit, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Petitioner, at the outset, submitted that
the pertinent issue which is required to be decided by this Court in the present // 13 // writ petition
is whether on the ground of surcharge order, the pensionary and retirement benefits as is due to a
retired Government servant can be withheld under the provisions of the OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992.
In course of his argument, Mr. Palit, referring to the provisions contained in Rule-7(1) of the OCS
(Pension) Rules, 1992, submitted that such rule permits the State Government to withhold pension
or gratuity and the State Government may order recovery of any pecuniary loss caused to the
Government only after it has been ascertained in a disciplinary or judicial proceeding that the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28811987/ 4
Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
Petitioner is guilty of grave misconduct. In the present case, no disciplinary proceeding having been
initiated against the Petitioner and the FIR in the Vigilance Case having already been quashed by a
coordinate Bench of this Court, the State-Opposite Parties cannot withhold the gratitude as is due
and admissible to the Petitioner. In the aforesaid context, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
Petitioner referred to the judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of // 14 // D.V. Kapoor
v. UOI and Others, reported in (1990) 4 SCC
314. He specifically placed reliance on para-4, 8, 9 and 10 of the said judgment.
16. In course of his argument, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Petitioner also specifically
referred to the circular of the Government of Odisha dated 27.08.1991, which has been annexed to
the writ petition as Annexure-9. For better appreciation of the issue and the decision of the
Government under the aforesaid circular, this Court deems it proper to extract the entire circular
herein below:-
"No.Pen. 44/91-31740/F., Government of Orissa, Finance Department OFFICE
MEMORANDUM Recovery of dues arising out of non-settlement of audit objections.
While taking up pension case in the pension Adalat for finalization it has come to the
notice that in some cases D.C.R. Gratuity etc. have been held up pending settlement
of audit objections. It has to be borne in mind that the findings in an audit
report/para do not impose any liability on the Government servant concerned unless
the same is // 15 // established in Departmental proceedings initiated against him
under the Orissa Civil Service classification, control and Appeal) Rules, 1962. Such
liability does not come under the purview of Government dues. It is mandatory that
Government dues are required to be cleared by the retiring Government servant
before the date of his retirement. The existing provisions of Rule 157 and 158 of the
O.P.R. 1977 do not define the term of Govt. dues. The expression "Government dues"
includes only arrears of rent and other charges pertaining to occupation of Govt. accommodation,
balance of house building or conveyance advance, over-payment of pay and allowances or leave
salary and arrears of Income Tax deductible at source under the Income Tax Act, 1961.
As such the amount arising out of Audit report/para which has not been termed as "Government
dues" can not be recovered from D.C.R. Gratuity. Such dues can, however, be realized provided the
responsibility is fixed by following the appropriate procedure.
Sd/-S.K. Rath, Joint Secy. to Government Memo No.31741/F., dt. 22.8.91.
Copy forwarded to all Departments of Govt./all Heads of Departments. Xxx xxx for information and
necessary action.
Sd/-S.K. Rath, Section Officer"
// 16 //
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28811987/ 5
Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
17. Referring to the aforesaid circular, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Petitioner further
emphatically submitted that the Finance Department, Government of Odisha, has stipulated that
the findings in an audit report/para do not impose any liability on the concerned Government
servant unless, the same is established in a departmental proceedings initiated against the
delinquent officer under the Orissa Civil Service (CCA) Rules, 1962 and that such liability does not
come under the purview of Government dues. He further contended that the said circular provides
that the expression "Government dues" includes only arrears of rent and other charges pertaining to
occupation of Govt. accommodation, balance of house building or conveyance advance, over
payment of pay and allowances or leave salary and arrears of Income Tax deductible at source under
the Income Tax Act, 1961. Therefore, the aforesaid circular clearly provides that the liability arising
out of audit report/para cannot be considered as Government dues and, // 17 // accordingly, the
same cannot be recovered from D.C.R., Gratuity as Government dues. Further, such circular
specifies that such dues, nevertheless, can be realized provided the responsibility is fixed by
following the procedure. In such view of the matter, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the
Petitioner submitted that the aforesaid dues by no stretch of imagination can be construed as
Government dues. Hence, the gratuity of the Petitioner could not have been withheld by the
Opposite Party No.1.
18. Learned Senior Counsel also relied upon the ratio laid down by a coordinate Bench of this Court
in Duryodhan Nayak v. State of Odisha and Others (W.P.(C) No.2098 of 2013 disposed of vide
judgment dated 01.03.2023). On a careful reading of the aforesaid judgment in Duryodhan Nayak's
case (supra), this Court observes that a coordinate Bench of this Court by referring to the judgment
passed by this Court in Manoranjan Khadenga v. Chairman, Orissa Forest Development Corporation
Ltd., Bhubaneswar, // 18 // Khurda and others, reported in 2016(1) OLR-651, has come to a finding
that the withholding of retirement benefits along with gratuity as well as leave salary as is due and
admissible to the Petitioner, without initiating any disciplinary proceeding to determine the liability,
only on the basis of audit report after retirement of the employee is without authority of law. For
better appreciation, the relevant portion of the judgment as contained in para-7 is quoted herein
below:-
"7. Law is well settled that the findings of the Audit Report, per se, cannot be the
basis for recovery of any amount from an employee much less a retired employee. In
the case of Manoranjan Khadenga v. Chairman, Orissa Forest Development
Corporation Ltd., (supra), a co-ordinate bench of this Court, while dealing with a
similar case held that withholding the retirement benefits admissible to the Petitioner
such as gratuity as well as leave salary without initiating any disciplinary proceeding
to determine the liability, only on the basis of the audit report after his retirement is
without authority of law. This Court is in respectful agreement with the ratio decided
as above. Further, a perusal of the Audit Report does not conclusively reveal that the
amount in question // 19 // was 'Government dues'. In the Finance Department
Office Memorandum dated 22nd August, 1991 the expression, 'Government dues' has
been held to include 'only arrears of rent and other charges pertaining to occupation
of Government accommodation, balance of house building or conveyance advance,
overpayment of pay and allowances or leave salary and arrears of Income Tax
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28811987/ 6
Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
deductible at source under the Income Tax Act, 1961'. The Office memorandum
further states as under;
"As such the amount arising out of Audit report/Para which has not been termed as
'Government dues' cannot be recovered from D.C.R. Gratuity. Such dues can,
however, be realized provided the responsibility is fixed by following the appropriate
procedure."
19. Additionally, learned Senior Counsel appearing for the Petitioner, referring to Rule-68
submitted that the said rule empowers the State Government for recovery of only the Government
dues from the DCRG of the retired employees. Rule-68(3) defines Government dues, which includes
dues pertaining to government accommodation, dues with respect to balance of house building or
conveyance or any other // 20 // advance, overpayment of pay & allowances or leave salary and
arrears of Income Tax deductible at the source. In the aforesaid context, it was further submitted
before this Court that none of such dues are pending against the Petitioner and in view of the
provisions contained in Rule-68, as well as the Government Circular of the Finance Department as
referred to hereinabove, the surcharge amount, if any, is not recoverable from the gratuity of the
present Petitioner as Government dues. Moreover, the aforesaid surcharge amount can very well be
recovered from the defaulting/delinquent Government employee under Section 10(1) of the Odisha
Local Fund Audit Act, 1948. Section 10(1) of OLFA Act, 1948 provides that any surcharge dues can
be recovered from the person concerned as "arrears of land revenue". Therefore, the pendency of
surcharge appeal will have no bearing in the present writ petition.
20. In the context of pending disciplinary and judicial proceeding on the date of retirement, learned
Senior Counsel // 21 // for the Petitioner submitted that it is an admitted fact that no disciplinary
proceeding was initiated against the present Petitioner. So far judicial proceeding arising out of
Vigilance P.S. Case No.84 of 2012 is concerned, learned Senior Counsel for the Petitioner submitted
that, by the date of Petitioner's retirement from service, no charge sheet have been filed by the
Vigilance Department and consequentially, no cognizance was also taken by the Court in seisin over
the matter. In the said context, learned Senior Counsel for the Petitioner, referring to the provisions
contained in Rule-7(d) of OCS (Pension) Rules, 1992, submitted that the aforesaid provision has
been elaborately analysed in a judgment by a Division Bench of this Court in State of Odisha and
others v. Sushanta Chandra Sahoo and others (W.P.(C) No.14718 of 2015 disposed of vide order
dated 06.05.2022). In the aforesaid case, the Hon'ble Division Bench has categorically held that a
judicial proceeding can be said to be pending against the employee where cognizance has been
taken. Since // 22 // no cognizance was taken in the present case and the F.I.R. having been
quashed subsequently by this Court, it cannot be said that a judicial proceeding or any disciplinary
proceeding was pending against the Petitioner on the date of retirement of the Petitioner, which
would deprived the Petitioner of the benefits which is due and admissible to the Petitioner in the
shape of gratuity or final pension on his retirement. He also referred to Rule-82 of the OCS
(Pension) Rules, 1992 with regard to the payment of pensionary benefits and since the Petitioner
has not been paid the pensionary and retiral benefits, he is entitled to interest w.e.f. 01.06.2013 on
such outstanding amount in terms of Notification dated 30.12.1999 issued by the G.A. & P.G.
Department, Government of Odisha.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28811987/ 7
Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
21. Per contra, learned Additional Government Advocate appearing for the State-Opposite Parties,
by referring to the counter affidavit submitted that the Opposite Parties have not committed any
illegality while disposing of the representation // 23 // of the Petitioner pursuant to the order
passed by this Court in the earlier writ petition. He further contended that it would be wrong to
assume that the authority has rejected the representation of the Petitioner. Further, referring to the
order under Annexure-8 to the writ petition passed by the Opposite Party No.1 pursuant to the
direction of this Court, learned Additional Government Advocate submitted that the Opposite Party
No.1 has narrated in detail the entire factual background of the present case. In the aforesaid factual
background, the Opposite Party No.1 while disposing of the representation vide order under
Annexure-8 has finally stated that expeditious steps have been taken to finalize the retiral benefits of
the Petitioner at the earliest.
22. In course of his argument, learned Additional Government Advocate further referring to the
order passed in the surcharge proceeding, submitted that on the basis of the audit report a
surcharge proceeding was initiated against the Petitioner by the Examiner of Local Accounts,
Directorate of // 24 // Local Fund Audit, Odisha. In his order, the Examiner of Local Accounts,
while dropping some of the audit objections/paras to the tune of Rs.1,96,357/-, has categorically
held that an amount of Rs.7,97,817/- is still to be recovered from the Petitioner on the basis of the
observations made in the Audit Report. He further contended that since the amount which is
recoverable exceeds the retiral and pensionary benefits as is due and admissible to the Petitioner,
the Opposite Party No.1, awaiting the final decision of the Finance Department, has not taken any
final decision in the matter. He further contended that the amount which is recoverable in view of
the surcharge proceeding is Government due and, as such, the Opposite Party No.1 has rightly
withheld the gratuity and pension of the Petitioner as per the provisions contained in the relevant
statute. Therefore, no fault can be found with the Opposite Party No.1 while disposing of the
representation of the Petitioner under Annexure-8 to the writ petition vide order dated // 25 //
13.10.2023. In such view of the matter, learned Additional Government Advocate submitted that the
writ petition filed by the Petitioner is devoid of merit and, accordingly, the same should be
dismissed.
23. Having due regard to the pleadings of the respective parties and on a careful analysis of the
submissions made by the learned counsels appearing for the parties, as well as on a careful
examination of the record, this Court is of the view that the relevant question which falls for
determination in the present writ petition is with regard to the conduct of the Opposite Party No.1,
i.e, whether the Opposite Party No.1 is within his authority to withhold the retirement as well as
pensionary benefit and gratuity of the Petitioner under the O.C.S. (Pension) Rules by treating the
same to be the Government dues? Now, therefore, this Court is required to consider two questions.
(1) Whether any disciplinary proceeding/judicial/criminal proceeding was pending against the
Petitioner on the date of retirement? And (2) whether the // 26 // dues, as have been fixed in the
surcharge proceeding on the basis of the audit report, can be treated as Government dues in view of
the settled position of law as well as the circular of the Finance Department dated 27th August, 1991
under Annexure-9 to the writ petition?
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28811987/ 8
Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
24. The first question that falls for consideration of this Court is with regard to the pendency of the
disciplinary or judicial/criminal proceeding against the Petitioner on the date of Petitioner's
retirement on 31.05.2013, admittedly, no disciplinary proceeding whatsoever was initiated against
the present Petitioner. So far judicial/criminal proceeding is concerned, the assertion in the writ
petition is that no charge sheet was filed and, as such, no cognizance was taken by the Court in seisin
over the matter as on 31.05.2013, i.e. the date of retirement of the Petitioner. In such view of the
matter, this court is required to decide as to whether the Cuttack Vigilance P.S. Case No.84 of 2012
lodged on 28.12.2013 can be construed by this Court as a criminal proceeding pending // 27 //
against the Petitioner on the date of his retirement. This question has been elaborately discussed,
analyzed and answered in a judgment by a Division Bench of this Court in Sushanta Chandra
Sahoo's case (supra). A copy of the judgment delivered by the Division Bench on 06.05.2022 has
been annexed as Annexure-13 to the writ petition. On perusal of the Annexure-13, this Court
observes that the Division Bench of this Court has categorically held that in view of explanation (b)
to Rule-7(2)(1) of Odisha Pension Rules, a criminal proceeding or judicial proceeding can be said to
be pending against the Government employee when the Magistrate takes cognizance. In such view of
the matter and, keeping in view of such detailed analysis in the judgment under Annexure-13, this
Court deems it proper not to discuss the issue any further by wasting valuable judicial time even
otherwise also the judgment of the Division Bench under Annexure-13 to the writ petition is binding
on this Court. In view of the ratio laid down in the judgment under // 28 // Annexure-13, i.e.
Sushanta Chandra Sahoo's case (supra), this Court categorically holds that no disciplinary or judicial
proceeding was pending against the Petitioner on the date of his retirement from service w.e.f.
31.05.2013.
25. With regard to the payment of pensionary and retirement benefits including the gratuity, this
Court by following a series of judgments of the Hon'ble Supreme Court is of the considered view that
grant of pensionary benefit and gratuity are no longer matter of bounty to be distributed by the
Government, rather those are in the form of valuable rights acquired by the retired employees and,
as such, property in their hands and any delay in settlement and disbursement thereof should
viewed seriously and dealt with severely by imposing penalty in form of payment of interest. In the
OCS (Pension) Rules, a penalty to the tune of 7% has also been provided. In the aforesaid context,
this Court would like to refer to the judgments in Gorakhpur University & Ors. V. Dr. Shitla Prasad
Nagendra & Ors., reported in // 29 // AIR 2001 SC 2433; R. Kapur v. Director of Inspection
(Painting and Pulication) Income Tax, reported in (1994) 6 SCC 589; State of Kerela v. M.
Padmanavan Nair, reported in AIR 1985 SC 356; and Som Prakash v. Union of India, reported in
AIR 1981 SC 212.
26. Additionally, this Court would also like to refer to the judgment by the coordinate Bench in
Duryodhan Nayak's case (supra) wherein it has been categorically held by the coordinate Bench that
the finding in the audit report, per se, cannot be the basis for recovery of any amount from an
employee, much less a retired employee and the only way to recover such amount is to first fix the
liability by following a due process of law, i.e., by initiating a disciplinary proceeding. This Court
would also like to refer to the judgment of Hon'ble Supreme Court in Deokinandan Prasad v. State
of Bihar, reported in (1971) 2 SCC 330 wherein the Hon'ble Supreme Court has held that the right to
grant pension to a Government servant flows from the rules and the // 30 // same cannot be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28811987/ 9
Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
withheld by virtue of an executive order. With regard to the initiation of the disciplinary proceeding,
this Court on a perusal of Rule-7 of the O.C.S. (Pension) Rules, is of the considered view that the
same cannot be initiated in support of an incident/occurrence which had taken place more than 4
years prior to the date of institution. A disciplinary proceeding having not been initiated against the
Petitioner cannot also be initiated now. The aforesaid finding of this Court gets support from a
judgment of this Court in State of Orissa and Ors. V. Prabodh Kumar Pal, reported in (2013) II OLR
513.
27. Furthermore, In the context of withholding of pension or gratuity by the Opposite Parties, this
Court is of the considered view that the law is no more res integra. Such an issue engaged the
attention of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of Dr. Hira Lal v. State of Bihar and Ors. The
Hon'ble Supreme Court vide judgment dated 18.02.2020 in Civil Appeal No.1677-1678 of 2020 has
categorically held // 31 // that in the absence of any statutory rules permitting withholding of
pension or gratuity, the State authorities could not do so by way of executive instructions. This
Court, at this juncture, is also reminded of the settled proposition of law that an executive
instruction which does not have any statutory sanction cannot be termed as law within the meaning
of Article 300A of the Constitution of India as has been held by the Hon'ble Supreme Court in
Bishamber Dayal Chandra Mohan v. State of UP, reported in AIR 1982 SC 33 and Hindustan Times
v. State of UP, reported in AIR 2003 SC 250.
28. In reply to the second question formulated by this Court to decide the issue involved in the
present writ petition, i.e. as to whether the dues as has been held to be payable by the Examiner of
Accounts under the OLFA Act, 1948 could be treated as Government dues? The aforesaid question
need not be discussed elaborately and no further analysis is required in view of the Circular dated
27th August, 1991 of the Finance // 32 // Department, Government of Odisha which has been
quoted in the preceding paragraph. Moreover, the aforesaid circular has been elaborately discussed
and analyzed by a coordinate Bench of this Court in its judgment in Duryodhan Nayak's case
(supra). This Court is required to apply the aforesaid well-settled principle to the facts of the present
case. In the instant case, the dues that have been claimed by Opposite Party No.1 as recoverable
from the Petitioner arise out of a surcharge proceeding. Such surcharge proceeding was initiated on
the basis of an audit report by the Local Fund Auditor. The order of Examiner of Accounts has been
assailed by filing an appeal before the Appellate Authority as provided under the OLFA Act, 1948.
Moreover, taking into consideration the definition of Government dues as has been provided in the
Finance Department Circular under Annexure-9, this Court has no hesitation in coming to a
conclusion that the surcharge dues under the OLFA Act, 1948 cannot be construed as Government
dues.
// 33 //
29. Moreover, in the event such dues are recoverable, then a procedure is available under the OLFA
Act, 1948 to recover the same from the retired employee by following the procedure and by treating
such dues as arrear land revenue. Furthermore, the words "Government dues" having been defined
in the rules as well as circular under Annexure-9 and the surcharge dues having not been covered
under such definition cannot be construed to be Government dues. Moreover, by applying the ratio
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28811987/ 10
Prasant Kumar Patnaik vs State Of Odisha And Another ... Opposite ... on 1 March, 2024
laid down by a coordinate Bench of this Court in Duryodhan Nayak's case (supra), this Court is
persuaded to hold that the dues in the present case cannot be construed to be Government dues and,
as such, the same cannot stand as a bar in disbursing the final pension and gratuity to the Petitioner.
Since the amount as is due and admissible to the Petitioner on account of final pension and gratuity
has been withheld by the Opposite Parties without any sanction of law, therefore, the Opposite
Parties are liable // 34 // to pay penal interest to the Petitioner as has been provided under the
relevant rules.
30. With regard to payment of penal interest, this Court would like to refer to the judgment of the
Hon'ble Supreme Court in D.D. Tiwari's case (supra), which has been followed by this Court in
Gobardhan Nayak v. State of Orissa and others, reported in (2021) (III) ILR-CUT-60 and,
accordingly, an employee has been granted interest @ 18%. Moreover, this Court on a reading of the
judgment of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in Gangahanume Gowda v. Karnataka Agro Industries
Corporation Ltd., reported in (2003) 3 SCC 40 as well as in S.K. Dua v. State of Haryana and others,
reported in (2008) 3 SCC 44, wherein it has been held that interest on delayed payment of gratuity
as well as pensionary benefits is mandatory, is of the considered view that the employee concerned
needs to be compensated for such delayed payment of dues.
// 35 //
31. In view of the aforesaid analysis of factual background of the present case as well as the point of
law involved in the present writ petition and, also in view of the various judgments referred to
hereinabove laying down the proposition of law, this Court is inclined to hold that the Petitioner in
the absence of any judicial/criminal or disciplinary proceeding is entitled to the pensionary and
other retiral benefits including the gratuity upon his retirement from service w.e.f. 31.05.2013. Since
the same has not been paid to the Petitioner as of now, the reply of Opposite Party No.1 under
Annexure-8 is hereby quashed. Accordingly, the Opposite Party No.1 is directed to pay the
retirement benefits including gratuity, unutilized leave salary and other financial and pensionary
benefits, as is due and admissible to the Petitioner, as per law within a period of two months from
the date of communication of this judgment along with interest @ 18%.
// 36 //
32. With the aforesaid observation and direction, the writ petition is allowed. However, there shall
be no order as to costs.
(A.K. Mohapatra) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack The 1st March, 2024/Debasis Aech, Secretary
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28811987/ 11
