Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
Author: Sanjay Kumar
Bench: Sanjay Kumar
Digitally signed
LAIRENM by (Through video conferencing)
LAIRENMAYUM
AYUM INDRAJEET
INDRAJE SINGH
Date: IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
ET SINGH 2022.02.21
15:53:06 +05'30' AT IMPHAL
CRIMINAL PETITION NO. 39 OF 2021
Prateek Agarwal, aged about 37 years,
s/o Shri Rajendra Agarwal, a resident of S-206,
Panchsheel Park, New Delhi-110017.
....... Petitioner
- Versus -
1. Sharmila Goyanka, aged about 45 years,
w/o Mr. Manish Kumar Goyanka, a resident of H-348,
First Floor, H-Block, Naraina Vihar, New Delhi-110028 and
2. Shri Khomdram Devabarta Singh, aged about 41 years,
s/o Khomdram Lokeshore Singh, R/O Haobam Marak
Ngangom Leikai, Imphal West, Manipur-795001.
..... Respondents
For the Petitioner :: Mr. Th.Mahira, Advocate
For the Respondents :: Mr. Mangsatabam Rarry, Advocate
Date of reserving of Judgment :: 08.02.2022
Date of delivery of Judgment :: 21.02.2022
BEFORE
HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE MR. SANJAY KUMAR
JUDGMENT
Chapter XVII of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881, was inserted therein by the Banking, Public
Financial Institutions and Negotiable Instruments Laws (Amendment) Act, 1988 (Act 66 of 1988),
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28001333/ 1
Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
with effect from 01.04.1989. Thereby, the Parliament converted civil liability vis-à-vis causing
deliberate dishonour of one's own cheques into a culpable offence with the intendment of enhancing
acceptability of cheques. Section 138, in this chapter, Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 1 details
dishonour of a cheque for insufficiency of funds in the account etc. as an offence and prescribes the
punishment therefor in the form of imprisonment or fine or both. Sections 139 to 147, as they
presently stand, are machinery provisions dealing with various aspects, including the manner and
method of how cognizance is to be taken of this offence.
While so, akin to the Lernaean Hydra of Herculean lore, tricky questions of procedure and
jurisdiction in relation to this offence continue to raise their troublesome heads before the Courts
despite the lapse of over three decades. The case on hand is an instance.
[2] By way of this petition filed under Section 482 Cr.P.C., the petitioner seeks quashing of Criminal
(N.I.) Case No.12 of 2021 filed against him before the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Imphal
West, along with the orders dated 09.02.2021 and 04.03.2021 passed therein, whereby process was
issued against him. The said complaint case was filed by respondent No.1 through respondent No.2,
her power of attorney holder, under Sections 138 and 141 of the Negotiable Instruments Act, 1881
(hereinafter, 'the Act of 1881'). The case of the complainant was that the respondent therein, the
petitioner in this criminal petition, had issued in her name cheque bearing No.000156 dated
04.03.2020, drawn on RBL Bank at New Delhi, for a sum of `5 lakh but when she deposited the said
cheque at the Yes Bank Branch at Naraina Vihar in New Delhi for being credited to her bank account
bearing No.05499300000605 in the Yes Bank Branch at Thangal Bazar, Imphal, it was dishonoured
on the ground of 'insufficient funds'. The complainant stated that Demand Notices dated 16.03.2020
were sent to the petitioner herein at both his known addresses, one at S-206, Panchasheel Park,
New Delhi, and the other at Farm No.16, Defodil Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 2 Lane, Satbari,
Chatarpur, Delhi. As he failed to pay the amount due under the cheque within 15 days, as stipulated
in the statute, she approached the Court of the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Imphal West
(hereinafter, 'the Trial Court'), through her power of attorney holder, by way of the subject
complaint. Process was issued by the Trial Court against the petitioner herein under the orders
dated 09.02.2021 and 04.03.2021. Aggrieved by these developments, he filed the present quash
petition.
[3] An interim order was passed by this Court on 20.12.2021 to the effect that the warrant issued
against the petitioner by the Trial Court should not be executed and leaving it open to him to appear
before the Trial Court through video conferencing. However, the petition averments disclose that
the bailable warrant issued against the petitioner by the Trial Court was cancelled in October, 2021,
subject to his furnishing a bail bond for a sum of `50,000/- along with one local surety for a like
sum. Be that as it may. [4] Heard Mr. Th.Mahira, learned counsel for the petitioner; and Mr.
Mangsatabam Rarry, learned counsel, appearing for the respondents. [5] Mr. Th.Mahira, learned
counsel, would contend that the Trial Court does not have territorial jurisdiction to entertain the
complaint case and proceed against the petitioner. He would point out that respondent No.1 resides
at Delhi and presented the subject cheque at the Yes Bank Branch at Naraina Vihar, New Delhi. He
would state that the bank account at Imphal was opened by respondent No.1 only 11 days before the
presentation of the cheque and contend that the same demonstrates that she is abusing the process
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28001333/ 2
Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
of law, knowing fully well that the parties were both permanent residents of Delhi. Learned counsel
would also contend that there was a defect in the complaint Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 3 case as
no mention was made therein as to the petitioner receiving the Demand Notices dated 16.03.2020
issued by respondent No.1 after dishonour of the cheque. He would argue that the petitioner never
received the said notices and in the absence of proof of receipt thereof, the complaint case was liable
to be rejected straightaway. He would assert that the entire exercise was engineered by respondent
No.1 to harass the petitioner, a resident of Delhi, and that the subject complaint case and the orders
passed therein are liable to be quashed by this Court in exercise of inherent power under Section
482 Cr.P.C. [6] Per contra, Mr. Mangsatabam Rarry, learned counsel, would assert that the subject
cheque was issued by the petitioner herein in discharge of a legal liability and the same was
deposited by respondent No.1 for being credited to her bank account in the Yes Bank Branch at
Thangal Bazar, Imphal, situated within the jurisdiction of the Trial Court. He would assert that, in
terms of the legal position obtaining under the provisions of the Act of 1881 and the law declared in
that regard by the Supreme Court, the Trial Court has territorial jurisdiction to adjudicate the
complaint case. He would further assert that two demand notices were sent to the petitioner's
known addresses at New Delhi and Delhi and the same would be sufficient in law. He would point
out that the address of the petitioner in the cause title of this criminal petition is the same as the one
to which a demand notice was sent, viz., S-206, Panchasheel Park, New Delhi, and contend that the
petitioner cannot deny receipt thereof. He would argue that no grounds are made out to hold that
the Trial Court lacks territorial jurisdiction and pray for rejection of this quash petition.
Both the learned counsel relied on case law in support of their respective contentions.
Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 4
[7] Section 138 of the Act of 1881 provides that when a cheque
drawn by a person on a bank account maintained by him for payment of any amount of money to
another person from out of that account for the discharge of any legally enforceable debt or other
liability is returned by the bank unpaid, either because the amount of money in that account is
insufficient to honour the cheque or it exceeds the amount arranged to be paid from that account,
such person shall be deemed to have committed an offence and would be punishable with
imprisonment for a term which may extend to two years or with fine or with both. Under clause (a)
of the proviso thereunder, it is stated that nothing in the Section shall apply unless the cheque is
presented to the bank within six months from the date on which it is drawn or within the period of
its validity, whichever is earlier. Clause (b) of the proviso states that nothing in the Section shall
apply unless the payee or the holder in due course makes a demand for payment of the said amount
of money by giving a notice in writing to the drawer of the cheque within 30 days of the receipt of
information by him from the bank regarding the return of the cheque as unpaid. Clause (c) of the
proviso states that nothing in the Section shall apply unless the drawer of such cheque fails to make
the payment of the said amount of money to the payee or holder in due course within 15 days of the
receipt of the said notice.
It is now a settled proposition that the offence under Section 138 occurs upon the dishonour of the
cheque but prosecution in relation to such offence is postponed, by virtue of the provisos, till the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28001333/ 3
Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
failure of the drawer of the cheque to make payment within 15 days of receiving the demand notice.
[8] Section 142(1) of the Act of 1881 states to the effect that notwithstanding anything contained in
the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, -
Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 5
(a) no Court shall take cognizance of any offence punishable under Section 138 except upon a
complaint, in writing, made by the payee or the holder in due course of the cheque; (b) such
complaint is made within one month of the date on which the cause of action arises under clause (c)
of the proviso to Section 138; and (c) no Court inferior to that of a Metropolitan Magistrate or a
Judicial Magistrate of the First Class shall try an offence punishable under Section 138.
Be it noted that Section 142(1) was originally Section 142 in the Act of 1881. However, the statute
was amended by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015 (Act 26 of 2015), and, inter
alia, Sections 142(2) and 142A were also inserted therein. These amended provisions came into
effect from 15.06.2015. After such amendment, the original Section 142 was renumbered as Section
142(1). The newly added Section 142(2) states that the offence under Section 138 shall be inquired
into and tried only by a Court within whose local jurisdiction - (a) if the cheque is delivered for
collection through an account, the branch of the bank where the payee or holder in due course, as
the case may be, maintains the account, is situated; or (b) if the cheque is presented for payment by
the payee or holder in due course, otherwise than through an account, the branch of the drawee
bank where the drawer maintains the account is situated. The 'Explanation' thereto states that for
the purpose of clause (a), where a cheque is delivered for collection at any branch of the bank of the
payee or holder in due course, then, the cheque shall be deemed to have been delivered to the
branch of the bank in which the payee or holder in due course maintains the account.
[9] The newly added Section 142A is titled 'Validation for transfer of pending cases'. Section 142A(1)
states that notwithstanding anything contained Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 6 in the Code of
Criminal Procedure, 1973, or any judgment, decree, order or direction of any Court, all cases
transferred to the Court having jurisdiction under Section 142(2), as amended by the Negotiable
Instruments (Amendment) Ordinance, 2015 (Ordinance 6 of 2015), shall be deemed to have been
transferred under this Act, as if that sub-section had been in force at all material times. The other
sub-sections of Section 142A are of no relevance presently. [10] Prior to amendment of the Act of
1881 in 2015, plenty of controversy prevailed on various issues pertaining to Section 138, including
territorial jurisdiction. Plethora of case law emanated on the subject.
In K.Bhaskaran vs. Sankaran Vaidhyan Balan and another [(1999) 7 SCC 510], a 2-Judge Bench of
the Supreme Court held that an offence under Section 138 of the Act of 1881 has five components:
(1) drawing of the cheque, (2) presentation of the cheque to the bank, (3) returning of the cheque
unpaid by the drawee bank, (4) giving notice in writing to the drawer of the cheque demanding
payment of the cheque amount, and (5) failure of the drawer to make payment within 15 days of the
receipt of the notice. It was held that any Court having jurisdiction over the territorial limits wherein
any of the five acts that constitute the components of the offence occurred would have the
jurisdiction to deal with the case. It was further elaborated that if the five acts were done in five
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28001333/ 4
Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
different areas, any one of the Courts exercising jurisdiction in those five areas would have
jurisdiction and the complainant can choose any one of those Courts. Territorial jurisdiction under
Sections 177, 178 and 179 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, was also considered. The Bench
held that Section 138 required the making of a demand by the payee through a notice and the thrust
in the provision is on the need to make a demand and Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 7 once a notice
is dispatched, his part is over. The Bench held that if a strict interpretation is given that the drawer
should have actually received the notice for the period of 15 days to start running, a trickster cheque
drawer would get the premium to avoid receiving the notice by different strategies and could escape
from the legal consequence of Section 138. Thus, when a notice is returned by the sendee as
unclaimed such date, per the Supreme Court, would be the commencement date for reckoning the
period of 15 days contemplated in clause (c) to the proviso in Section 138. Such reckoning was held
to be without prejudice to the right of the drawer of the cheque to show that he had no knowledge
that the notice was brought to his address.
[11] In Harman Electronics Private Limited and another vs. National Panasonic India Private
Limited [(2009) 1 SCC 720], another 2-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court again considered
territorial jurisdiction of a Court to try an offence under Section 138 of the Act of 1881. In that case,
the cheque was issued at Chandigarh and was presented at Chandigarh. The complainant, however,
issued the demand notice from Delhi and the same was served upon the drawer of the cheque at
Chandigarh. The case was instituted by the complainant at Delhi. In this situation, having
considered the earlier decision in K.Bhaskaran (supra), the Supreme Court stated that it is one thing
to say that sending of the notice is one of the ingredients for maintaining a complaint but it is
another thing to say that dishonour of the cheque, by itself, constitutes an offence. According to the
Supreme Court, receipt of the demand notice would ultimately give rise to the cause of action for
filing a complaint. Issuance of the notice would not, by itself, give rise to a cause of action but
communication of the notice would. The Bench held that for constituting an Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021
Page 8 offence under Section 138, the notice must be received by the accused though it may be
deemed to have been received in certain situations. The Bench therefore held that the Delhi Court
had no jurisdiction to try the case. [12] Earlier, in Shri Ishar Alloy Steels Limited vs. Jayaswals Neco
Ltd. [(2001) 3 SCC 609], a 3-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court considered clause (a) of the proviso
to Section 138 of the Act of 1881. The facts of that case were as follows: The appellant had issued a
cheque to the respondent on 21.07.1997 and the respondent presented it to its bank on 20.01.1998.
In turn, the said bank presented it to the drawee bank on 24.01.1998. By that date, six months had
elapsed since the date mentioned on the cheque. The cheque was returned unpaid by the drawee
bank on that ground. A cheque bouncing case having been filed, the appellant's contention was that
the cheque had been presented beyond the period of six months and, therefore, no offence was made
out. However, the High Court held that presentation of the cheque to the collecting bank within six
months was sufficient to maintain the complaint. Reversing that view, the Supreme Court opined
that, to make out an offence under Section 138 of the Act of 1881, a cheque has to be presented to
the drawee bank within the six months period and, therefore, presentation to the collecting bank
within that period would not suffice. The decision in K.Bhaskaran (supra) was not considered by the
3-Judge Bench as it was on a different issue altogether.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28001333/ 5
Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
[13] Again, in Nishant Aggarwal vs. Kailash Kumar Sharma [(2013) 10 SCC 72], a 2-Judge Bench of
the Supreme Court considered the issue of territorial jurisdiction of Courts to try offences under
Section 138 of the Act of 1881. This decision followed K.Bhaskaran (supra) on the point that a
Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 9 complaint could be filed in a Court that had jurisdiction over the
place of presentation of the cheque though the drawer did not reside there. Significantly, the Bench
went on to hold that the commission of the offence would be complete only on service of the demand
notice and consequent failure on the part of the drawer to pay the demanded amount within the
stipulated 15 days. In effect, the Bench held that issuance of the demand notice would not, by itself,
give rise to a cause of action but communication of the notice would. Harman Electronics Private
Limited (supra) was also considered and affirmed. [14] In M/s Escorts Limited vs. Rama Mukherjee
[(2014) 2 SCC 255], the same 2-Judge Bench had occasion to again consider the question of
territorial jurisdiction of Courts in relation to Section 138 of the Act of 1881. Relying on its earlier
decision in Nishant Aggarwal (supra), the Bench held that Courts within whose jurisdiction the
cheque is presented and dishonoured would also have jurisdiction to try the offence. In that case,
the cheque was issued in Kolkata and presented in Delhi. As it was dishonoured, notice was issued
from Delhi and proceedings were finally initiated at Delhi. The High Court, however, held that the
Delhi Court did not have jurisdiction and asked the complainant to prosecute his case before the
Kolkata Court. Disagreeing with this view, the Supreme Court affirmed that the Court within whose
jurisdiction the dishonoured cheque was presented for encashment would also have jurisdiction to
try the case. In effect, K.Bhaskaran (supra) was again reaffirmed. [15] The dichotomy between the
views taken in K.Bhaskaran (supra) and later decisions, including Harman Electronics Private
Limited (supra), was resolved by a 3-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court in Dasarath Rupsingh
Rathod vs. State of Maharastra and another [(2014) 9 SCC 129].
Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 10 Having considered the gamut of precedential law on the issue of
territorial jurisdiction, the Bench summed up that the offence under Section 138 of the Act of 1881 is
committed no sooner the cheque is returned unpaid for insufficiency of funds or for the reason that
the amount exceeds the arrangement made with the bank. However, per the Bench, cognizance of
such offence is forbidden under Section 142 of the Act of 1881 till a complaint, in writing, is made by
the payee or holder of the cheque in due course within one month from the date the cause of action
accrues under clause (c) of the proviso to Section 138. The Bench further held that the facts
constituting the cause of action would not constitute the ingredients of the offence and the proviso
to Section 138 simply postpones/ defers institution of criminal proceedings and taking of cognizance
by the Court till such time the cause of action, in terms of clause (c) of the proviso, accrues to the
complainant. Once that cause of action accrues to the complainant, per the Supreme Court, the
jurisdiction of the Court to try the case will be determined by reference to the place where the
cheque is 'dishonoured'. According to the Supreme Court, prosecution in such a case can be
launched against the drawer of the cheque only before the Court within whose jurisdiction the
'dishonour' takes place, except in situations where the offence is committed along with other
offences in a single transaction. It was finally held that the place, situs, or venue of judicial enquiry
and trial of the offence must logically be restricted to where the drawee bank is located as the
dishonour of the cheque takes place when the said bank returns the cheque unpaid.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28001333/ 6
Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
[16] The curial wisdom expressed in the aforesaid decisions was in the context of the Act of 1881
prior to the amendments effected therein by the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Act, 2015.
Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 11 In Bridgestone India Private Limited vs. Inderpal Singh [(2016) 2
SCC 75], a 2-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court considered the amended provisions of the Act of
1881 and more particularly, the newly added Sections 142(2) and 142A, in the context of territorial
jurisdiction in relation to an offence under Section 138 of the Act of 1881. In that case, the cheque
was issued by Inderpal Singh at Chandigarh and was presented by Bridgestone India Pvt. Ltd., the
company, for being credited to its bank account in Indore. Upon dishonour of the cheque on account
of 'exceeding arrangement', the company issued a demand notice but Inderpal Singh failed to pay
the amount within the stipulated period. The company thereupon initiated proceedings against
Inderpal Singh before the Court at Indore under Section 138 of the Act of 1981. Inderpal Singh
raised the issue of territorial jurisdiction and the matter ultimately came before the Supreme Court.
Reliance was placed by Inderpal Singh on Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod (supra), which held to the
effect that the Court at the place where the cheque is dishonoured, viz., where the bank on which the
cheque is drawn is located, would alone have jurisdiction to try the case under Section 138 of the Act
of 1881. However, the company relied on the amended provisions of the Act of 1881 to overcome the
legal position declared in Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod (supra). By virtue of these amended provisions
and more particularly, Sections 142(2) and 142A, the Supreme Court observed that there was no
room for any doubt that, with reference to an offence under Section 138 of the Act of 1881, the place
where the cheque is delivered for collection, i.e., the branch of the bank of the payee or the holder in
due course, where the drawee maintains an account, would be determinative of territorial
jurisdiction. Observing that it was imperative for the present controversy that the Cril.Petn. No.39 of
2021 Page 12 company overcomes the legal position declared in Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod (supra)
as well as the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, the Supreme Court referred to
Section 4 of the Negotiable Instruments (Amendment) Second Ordinance, 2015, whereby Section
142A was inserted in the Act of 1881. Perusal of Section 4(1) thereof, per the Supreme Court, left no
room for doubt that in so far as an offence under Section 138 of the Act of 1881 is concerned, on the
issue of jurisdiction, provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, 1973, would have to give way to
the provisions of the instant enactment on account of the non-obstante clause in Section 142A(1)
and likewise, any judgment, decree, order or direction issued by a Court would have no effect in so
far as the territorial jurisdiction for initiating proceedings under Section 138 of the Act of 1881 is
concerned. In that view of the matter, it was observed that the judgment rendered in Dashrath
Rupsingh Rathod (supra) would not non-suit the company. The Bench voiced complete agreement
with the contention advanced by the company in this regard and expressed satisfaction that Section
142(2)(a) of the Act of 1881 vested jurisdiction for initiating proceedings for an offence under
Section 138 in the Court where the cheque is delivered for collection (through an account of the
branch of the bank where the payee or holder in due course maintains an account). The Bench also
recorded satisfaction, based on Section 142A(1), that Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod (supra) would not
stand in the way of the company in so far as territorial jurisdiction for initiating proceedings was
concerned. The appeal was accordingly allowed.
The view expressed in Bridgestone India Pvt. Ltd. (supra) finds affirmation in the later judgment of
the Supreme Court in M/s Himalaya Self Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 13 Farming Group and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28001333/ 7
Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
another vs. M/s Goyal Feed Suppliers [Transfer Petition (Criminal) No.273 of 2020, decided on
16.09.2020]. [17] In the case on hand, it is not in dispute that respondent No.1 has a bank account at
the Yes Bank Branch in Thangal Bazar, Imphal. The date of opening of the said account does not
have bearing on that irrefutable fact. The subject cheque was deposited at a Delhi Branch of Yes
Bank for being credited to the said account. Mere presentation of the cheque at a Delhi Branch has
no impact whatsoever in the light of the 'Explanation' to Section 142(2)(a), which categorically states
that even if the cheque is delivered in any other branch of the bank of the payee, it shall be deemed
to have been delivered to the branch where the payee actually maintains an account. Therefore,
presentation of the cheque at a Delhi Branch of Yes Bank is of no import at all.
In the light of the amended provisions of the Act of 1881 and more so, Section 142(2)(a), and the
edicts of the Supreme Court in relation thereto in Bridgestone India Pvt. Ltd. (supra) and M/s
Himalaya Self Farming Group (supra), it cannot be doubted that institution of the complaint case
before the Trial Court was strictly in accordance with law, as obtaining presently. The Trial Court
has jurisdiction over the area in which respondent No.1 maintains her bank account, being the
account to which the cheque amount was to be credited. Therefore, the Trial Court clearly has
territorial jurisdiction to entertain and deal with the matter.
[18] As regards service of the demand notice in terms of the statutory requirement, it may be noted
that one of the Demand Notices dated 16.03.2020 was addressed to the petitioner at S-206,
Panchsheel Park, New Delhi, 110017, which is shown as his address in the cause title of this criminal
petition. Notably, Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 14 it is not even his case that he did not receive the
same. He merely stated in paragraph No.2(d) of this petition that nothing was mentioned in the
impugned complaint about the date on which the said notices were received by him. There is no
denial, as such, by him of actual receipt of the demand notice. Such denial came only during the
course of oral arguments. At this stage, it would be apposite to note the case law on the issue of
service of a demand notice. [19] In D.Vinod Shivappa vs. Nanda Belliappa [(2006) 6 SCC 456], a
2-Judge Bench of the Supreme Court considered the issue of service of the demand notice in relation
to Section 138 of the Act of 1881. It was observed therein that the drawer of the cheque makes
himself liable for prosecution under Section 138 of the Act of 1881 if he fails to make payment within
15 days of the receipt of the demand notice given by the drawee and his failure to make such
payment gives rise to the cause of action to the complainant to prosecute him under the said
provision. It was pointed out that it is not the 'giving' of the demand notice but it is the failure to pay
after 'receipt' of the demand notice by the drawer which gives rise to the cause of action to the
complainant to file a complaint within the statutory period. In this regard, the Court observed that it
is no doubt true that the receipt of the demand notice has to be proved but if the notice is refused by
the drawee, it may be presumed to have been served. Elaborating further, the Supreme Court
observed that in a case where the demand notice is not claimed, even though served by registered
post, the drawer of the cheque may be called upon to rebut the presumption which arose in favour of
service of the notice with the aid of Section 27 of the General Clauses Act, 1897 (hereinafter, 'the Act
of 1897'). The Supreme Court however cautioned that no rule of universal application can be laid
down that in all cases Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 15 where notice is not served on account of
non-availability of the addressee, the Court must presume service of notice. These observations were
made in the context of a person who dodges the postman for about a month or two or a person who
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28001333/ 8
Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
can get a fake endorsement made regarding his non-availability and can successfully avoid his
prosecution, as the payee is bound to issue notice to him within a period of 30 days from the date of
receipt of information about the dishonour of the cheque. The Supreme Court further pointed out
that it is a matter of evidence and proof and even in a case where the demand notice is returned with
the endorsement that the premises were found locked or the addressee was not available, it would
be open to the complainant to prove at the trial, by evidence, that the endorsement was not correct
and that the addressee, with knowledge of the notice, had deliberately avoided to receive the same.
Applying the purposive construction or mischief rule propounded in Heydon's case [(1584) 76 ER
637], it was held that in interpreting a statute the Court must adopt that construction which
suppresses the mischief and advances the remedy. In effect, the Supreme Court held that the
question as to whether service of notice has been fraudulently refused by unscrupulous means and
whether there was deemed service of the notice is essentially a question of fact and that must be
considered in the light of the evidence on record. In such circumstances, per the Supreme Court, it
would be premature for the High Court to quash the proceedings at the stage of issuance of process,
under Section 482 Cr.P.C..
[20] In C.C.Alavi Haji vs. Palapetty Muhammed and another [(2007) 6 SCC 555], a 3-Judge Bench
of the Supreme Court dealt with the requirement of giving a demand notice under Section 138 of the
Act of 1881.
Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 16 The matter came before the 3-Judge Bench in view of the reference
made by a 2-Judge Bench on the ground that, in D.Vinod Shivappa (supra), the Court had not taken
into consideration the presumption arising under Section 114 of the Evidence Act, 1872 (hereinafter,
'the Act of 1872'). The referring Bench was of the opinion that as the presumption under Section 114
is a rebuttable one, the complaint should necessarily contain averments to raise a presumption of
service of the notice, meaning thereby, it would not be sufficient for the complainant to merely state
that the notice was sent by registered post and was returned with the endorsement 'out of station'
and there must be a further averment that the addressee/drawer had deliberately evaded receiving
the notice or that the addressee had knowledge of the notice. However, the 3-Judge Bench held that
there is no necessity of making an averment in the complaint that service of notice was evaded by
the accused or that the accused had a role to play in the return of the notice unserved. It was further
held that once a notice is sent by correctly addressing the drawer of the cheque, service of notice is
deemed to have been effected. Reference was made by the Bench to Section 27 of the Act of 1897,
which gives rise to a presumption that service of notice has been effected when it is sent to the
correct address by registered post, and it was held that once this act has been referred to in the
complaint, it is unnecessary for the complainant to further aver that it is deemed to have been
served or that the addressee is deemed to have knowledge of the notice. Per the Bench, unless and
until the contrary is proved by the addressee, service of notice is deemed to have been effected at the
time at which the letter would have been delivered in the ordinary course of business. It was
observed that any drawer who claims that he had not been served with the notice can, within
Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 17 15 days of the receipt of the summons from the Court in respect of
the complaint filed under Section 138 of the Act of 1881, make payment of the cheque amount and
submit to the Court that he had made such payment within 15 days of the receipt of the summons
and, therefore, the complaint is liable to be rejected. It was further observed that a person, who does
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28001333/ 9
Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
not pay the cheque amount within 15 days of the receipt of the summons from the Court, cannot
thereafter contend that there was no proper service of the demand notice as required under Section
138, by ignoring the statutory presumption to the contrary under Section 27 of the Act of 1897 and
Section 114 of the Act of 1872. In that case, there was no averment in the complaint that the demand
notice had even been sent to the correct address of the drawer. However, the returned envelope was
annexed to the complaint and the same showed that the notice had been sent by registered post to
the correct address and was returned with the endorsement 'addressee abroad'. On these facts, the
Supreme Court held that the requirement of Section 138 of the Act of 1881 as to service of a demand
notice had been sufficiently complied with.
Be it noted that in Dashrath Rupsingh Rathod (supra), the supplementing judgment of Hon'ble Mr.
Justice T.S.Thakur, as the learned Judge then was, specifically referred to C.C.Alavi Haji (supra) but
no discordant note or distinguishing on facts was made by that co-ordinate Bench in relation to the
ratio recorded therein.
[21] In the light of the law laid down by the Supreme Court in C.C.Alavi Haji (supra), a presumption
arises as to the service of the demand notice upon the petitioner as the address was shown correctly
and there is no evidence of the said notice being returned unserved. Further, as pointed out in
Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 18 the said decision, this is a matter for evidence and cannot
constitute a ground for non-suiting the complainant at the threshold. It is for the petitioner to rebut
the statutory presumptions in this regard with satisfactory evidence. [22] On the above analysis, this
Court finds that the learned Chief Judicial Magistrate, Imphal West, has territorial jurisdiction to
entertain, try and adjudicate the subject complaint case and the pleas to the contrary by the
petitioner, on all counts, are bereft of merit.
No grounds are made out for exercising inherent power under Section 482 Cr.P.C. to quash and set
aside the subject complaint case or the orders passed therein.
The criminal petition is accordingly dismissed.
Interim order shall stand vacated.
A copy of this order shall be supplied online/through WhatsApp to both the learned counsel.
CHIEF JUSTICE
FR
Opendro
Cril.Petn. No.39 of 2021 Page 19
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28001333/ 10
Prateek Agarwal vs Sharmila Goyanka on 21 February, 2022
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/28001333/ 11
