Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast
Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
Author: R.Mahadevan
Bench: R.Mahadevan, Mohammed Shaffiq
TCA.No. 525 of 2021
IN THE HIGH COURT OF JUDICATURE AT MADRAS
DATED : 25.11.2021
CORAM
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE R.MAHADEVAN
and
THE HONOURABLE MR.JUSTICE MOHAMMED SHAFFIQ
T.C.A. No. 525 of 2021
Principal Commissioner of Income Tax
Company Circle-VI(1)
Chennai. .. Appellant/Respondent
Vs.
M/s. Chemplast Sanmar Limited
No.9, Cathedral Road
Chennai – 600 086. ..
Respondent/Petitioner
Tax Case Appeal filed under Section 260A of the Income Tax Act,
1961 against the order of the Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 'D' Bench,
Chennai dated 09.04.2021 in M.P. No. 94/Chny/2020 in ITA
No.2807/Chny/2017 for the assessment year 2010-11.
For Appellant : Mr. R.Karthik
For Respondent : Mr. R.Vijayaraghavan
1/19
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
(cid:12) TCA.No. 525 of 2021
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/628130/ 1
Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
JUDGMENT
(Judgment was delivered by R.Mahadevan, J.) This tax case appeal has been filed by the appellant /
Revenue, against the order of the Tribunal dated 09.04.2021, in M.P. No. 94/Chny/2020 in
following substantial question of law:-
“1. Whether on the facts and circumstances of the case and in law, the Tribunal is
legally correct in holding that the sale of Carbon Emission Reduction (CER) also
known as Carbon Credits is to be considered as capital receipt and not liable to tax?”
2.Heard the learned counsel appearing for both sides, who jointly submitted that the issue raised in
this appeal has already been decided in favour of the assessee, by a decision of this court in S.P.
Spinning Mills (P) Ltd. v. Assistant Commissioner of Income Tax [(2021) 433 ITR 61 (Mad), the
relevant passage of which is profitably, extracted below:
“28.Insofar as substantial question of law no.4 is https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
concerned, it deals with carbon credit. The question, as to the manner in which
carbon credit receipt has to be treated, has been considered by several High Courts
and it has been held that the receipt should be treated as a capital receipt. In this
regard, it would be beneficial to refer to the decision in the case of CIT vs. Subhash
Kabini Power Corporation Ltd., [(2016) 385 ITR 0592 (Karn.)]. In the said decision,
the Karnataka High Court approved the view taken by the ITAT, Hyderabad Bench,
which decision was upheld by the High Court of Andhra Pradesh in the case of CIT
vs. My Home Power Ltd. [(2014) 365 ITR 0082 (AP)], which was subsequently
followed by the ITAT, Chennai and Jaipur Benches. The operative portion of the
judgment reads as follows:-
“11. The decision has been upheld by the Hon’ble Andhra Pradesh High Court. This
decision has been subsequently followed by the ITAT Chennai and Jaipur Benches.
There is no decision either from the Hon’ble Supreme Court or from the Hon’ble
jurisdictional High Court. These decisions indicate that sale of carbon credit would
result capital receipt which is not taxable. When we confronted the learned DR with
regard to this position, it was contended that the position as on the day when the
assessment order was passed, is to be seen and on that day these orders were not
available. Therefore, the assessee cannot claim the benefit of these orders. However,
we do not concur with this proposition of the learned CIT, because the Full Bench of
the Hon’ble Punjab & Haryana High Court in the case of Aruna Luthra reported in
254 ITR 76 has held that a Court decide a dispute between the parties. The case can
involve decision on facts. It can also involve a decision on point of law. Both may
have bearing on the ultimate result of the case. When a Court interprets a provision,
it decides as to what is the meaning and effect of the words used by the Legislature, it
is the declaration https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis regarding the statute. In other
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/628130/ 2
Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
words the judgment declares as to what the legislature had said at the time of
promulgation of the law, the declaration is.........., this was the law, this is the law, this
is how the provision shall be construed. Therefore, he cannot plead that the view
taken by the Tribunal and upheld by the Hon’ble Andhra Pradesh High Court could
be considered as if applicable from the date of the decision. In the decision only the
position of the law as to how receipts from sale of carbon credits are to be treated, has
been explained. One of the argument raised by the DR was that at this stage, the
additional ground ought not to be permitted to be raised. It is pertinent to mention
here that basically, it is not a separate ground, it is a limb of arguments, which is
affecting the ultimate tax liability of the assessee. The Hon’ble Supreme Court in the
case of NTPC Ltd (Supra) has held that the Tribunal had jurisdiction to examine a
question of law which arose from the fact as found by the Income Tax authorities and
having a bearing on the tax liability of the assessee. As far as the nature of the receipt
from sale of carbon credit is concerned, it is available from the assessment stage. It is
not disputed even by the learned Commissioner, the dispute is, whether it has been
derived from the eligible industrial undertaking for qualifying the grant of deduction
u/s 80IA. The learned Commissioner felt that this receipt has not been derived from
the industrial undertaking which will be eligible for grant of deduction u/s 80IA and
the Assessing Officer committed an error in including the receipt in the eligible
profit. Those facts are already on the record. It is to be seen, whether the receipt is of
capital nature or of a revenue nature. Even in case the order of the CIT is upheld,
then, in law, it will affect the computation of income, ultimately because the receipt
will not be taxable, it will not come under the ambit of computation of income.
Simultaneously it will be excluded from the deduction u/s 80IA as well as of the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis total income. The result will remain as it is. It is a
revenue neutral case. Therefore, in view of the ratio laid down by the Hon’ble
jurisdictional High Court in the case of Gopala Gowda (Supra), the second condition
for taking action u/s 263 does not exist. The assessment order is not prejudicial to the
interests of the Revenue. In view of the above discussion, we allow the appeal of the
assessee and quash the impugned order of the learned CIT passed u/s 263 of the
Income Tax Act.” The aforesaid shows that, so far as the question as to whether, the
income by sale of carbon credit could be termed as capital receipt or profit, is
concerned, the Tribunal has considered the decision of the Hyderabad Bench and it
has further taken note of the fact that decision of the Tribunal of Hyderabad Bench
was carried before the Andhra Pradesh High Court and the said decision was not
interfered with. The Tribunal, in its decision has also referred to the decision of the
Apex Court with regard to power under Section 263 of the Income Tax Act, 1961
(hereinafter referred to as “the Act”) of the revisional authority.
4. In our view, the principal question, which may arise is, as to whether by sale of
carbon credit capital receipt is generated or a profit out of the business activity of the
assessee. More or less, in a similar case, the Apex Court had an occasion to consider
such an issue in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax v. Maheshwari Devi Jute
Mills Ltd. [(1965) 57 ITR 36 (SC)], wherein the question came up for consideration
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/628130/ 3
Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
before the Apex Court as to whether by sale of loom-hours, the amount received
could be termed as capital receipt or the income out of business.
In the said decision, the Apex Court held that the amount received out of sale of loom-hours can be
termed as capital receipt and not income out of business.
5. Subsequently, in a later decision of the Apex https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Court, a question
came up for consideration in the case of M/s. Empire Jute Co. Ltd. v. Commissioner of Income Tax
[(1980) 4 SCC 25] the question which arose before the Apex Court was, if loom-hours are purchased
by the manufacturing mills, whether it can be termed as capital expenditure or revenue expenditure.
In the said decision, the earlier decision of the Apex Court in the case of Maheswari Devi Jute Mills
(supra) was also relied upon by the Revenue and after considering the same, the Apex Court at
paragraph Nos. 4 and 5 observed thus:
“4. Now an expenditure incurred by an assessee can qualify for deduction under
Section 10(2) (xv) only if it is incurred wholly and exclusively for the purpose of his
business, but even if it fulfils this requirement, it is not enough; it must further be of
revenue as distinguished from capital nature. Here in the present case it was not
contended on behalf of the Revenue that the sum of Rs. 2,03,255 was not laid out
wholly and exclusively for the purpose of the assessee’s business but the only
argument was and this argument found favour with the High Court, that it
represented capital expenditure and was hence not deductible under Section 10(2)
(xv). The sole question which therefore arises for determination in the appeal is
whether the sum of Rs. 2,03,255 paid by the assessee represented capital expenditure
or revenue expenditure. We shall have to examine this question on principle but
before we do so, we must refer to the decision of this Court in Maheshwari Devi Jute
Mills case since that is the decision which weighed heavily with the High Court, in
fact, compelled it to negative the claim of the assessee and hold the expenditure to be
on capital account. That was a converse case where the question was whether an
amount received by the assessee for sale of loom hours was in the nature of capital
receipt or revenue receipt. The view taken by this Court was that it was in the nature
of capital receipt https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis and hence not taxable. It was
contended on behalf of the Revenue, relying on this decision, that just as the amount
realised for sale of loom hours was held to be capital receipt, so also the amount paid
for purchase of loom hours must be held to be of capital nature. But this argument
suffers from a double fallacy.
5. In the first place it is not a universally true proposition that what may be capital
receipt in the hands of the payee must necessarily be capital expenditure in relation
to the payer. The fact that a certain payment constitutes income or capital receipt in
the hands of the recipient is not material in determining whether the payment is
revenue or capital disbursement qua the prayer.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/628130/ 4
Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
It was felicitously pointed out by Macnaghten, J. in Racecourse Betting Control Board v. Wildthat a
“payment may be a revenue payment from the point of view of the payer and a capital payment from
the point of view of the receiver and vice versa”. Therefore, the decision in Maheshwari Devi Jute
Mills case cannot be regarded as an authority for the proposition that payment made by an assessee
for purchase of loom hours would be capital expenditure. Whether it is capital expenditure or
revenue expenditure would have to be determined having regard to the nature of the transaction
and other relevant factors.” Thereafter, the Apex Court while considering the test to find out as to
whether a particular expenditure can be termed as capital or revenue expenditure observed at
paragraph Nos. 8 and 9 as under:
“8. The decided cases have, from time to time, evolved various tests for distinguishing
between capital and revenue expenditure but no test is paramount or conclusive.
There is no all embracing formula which can provide a ready solution to the problem;
no touchstone has been devised. Every case has to be decided on its own facts
keeping in mind the broad picture of the whole operation
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis in respect of which the expenditure has been
incurred. But a few tests formulated by the courts may be referred to as they might
help to arrive at a correct decision of the controversy between the parties. One
celebrated test is that laid down by Lord Cave, L.C., in Atherion v. British Insulated
and Halsby Cables Ltd. where the learned law Lord stated:
When an expenditure is made, not only once and for all, but with a view to bringing
into existence an asset or an advantage for the enduring benefit of a trade, there is
very good reason (in the absence of special circumstances leading to an opposite
conclusion) for treating such an expenditure as properly attributable not to revenue
but to capital.
This test, as the parenthetical clause shows, must yield where there are special
circumstances leading to a contrary conclusion and, as pointed out by Lord Radcliffe
in Commissioner of Taxes v. Nchanga Consolidated Copper Mines Ltd., it would be
misleading to suppose that in all cases, securing a benefit for the business would be
prima facie capital expenditure “so long as the benefit is not so transitory as to have
no endurance at all”. There may be cases where expenditure, even if incurred for
obtaining advantage of enduring benefit, may, nonetheless, be on revenue account
and the test of enduring benefit may break down. It is not every advantage of
enduring nature, acquired by an assessee that brings the case within the principle
laid down in this test. What is material to consider is the nature of the advantage in a
commercial sense and it is only where the advantage is in the capital field that the
expenditure would be disallowable on an application of this test. If the advantage
consists merely in facilitating the assessee’s trading operations or enabling the
management and conduct of the assessee’s business to be carried on more efficiently
or more profitably while https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis leaving the fixed capital
untouched, the expenditure would be on revenue account, even though the advantage
may endure for an indefinite future. The test of enduring benefit is therefore not a
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/628130/ 5
Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
certain or conclusive test and it cannot be applied blindly and mechanically without
regard to the particular facts and circumstances of a given case. But even if this test
were applied in the present case, it does not yield a conclusion in favour of the
Revenue. Here, by purchase of loom hours no new asset has been created. There is no
addition to or expansion of the profit-making apparatus of the assessee. The
income-earning machine remains what it was prior to the purchase of loom hours.
The assessee is merely enabled to operate the profit- making structure for a longer
number of hours. And this advantage is clearly not of an enduring nature. It is limited
in its duration to six months and, moreover, the additional working hours per week
transferred to the assessee have to be utilised during the week and cannot be carried
forward to the next week. It is, therefore, not possible to say that any advantage of
enduring benefit in the capital field was acquired by the assessee in purchasing loom
hours and the test of enduring benefit cannot help the Revenue.
9. Another test which is often applied is the one based on distinction between fixed
and circulating capital.
This test was applied by Lord Haldane in the leading case of John Smith & Son v. Moore where the
learned law Lord drew the distinction between fixed capital and circulation capital in words which
have almost acquired the status of a definition.
He said:
Fixed capital (is) what the owner turns to profit by keeping it in his own possession;
circulating capital (is) what he makes profit of by parting with it and letting it change
masters.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Now so long as the expenditure in question can be
clearly referred to the acquisition of an asset which falls within one or the other of
these two categories, such a test would be a critical one.
But this test also sometimes break down because there are many forms of
expenditure which do not fall easily within these two categories and not infrequently,
as pointed out by Lord Radcliffe in Commissioner of Taxes v. Nchanga Consolidated
Copper Mines Ltd., the line of demarcation is difficult to draw and leads to subtle
distinctions between profit that is made “out of” assets and profit that is made “upon”
assets or “with” assets. Moreover, there may be cases where expenditure, though
referable to or in connection with fixed capital, is nevertheless allowable as revenue
expenditure. An illustrative example would be of expenditure incurred in preserving
or maintaining capital assets. This test is therefore clearly not one of universal
application. But even if we were to apply this test, it would not be possible to
characterise the amount paid for purchase of loom hours as capital expenditure,
because acquisition of additional loom hours does not add at all to the fixed capital of
the assessee. The permanent structure of which the income is to be the produce or
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/628130/ 6
Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
fruit remains the same; it is not enlarged. We are not sure whether loom hours can be
regarded as part of circulating capital like labour, raw material, power etc., but it is
clear beyond doubt that they are not part of fixed capital and hence even the
application of this test does not compel the conclusion that the payment for purchase
of loom hours was in the nature of capital expenditure.” After making the aforesaid
observation, at paragraph No. 10, the Apex Court, on the basis of the facts of the said
case concluded as under: “Similarly, if payment has to be made for securing
additional power https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis every week, such payment would
also be part of the cost of operating the profit-making structure and hence in the
nature of revenue expenditure, even though the effect of acquiring additional power
would be to augment the productivity of the profit-making structure. On the same
analogy payment made for purchase of loom hours which would enable the assessee
to operate the profit-making structure for a longer number of hours than those
permitted under the working time agreement would also be part of the cost of
performing the income earning operations and hence revenue in character.”
Accordingly, the payment made for purchase of loom-hours by Jute Mill Company
was held to be Revenue expenditure.
6. At this stage, we may also refer to the decision of the Andhra Pradesh High Court, which has been
relied upon by the Tribunal in the impugned order. More or less, identical question was raised and
the Andhra Pradesh High Court in the case of Commissioner of Income Tax-IV v. My Home Power
Ltd. [(2014) 46 Taxmann.com 314 (Andhra Pradesh), at paragraph No. 3 observed thus:
“3. We have considered the aforesaid submission and we are unable to accept the
same, as the learned Tribunal has factually found that “Carbon Credit is not an
offshoot of business but an offshoot of environmental concerns. No asset is generated
in the course of business but it is generated due to environmental concerns.
“We agree with this factual analysis as the assessee is carrying on the business of
power generation. The Carbon Credit is not even directly linked with power
generation. On the sale of excess Carbon Credits the income was received and hence
as correctly held by the Tribunal it is capital receipt and it cannot be business receipt
o r i n c o m e . I n t h e c i r c u m s t a n c e s , w e d o n o t f i n d a n y
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis element of law in this appeal.” The aforesaid shows
that the Andhra Pradesh High Court has confirmed the view of the Tribunal that
Carbon Credit is not an offshoot of business, but an offshoot of environmental
concerns. No asset is generated in the course of business, but it is generated due to
environmental concerns. It was also found that the carbon credit is not even directly
linked with the power generation and the income is received by sale of the excess
carbon credits. It was found that the Tribunal has rightly held that it is capital receipt
and not business income.
7. As such, in our view, when the issue is already covered by the decision of the Andhra Pradesh
High Court, wherein the view taken by the Tribunal of Hyderabad Bench has been followed in the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/628130/ 7
Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
present case, one may say that no substantial question of law would arise for consideration.”
29.The Hon'ble Division Bench of this Court in the case of PCIT vs. Arun Textiles Pvt.
Ltd.,[T.C.A.No.606 of 2016, dated 29.8.2016], after referring to the decision in My Home Power
Ltd., (supra), dismissed the appeal filed by the Revenue and confirmed the order passed by the ITAT
holding that sale of carbon credits has to be considered as capital receipt and accordingly, it is not
taxable.
30. The argument of Ms.V.Pushpa, learned Senior Standing Counsel is by referring to the
substantial questions of law framed by the assessee and it is submitted that if the receipts from sale
of carbon credit has to be treated as a capital receipt, then the assessee could not have claimed it as a
deduction under Section 80IA of the Act and if the substantial question of law as framed by the
assessee is to be answered, it should be answered against the assessee.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
31.In our considered view, there is a slightly different approach that needs to be adopted, as this
Court exercises power under Section 260A of the Act, while deciding the substantial question of law.
The assessee is required to place all materials before the Assessing Officer and make a full and true
disclosure of their entire financial. If any query is raised by the Assessing Officer, the assessee is
bound to answer. Thereafter, it is the Assessing Officer, who has to apply the law and complete the
assessment. It has been held that it is not for the assessee to assist the Assessing Officer to complete
the assessment in a particular manner or to supply a draft assessment order to the Assessing Officer.
At this juncture, it is beneficial to refer to the decision in the case of CIT vs. India Express (Madurai)
Pvt. Ltd., [(1983) 104 ITR 705 (Madras)]. The reference to the High Court was to decide the scope of
the appellate jurisdiction of the Income Tax Tribunal.
32.The Hon'ble Division Bench refers to three decisions of the Hon'ble Supreme Court in the case of
Hukumchand Mills Ltd. vs. CIT [(1967) 63 ITR 232 (SC)]; CIT vs. Mahalakshmi Textile Mills Ltd.,
[(1967) 66 ITR 710]; and CIT vs. Nelliappan [(1967) 66 ITR 722 (SC)] wherein, the observations
made by the Hon'ble Supreme Court were referred to, which are quoted hereunder:-
"In hearing an appeal, the Tribunal may give leave to the assessee to urge grounds
not set forth in the memorandum of appeal, and in deciding the appeal the Tribunal
is not restricted to the grounds set forth in the memorandum of appeal or taken by
leave of the Tribunal. The Tribunal was, therefore, competent to allow the assessees
to raise the contention relating to the cash credits which was not made the
subject-matter of a ground in the memorandum of appeal. It cannot be said that in
accepting the contention of the assessee that the cash credits
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis represented income from the business withheld
from the books, the Tribunal made out a new case inconsistent with the assessee's
own plea. In any event, the Tribunal is not precluded from adjusting the tax liability
of the assessee in the light of its findings merely because the findings are inconsistent
with the case pleaded by the assessees."
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/628130/ 8
Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
33.In Mahalakshmi Textile Mill's case, it was held as hereunder:- “Under sub-s. (4) of s. 33 of the
Indian Income-tax Act, 1922, the Appellate Tribunal is competent to pass such orders on the appeal
"as it thinks fit". There is nothing in the Income-tax Act which restricts the Tribunal to the
determination of questions raised before the departmental authorities. All questions whether of law
or of fact which relate to the assessment of the assessee may be raised before the Tribunal. If' for
reasons recorded by the departmental authorities in rejecting a contention raised by the assessee,
grant of relief to him on another ground is justified, it would be open to the departmental
authorities and the Tribunal, and indeed they would be under a duty to grant that relief. The right of
the assessee to relief is not restricted to the plea raised by him.”
34.After referring to the above decisions, it was pointed out that the Appellate Tribunal is competent
to pass such orders on the appeal, as it thinks fit and it would be the duty of the Tribunal to decide
all questions on fact and law before it, even though it was not raised by the departmental authorities.
After referring to the powers of the Tribunal and that of this Court and the Hon'ble Supreme Court,
it was pointed out that based on the cardinal principle, which has been incorporated as a veritable
constitutional provision, that no tax can be levied or collected save under authority of law.
35.It was further pointed out that the task of an Appellate Authority under the taxing statute,
especially a non-departmental authority like the Tribunal, is to address
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis its mind to the factual and legal basis of an assessment for the
purpose of properly adjusting the taxpayer's liability to make it accord with the legal provisions
governing his assessment. Since be-all and end-all of the statutory provisions, especially those
relating to the administration and management of income tax is to ascertain the taxpayer's liability
correctly to the last pie, if it were possible, the various provisions relating to Appeal, Second Appeal,
Reference and the like can hardly be equated to a lis or dispute as arises between two parties in a
civil litigation.
36.It was further pointed out that although the income-tax statute makes the Department or its
officers figure as parties in the appeal proceedings, they are not in the strict sense what are called by
American writers as parties to adversary proceedings. This is so because, the very object of the
appeal is not to decide a point raised as a dispute, but any point which goes into the adjustment of
the taxpayer's liability. In that sense, a view prevails, even in England, that the authorities sitting in
an appeal in tax case, cannot be regarded as deciding a lis, but they are only engaged in an
administrative act of adjusting the taxpayer's liability.
37.Further, it was pointed out that under our fiscal jurisprudence, we may regard the Appellate
Authorities as exercising quasi judicial functions in the same sense, as a tax officer does. But, even
so, the proceedings before them lack the basic elements of adversary proceedings. It, therefore,
follows that the discussion and the scope of the appellate jurisdiction of the Tribunal and the other
authorities under the tax code cannot be pursued by drawing a parallel to civil litigation with
particular reference to appeal from decrees, and the like. Further, it was pointed out that in the case
of Mahalakshmi Textile Mills Ltd., the Hon'ble Supreme Court observed that the
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis Tribunal is not precluded from “adjusting the tax liabilities” of the
assessee in the light of its findings merely because, the findings are inconsistent with the case
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/628130/ 9
Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
pleaded by the assessee. The decision of the Hon'ble Full Bench of this Court in the case of State of
Tamil Nadu vs. Arulmurugan & Co., [(1982) 51 STC 381] was referred to wherein, it was held that
the Appellate Authorities perform precisely the same functions, as the assessing authority. The
above decision and the findings rendered are a clear answer to the arguments raised before us by the
Revenue contending that substantial question of law no.4, as framed has to be decided against the
assessee. We, thus, have no hesitation to hold that the Tribunal failed to exercise its power in a
proper prospective as a final fact finding authority and examining as to whether there is any
adjustment required to be made in the assessee's tax liability qua the various decisions of the Court,
which have held that receipt on account of sale of carbon credit is capital in nature.
38.In the instant case, the assessee while preferring appeal before the CIT(A), has specifically raised
a contention that the receipts from sale of carbon credit is a capital receipt and cannot be included
in the taxable income. Though this ground raised by the assessee before the CIT(A) has been
recorded in the order, the CIT(A) did not take a decision on the same. Similar ground was raised by
the assessee before the Tribunal, which was not considered by the Tribunal, though the Tribunal
refers to all the decisions relied on by the assessee, but would pin the assessee to his claim made
under Section 80IA of the Act and accordingly, negatives it. This finding of the Tribunal is wholly
erroneous and perverse. The Tribunal was expected to apply the law and take a decision in the
matter and if the CIT(A) or the Assessing Officer had failed to apply the law, then the Tribunal was
bound to https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis apply the law. This is so because, in the light of the
decisions referred above, the receipt by way of sale of carbon credit has been held to be capital
receipt. Therefore, it is of a little consequence as to the claim made by the assessee under Section
80IA of the Act or in other words, the question of taking a decision as to whether the deduction is
admissible under Section 80IA of the Act is a non-issue. If the receipt from the sale of carbon credit
is a capital receipt, then it will go out of the purview of the gross total income as defined under
Section 80B(5) of the Act, which expression is found in Section 80IA of the Act. Thus, if the receipts
by sale of carbon credit will not fall within the definition of total income, the same cannot be
included under Section 80IA of the Act. Therefore, even if the assessee has made such a claim, that
cannot be a reason for the Tribunal to non-suit the assessee.
39.One more important factor to be noted is that Section 115BBG of the Act was introduced by
Finance Act, 2017 with effect from 01.04.2018, prior to which, there was no such provision and
Mr.V.S.Jayakumar, learned counsel for the assessee would submit that the assessees were under
utter confusion as to under which provision of the Act, they should make a claim for deduction and
having left with no other option, had been making the claim under Section 80IA of the Act and
merely because the assessee due to uncertainty in the legal position, had made a claim under Section
80IA of the Act that cannot be a reason to deny a benefit granted in favour of the assessee. The
submission, made by Mr.V.S.Jayakumar, learned counsel for the appellant, in this regard, is well
found and accepted.
40.For the above reasons, substantial question of law no.4 is answered in favour of the assessee.”
3.Following the above decision, this tax case appeal stands https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
dismissed and the substantial question of law is answered against the Revenue. No costs.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/628130/ 10
Principal Commissioner Of Income Tax vs M/S. Chemplast Sanmar Limited on 25 November, 2021
[R.M.D., J.] [M.S.Q., J.] 25.11.2021 Index : Yes/No Speaking/Non-Speaking Order Maya To
1.The Income Tax Appellate Tribunal 'D' Bench, Chennai
2.The Principal Commissioner of Income Tax Company Circle-VI(1) Chennai.
https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis R. MAHADEVAN, J.
and MOHAMMED SHAFFIQ, J.
Maya Dated : 25.11.2021 https://www.mhc.tn.gov.in/judis
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/628130/ 11
