Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30
December, 2023
Author: Vinod Chatterji Koul
Bench: Vinod Chatterji Koul
HIGH COURT OF JAMMU & KASHMIR AND LADAKH
AT JAMMU
CRMC No.758/2017
Reserved on: 06.12.2023
Pronounced on: 30.12.2023
Pritam Chand alias Pritam Singh, age 66 years
S/o Ram Krishan
R/o Akalpur Morh, Lower Muthi, Jammu,
Ownjer, Editor & Publisher,
NAWA-I-WAQT Azeem
Daily News Paper.
..... Appellant/Petitioner(s)
Through: - Mr. Ajay Sharma Advocate
v/s
Dr. Kamal Saini
S/o Sh. B.B.Saini,
R/o H.No.214-A,
Sainik Colony, Jammu.
Through:- Mr. Anil Sethi Advocate.
Coram: HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL, JUDGE
ORDER
1. Petitioner through the medium of the present writ petition is seeking quashing of the proceedings
/complaint filed by the respondent against the petitioner for offences punishable under Sections
499, 500, 501, 502 RPC and order dated 27.03.2017 passed by the Court of learned Judicial
Magistrate 1st Class/City Judge, Jammu ( for short „trial Court(cid:129))
2. The aforesaid complaint is sought to be quashed by the petitioner in this petition precisely, on the
following grounds:
(i) That even if the allegations in the complaint and the statement of the
complainant/respondent no.1 herein are taken at their face value and accepted in
their entirety still no case is made out against the petitioner much less offence under
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 1
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
section 499,500 RPC. Not only this, the allegations in the complaint and the
statement of the complainant and witness do not constitute any offence and the
pendency of the complaint/ proceedings before trial court amounts to abuse of the
process of law and are required to be quashed on this ground alone;
(ii) The allegations made against the petitioner in complaint are so absurd and
inherently improbable on the basis of which no prudent person can lead to the
conclusion that there are sufficient grounds to proceed in the present complaint;
(iii) That though the respondent has filed complaint U/s 499, 500 RPC but the court
below took the cognizance of offence U/s 499, 500, 501 & 502 RPC though there was
no material before the court below to take the cognizance, but despite that the court
below took the cognizance of the offence which prima facie are not made out against
the petitioner;
(iv) That all the necessary ingredients of the alleged offence are missing and the
continuance of the proceedings shall be an exercise in futility leading to unnecessary
harassment to the petitioner and abuse of the process of court;
(v) That viewed from any angle the complaint and proceedings before the court below
is per-se illegal and contrary to the provisions of the law and cannot stand the
principles laid down by the apex court;
(vi) That the respondent has filed the complaint with an oblique motive to victimize
the petitioner and to harass him which is not permissible under law as per the law
laid down by the Hon`ble Apex Court in Bhajan Lal's case;
(vii) That the news items published in the news paper were based on information
supplied to the petitioner under the provisions of J&K Right to Information Act and
the same are nothing but only truth. Since the news item on the basis of which the
respondent has filed the complaint, were published on the basis of information
supplied to the petitioner by the concerned department as such there was no reason
for the petitioner to disbelieve them and the petitioner bona fidly believed them to be
true and publish it in the news paper as such no offence is said to be committed by
the petitioner as the same falls within the exception 1;
3. Briefly stating the facts are that the respondent/complaint filed a complaint under Sections 499,
500, 501, 502 RPC against the petitioner herein wherein he alleged that the
respondent/complainant has remained a highly decorated, honest and brave officer and has earned
impeccable respect in the society and is respected by police force, people of the civil society and
baradari of the complainant. The petitioner has been deliberately and maliciously carrying out false,
scandalour and defamatory news items against the complainant in his newspaper. He has also been
deliberately and with ulterior purposes carrying out a malicious campaign to cause damage to his
reputation. The name and goodwill enjoyed by him in the society has been extensively damaged
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 2
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
because of the news items carried by him in his newspaper. This newspaper namely Nawa-e-Waqt
has very thin publication but has he made it a point to distribute in the close circle of the
complainant on each day when the newspaper carries malicious news items against him. All this has
been done with the intention to harm the reputation of the complainant.
4. The trial Court after recording the statement of the complainant and the witness and taking into
consideration the allegations and the documents attached with the complaint took the cognizance
and issued process against the petitioner.
5. The learned counsel for the petitioner submits that the trial Court has wrongly taken the
cognizance though there was no material placed before it to make out a case for offences punishable
under Sections 499, 500,501, 502 RPC. The allegations contained in the complaint and the
statement of the complainant and his witnesses do not constitute any offence. The necessary
ingredients are missing and the respondent has filed the compliant with an oblique motive to
victimize the petitioner and to harass him. The news items published in the newspaper were based
on information supplied to the petitioner under the provisions of J&K Right to Information Act and
the same are nothing but only truth. The news item on which the complainant has filed the
complaint were published based on information provided to the petitioner by the concerned
department as such, there was no reason for the petitioner to disbelieve. Petitioner bonafidly
believed them to be true and published it in the newspaper, as such no offence is said to be
committed by the petitioner as same falls within the exception as provided under Article 19 (1) (a) of
the Constitution of India.
6. In support of his contention he has relied upon 2010(5) SCC 600, CRMC No.289 of 2018, I.A
No.1/2018 & 2/2018 dated 23.8.2021 titled Asif Iqbal Naik v State of J&K, 2021(6)JKJ(HC) 78, and
2013(2) SriLJ 705.
7. Learned counsel for the respondent submits that the news item carried by the petitioner would
show that the petitioner has published such news items with intention to cause damage to the
reputation of the respondent. Such news items carried do not fall within any exception as provided
under Article 19 (1) (a) of the Constitution of India. He submits that the petitioner has no right to
tarnish or damage the reputation of the petitioner only by claiming that he has published the news
items in the newspaper on the information. The respondent has fundamental right to reputation. He
submits that the news items carried have no substance nor such publications are based upon any
fact. Such information cannot be said to be the publications based upon any information. The right
to information Act cannot be used as a tool to tarnish the image of the respondent. The defamatory
statements have been published by the petitioner under the garb of freedom of speech and
expression which right cannot be said to include right to defame anybody without any proof.
8. I have considered the complaint, documents placed on file, grounds taken in this petition as well
as the arguments put forth by the learned counsel for the parties.
9. So far as the judgments relied upon by the petitioner are concerned, in the facts and
circumstances of the case same do not lend any help to him so far as this petition is concerned.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 3
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
10. Statements published by the petitioner in his news paper, which are said to be defamatory and
which according to the respondent caused damaged to his reputation are as under:
"23 Jan 2014- "Rags to riches story" of IGP Saini who publicly claims to be "Honest".
25 April 2014-"Accused gets Gun license as uncle "SP Border" misuses his official position"
26 April-"Govt. land at Sarora "grabbed" by retd. IGP Kamal Saini, Domana Police dragging feet to
register FIR"
01 May 2014-"Isn`t it a misleading property statement of IGP (retd) Kamal Saini"
20 May 2014-"Violating police norms, IGP (retd) Kamal Saini appointed 1186 near and dears as
SPOs"
22 May-"The Dishonest Deal: Kamal Saini gave out of promotion of his sister`s
son-in-law when he was SP, Poonch"
21 Feb 2017-"Crime branch Jammu failed to book retired IG Kamal Saini:
„not admitted(cid:129) enquiry despite proofs(cid:129)
11. The press must refrain from publishing contents in the newspaper that are
manifestly defamatory in nature against an individual. The content published should
be duly verified and there should be sufficient reason to believe that it is true and
serves the public good.
Truth is no defence for publishing defamatory material against a private citizen where no public
interest is involved. Furthermore, the press has the right to expose cases of corruption and
irregularities in public bodies as a custodian of public interest but such reporting should be based on
irrefutable evidence, published after due inquiry and verification from the concerned sources and
should include the version of the person or authority being commented upon. In Subramanian
Swamy v. Union of India, Ministry of Law and Ors. 2016 SCC Online SC 550, it has been held as
under:
" In a democracy an individual has a right to criticize and dissent, but this right under
Article 19(1)(a) is not absolute and he cannot defame another person as that would
offend victim`s fundamental right to reputation which is a facet of Art.21 of the
Constitution. There needs to be a proper balancing of the two fundamental rights."
12. The respondent/complainant claimed that false and defamatory imputations were made against
him without any proof or verification. Examining the language used in the current newspaper article
and against Kamal Saini this Court can firmly conclude that the headlines are overriding and in
contravention to the contents of the material alleged to have been received by the petitioner. The
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 4
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
articles, when read in totality, would indicate that its tenor is clearly to defame the complainant by
terming him as a „corrupt person(cid:129) who throughout has misused his position of power and is a
dishonest person.
13. The mode and manner in which the headlines were drafted of the newspaper articles clearly
reflects the intention of the petitioner which was to defame the respondent. The material collected
by the petitioner was not published with purely the information received but on the contrary the
petitioner`s own interpretation and opinion was also mixed and published in the newspaper. This in
conclusion cannot be protected as free speech protected under Article 19 of the Constitution.
14.Section 499 RPC provides that whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by
signs or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any person
intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such imputation will harm, the
reputation of such person, is said to defame that person. It would be advantageous, for facility of
reference, to reproduce Section 499 infra:
"Section 499.--Whoever, by words either spoken or intended to be read, or by signs
or by visible representations, makes or publishes any imputation concerning any
person intending to harm, or knowing or having reason to believe that such
imputation will harm, the reputation of such person, is said, except in the cases
hereinafter excepted, to defame that person.
Explanation 1.--It may amount to defamation to impute anything to a deceased
person, if the imputation would harm the reputation of that person if living, and is
intended to be hurtful to the feelings of his family or other near relatives.
Explanation 2.--It may amount to defamation to make an imputation concerning a
company or an association or collection of persons as such.
Explanation 3.--An imputation in the form of an alternative or expressed ironically,
may amount to defamation. Explanation 4.--No imputation is said to harm a person's
reputation, unless that imputation directly or indirectly, in the estimation of others,
lowers the moral or intellectual character of that person, or lowers the character of
that person in respect of his caste or of his calling, or lowers the credit of that person,
or causes it to be believed that the body of that person is in a loathsome state, or in a
state generally considered as disgraceful.
Illustrations
(a) A says-- "Z is an honest man; he never stole B's watch";
intending to cause it to be believed that Z did steal B's watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within
one of the exceptions.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 5
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
(b) A is asked who stole B's watch. A points to Z, intending to cause it to be believed that Z stole B's
watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions.
(c) A draws a picture of Z running away with B's watch, intending it to be believed that Z stole B's
watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions.
(d) d) A draws a picture of Z running away with B's watch, intending it to be believed that Z stole B's
watch. This is defamation, unless it fall within one of the exceptions. First Exception.--Imputation of
truth which public good requires to be made or published.--It is not defamation to impute anything
which is true concerning any person, if it be for the public good that the imputation should be made
or published. Whether or not it is for the public good is a question of fact.
Second Exception.--Public conduct of public servants.--It is not defamation to express in good faith
any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of a public servant in the discharge of his public
functions, or respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Third Exception.--Conduct of any person touching any public question.--It is not defamation to
express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the conduct of any person touching any
public question, and respecting his character, so far as his character appears in that conduct, and no
further. Fourth Exception.--Publication of reports of proceedings of courts.--It is not defamation to
publish substantially true report of the proceedings of a Court of Justice, or of the result of any such
proceedings.
Explanation.--A Justice of the Peace or other officer holding an enquiry in open Court preliminary
to a trial in a Court of Justice, is a Court within the meaning of the above section.
Fifth Exception.--Merits of case decided in Court or conduct of witnesses and others concerned.--It
is not defamation to express in good faith any opinion whatever respecting the merits of any case,
civil or criminal, which has been decided by a Court of Justice, or respecting the conduct of any
person as a party, witness or agent, in any such case, or respecting the character of such person, as
far as his character appears in that conduct, and no further.
Sixth Exception.--Merits of public performance.--It is not defamation to express in good faith any
opinion respecting the merits of any performance which its author has submitted to the judgment of
the public, or respecting the character of the author so far as his character appears in such
performance, and no further.
Explanation.--A performance may be submitted to the judgment of the public expressly or by acts on
the part of the author which imply such submission to the judgment of the public.
Seventh Exception.--Censure passed in good faith by person having lawful authority over
another.--It is not defamation in a person having over another any authority, either conferred by law
or arising out of a lawful contract made with that other, to pass in good faith any censure on the
conduct of that other in matters to which such lawful authority relates. Eighth
Exception.--Accusation preferred in good faith to authorised person.--It is not defamation to prefer
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 6
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
in good faith an accusation against any person to any of those who have lawful authority over that
person with respect to the subject-matter of accusation.
Ninth Exception.--Imputation made in good faith by person for protection of his or other's
interests.--It is not defamation to make an imputation on the character of another provided that the
imputation be made in good faith for the protection of the interests of the person making it, or of
any other person, or for the public good.
Tenth Exception.--Caution intended for good of person to whom conveyed or for public good.--It is
not defamation to convey a caution, in good faith, to one person against another, provided that such
caution be intended for the good of the person to whom it is conveyed, or of some person in whom
that person is interested, or for the public good."
15.It is pertinent to mention here that the allegations made against any person if found to be false it
can affect his reputation. Reputation is a sort of right to enjoy the good opinion of others and it is a
personal right and an injury to reputation is a personal injury. Thus, defamation is injurious to
reputation. Reputation has been defined in dictionary as "to have a good name; the credit, honor, or
character which is derived from a favourable public opinion or esteem and character by report".
Personal rights of a human being include the right of reputation. A good reputation is an element of
personal security and is protected by the Constitution equally with the right to the enjoyment of life,
liberty and property. So, it has been held to be anessential component vis-à-vis right to life of a
citizen under Article 21 of the Constitution. International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights,
1966,recognizes the right to have opinions and the right of freedom of expression under Article 19 is
subject to the right of reputation of others. Reputation is "not only a salt of life but the purest
treasure and the most precious perfume of life". [See: Smt. Kiran Bedi and Jinder Singh v. The
Committee of Inquiry and another, AIR 1989 SC 714; Board of Trustees of the Port of Bombay v.
Dilipkumar Raghavendranath Nadkarni and others, AIR 1983 SC 109; Nilgiris Bar Association v. TK
Mahalingam and another, AIR 1998 SC 398; Dr. Mehmood Nayyar Azam v. State of Chattisgarh and
others, AIR 2012 SC 2573; Vishwanath Sitaram Agrawal v. Sau Sarla Vishwanath Agrawal, AIR 2012
SC 586; and Kishore Samrite v. State of U.P. and others, (2013) 2 SCC 398].
16.The scope of Section 482 Cr.P.C. is well defined and inherent powers could be exercised by the
High Court to give effect to an order under the Code, to prevent abuse of the process of court; and to
otherwise secure the ends of justice. This extraordinary power is to be exercised ex debito justitiae.
However, in exercise of such powers, it is not permissible for the High Court to appreciate the
evidence as it can only evaluate material documents on record to the extent of its prima facie
satisfaction about existence of sufficient ground for proceedings against accused and the court
cannot look into materials, acceptability of which is essentially a matter for trial.
17.Law does not prohibit entertaining a petition under Section 482 Cr.P.C. for quashing the charge
sheet even before the charges are framed or before the application of discharge is filed or even
during its pendency of such application before the court concerned. The High Court cannot reject an
application merely on the ground that accused can argue legal and factual issues at the time of
framing of the charge.However, inherent power of the court should not be exercised to stifle the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 7
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
legitimate prosecution but can be exercised to save the accused to undergo the agony of a criminal
trial. (Vide:
Pepsi Food Ltd. & Anr. v. Special Judicial Magistrate and others, AIR 1998 SC 128;
Ashok Chaturvedi and others v. Shitulh Chanchani and another, AIR 1998 SC 2796;
G. Sagar Suri and another v. State of U.P. and others, AIR 2000 SC 754; and Padal
Venkata Rama Reddy @ Ramu v. Kovvuri Satyanarayana Reddy and others, (2011) 12
SCC 437).
18.The judicial conscience of the High Court should persuade it to quash such criminal proceedings
in exercise of power vested in it under Section 482 Cr.P.C., if answer to all the steps, as enumerated
herein after, is in affirmative, has been so said by the Supreme Court in Rajiv Thapar v Madan Lal
Kapoor, 2013 (3) SCC 330:
"Based on the factors canvassed in the foregoing paragraphs, we would delineate the
following steps to determine the veracity of a prayer for quashing, raised by an
accused by invoking the power vested in the High Court under Section 482 of the
Code of Criminal Procedure:
i. Step one, whether the material relied upon by the accused is sound, reasonable, and
indubitable, i.e., the material is of sterling and impeccable quality?
ii. Step two, whether the material relied upon by the accused, would rule out the
assertions contained in the charges levelled against the accused, i.e., the material is
sufficient to reject and overrule the factual assertions contained in the complaint, i.e.,
the material is such, as would persuade a reasonable person to dismiss and condemn
the factual basis of the accusations as false.
iii. Step three, whether the material relied upon by the accused, has not been refuted
by the prosecution/complainant; and/or the material is such, that it cannot be
justifiably refuted by the prosecution/complainant?
iv. Step four, whether proceeding with the trial would result in an abuse of process of
the court, and would not serve the ends of justice?"
1. The SupremeCourt in State of Telangana v. Habib AbdullahJeelani, reported in 2017 (2) SCC 779,
has held that the powers under Section 482 Cr.PC or under Article 226 of the Constitution of India,
to quash the FIR, is to be exercised in a very sparing manner as is not to be used to choke or smother
the prosecution that is legitimate. Inherent powers do not confer an arbitrary jurisdiction on the
High Court to act according to whim or caprice. Such power has to be exercised sparingly, with
circumspection and in the rarest of rare cases. Inherent powers in a matter of quashing FIR have to
be exercised sparingly and with caution and only when such exercise is justifying by the test
specifically laid down in provision itself. Power under Section 482 Cr.PC, is a very wide, but
conferment of wide power requires the Court to be more conscious. It casts an onerous and more
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 8
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
diligent duty on the Court.
2. The Supreme Court in the case of State of Haryana and others v. Bhajan Lal and others, 1992
Supp (1) SCC 335, has elaborately considered scope and ambit of Section 482 Cr.P.C. and Article
226 of the Constitution of India in the background of quashing the proceedings in criminal
investigation. After noticing various earlier pronouncements, the Supreme Court made certain
categories of cases by way of illustration, where the power under Section 482 Cr. P.C. can be
exercised to prevent abuse of the process of the Court or secure ends of justice. Paragraph 102,
which gives seven categories of cases where power can be exercised under Section 482 Cr. P.C. are
reproduced as follows:
"102. In the backdrop of the interpretation of the various relevant provisions of the
Code under Chapter XIV and of the principles of law enunciated by this Court in a
series of decisions relating to the exercise of the extraordinary power under Article
226 or the inherent powers under Section 482 of the Code which we have extracted
and reproduced above, we give the following categories of cases by way of illustration
wherein such power could be exercised either to prevent abuse of the process of any
court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice, though it may not be possible to lay
down any precise, clearly defined and sufficiently channelized and inflexible
guidelines or rigid formulae and to give an exhaustive list of myriad kinds of cases
wherein such power should be exercised.
(1) Where the allegations made in the first information report or the complaint, even
if they are taken at their face value and accepted in their entirety do not prima facie
constitute any offence or make out a case against the accused.
(2) Where the allegations in the first information report and other materials, if any,
accompanying the FIR do not disclose a cognizable offence, justifying an
investigation by police officers under 156 (1) of the Code except under an order of a
Magistrate within the purview of Section 155 (2) of the Code.
(3) Where the uncontroverted allegations made in the FIR or complaint and the evidence collected
in support of the same do not disclose the commission of any offence and make out a case against
the accused.
(4) Where, the allegations in the FIR do not constitute a cognizable offence but constitute only a
non-cognizable offence, no investigation is permitted by a police officer without an order of a
Magistrate as contemplated under Section 155 (2) of the Code.
(5) Where the allegations made in the FIR or complaint are so absurd and inherently improbable on
the basis of which no prudent person can ever reach a just conclusion that there is sufficient ground
for proceeding against the accused.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 9
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
(6) Where there is an express legal bar engrafted in any of the provisions of the Code or the
concerned Act (under which a criminal proceeding is instituted) to the institution and continuance
of the proceedings and/or where there is a specific provision in the Code or the concerned Act,
providing efficacious redress for the grievance of the aggrieved party.
(7) Where a criminal proceeding is manifestly attended with mala fide and/or where the proceeding
is maliciously instituted with an ulterior motive for wreaking vengeance on the accused and with a
view to spite him due to private and personal grudge."
3. In another case of State of Andhra Pradesh v. Golconda Linga Swamy, reported in (2004) 6 SCC
522, the Supreme Court, while dealing with inherent powers of the High Court under Section 482
Cr. P.C., has observed and held as under:
"5. Exercise of power under Section 482of the Code in a case of this nature is the
exception and not the rule. The Section does not confer any new powers on the High
Court. It only saves the inherent power which the Court possessed before the
enactment of the Code. It envisages three circumstances under which the inherent
jurisdiction may be exercised, namely, (i) to give effect to an order under the Code,
(ii) to prevent abuse of the process of court, and (iii) to otherwise secure the ends of
justice. It is neither possible nor desirable to lay down any inflexible rule which
would govern the exercise of inherent jurisdiction. No legislative enactment dealing
with procedure can provide for all cases that may possibly arise. Courts, therefore,
have inherent powers apart from express provisions of law which are necessary for
proper discharge of functions and duties imposed upon them by law. That is the
doctrine which finds expression in the Section which merely recognizes and preserves
inherent powers of the High Courts. All courts, whether civil or criminal possess, in
the absence of any express provision, as inherent in their constitution, all such
powers as are necessary to do the right and to undo a wrong in course of
administration of justice on the principle quando lex aliquidaliqueconcedit,
conceditur et id sine quo res ipsaesse non potest (when the law gives a person
anything it gives him that without which it cannot exist). While exercising powers
under the Section, the Court does not function as a court of appeal or revision.
Inherent jurisdiction under the Section though wide has to be exercised sparingly,
carefully and with caution and only when such exercise is justified by the tests
specifically laid down in the Section itself. It is to be exercised ex debito justitiae to do
real and substantial justice for the administration of which alone courts exist.
Authority of the court exists for advancement of justice and if any attempt is made to
abuse that authority so as to produce injustice, the court has power to prevent such
abuse. It would be an abuse of process of the court to allow any action which would
result in injustice and prevent promotion of justice. In exercises of the powers court
would be justified to quash any proceeding if it finds that initiation or continuance of
it amounts to abuse of the process of court or quashing of these proceedings would
otherwise serve the ends of justice. When no offence is disclosed by the complaint,
the court may examine the question of fact. When a complaint is sought to be
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 10
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
quashed, it is permissible to look into the materials to assess what the complainant
has alleged and whether any offence is made out even if the allegations are accepted
in toto.
xxxxxx
7. In dealing with the last category, it is important to bear in mind the distinction
between a case where there is no legal evidence or where there is evidence which is
clearly inconsistent with the accusations made, and a case where there is legal
evidence which, on appreciation, may or may not support the accusations. When
exercising jurisdiction under Section 482 of the Code, the High Court would not
ordinarily embark upon an enquiry whether the evidence in question is reliable or not
or whether on a reasonable appreciation of it accusation would not be sustained. That
is the function of the trial Judge. Judicial process no doubt should not be an
instrument of oppression, or, needless harassment. Court should be circumspect and
judicious in exercising discretion and should take all relevant facts and circumstances
into consideration before issuing process, lest it would be an instrument in the hands
of a private complainant to unleash vendetta to harass any person needlessly. At the
same time the Section is not an instrument handed over to an accused to short-circuit
a prosecution and bring about its sudden death. The scope of exercise of power under
Section 482 of the Code and the categories of cases where the High Court may
exercise its power under it relating to cognizable offences to prevent abuse of process
of any court or otherwise to secure the ends of justice were set out in some detail by
this Court in State of Haryana v. Bhajan Lal (1992 Supp (1) SCC
335)......
xxxxxxx 8 As noted above, the powers possessed by the High Court under Section 482 of the Code
are very wide and the very plenitude of the power requires great caution in its exercise. Court must
be careful to see that its decision in exercise of this power is based on sound principles. The inherent
power should not be exercised to stifle a legitimate prosecution. High Court being the highest Court
of a State should normally refrain from giving a prima facie decision in a case where the entire facts
are incomplete and hazy, more so when the evidence has not been collected and produced before the
Court and the issues involved, whether factual or legal, are of magnitude and cannot be seen in their
true perspective without sufficient material. Of course, no hard and fast rule can be laid down in
regard to cases in which the High Court will exercise its extraordinary jurisdiction of quashing the
proceeding at any stage. (See : The Janata Dal etc. v. H.S. Chowdhary and others, etc. (AIR 1993 SC
892), Dr. Raghubir Saran v. State of Bihar and another (AIR 1964 SC 1)). It would not be proper for
the High Court to analyse the case of the complainant in the light of all probabilities in order to
determine whether a conviction would be sustainable and on such premises, arrive at a conclusion
that the proceedings are to be quashed. It would be erroneous to assess the material before it and
conclude that the complaint cannot be proceeded with. In proceeding instituted on complaint,
exercise of the inherent powers to quash the proceedings is called for only in a case where the
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 11
Pritam Chand Alias Pritam Singh vs Dr. Kamal Saini on 30 December, 2023
complaint does not disclose any offence or is frivolous, vexatious or oppressive. If the allegations set
out in the complaint do not constitute the offence of which cognizance has been taken by the
Magistrate, it is open to the High Court to quash the same in exercise of the inherent powers under
Section 482 of the Code. It is not, however, necessary that there should be meticulous analysis of the
case before the trial to find out whether the case would end in conviction or acquittal. The
complaint/F.I.R. has to be read as a whole. If it appears that on consideration of the allegations in
the light of the statement made on oath of the complainant or disclosed in the F.I.R. that the
ingredients of the offence or offences are disclosed and there is no material to show that the
complaint/F.I.R. is mala fide, frivolous or vexatious, in that event there would be no justification for
interference by the High Court. When an information is lodged at the police station and an offence is
registered, then the mala fides of the informant would be of secondary importance. It is the material
collected during the investigation and evidence led in Court which decides the fate of the accused
person. The allegations of mala fides against the informant are of no consequence and cannot by
itself be the basis for quashing the proceeding."
4. The above settled position of law has also been reiterated by the Supreme Court in Priti Saraf and
another v. State of NCT of Delhi and another, 2021 SCC Online SC 206, and it has been said that
inherent power of the High Court is an extraordinary power which has to be exercised with great
care and circumspection before embarking to scrutinize a complaint/FIR/ charge-sheet in deciding
whether the case is the rarest of rare cases, to scuttle the prosecution at its inception. It was also
held by the Supreme Court that the grounds raised by the accused can be their defence during the
course of trial and cannot be taken by the High Court to quash the criminal proceedings. This Court,
considering the gravity of the charges and in the light of the law laid down by the Supreme Court, as
discussed supra, while exercising jurisdiction under Section 561-A Cr.P.C. (Section 482 Cr.P.C.
(Central), cannot decide whether or not the offence has been made out, from the materials collected
by the prosecution nor can this Court decide the complicity of present petitioner with the charges
framed against him. All these aspects have to be seen only in the trial and not by this Court in
exercise of inherent powers under Section 561-A Cr.P.C. Thus, this Court is not inclined to quash the
impugned FIR or the order passed by the Special Judge or proceedings initiated by it.
5. For the reasons discussed above, the instant petition is without any merit and is, accordingly,
dismissed with connected CM(s). Interim direction, if any, shall stand vacated.
(VINOD CHATTERJI KOUL) JUDGE Jammu 30.12.2023 BIR Whether approved for reporting?
Yes/No
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/136731913/ 12
