Priyadarshini Amrita Panda vs Biswajit Pati .... Opposite on 31 January, 2025
Priyadarshini Amrita Panda vs Biswajit Pati .... Opposite on 31
January, 2025
Author: G. Satapathy
Bench: G. Satapathy
IN THE HIGH COURT OF ORISSA AT CUTTACK
W.P.(C) No.3134 of 2025
(In the matter of an application Under Articles 226 & 227
of the Constitution of India)
Priyadarshini Amrita Panda .... Petitioner
-versus-
Biswajit Pati .... Opposite
Party
For Petitioner : Mr.T.K. Mishra, Advocate
For Opposite : Mr. G.M. Rath, Advocate
Parties
CORAM:
JUSTICE G. SATAPATHY
DATE OF HEARING & JUDGMENT:31.01.2025(ORAL)
G. Satapathy, J.
1. This writ petition is directed against the impugned order dated 27.01.2025 passed by the learned
Judge, Family Court, Cuttack in IA no.5 of 2025 arising out of CP No. 488 of 2018 directing to take
up such application at the time of final adjudication of the case in an application U/S. 24 of the
Hindu Marriage Act(In short "the Act").
2. In course of hearing, Mr. Tusar Kumar Mishra, learned counsel for the petitioner by reiterating
the provision of Section-24 of the Act submits that the litigations expenses as meant under this
provision is to provide the party the expenses to maintain the litigation because the spouse is unable
to maintain herself, so also unable to gather necessary expenses to support for the proceeding, but
the learned trial Court ignoring this principle has considered that such application can be
adjudicated at the time of final adjudication which is contrary to the intention of the provision of law
as laid down in Sec. 24 of the Act. Mr.Mishra further submits that unless the petitioner gets the
litigation expenses, which is the cornerstone of the provision of Section 24 she is unable to maintain
the proceeding and thereby, deferring to decide the application U/S. 24 of the Act amounts to
miscarriage of justice. Accordingly, Mr. Mishra prays to intervene in the matter.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3508753/ 1
Priyadarshini Amrita Panda vs Biswajit Pati .... Opposite on 31 January, 2025
2.1. On the other hand, Mr. Gouri Mohan Rath, leaned counsel appearing for OP submits that the
proceeding is continuing since last seven years, but only to protract the litigation, the wife has filed
such an application at a belated stage, especially when the matter was posted for argument and the
intention of petitioner is only to protract the litigation and, therefore, the learned trial Court having
not refused the application for grant of litigation expenses which can be awarded at the time of
disposal of the case, the writ petition challenging the impugned order merits no consideration.
Accordingly, Mr. Rath prays to dismiss the writ petition.
3. In order to address the rival contention and the spirit of Section 24 of the Act, this court considers
it apt to extract the provision of Section 24 which reads as under:-
"24. Maintenance pendente lite and expenses of proceedings--Where in any
proceeding under this Act it appears to the court that either the wife or the husband,
as the case may be, has no independent income sufficient for her or his support and
the necessary expenses of the proceeding, it may, on the application of the wife or the
husband, order the respondent to pay to the petitioner the expenses of the
proceeding, and monthly during the proceeding such sum as, having regard to the
petitioner's own income and the income of the respondent, it may seem to the court
to be reasonable:
[Provided that the application for the payment of the expenses of the proceeding and
such monthly sum during the proceeding, shall, as far as possible, be disposed of
within sixty days from the date of service of notice on the wife or the husband, as the
case may be.]"
4. A casual look to the aforesaid provision makes it imperative that the objective behind the
provision of Section 24 of the Act is for providing sustenance to the spouse for his/her own
maintenance and litigation expenses, when the spouse has no independent income sufficient for
his/her support and the necessary expenses of the proceeding. In this case, admittedly the
proceeding has been instituted in the year 2018 and Mr. Mishra on being asked during the course of
argument has admitted that such an application of the petitioner U/S. 24 of the Act was earlier
rejected by the trial Court on 17.09.2019 which was never challenged before any other forum since
the petitioner is getting regular maintenance out of a DV proceeding. True it is that the learned trial
Court has in fact not passed any order for grant of litigation expenses on the fresh application of the
petitioner which was filed on 13.01.2025 just after the matter was posted for argument. The
provision of Section 24 of the Act nowhere makes it imperative or mandatory to pass any order on
the same day of filing of such petition, but it should be disposed of at the earliest within sixty days
from the date of service of notice on the other side, however, in this case when the matter was
posted for argument, the petitioner approached the said court for the second time for grant of
litigation expenses and that too, when she is already getting maintenance in a DV proceeding, but
the intention/objective of Section 24 of the Act is to provide sustenance to the spouse, if she/he is
unable to maintain herself during the pendency, so also unable to gather sufficient fund for the
litigation expenses. In this circumstance, it appears to the Court that the petitioner is able to
maintain herself out of the maintenance amount so granted in DV proceeding as submitted and
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3508753/ 2
Priyadarshini Amrita Panda vs Biswajit Pati .... Opposite on 31 January, 2025
when she has not applied for grant of litigation expenses for all along about six years after rejection
of her such application which was rejected way back on 17.09.2019, but was never challenged, it can
be simply said that the learned trial Court has rightly deferred the application for grant of litigation
expenses which is required to be disposed of within sixty days, to be decided at the final adjudication
of the matter because the matter has already been posted for argument.
5. In the result, the writ petition stands dismissed on contest, but in the circumstance, there is no
order as to costs.
It is, however, made clear the learned trial Court shall not further linger the proceeding and dispose
of the case as early as possible by hearing the argument, but if parties do not cooperate in arguing in
the matter, the Court can pass appropriate order/judgment by going through the pleadings and
evidence on record. The learned Trial Court shall not be influenced by any of the observation made
in this order which has been passed purely for disposal of the writ application.
(G. Satapathy) Judge Orissa High Court, Cuttack, Dated the 31st January, 2025/Priyajit Date:
03-Feb-2025 18:03:54
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/3508753/ 3
