Pukhrem Sharatchandra Singh vs Mairembam Prithviraj Singh @ ... on 24 November, 2022
Pukhrem Sharatchandra Singh vs Mairembam Prithviraj Singh
@ ... on 24 November, 2022
Author: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Bench: Ahanthem Bimol Singh
Item No. 25
IN THE HIGH COURT OF MANIPUR
AT IMPHAL
MC(El. Pet.) No. 150 of 2022
Pukhrem Sharatchandra Singh
.....Applicant/s
- Versus -
Mairembam Prithviraj Singh @ Prithiviraj & Anr.
.... Respondent/s
BEFORE HON'BLE MR. JUSTICE AHANTHEM BIMOL SINGH 24.11.2022 Heard Mr. N. Kumarjit,
learned senior counsel assisted by Mr. N. Zequeson, learned counsel appearing for the applicant,
Mr. Ajoy Pebam, learned counsel appearing for respondent No. 1 and Mr. P. Praveenkumar, learned
counsel appearing for respondent No. 2.
The present application had been filed seeking leave for allowing the applicant to file replication to
the written statement filed by respondent No. 2. The present application is opposed by the counsel
for respondent No. 2 on the ground that in the said replication filed by the applicant, certain new
facts particularly a document which is an order dated 09.07.2018 issued by the Joint Secretary
(GAD), Government of Manipur, has been enclosed which according to the learned counsel is new
facts/new pleadings. On this ground, the learned counsel submitted that the present application
should be rejected.
The learned senior counsel appearing for the applicant submitted that the said order is an order
issued by the Government showing the salaries/remuneration of the personals as mentioned in the
said order and the said document is required to brought on record to controvert the pleadings made
by respondent No. 2 in his written statement.
After hearing the rival submission made by the learned counsel appearing for the parties and on
examination of the record, this Court is of the view that the issue as to whether new facts has been
brought in the said replication or whether the said document marks as Annexure - M/1 in the
replication are new facts or not can be decided at the trial of the connected election recrimination
petition. The counsel for respondent No. 2 is also at liberty to raise this issue at the time of framing
of issues in the connected election recrimination petition.
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191279807/ 1
Pukhrem Sharatchandra Singh vs Mairembam Prithviraj Singh @ ... on 24 November, 2022
In view of the above, this Court is of the considered view that the present application can be allowed
to proceed with the trial of the connected election recrimination petition. Accordingly, the present
application is hereby allowed.
Registry is directed to put on record the said recrimination petition /rejoinder affidavit in the
connected record.
Misc. case stands allowed.
JUDGE
joshua
KH. JOSHUA KH. JOSHUA MARING
MARING Date: 2022.11.24
14:01:09 +05'30'
Indian Kanoon - http://indiankanoon.org/doc/191279807/ 2
